      BRIEF BIOGRAPHY: GALILEO GALILIEI




                From 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica, Volume 11


GALILEO  GALILIEI  (1564–1642),  Italian  astronomer  and  experimental

philosopher,  was  born  at  Pisa  on  the  15th  of  February  1564.  His  father,

Vincenzio,  was  an  impoverished  descendant  of  a  noble  Florentine  house,

which  had  exchanged  the  surname  of  Bonajuti  for  that  of  Galilei,  on  the

election,  in  1343,  of  one  of  its  members,  Tommaso  de’  Bonajuti,  to  the

college of the twelve Buonuomini. The family, which was nineteen times

represented  in  the  signoria,  and  in  1445  gave  a  gonfalonier  to  Florence,

flourished with the republic and declined with its fall. Vincenzio Galilei was

a man of better parts than fortune. He was a competent mathematician, wrote

with  considerable  ability  on  the  theory  and  practice  of  music,  and  was

especially distinguished amongst his contemporaries for the grace and skill of

his performance upon the lute. By his wife, Giulia Ammannati of Pescia, he

had three sons and four daughters.

  From  his  earliest  childhood  Galileo,  the  eldest  of  the  family,  was

remarkable for intellectual aptitude as well as for mechanical invention. His

favourite  pastime  was  the  construction  of  original  and  ingenious  toy-

machines; but his application to literary studies was equally conspicuous. In

the  monastery  of  Vallombrosa,  near  Florence,  where  his  education  was

principally conducted, he not only made himself acquainted with the best

Latin authors, but acquired a fair command of the Greek tongue, thus laying

the foundation of his brilliant and elegant style. From one of the monks he

also received instruction in logic; but the subtleties of the scholastic science

were thoroughly distasteful to him. A document published by F. Selmi in

1864 proves that he was at this time so far attracted towards a religious life as

to have joined the novitiate; but his father, who had other designs for him,

seized  the  opportunity  of  an  attack  of  ophthalmia  to  withdraw  him

permanently from the care of the monks. Having had personal experience of

the unremunerative character both of music and of mathematics, he desired

that his son should apply himself to the cultivation of medicine, and, not

without some straining of his slender resources, placed him, before he had

completed  his  eighteenth  year,  at  the  university  of  Pisa.  He  accordinglymatriculated there on the 5th of November 1581, and immediately entered

upon  attendance  at  the  lectures  of  the  celebrated  physician  and  botanist,

Andrea Cesalpino.

  The natural gifts of the young student seemed at this time equally ready to

develop in any direction towards which choice or hazard might incline them.

In musical skill and invention he already vied with the best professors of the

art in Italy; his personal taste would have led him to choose painting as his

profession, and one of the most eminent artists of his day, Lodovico Cigoli,

owned  that  to  his  judgment  and  counsel  he  was  mainly  indebted  for  the

success of his works. In 1581, while watching a lamp set swinging in the

cathedral of Pisa, he observed that, whatever the range of its oscillations, they

were invariably executed in equal times. The experimental verification of this

fact led him to the important discovery of the isochronism of the pendulum.

He at first applied the new principle to pulse-measurement, and more than

fifty years later turned it to account in the construction of an astronomical

clock. Up to this time he was entirely ignorant of mathematics, his father

having carefully held him aloof from a study which he rightly apprehended

would lead to his total alienation from that of medicine. Accident, however,

frustrated this purpose. A lesson in geometry, given by Ostilio Ricci to the

pages of the grand-ducal court, chanced, tradition avers, to have Galileo for

an unseen listener; his attention was riveted, his dormant genius was roused,

and  he  threw  all  his  energies  into  the  new  pursuit  thus  unexpectedly

presented to him. With Ricci’s assistance, he rapidly mastered the elements

of the science, and eventually extorted his father’s reluctant permission to

exchange Hippocrates and Galen for Euclid and Archimedes. In 1585 he was

withdrawn from the university, through lack of means, before he had taken a

degree, and returned to Florence, where his family habitually resided. We

next hear of him as lecturing before the Florentine Academy on the site and

dimensions of Dante’s Inferno; and he shortly afterwards published an essay

descriptive of his invention of the hydrostatic balance, which rapidly made

his  name  known  throughout  Italy.  His  first  patron  was  the  Marchese

Guidubaldo  del  Monte  of  Pesaro,  a  man  equally  eminent  in  science,  and

influential through family connexions. At the Marchese’s request he wrote, in

1588, a treatise on the centre of gravity in solids, which obtained for him,

together with the title of “the Archimedes of his time,” the honourable though

not lucrative post of mathematical lecturer at the Pisan university. During the

ensuing  two  years  (1589–1591)  he  carried  on  that  remarkable  series  ofexperiments  by  which  he  established  the  first  principles  of  dynamics  and

earned the undying hostility of bigoted Aristotelians. From the leaning tower

of Pisa he afforded to all the professors and students of the university ocular

demonstration of the falsehood of the Peripatetic dictum that heavy bodies

fall with velocities proportional to their weights, and with unanswerable logic

demolished  all  the  time-honoured  maxims  of  the  schools  regarding  the

motion  of  projectiles,  and  elemental  weight  or  levity.  But  while  he

convinced, he failed to conciliate his adversaries. The keen sarcasm of his

polished  rhetoric  was  not  calculated  to  soothe  the  susceptibilities  of  men

already smarting under the deprivation of their most cherished illusions. He

seems, in addition, to have compromised his position with the grand-ducal

family by the imprudent candour with which he condemned a machine for

clearing  the  port  of  Leghorn,  invented  by  Giovanni  de’  Medici,  an

illegitimate  son  of  Cosmo  I.  Princely  favour  being  withdrawn,  private

rancour was free to show itself. He was publicly hissed at his lecture, and

found  it  prudent  to  resign  his  professorship  and  withdraw  to  Florence  in

1591. Through the death of his father in July of that year family cares and

responsibilities devolved upon him, and thus his nomination to the chair of

mathematics  at  the  university  of  Padua,  secured  by  the  influence  of  the

Marchese  Guidubaldo  with  the  Venetian  senate,  was  welcome  both  as

affording a relief from pecuniary embarrassment and as opening a field for

scientific distinction.

  His residence at Padua, which extended over a period of eighteen years,

from  1592  to  1610,  was  a  course  of  uninterrupted  prosperity.  His

appointment was three times renewed, on each occasion with the expressions

of the highest esteem on the part of the governing body, and his yearly salary

was progressively raised from 180 to 1000 florins. His lectures were attended

by persons of the highest distinction from all parts of Europe, and such was

the charm of his demonstrations that a hall capable of containing 2000 people

had  eventually  to  be  assigned  for  the  accommodation  of  the  overflowing

audiences which they attracted. His invention of the proportional compass or

sector — an implement still used in geometrical drawing — dates from 1597;

and about the same time he constructed the first thermometer, consisting of a

bulb and tube filled with air and water, and terminating in a vessel of water.

In  this  instrument  the  results  of  varying  atmospheric  pressure  were  not

distinguishable from the expansive and contractive effects of heat and cold,

and  it  became  an  efficient  measure  of  temperature  only  when  Rinieri,  in1646, introduced the improvement of hermetically sealing the liquid in glass.

The  substitution,  in  1670,  of  mercury  for  water  completed  the  modern

thermometer.

  Galileo  seems,  at  an  early  period  of  his  life,  to  have  adopted  the

Copernican theory of the solar system, and was deterred from avowing his

opinions — as is proved by his letter to Kepler of August 4, 1597 — by the

fear  of  ridicule  rather  than  of  persecution.  The  appearance,  in  September

1604, of a new star in the constellation Serpentarius afforded him indeed an

opportunity, of which he eagerly availed himself, for making an onslaught

upon the Aristotelian axiom of the incorruptibility of the heavens; but he

continued  to  conform  his  public  teachings  in  the  main  to  Ptolemaic

principles, until the discovery of a novel and potent implement of research in

the shape of the telescope (q.v.) placed at his command startling and hitherto

unsuspected  evidence  as  to  the  constitution  and  mutual  relations  of  the

heavenly bodies. Galileo was not the original inventor of the telescope. That

honour  must  be  assigned  to  Johannes  Lippershey,  an  obscure  optician  of

Middleburg, who, on the 2nd of October 1608, petitioned the states-general

of the Low Countries for exclusive rights in the manufacture of an instrument

for  increasing  the  apparent  size  of  remote  objects.  A  rumour  of  the  new

invention, which reached Venice in June 1609, sufficed to set Galileo on the

track;  and  after  one  night’s  profound  meditation  on  the  principles  of

refraction, he succeeded in producing a telescope of threefold magnifying

power. Upon this first attempt he rapidly improved, until he attained to a

power of thirty-two, and his instruments, of which he manufactured hundreds

with his own hands, were soon in request in every part of Europe. Two lenses

only  —  a  plano-convex  and  a  plano-concave  —  were  needed  for  the

composition of each, and this simple principle is that still employed in the

construction of opera-glasses. Galileo’s direction of his new instrument to the

heavens  formed  an  era  in  the  history  of  astronomy.  Discoveries  followed

upon it with astounding rapidity and in bewildering variety. The Sidereus

Nuncius, published at Venice early in 1610, contained the first-fruits of the

new  mode  of  investigation,  which  were  sufficient  to  excite  learned

amazement on both sides of the Alps. The mountainous configuration of the

moon’s  surface  was  there  first  described,  and  the  so-called

“phosphorescence” of the dark portion of our satellite attributed to its true

cause — namely, illumination by sunlight reflected from the earth. All the

time-worn  fables  and  conjectures  regarding  the  composition  of  the  MilkyWay  were  at  once  dissipated  by  the  simple  statement  that  to  the  eye,

reinforced by the telescope, it appeared as a congeries of lesser stars, while

the  great  nebulae  were  equally  declared  to  be  resolvable  into  similar

elements.  But  the  discovery  which  was  at  once  perceived  to  be  most

important in itself, and most revolutionary in its effects, was that of Jupiter’s

satellites, first seen by Galileo on the 7th of January 1610, and by him named

Sidera Medicea, in honour of the grand-duke of Tuscany, Cosmo II., who had

been his pupil, and was about to become his employer. An illustration is, with

the general run of mankind, more powerful to convince than an argument;

and the cogency of the visible plea for the Copernican theory offered by the

miniature  system,  then  first  disclosed  to  view,  was  recognizable  in  the

triumph  of  its  advocates  as  well  as  in  the  increased  acrimony  of  its

opponents.

  In  September  1610  Galileo  finally  abandoned  Padua  for  Florence.  His

researches with the telescope had been rewarded by the Venetian senate with

the  appointment  for  life  to  his  professorship,  at  an  unprecedentedly  high

salary.  His  discovery  of  the  “Medicean  Stars”  was  acknowledged  by  his

nomination (July 12, 1610) as philosopher and mathematician extraordinary

to the grand-duke of Tuscany. The emoluments of this office, which involved

no duties save that of continuing his scientific labours, were fixed at 1000

scudi; and it was the desire of increased leisure, rather than the promptings of

local patriotism, which induced him to accept an offer the original suggestion

of  which  had  indeed  come  from  himself.  Before  the  close  of  1610  the

memorable cycle of discoveries begun in the previous year was completed by

the observation of the ansated or, as it appeared to Galileo, triple form of

Saturn  (the  ring-formation  was  first  recognized  by  Christiaan  Huygens  in

1655), of the phases of Venus, and of the spots upon the sun. As regards sun-

spots, however, Johann Fabricius of Osteel in Friesland can claim priority of

publication, if not of actual detection. In the spring of 1611 Galileo visited

Rome,  and  exhibited  in  the  gardens  of  the  Quirinal  Palace  the  telescopic

wonders  of  the  heavens  to  the  most  eminent  personages  at  the  pontifical

court. Encouraged by the flattering reception accorded to him, he ventured, in

his Letters on the Solar Spots, printed at Rome in 1613, to take up a more

decided position towards that doctrine on the establishment of which, as he

avowed in a letter to Belisario Vinta, secretary to the grand-duke, “all his life

and being henceforward depended.” Even in the time of Copernicus some

well-meaning  persons,  especially  those  of  the  reformed  persuasion,  hadsuspected  a  discrepancy  between  the  new  view  of  the  solar  system  and

certain  passages  of  Scripture  —  a  suspicion  strengthened  by  the  anti-

Christian inferences drawn from it by Giordano Bruno; but the question was

never formally debated until Galileo’s brilliant disclosures, enhanced by his

formidable dialectic and enthusiastic zeal, irresistibly challenged for it the

attention of the authorities. Although he had no desire to raise the theological

issue, it must be admitted that, the discussion once set on foot, he threw

himself into it with characteristic impetuosity, and thus helped to precipitate a

decision which it was his interest to avert. In December 1613 a Benedictine

monk named Benedetto Castelli, at that time professor of mathematics at the

university of Pisa, wrote to inform Galileo of a recent discussion at the grand-

ducal  table,  in  which  he  had  been  called  upon  to  defend  the  Copernican

doctrine against theological objections. This task Castelli, who was a steady

friend and disciple of the Tuscan astronomer, seems to have discharged with

moderation  and  success.  Galileo’s  answer,  written,  as  he  said  himself,

currente calamo, was an exposition of a formal theory as to the relations of

physical science to Holy Writ, still further developed in an elaborate apology

addressed  by  him  in  the  following  year  (1614)  to  Christina  of  Lorraine,

dowager grand-duchess of Tuscany. Not satisfied with explaining adverse

texts, he met his opponents with unwise audacity on their own ground, and

endeavoured to produce scriptural confirmation of a system which seemed to

the ignorant many an incredible paradox, and to the scientific few a beautiful

but daring innovation. The rising agitation on the subject, fomented for their

own purposes by the rabid Aristotelians of the schools, was heightened rather

than allayed by these manifestoes, and on the fourth Sunday of the following

Advent found a voice in the pulpit of Santa Maria Novella. Padre Caccini’s

denunciation  of  the  new  astronomy  was  indeed  disavowed  and  strongly

condemned  by  his  superiors;  nevertheless,  on  the  5th  of  February  1615,

another Dominican monk named Lorini laid Galileo’s letter to Castelli before

the Inquisition.

  Cardinal Robert Bellarmin was at that time by far the most influential

member of the Sacred College. He was a man of vast learning and upright

piety, but, although personally friendly to Galileo, there is no doubt that he

saw in his scientific teachings a danger to religion. The year 1615 seems to

have been a period of suspense. Galileo received, as the result of a conference

between  Cardinals  Bellarmin  and  Del  Monte,  a  semi-official  warning  to

avoid theology, and limit himself to physical reasoning. “Write freely,” hewas told by Monsignor Dini, “but keep outside the sacristy.” Unfortunately,

he  had  already  committed  himself  to  dangerous  ground.  In  December  he

repaired  personally  to  Rome,  full  of  confidence  that  the  weight  of  his

arguments and the vivacity of his eloquence could not fail to convert the

entire pontifical court to his views. He was cordially received, and eagerly

listened to, but his imprudent ardour served but to injure his cause. On the

24th  of  February  1616  the  consulting  theologians  of  the  Holy  Office

characterized the two propositions — that the sun is immovable in the centre

of the world, and that the earth has a diurnal motion of rotation — the first as

“absurd in philosophy, and formally heretical, because expressly contrary to

Holy Scripture,” and the second as “open to the same censure in philosophy,

and at least erroneous as to faith.” Two days later Galileo was, by command

of the pope (Paul V.), summoned to the palace of Cardinal Bellarmin, and

there officially admonished not thenceforward to “hold, teach or defend” the

condemned  doctrine.  This  injunction  he  promised  to  obey.  On  the  5th  of

March the Congregation of the Index issued a decree reiterating, with the

omission of the word “heretical,” the censure of the theologians, suspending,

usque corrigatur, the great work of Copernicus, De revolutionibus orbium

coelestium, and absolutely prohibiting a treatise by a Carmelite monk named

Foscarini, which treated the same subject from a theological point of view. At

the same time it was given to be understood that the new theory of the solar

system  might  be  held ex  hypothesi,  and  the  trivial  verbal  alterations

introduced  into  the  Polish  astronomer’s  book  in  1620,  when  the  work  of

revision was completed by Cardinal Gaetani, confirmed this interpretation.

This edict, it is essential to observe, the responsibility for which rests with a

disciplinary  congregation  in  no  sense  representing  the  church,  was  never

confirmed by the pope, and was virtually repealed in 1757 under Benedict

XIV.

  Galileo  returned  to  Florence  three  months  later,  not  ill-pleased,  as  his

letters testify, with the result of his visit to Rome. He brought with him, for

the  refutation  of  calumnious  reports  circulated  by  his  enemies,  a  written

certificate from Cardinal Bellarmin, to the effect that no abjuration had been

required of or penance imposed upon him. During a prolonged audience he

had  received  from  the  pope  assurances  of  private  esteem  and  personal

protection; and he trusted to his dialectical ingenuity to find the means of

presenting  his  scientific  convictions  under  the  transparent  veil  of  an

hypothesis. Although a sincere Catholic, he seems to have laid but little stresson the secret admonition of the Holy Office, which his sanguine temperament

encouraged him gradually to dismiss from his mind. He preserved no written

memorandum of its terms, and it was represented to him, according to his

own deposition in 1633, solely by Cardinal Bellarmin’s certificate, in which,

for obvious reasons, it was glossed over rather than expressly recorded. For

seven years, nevertheless, during which he led a life of studious retirement in

the  Villa  Segni  at  Bellosguardo,  near  Florence,  he  maintained  an  almost

unbroken silence. At the end of that time he appeared in public with his

Saggiatore, a polemical treatise written in reply to the Libra astronomica of

Padre Grassi (under the pseudonym of Lotario Sarsi), the Jesuit astronomer

of the Collegio Romano. The subject in debate was the nature of comets, the

conspicuous appearance of three of which bodies in the year 1618 furnished

the occasion of the controversy. Galileo’s views, although erroneous, since he

held comets to be mere atmospheric emanations reflecting sunlight after the

evanescent  fashion  of  a  halo  or  a  rainbow,  were  expressed  with  such

triumphant  vigour,  and  embellished  with  such  telling  sarcasms,  that  his

opponent did not venture upon a reply. The Saggiatore was printed at Rome

in  October  1623  by  the  Academy  of  the  Lincei,  of  which  Galileo  was  a

member, with a dedication to the new pope, Urban VIII., and notwithstanding

some  passages  containing  a  covert  defence  of  Copernican  opinions,  was

received  with  acclamation  by  ecclesiastical,  no  less  than  by  scientific

authorities.

  Everything  seemed  now  to  promise  a  close  of  unbroken  prosperity  to

Galileo’s career. Maffeo Barberini, his warmest friend and admirer in the

Sacred College, was, by the election of the 8th of August 1623, seated on the

pontifical throne; and the marked distinction with which he was received on

his visit of congratulation to Rome in 1624 encouraged him to hope for the

realization of his utmost wishes. He received every mark of private favour.

The pope admitted him to six long audiences in the course of two months,

wrote an enthusiastic letter to the grand-duke praising the great astronomer,

not only for his distinguished learning, but also for his exemplary piety, and

granted a pension to his son Vincenzio, which was afterwards transferred to

himself, and paid, with some irregularities, to the end of his life. But on the

subject of the decree of 1616, the revocation of which Galileo had hoped to

obtain through his personal influence, he found him inexorable. Yet there

seemed reason to expect that it would at least be interpreted in a liberal spirit,

and  Galileo’s  friends  encouraged  his  imprudent  confidence  by  eagerlyretailing to him every papal utterance which it was possible to construe in a

favourable sense. To Cardinal Hohenzollern, Urban was reported to have said

that  the  theory  of  the  earth’s  motion  had  not  been  and  could  not  be

condemned as heretical, but only as rash; and in 1630 the brilliant Dominican

monk Tommaso Campanella wrote to Galileo that the pope had expressed to

him in conversation his disapproval of the prohibitory decree. Thus, in the

full anticipation of added renown, and without any misgiving as to ulterior

consequences, Galileo set himself, on his return to Florence, to complete his

famous but ill-starred work, the Dialogo dei due massimi sistemi del mondo.

Finished in 1630, it was not until January 1632 that it emerged from the

presses of Landini at Florence. The book was originally intended to appear in

Rome, but unexpected obstacles interposed. The Lincean Academy collapsed

with the death of Prince Federigo Cesi, its founder and president; an outbreak

of plague impeded communication between the various Italian cities; and the

imprimatur was finally extorted, rather than accorded, under the pressure of

private friendship and powerful interest. A tumult of applause from every

part of Europe followed its publication; and it would be difficult to find in

any language a book in which animation and elegance of style are so happily

combined  with  strength  and  clearness  of  scientific  exposition.  Three

interlocutors, named respectively Salviati, Sagredo, and Simplicio, take part

in  the  four  dialogues  of  which  the  work  is  composed.  The  first-named

expounds  the  views  of  the  author;  the  second  is  an  eager  and  intelligent

listener; the third represents a well-meaning but obtuse Peripatetic, whom the

others treat at times with undisguised contempt. Salviati and Sagredo took

their  names  from  two  of  Galileo’s  early  friends,  the  former  a  learned

Florentine,  the  latter  a  distinguished  Venetian  gentleman;  Simplicio

ostensibly derived his from the Cilician commentator of Aristotle, but the

choice was doubtless instigated by a sarcastic regard to the double meaning

of  the  word.  There  were  not  wanting  those  who  insinuated  that  Galileo

intended to depict the pope himself in the guise of the simpleton of the party;

and  the  charge,  though  preposterous  in  itself,  was  supported  by  certain

imprudences of expression, which Urban was not permitted to ignore.

  It was at once evident that the whole tenor of this remarkable work was in

flagrant  contradiction  with  the  edict  passed  sixteen  years  before  its

publication, as well as with the author’s personal pledge of conformity to it.

The  ironical  submission  with  which  it  opened,  and  the  assumed

indetermination  with  which  it  closed,  were  hardly  intended  to  mask  thevigorous assertion of Copernican principles which formed its substance. It is

a  singular  circumstance,  however,  that  the  argument  upon  which  Galileo

mainly relied as furnishing a physical demonstration of the truth of the new

theory rested on a misconception. The ebb and flow of the tides were, he

asserted,  a  visible  proof  of  the  terrestrial  double  movement,  since  they

resulted  from  inequalities  in  the  absolute  velocities  through  space  of  the

various parts of the earth’s surface, due to its rotation. To this notion, which

took its rise in a confusion of thought, he attached capital importance, and he

treated with scorn Kepler’s suggestion that a certain occult attraction of the

moon  was  in  some  way  concerned  in  the  phenomenon.  The  theological

censures  which  the  book  did  not  fail  to  incur  were  not  slow  in  making

themselves felt. Towards the end of August the sale was prohibited; on the

1st of October the author was cited to Rome by the Inquisition. He pleaded

his age, now close upon seventy years, his infirm health, and the obstacles to

travel caused by quarantine regulations; but the pope was sternly indignant at

what he held to be his ingratitude and insubordination, and no excuse was

admitted. At length, on the 13th of February 1633, he arrived at the residence

of Niccolini, the Tuscan ambassador to the pontifical court, and there abode

in retirement for two months. From the 12th to the 30th of April he was

detained  in  the  palace  of  the  Inquisition,  where  he  occupied  the  best

apartments and was treated with unexampled indulgence. On the 30th he was

restored to the hospitality of Niccolini, his warm partisan. The accusation

against him was that he had written in contravention of the decree of 1616,

and in defiance of the command of the Holy Office communicated to him by

Cardinal Bellarmin; and his defence consisted mainly in a disavowal of his

opinions, and an appeal to his good intentions. On the 21st of June he was

finally examined under menace of torture; but he continued to maintain his

assertion that after its condemnation by the Congregation of the Index, he had

never held the Copernican theory. Since the publication of the documents

relating to this memorable trial, there can no longer be any doubt, not only

that the threat of torture was not carried into execution, but that it was never

intended that it should be. On the 22nd of June, in the church of Santa Maria

sopra Minerva, Galileo read his recantation, and received his sentence. He

was condemned, as “vehemently suspected of heresy,” to incarceration at the

pleasure of the tribunal, and by way of penance was enjoined to recite once a

week for three years the seven penitential psalms. This sentence was signed

by seven cardinals, but did not receive the customary papal ratification. Thelegend according to which Galileo, rising from his knees after repeating the

formula  of  abjuration,  stamped  on  the  ground,  and  exclaimed,  “Eppur  si

muove!”  is,  as  may  readily  be  supposed,  entirely  apocryphal.  Its  earliest

ascertained appearance is in the Abbé Irailh’s Querelles littéraires (vol. iii. ,

1761).

  Galileo remained in the custody of the Inquisition from the 21st to the

24th  of  June,  on  which  day  he  was  relegated  to  the  Villa  Medici  on  the

Trinità de’ Monti. Thence, on the 6th of July, he was permitted to depart for

Siena, where he spent several months in the house of the archbishop, Ascanio

Piccolomini,  one  of  his  numerous  and  trusty  friends.  It  was  not  until

December that his earnest desire of returning to Florence was realized, and

the remaining eight years of his life were spent in his villa at Arcetri called

“Il Giojello,” in the strict seclusion which was the prescribed condition of his

comparative  freedom.  Domestic  afflictions  combined  with  numerous  and

painful infirmities to embitter his old age. His sister-in-law and her whole

family, who came to live with him on his return from Rome, perished shortly

afterwards  of  the  plague;  and  on  the  2nd  of  April  1634  died,  to  the

inexpressible grief of her father, his eldest and best-beloved daughter, a nun

in the convent of San Matteo at Arcetri. Galileo was never married; but by a

Venetian woman named Marina Gamba he had three children — a son who

married and left descendants, and two daughters who took the veil at an early

age. His prodigious mental activity continued undiminished to the last. In

1636  he  completed  his Dialoghi  delle  nuove  scienze,  in  which  he

recapitulated the results of his early experiments and mature meditations on

the principles of mechanics. This in many respects his most valuable work

was printed by the Elzevirs at Leiden in 1638, and excited admiration equally

universal and more lasting than that accorded to his astronomical treatises.

His  last  telescopic  discovery  —  that  of  the  moon’s  diurnal  and  monthly

librations — was made in 1637, only a few months before his eyes were for

ever closed in hopeless blindness. It was in this condition that Milton found

him when he visited him at Arcetri in 1638. But the fire of his genius was not

even yet extinct. He continued his scientific correspondence with unbroken

interest and undiminished logical acumen; he thought out the application of

the pendulum to the regulation of clockwork, which Huygens successfully

realized fifteen years later; and he was engaged in dictating to his disciples,

Viviani and Torricelli, his latest ideas on the theory of impact when he was

seized with the slow fever which in two months brought him to the grave. Onthe 8th of January 1642 he closed his long life of triumph and humiliation,

which just spanned the interval between the death of Michelangelo and the

birth of Isaac Newton.

  The  direct  services  which  Galileo  rendered  to  astronomy  are  virtually

summed up in his telescopic discoveries. To the theoretical perfection of the

science he contributed little or nothing. He pointed out indeed that the so-

called “third motion,” introduced by Copernicus to account for the constant

parallelism  of  the  earth’s  axis,  was  a  superfluous  complication.  But  he

substituted the equally unnecessary hypothesis of a magnetic attraction, and

failed to perceive that the phenomenon to be explained was, in relation to

absolute  space,  not  a  movement  but  the  absence  of  movement.  The

circumstance,  however,  which  most  seriously  detracts  from  his  scientific

reputation is his neglect of the discoveries made during his lifetime by the

greatest of his contemporaries. Kepler’s first and second laws were published

in 1609, and his third ten years later. By these momentous inductions the

geometrical  theory  of  the  solar  system  was  perfected,  and  a  hitherto

unimagined symmetry was perceived to regulate the mutual relations of its

members. But by Galileo they were passed over in silence. In his Dialogo dei

massimi sistemi, printed not less than thirteen years after the last of the three

laws  had  been  given  to  the  world,  the  epicycles  by  which  Copernicus,

adhering  to  the  ancient  postulate  of  uniform  circular  motion,  had

endeavoured  to  reduce  to  theory  the  irregularities  of  the  planetary

movements, were neither expressly adopted nor expressly rejected; and the

conclusion  seems  inevitable  that  this  grave  defection  from  the  cause  of

progress was due to his perhaps unconscious reluctance to accept discoveries

which he had not originated. His name is nevertheless justly associated with

that vast extension of the bounds of the visible universe which has rendered

modern  astronomy  the  most  sublime  of  sciences,  and  his  telescopic

observations are a standing monument to his sagacity and acumen.

  With the sure instinct of genius, he seized the characteristic features of the

phenomena  presented  to  his  attention,  and  his  inferences,  except  when

distorted by polemical exigencies, have been strikingly confirmed by modern

investigations. Of his two capital errors, regarding respectively the theory of

the tides and the nature of comets, the first was insidiously recommended to

him by his passionate desire to find a physical confirmation of the earth’s

double motion; the second was adopted for the purpose of rebutting an anti-

Copernican  argument  founded  on  the  planetary  analogies  of  those  erraticsubjects  of  the  sun.  Within  two  years  of  their  first  discovery,  he  had

constructed  approximately  accurate  tables  of  the  revolutions  of  Jupiter’s

satellites, and he proposed their frequent eclipses as a means of determining

longitudes, not only on land, but at sea. This method, on which he laid great

stress, and for the facilitation of which he invented a binocular glass, and

devised some skilful mechanical contrivances, was offered by him in 1616 to

the Spanish government, and afterwards to that of Tuscany, but in each case

unsuccessfully; and the close of his life was occupied with prolonged but

fruitless negotiations on the same subject with the states-general of Holland.

The idea, though ingenious, has been found of little practical utility at sea.

  A series of careful observations made him acquainted with the principal

appearances revealed by modern instruments in the solar spots. He pointed

out that they were limited to a certain defined zone on the sun’s surface; he

noted the faculae with which they are associated, the penumbra by which

they  are  bordered,  their  slight  proper  motions  and  their  rapid  changes  of

form. He inferred from the regularity of their general movements the rotation

of the sun on its axis in a period of little less than a month; and he grounded

on the varying nature of the paths seemingly traversed by them a plausible,

though  inconclusive,  argument  in  favour  of  the  earth’s  annual  revolution.

Twice in the year, he observed, they seem to travel across the solar disk in

straight lines; at other times, in curves. These appearances he referred with

great acuteness to the slight inclination of the sun’s axis of rotation to the

plane of the ecliptic. Thus, when the earth finds herself in the plane of the

sun’s equator, which occurs at two opposite points of her orbit, the spots,

travelling in circles parallel with that plane, necessarily appear to describe

right lines; but when the earth is above or below the equatorial level, the

paths  of  the  spots  open  out  into  curves  turned  downwards  or  upwards,

according to the direction in which they are seen. But the explanation of this

phenomenon is equally consistent with the geocentric as with the heliocentric

theory of the solar system. The idea of a universal force of gravitation seems

to have hovered on the borders of this great man’s mind, without ever fully

entering it. He perceived the analogy between the power which holds the

moon in the neighbourhood of the earth, and compels Jupiter’s satellites to

circulate round their primary, and the attraction exercised by the earth on

bodies at its surface; but he failed to conceive the combination of central

force with tangential velocity, and was disposed to connect the revolutions of

the planets with the axial rotation of the sun. This notion, it is plain, tendedrather towards Descartes’s theory of vortices than towards Newton’s theory

of gravitation. More valid instances of the anticipation of modern discoveries

may be found in his prevision that a small annual parallax would eventually

be found for some of the fixed stars, and that extra-Saturnian planets would at

some  future  time  be  ascertained  to  exist,  and  in  his  conviction  that  light

travels with a measurable, although, in relation to terrestrial distances, infinite

velocity.

  The  invention  of  the  microscope,  attributed  to  Galileo  by  his  first

biographer,  Vincenzio  Viviani,  does  not  in  truth  belong  to  him.  Such  an

instrument was made as early as 1590 by Zacharias Jansen of Middleburg;

and although Galileo discovered, in 1610, a means of adapting his telescope

to the examination of minute objects, he did not become acquainted with the

compound microscope until 1624 when he saw one of Drebbel’s instruments

in Rome, and, with characteristic ingenuity, immediately introduced some

material improvements into its construction.

  The most substantial, if not the most brilliant part of his work consisted

undoubtedly in his contributions towards the establishment of mechanics as a

science. Some valuable but isolated facts and theorems had been previously

discovered and proved, but it was he who first clearly grasped the idea of

force  as  a  mechanical  agent,  and  extended  to  the  external  world  the

conception of the invariability of the relation between cause and effect. From

the time of Archimedes there had existed a science of equilibrium, but the

science of motion began with Galileo. It is not too much to say that the final

triumph of the Copernican system was due in larger measure to his labours in

this department than to his direct arguments in its favour. The problem of the

heavens  is  essentially  a  mechanical  one;  and  without  the  mechanical

conceptions  of  the  dependence  of  motion  upon  force  which  Galileo

familiarized  to  men’s  minds,  that  problem  might  have  remained  a  sealed

book even to the intelligence of Newton. The interdependence of motion and

force  was  not  indeed  formulated  into  definite  laws  by  Galileo,  but  his

writings  on  dynamics  are  everywhere  suggestive  of  those  laws,  and  his

solutions of dynamical problems involve their recognition. The extraordinary

advances made by him in this branch of knowledge were owing to his happy

method of applying mathematical analysis to physical problems. As a pure

mathematician he was, it is true, surpassed in profundity by more than one

among his pupils and contemporaries; and in the wider imaginative grasp of

abstract  geometrical  principles  he  cannot  be  compared  with  Fermat,Descartes or Pascal, to say nothing of Newton or Leibnitz. Still, even in the

region of pure mathematics, his powerful and original mind left notable traces

of its working. He studied the properties of the cycloid, and attempted the

problem of its quadrature; and in the “infinitesimals,” which he was one of

the  first  to  introduce  into  geometrical  demonstrations,  was  contained  the

fruitful  germ  of  the  differential  calculus.  But  the  method  which  was

peculiarly his, and which still forms the open road to discoveries in natural

science, consisted in the combination of experiment with calculation — in the

transformation of the concrete into the abstract, and the assiduous comparison

of  results.  The  first-fruits  of  the  new  system  of  investigation  was  his

determination  of  the  laws  of  falling  bodies.  Conceiving  that  the  simplest

principle is the most likely to be true, he assumed as a postulate that bodies

falling freely towards the earth descend with a uniformly accelerated motion,

and deduced thence that the velocities acquired are in the direct, and the

spaces  traversed  in  the  duplicate  ratio  of  the  times,  counted  from  the

beginning of motion; finally, he proved, by observing the times of descent of

bodies falling down inclined planes, that the postulated law was the true law.

Even here, he was obliged to take for granted that the velocities acquired in

descending from the same height along planes of every inclination are equal;

and it was not until shortly before his death that he found the mathematical

demonstration of this not very obvious principle.

  The first law of motion — that which expresses the principle of inertia —

is  virtually  contained  in  the  idea  of  uniformly  accelerated  velocity.  The

recognition of the second — that of the independence of different motions —

must be added to form the true theory of projectiles. This was due to Galileo.

Up to his time it was universally held in the schools that the motion of a body

should cease with the impulse communicated to it, but for the “reaction of the

medium” helping it forward. Galileo showed, on the contrary, that the nature

of motion once impressed is to continue indefinitely in a uniform direction,

and  that  the  effect  of  the  medium  is  a  retarding,  not  an  impelling  one.

Another commonly received axiom was that no body could be affected by

more than one movement at one time, and it was thus supposed that a cannon

ball, or other projectile, moves forward in a right line until its first impulse is

exhausted, when it falls vertically to the ground. In the fourth of Galileo’s

dialogues  on  mechanics,  he  demonstrated  that  the  path  described  by  a

projectile, being the result of the combination of a uniform transverse motion

with a uniformly accelerated vertical motion, must, apart from the resistanceof  the  air,  be  a  parabola.  The  establishment  of  the  principle  of  the

composition of motions formed a conclusive answer to the most formidable

of  the  arguments  used  against  the  rotation  of  the  earth,  and  we  find  it

accordingly triumphantly brought forward by Galileo in the second of his

dialogues on the systems of the world. It was urged by anti-Copernicans that

a body flung upward or cast downward would, if the earth were in motion, be

left behind by the rapid translation of the point from which it started; Galileo

proved  on  the  contrary  that  the  reception  of  a  fresh  impulse  in  no  way

interfered with the movement already impressed, and that the rotation of the

earth was insensible, because shared equally by all bodies at its surface. His

theory  of  the  inclined  plane,  combined  with  his  satisfactory  definition  of

“momentum,” led him towards the third law of motion. We find Newton’s

theorem,  that  “action  and  reaction  are  equal  and  opposite,”  stated  with

approximate  precision  in  his  treatise Della  scienza  meccanica,  which

contains  the  substance  of  lectures  delivered  during  his  professorship  at

Padua; and the same principle is involved in the axiom enunciated in the third

of his mechanical dialogues, that “the propensity of a body to fall is equal to

the least resistance which suffices to support it.” The problems of percussion,

however, received no definitive solution until after his death.

  His services were as conspicuous in the statical as in the kinetical division

of mechanics. He gave the first satisfactory demonstration of equilibrium on

an inclined plane, reducing it to the level by a sound and ingenious train of

reasoning; while, by establishing the theory of “virtual velocities,” he laid

down the fundamental principle which, in the opinion of Lagrange, contains

the general expression of the laws of equilibrium. He studied with attention

the still obscure subject of molecular cohesion, and little has been added to

what he ascertained on the question of transverse strains and the strength of

beams, first brought by him within the scope of mechanical theory. In his

Discorso intorno alle cose che stanno su l’acqua, published in 1612, he used

the principle of virtual velocities to demonstrate the more important theorems

of hydrostatics, deducing from it the equilibrium of fluid in a siphon, and

proved against the Aristotelians that the floating of solid bodies in a liquid

depends not upon their form, but upon their specific gravities relative to such

liquid.

  In order to form an adequate estimate of the stride made by Galileo in

natural  philosophy,  it  would  be  necessary  to  enumerate  the  confused  and

erroneous  opinions  prevailing  on  all  such  subjects  in  his  time.  His  besteulogium, it has been truly said, consists in the fallacies which he exposed.

The scholastic distinctions between corruptible and incorruptible substances,

between absolute gravity and absolute levity, between natural and violent

motions, if they did not wholly disappear from scientific phraseology, ceased

thenceforward to hold the place of honour in the controversies of the learned.

Discarding these obscure and misleading notions, Galileo taught that gravity

and levity are relative terms, and that all bodies are heavy, even those which,

like the air, are invisible; that motion is the result of force, instantaneous or

continuous; that weight is a continuous force, attracting towards the centre of

the earth; that, in a vacuum, all bodies would fall with equal velocities; that

the  “inertia  of  matter”  implies  the  continuance  of  motion,  as  well  as  the

permanence of rest; and that the substance of the heavenly bodies is equally

“corruptible”  with  that  of  the  earth.  These  simple  elementary  ideas  were

eminently capable of development and investigation, and were not only true

but the prelude to further truth; while those they superseded defied inquiry by

their vagueness and obscurity. Galileo was a man born in due time. He was

superior  to  his  contemporaries,  but  not  isolated  amongst  them.  He

represented and intensified a growing tendency of the age in which he lived.

It was beginning to be suspected that from Aristotle an appeal lay to nature,

and some were found who no longer treated the ipse dixit of the Stagirite as

the final authority in matters of science. A vigorous but ineffectual warfare

had already been waged against the blind traditions of the schools by Ramus

and Telesius, by Patricius and Campanella, and the revolution which Galileo

completed  had  been  prepared  by  his  predecessors.  Nevertheless,  the  task

which  he  so  effectually  accomplished  demanded  the  highest  and  rarest

quality of genius. He struck out for himself the happy middle path between

the a priori and the empirical systems, and exemplified with brilliant success

the method by which experimental science has wrested from nature so many

of her secrets. His mind was eminently practical. He concerned himself above

all with what fell within the range of exact inquiry, and left to others the

larger but less fruitful speculations which can never be brought to the direct

test of experiment. Thus, while far-reaching but hasty generalizations have

had their day and been forgotten, his work has proved permanent, because he

made sure of its foundations. His keen intuition of truth, his vigour and yet

sobriety of argument, his fertility of illustration and acuteness of sarcasm,

made  him  irresistible  to  his  antagonists;  and  the  evanescent  triumphs  ofscornful controversy have given place to the sedate applause of a long-lived

posterity.

  The first complete edition of Galileo’s writings was published at Florence

(1842–1856),  in  16  8vo  vols.,  under  the  supervision  of  Signor  Eugenio

Albèri. Besides the works already enumerated, it contained the Sermones de

motu gravium composed at Pisa between 1589 and 1591; his letters to his

friends, with many of their replies, as well as several of the essays of his

scientific opponents; his laudatory comments on the Orlando Furioso, and

depreciatory notes on the Gerusalemme Liberata, some stanzas and sonnets

of no great merit, together with the sketch of a comedy; finally, a reprint of

Viviani’s Life, with valuable notes and corrections. The original documents

from the archives of the Inquisition, relating to the events of 1616 and 1633,

recovered from Paris in 1846 by the efforts of Count Rossi, and now in the

Vatican Library, were to a limited extent made public by Monsignor Marino-

Marini in 1850, and more unreservedly by M. Henri de l’Épinois, in an essay

entitled Galilée, son procès, sa condemnation, published in 1867 in the Revue

des questions historiques. He was followed by M. Karl von Gebler, who, in

an able and exhaustive but somewhat prejudiced work, Galileo Galilei und

die römische Curie (Stuttgart, 1876), sought to impeach the authenticity of a

document  of  prime  importance  in  the  trial  of  1633.  He  was  victoriously

answered  by  Signor  Domenico  Berti,  in Il  Processo  originale  di  Galileo

Galilei (Rome, 1876), and by M. de l’Épinois, with Les pièces du procès de

Galilée  (Rome,  Paris,  1877).  The  touching  letters  of  Galileo’s  eldest

daughter,  Sister  Maria  Celeste,  to  her  father  were  printed  in  1864  by

Professor Carlo Arduini, in a publication entitled La Primogenita di Galileo

Galilei.


The issue of a “national edition” of the Works of Galileo, in 20 large volumes, was begun at Florence
in 1890. It includes a mass of previously inedited correspondence and other documents, collected by
the indefatigable director, Professor Antonio Favaro, among whose numerous publications on Galilean
subjects may be mentioned: Galileo e lo studio di Padova (2 vols., 1883); Scampoli Galileani (12
series, 1886–1897); Nuovi Studii Galileani (1891); Galileo Galilei e Suor Maria Celeste (1891). See
also Th. Henri Martin’s Galilée, les droits de la science et la méthode des sciences physiques (1868);
Private Life of Galileo (by Mrs Olney, 1870); J.J. Fahie’s Galileo; his Life and Work (1903); Galilée et
Marius,  by  J.A.C.  Oudemans  and  J.  Bosscha  (1903).  The  relations  of  Galileo  to  the  Church  are
temperately and ably discussed by F.R. Wegg-Prosser in Galileo and his Judges (1889), and in two
articles published in the American Catholic Quarterly for April and July 1901.              The Delphi Classics Catalogue



We are proud to present a listing of our complete catalogue of English titles, with new titles being
added every month.  Buying direct from our website means you can make great savings and take
advantage of our instant Updates service.  You can even purchase an entire series (Super Set) at a
special discounted price.
  Only from our website can readers purchase the special Parts Edition of our Complete Works titles.
When you buy a Parts Edition, you will receive a folder of your chosen author’s works, with each
novel, play, poetry collection, non-fiction book and more divided into its own special volume. This
allows you to read individual novels etc. and to know precisely where you are in an eBook. For more
information, please visit our Parts Edition page.                                Series Contents











                                      Series One


                                      Anton Chekhov
                                      Charles Dickens
                                      D.H. Lawrence
                                    Dickensiana Volume I
                                      Edgar Allan Poe
                                      Elizabeth Gaskell
                                    Fyodor Dostoyevsky
                                        George Eliot
                                        H. G. Wells
                                      Henry James
                                      Ivan Turgenev
                                      Jack London
                                        James Joyce
                                        Jane Austen
                                      Joseph Conrad
                                        Leo Tolstoy
                                    Louisa May Alcott
                                        Mark Twain
                                        Oscar Wilde
                                  Robert Louis Stevenson
                                  Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
                                      Sir Walter Scott
                                        The Brontës
                                      Thomas Hardy
                                      Virginia Woolf
                                      Wilkie Collins
                              William Makepeace Thackeray                                      Series Two


                                      Alexander Pushkin
                                Alexandre Dumas (English)
                                        Andrew Lang
                                    Anthony Trollope
                                      Bram Stoker
                                    Christopher Marlowe
                                      Daniel Defoe
                                      Edith Wharton
                                    F. Scott Fitzgerald
                                    G. K. Chesterton
                                Gustave Flaubert (English)
                                    H. Rider Haggard
                                      Herman Melville
                                Honoré de Balzac (English)
                                J. W. von Goethe (English)
                                        Jules Verne
                                      L. Frank Baum
                                      Lewis Carroll
                                  Marcel Proust (English)
                                    Nathaniel Hawthorne
                                      Nikolai Gogol
                                        O. Henry
                                      Rudyard Kipling
                                      Tobias Smollett
                                        Victor Hugo
                                    William Shakespeare











                                      Series Three                                      Ambrose Bierce
                                      Ann Radcliffe
                                        Ben Jonson
                                      Charles Lever
                                        Émile Zola
                                    Ford Madox Ford
                                      Geoffrey Chaucer
                                      George Gissing
                                      George Orwell
                                    Guy de Maupassant
                                      H. P. Lovecraft
                                        Henrik Ibsen
                                  Henry David Thoreau
                                      Henry Fielding
                                      J. M. Barrie
                                  James Fenimore Cooper
                                      John Buchan
                                      John Galsworthy
                                      Jonathan Swift
                                      Kate Chopin
                                    Katherine Mansfield
                                    L. M. Montgomery
                                      Laurence Sterne
                                      Mary Shelley
                                      Sheridan Le Fanu
                                      Washington Irving











                                      Series Four


                                      Arnold Bennett
                                      Arthur Machen
                                      Beatrix Potter
                                        Bret Harte
                                  Captain Frederick Marryat
                                      Charles Kingsley
                                      Charles Reade
                                      G. A. Henty
                                    Edgar Rice Burroughs
                                      Edgar Wallace
                                      E. M. Forster                                        E. Nesbit
                                      George Meredith
                                  Harriet Beecher Stowe
                                    Jerome K. Jerome
                                        John Ruskin
                                    Maria Edgeworth
                                      M. E. Braddon
                                    Miguel de Cervantes
                                      M. R. James
                                    R. M. Ballantyne
                                    Robert E. Howard
                                      Samuel Johnson
                                          Stendhal
                                      Stephen Crane
                                        Zane Grey











                                      Series Five


                                    Algernon Blackwood
                                      Anatole France
                                  Beaumont and Fletcher
                                      Charles Darwin
                                  Edward Bulwer-Lytton
                                      Edward Gibbon
                                      E. F. Benson
                                  Frances Hodgson Burnett
                                    Friedrich Nietzsche
                                    George Bernard Shaw
                                    George MacDonald
                                      Hilaire Belloc
                                      John Bunyan
                                      John Webster
                                      Margaret Oliphant
                                      Maxim Gorky
                                      Oliver Goldsmith
                                      Radclyffe Hall
                                    Robert W. Chambers
                                      Samuel Butler
                                    Samuel Richardson
                                    Sir Thomas Malory                                      Thomas Carlyle
                                William Harrison Ainsworth
                                  William Dean Howells
                                      William Morris











                                      Series Six

                                      Anthony Hope
                                        Aphra Behn
                                      Arthur Morrison
                                    Baroness Emma Orczy
                                    Captain Mayne Reid
                                    Charlotte M. Yonge
                                  Charlotte Perkins Gilman
                                      E. W. Hornung
                                        Ellen Wood
                                      Frances Burney
                                      Frank Norris
                                    Frank R. Stockton
                                        Hall Caine
                                      Horace Walpole
                              One Thousand and One Nights
                                    R. Austin Freeman
                                      Rafael Sabatini
                                          Saki
                                      Samuel Pepys
                                    Sir Issac Newton
                                    Stanley J. Weyman 
                                    Thomas De Quincey
                                    Thomas Middleton
                                          Voltaire
                                      William Hazlitt
                                  William Hope Hodgson                                      Series Seven

                                        Adam Smith
                                      Benjamin Disraeli
                                        Confucius
                                        David Hume
                                      E. M. Delafield
                                  E. Phillips Oppenheim
                                      Edmund Burke
                                    Ernest Hemingway
                                      Frances Trollope
                                      Galileo Galilei
                                      Guy Boothby
                                  Hans Christian Andersen
                                        Ian Fleming
                                      Immanuel Kant
                                        Karl Marx
                                      Kenneth Grahame
                                      Lytton Strachey
                                    Mary Wollstonecraft
                                    Michel de Montaigne
                                      René Descartes
                                      Richard Marsh
                                        Sax Rohmer
                                    Sir Richard Burton
                                      Talbot Mundy
                                Thomas Babington Macaulay
                                      W. W. Jacobs











                                      Series Eight                                  Anna Katharine Green
                                    Arthur Schopenhauer
                                    The Brothers Grimm
                                        C. S. Lewis
                                  Charles and Mary Lamb
                                    Elizabeth von Arnim
                                      Ernest Bramah
                                      Francis Bacon
                                    Gilbert and Sullivan
                                        Grant Allen
                                    Henryk Sienkiewicz
                                      Hugh Walpole
                                    Jean-Jacques Rousseau
                                        John Locke
                                        John Muir
                                      Joseph Addison
                                      Lafcadio Hearn
                                      Lord Dunsany
                                      Marie Corelli
                                    Niccolò Machiavelli
                                          Ouida
                                  Richard Brinsley Sheridan
                                      Sigmund Freud
                                      Theodore Dreiser
                                        Walter Pater
                                  W. Somerset Maugham











                                  Ancient Classics


                                      Achilles Tatius
                                        Aeschylus
                                  Ammianus Marcellinus
                                        Apollodorus
                                          Appian
                                          Apuleius
                                    Apollonius of Rhodes
                                        Aristophanes
                                          Aristotle
                                          Arrian
                                        Augustine                                      Aulus Gellius
                                          Bede
                                        Cassius Dio
                                          Cato
                                          Catullus
                                          Cicero
                                    Clement of Alexandria
                                      Cornelius Nepos
                                        Demosthenes
                                      Diodorus Siculus
                                      Diogenes Laërtius
                                          Euripides
                                          Frontius
                                        Herodotus
                                          Hesiod
                                        Hippocrates
                                          Homer
                                          Horace
                                          Isocrates
                                          Josephus
                                        Julius Caesar
                                          Juvenal
                                          Livy
                                          Longus
                                          Lucan
                                          Lucian
                                          Lucretius
                                      Marcus Aurelius
                                          Martial
                                          Nonnus
                                          Ovid
                                        Pausanias
                                          Petronius
                                          Pindar
                                          Plato
                                          Plautus
                                      Pliny the Elder
                                    Pliny the Younger
                                          Plotinus
                                          Plutarch
                                          Polybius
                                        Procopius
                                        Propertius
                                          Ptolemy
                                  Quintus Curtius Rufus
                                    Quintus Smyrnaeus
                                          Sallust
                                          Sappho
                                    Seneca the Younger
                                        Septuagint                                          Sidonius
                                        Sophocles
                                          Statius
                                          Strabo
                                        Suetonius
                                          Tacitus
                                          Terence
                                        Theocritus
                                        Thucydides
                                          Tibullus
                                          Virgil
                                        Xenophon











                                Delphi Poets Series


                                      A. E. Housman
                                      Alexander Pope
                                  Alfred, Lord Tennyson
                                Algernon Charles Swinburne
                                      Andrew Marvell
                                          Beowulf
                                      Charlotte Smith
                                      Christina Rossetti
                                  D. H Lawrence (poetry)
                                  Dante Alighieri (English)
                                  Dante Gabriel Rossetti
                                  Delphi Poetry Anthology
                                  Edgar Allan Poe (poetry)
                                      Edmund Spenser
                                        Edward Lear
                                      Edward Thomas
                                Edwin Arlington Robinson
                                    Ella Wheeler Wilcox
                                Elizabeth Barrett Browning
                                      Emily Dickinson
                                        Ezra Pound
                                Friedrich Schiller (English)
                                      George Chapman
                                      George Herbert
                                  Gerard Manley Hopkins                                      Gertrude Stein
                                          Hafez
                                      Heinrich Heine
                                Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey
                              Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
                                      Isaac Rosenberg
                                    James Russell Lowell
                                  Johan Ludvig Runeberg
                                        John Clare
                                        John Donne
                                      John Dryden
                                        John Keats
                                        John Milton
                              John Wilmot, Earl of Rochester
                                      Joseph Addison
                                        Leigh Hunt
                                        Lord Byron
                                      Ludovico Ariosto
                                      Luís de Camões
                                      Matthew Arnold
                                      Matthew Prior
                                      Michael Drayton
                                      Nikolai Nekrasov
                                  Percy Bysshe Shelley
                                          Petrarch
                                  Ralph Waldo Emerson
                                      Robert Browning
                                        Robert Burns
                                        Robert Frost
                                      Robert Southey
                                          Rumi
                                      Rupert Brooke
                                  Samuel Taylor Coleridge
                                    Sir Philip Sidney
                                    Sir Thomas Wyatt
                                    Sir Walter Raleigh
                                    Thomas Chatterton
                                        Thomas Gray
                                  Thomas Hardy (poetry)
                                        Thomas Hood
                                      Thomas Moore
                                      Torquato Tasso
                                        T. S. Eliot
                                        W. B. Yeats
                                  Walter Savage Landor
                                      Walt Whitman
                                      Wilfred Owen
                                      William Blake
                                      William Cowper
                                    William Wordsworth                                    Masters of Art


                                      Albrecht Dürer
                                    Amedeo Modigliani
                                    Artemisia Gentileschi
                                      Camille Pissarro
                                          Canaletto
                                        Caravaggio
                                  Caspar David Friedrich
                                      Claude Lorrain
                                      Claude Monet
                                  Dante Gabriel Rossetti
                                      Diego Velázquez
                                        Edgar Degas
                                      Édouard Manet
                                      Edvard Munch
                                    Eugène Delacroix
                                      Francisco Goya
                                          Giotto
                                      Giovanni Bellini
                                      Gustave Courbet
                                        Gustav Klimt
                                      J. M. W. Turner
                                      Johannes Vermeer
                                      John Constable
                                    Leonardo da Vinci
                                        Michelangelo
                                      Paul Cézanne
                                      Paul Gauguin
                                        Paul Klee
                                    Peter Paul Rubens
                                    Piero della Francesca
                                    Pierre-Auguste Renoir
                                  Pieter Bruegel the Elder
                                      Sandro Botticelli
                                          Raphael
                                    Rembrandt van Rijn
                                    Thomas Gainsborough
                                        Tintoretto
                                          Titian                                    Vincent van Gogh
                                    Wassily Kandinsky                        Alphabetical List of Titles









                                      A. E. Housman
                                      Achilles Tatius
                                        Adam Smith
                                        Aeschylus
                                      Albrecht Dürer
                                      Alexander Pope
                                      Alexander Pushkin
                                Alexandre Dumas (English)
                                  Alfred, Lord Tennyson
                                    Algernon Blackwood
                                Algernon Charles Swinburne
                                      Ambrose Bierce
                                    Amedeo Modigliani
                                  Ammianus Marcellinus
                                      Anatole France
                                        Andrew Lang
                                      Andrew Marvell
                                      Ann Radcliffe
                                  Anna Katharine Green
                                      Anthony Hope
                                    Anthony Trollope
                                      Anton Chekhov
                                        Aphra Behn
                                        Apollodorus
                                    Apollonius of Rhodes
                                          Appian
                                          Apuleius
                                        Aristophanes
                                          Aristotle
                                      Arnold Bennett
                                          Arrian
                                    Artemisia Gentileschi
                                      Arthur Machen
                                      Arthur Morrison
                                    Arthur Schopenhauer
                                        Augustine
                                      Aulus Gellius
                                    Baroness Emma Orczy
                                      Beatrix Potter                                  Beaumont and Fletcher
                                          Bede
                                        Ben Jonson
                                      Benjamin Disraeli
                                          Beowulf
                                      Bram Stoker
                                        Bret Harte
                                        C. S. Lewis
                                      Camille Pissarro
                                          Canaletto
                                  Captain Frederick Marryat
                                    Captain Mayne Reid
                                        Caravaggio
                                  Caspar David Friedrich
                                        Cassius Dio
                                          Cato
                                          Catullus
                                  Charles and Mary Lamb
                                      Charles Darwin
                                      Charles Dickens
                                      Charles Kingsley
                                      Charles Lever
                                      Charles Reade
                                    Charlotte M. Yonge
                                  Charlotte Perkins Gilman
                                      Charlotte Smith
                                      Christina Rossetti
                                    Christopher Marlowe
                                          Cicero
                                      Claude Lorrain
                                      Claude Monet
                                    Clement of Alexandria
                                        Confucius
                                      Cornelius Nepos
                                  D. H Lawrence (poetry)
                                      D.H. Lawrence
                                      Daniel Defoe
                                  Dante Alighieri (English)
                                  Dante Gabriel Rossetti
                                  Dante Gabriel Rossetti
                                        David Hume
                                  Delphi Poetry Anthology
                                        Demosthenes
                                    Dickensiana Volume I
                                      Diego Velázquez
                                      Diodorus Siculus
                                      Diogenes Laërtius
                                      E. F. Benson
                                      E. M. Delafield
                                      E. M. Forster                                        E. Nesbit
                                  E. Phillips Oppenheim
                                      E. W. Hornung
                                      Edgar Allan Poe
                                  Edgar Allan Poe (poetry)
                                        Edgar Degas
                                    Edgar Rice Burroughs
                                      Edgar Wallace
                                      Edith Wharton
                                      Edmund Burke
                                      Edmund Spenser
                                      Édouard Manet
                                      Edvard Munch
                                  Edward Bulwer-Lytton
                                      Edward Gibbon
                                        Edward Lear
                                      Edward Thomas
                                Edwin Arlington Robinson
                                Elizabeth Barrett Browning
                                      Elizabeth Gaskell
                                    Elizabeth von Arnim
                                    Ella Wheeler Wilcox
                                        Ellen Wood
                                        Émile Zola
                                      Emily Dickinson
                                      Ernest Bramah
                                    Ernest Hemingway
                                    Eugène Delacroix
                                          Euripides
                                        Ezra Pound
                                    F. Scott Fitzgerald
                                    Ford Madox Ford
                                      Frances Burney
                                  Frances Hodgson Burnett
                                      Frances Trollope
                                      Francis Bacon
                                      Francisco Goya
                                      Frank Norris
                                    Frank R. Stockton
                                    Friedrich Nietzsche
                                Friedrich Schiller (English)
                                          Frontius
                                    Fyodor Dostoyevsky
                                      G. A. Henty
                                    G. K. Chesterton
                                      Galileo Galilei
                                      Geoffrey Chaucer
                                    George Bernard Shaw
                                      George Chapman
                                        George Eliot                                      George Gissing
                                      George Herbert
                                    George MacDonald
                                      George Meredith
                                      George Orwell
                                  Gerard Manley Hopkins
                                      Gertrude Stein
                                    Gilbert and Sullivan
                                          Giotto
                                      Giovanni Bellini
                                        Grant Allen
                                        Gustav Klimt
                                      Gustave Courbet
                                Gustave Flaubert (English)
                                      Guy Boothby
                                    Guy de Maupassant
                                        H. G. Wells
                                      H. P. Lovecraft
                                    H. Rider Haggard
                                          Hafez
                                        Hall Caine
                                  Hans Christian Andersen
                                  Harriet Beecher Stowe
                                      Heinrich Heine
                                        Henrik Ibsen
                                  Henry David Thoreau
                                      Henry Fielding
                                Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey
                                      Henry James
                              Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
                                    Henryk Sienkiewicz
                                      Herman Melville
                                        Herodotus
                                          Hesiod
                                      Hilaire Belloc
                                        Hippocrates
                                          Homer
                                Honoré de Balzac (English)
                                          Horace
                                      Horace Walpole
                                      Hugh Walpole
                                        Ian Fleming
                                      Immanuel Kant
                                      Isaac Rosenberg
                                          Isocrates
                                      Ivan Turgenev
                                      J. M. Barrie
                                      J. M. W. Turner
                                J. W. von Goethe (English)
                                      Jack London                                  James Fenimore Cooper
                                        James Joyce
                                    James Russell Lowell
                                        Jane Austen
                                    Jean-Jacques Rousseau
                                    Jerome K. Jerome
                                  Johan Ludvig Runeberg
                                      Johannes Vermeer
                                      John Buchan
                                      John Bunyan
                                        John Clare
                                      John Constable
                                        John Donne
                                      John Dryden
                                      John Galsworthy
                                        John Keats
                                        John Locke
                                        John Milton
                                        John Muir
                                        John Ruskin
                                      John Webster
                              John Wilmot, Earl of Rochester
                                      Jonathan Swift
                                      Joseph Addison
                                      Joseph Addison
                                      Joseph Conrad
                                          Josephus
                                        Jules Verne
                                        Julius Caesar
                                          Juvenal
                                        Karl Marx
                                      Kate Chopin
                                    Katherine Mansfield
                                      Kenneth Grahame
                                      L. Frank Baum
                                    L. M. Montgomery
                                      Lafcadio Hearn
                                      Laurence Sterne
                                        Leigh Hunt
                                        Leo Tolstoy
                                    Leonardo da Vinci
                                      Lewis Carroll
                                          Livy
                                          Longus
                                        Lord Byron
                                      Lord Dunsany
                                    Louisa May Alcott
                                          Lucan
                                          Lucian
                                          Lucretius                                      Ludovico Ariosto
                                      Luís de Camões
                                      Lytton Strachey
                                      M. E. Braddon
                                      M. R. James
                                  Marcel Proust (English)
                                      Marcus Aurelius
                                      Margaret Oliphant
                                    Maria Edgeworth
                                      Marie Corelli
                                        Mark Twain
                                          Martial
                                      Mary Shelley
                                    Mary Wollstonecraft
                                      Matthew Arnold
                                      Matthew Prior
                                      Maxim Gorky
                                      Michael Drayton
                                    Michel de Montaigne
                                        Michelangelo
                                    Miguel de Cervantes
                                    Nathaniel Hawthorne
                                    Niccolò Machiavelli
                                      Nikolai Gogol
                                      Nikolai Nekrasov
                                          Nonnus
                                        O. Henry
                                      Oliver Goldsmith
                              One Thousand and One Nights
                                        Oscar Wilde
                                          Ouida
                                          Ovid
                                      Paul Cézanne
                                      Paul Gauguin
                                        Paul Klee
                                        Pausanias
                                  Percy Bysshe Shelley
                                    Peter Paul Rubens
                                          Petrarch
                                          Petronius
                                    Piero della Francesca
                                    Pierre-Auguste Renoir
                                  Pieter Bruegel the Elder
                                          Pindar
                                          Plato
                                          Plautus
                                      Pliny the Elder
                                    Pliny the Younger
                                          Plotinus
                                          Plutarch                                          Polybius
                                        Procopius
                                        Propertius
                                          Ptolemy
                                  Quintus Curtius Rufus
                                    Quintus Smyrnaeus
                                    R. Austin Freeman
                                    R. M. Ballantyne
                                      Radclyffe Hall
                                      Rafael Sabatini
                                  Ralph Waldo Emerson
                                          Raphael
                                    Rembrandt van Rijn
                                      René Descartes
                                  Richard Brinsley Sheridan
                                      Richard Marsh
                                      Robert Browning
                                        Robert Burns
                                    Robert E. Howard
                                        Robert Frost
                                  Robert Louis Stevenson
                                      Robert Southey
                                    Robert W. Chambers
                                      Rudyard Kipling
                                          Rumi
                                      Rupert Brooke
                                          Saki
                                          Sallust
                                      Samuel Butler
                                      Samuel Johnson
                                      Samuel Pepys
                                    Samuel Richardson
                                  Samuel Taylor Coleridge
                                      Sandro Botticelli
                                          Sappho
                                        Sax Rohmer
                                    Seneca the Younger
                                        Septuagint
                                      Sheridan Le Fanu
                                          Sidonius
                                      Sigmund Freud
                                  Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
                                    Sir Issac Newton
                                    Sir Philip Sidney
                                    Sir Richard Burton
                                    Sir Thomas Malory
                                    Sir Thomas Wyatt
                                    Sir Walter Raleigh
                                      Sir Walter Scott
                                        Sophocles                                    Stanley J. Weyman
                                          Statius
                                          Stendhal
                                      Stephen Crane
                                          Strabo
                                        Suetonius
                                        T. S. Eliot
                                          Tacitus
                                      Talbot Mundy
                                          Terence
                                        The Brontës
                                    The Brothers Grimm
                                        Theocritus
                                      Theodore Dreiser
                                Thomas Babington Macaulay
                                      Thomas Carlyle
                                    Thomas Chatterton
                                    Thomas De Quincey
                                    Thomas Gainsborough
                                        Thomas Gray
                                      Thomas Hardy
                                  Thomas Hardy (poetry)
                                        Thomas Hood
                                    Thomas Middleton
                                      Thomas Moore
                                        Thucydides
                                          Tibullus
                                        Tintoretto
                                          Titian
                                      Tobias Smollett
                                      Torquato Tasso
                                        Victor Hugo
                                    Vincent van Gogh
                                          Virgil
                                      Virginia Woolf
                                          Voltaire
                                        W. B. Yeats
                                  W. Somerset Maugham
                                      W. W. Jacobs
                                      Walt Whitman
                                        Walter Pater
                                  Walter Savage Landor
                                      Washington Irving
                                    Wassily Kandinsky
                                      Wilfred Owen
                                      Wilkie Collins
                                      William Blake
                                      William Cowper
                                  William Dean Howells
                                William Harrison Ainsworth                                      William Hazlitt
                                  William Hope Hodgson
                              William Makepeace Thackeray
                                      William Morris
                                    William Shakespeare
                                    William Wordsworth
                                        Xenophon
                                        Zane Grey


                                www.delphiclassics.com


Is there an author or artist you would like to see in a series?  Contact us at sales@delphiclassics.com (or
                      via the social network links below) and let us know!

                  Be the first to learn of new releases and special offers:


                Like us on Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/delphiebooks


                    Follow our Tweets: https://twitter.com/delphiclassics


        Explore our exciting boards at Pinterest: https://www.pinterest.com/delphiclassics/                Basilica of Santa Croce, Florence — Galileo’s final resting place                                      Galileo’s tomb

 