I would know whether amongst the so many other indagations pretermitted

by  the  Author,  there  were  not  some  that  made  against  him,  that  is,  from

which calculating one might find the new star to have been above the Moon,

as at the very first sight I think we may reasonably question; in regard I see

these already produced to be so different from one another, that some of them

give me the distance of the said star from the Earth, 4, 6, 10, 100, a thousand,

and an hundred thousand times bigger one than another; so that I may well

suspect that amongst those that he did not calculate, there was some one in

fauour of the adverse party. And I guesse this to be the more probable, for

that I cannot conceive that those Astronomers the observators could want the

knowledg and practice of rhese computations, which I think do not depend

upon the abstrucest things in the World. And indeed it will seem to me a

thing more than miraculous, if whilst in these twelve investigations onely,

there are some that make the star to be distant from the Earth but a few miles,

and others that make it to be but a very fmall matter below the Moon, there

are none to be found that in favour of the contrary part do make it so much as

twenty yards above the Lunar Orb. And that which shall be yet again more

extravagant, that all those Astronomers should have been so blind as not to

have discovered that their so apparent mistake.


SALV.


Begin  now  to  prepare  your  ears  to  hear  with  infinite  admiration  to  what

excesses of confidence of ones own authority and others folly, the desire of

contradicting  and  shewing  ones  self  wiser  than  others,  transports  a  man.

Amongst the indagations omitted by the Author, there are such to be found as

make the new star not onely above the Moon, but above the fixed stars also.

And these are not a few, but the greater part, as you shall see in this other

paper, where I have set them down.


SAGR.


But what saith the Author to these? It may be he did not think of them?


SALV.


He hath thought of them but too much: but saith, that the observations upon

which the calculations make the star to be infinitely remote, are erroneous,and that they cannot be combined to one another.


SIMP.


But this seemeth to me a very lame evasion; for the adverse party may with

as much reason reply, that those are erroneous wherewith he collecteth the

star to have been in the Elementary Region.


SALV.


Oh Simplicius, if I could but make you comprehend the craft, though no great

craftinesse of this Author, I should make you to wonder, and also to be angry

to see how that he palliating his sagacity with the vail of the simplicity of

your self; and the rest of meer Philosophers, would insinuate himself into

your  good  opinion,  by  tickling  your  ears,  and  swelling  your  ambition,

pretending  to  have  convinced  and  silenced  these  petty  Astronomers,  who

went  about  to  assault  the  impregnable  inalterability  of  the  Peripatetick

Heaven, and which is more, to have foild and conquered them with their own

arms. I will try with all my ability to do the same; and in the mean time let

Sagredus take it in good part, if Simplicius and I try his patience, perhaps a

little too much, whilst that with a superfluous circumlocution (superfluous I

say to his most nimble apprehension) I go about to make out a thing, which it

is not convenient should be hid and unknown unto him.


SAGR.


I shall not onely without wearinesse, but also with much delight hearken to

your discourses; and so ought all Peripatetick Philosophers, to the end they

may know how much they are oblieged to this their Protector.


SALV.


Tell me, Simplicius, whether you do well comprehend, how, the new star

being placed in the meridian circle yonder towards the North, the same to one

that from the South should go towards the North, would seem to rise higher

and higher above the Horizon, as much as the Pole, although it should have

been scituate amongst the fixed stars; but, that in case it were considerablylower, that is nearer to the Earth, it would appear to ascend more than the said

pole, and still more by how much its vicinity was greater?


SIMP.


I think that I do very well conceive the same; in token whereof I will try if I

can make a mathematical Scheme of it, and in this great circle [in Fig. 1. of

this Dialogue. ] I will marke the pole P; and in these two lower circles I will

note two stars beheld from one place on the Earth, which let be A; and let the

two  stars  be  these  B  and  C,  beheld  in  the  same  line  ABC,  which  line  I

prolong till it meet with a fixed star in D. And then walking along the Earth,

till I come to the term E, the two stars will appear to me separated from the

fixed star D, and advanced neerer to the pole P, and the lower star B more,

which will appear to me in G, and the star C lesse, which will appear to me in

F, but the fixed star D will have kept the same distance from the Pole.


SALV.


I  see  that  you  understand  the  businesse  very  well.  I  believe  that  you  do

likewise comprehend, that, in regard the star B is lower than C, the angle

which is made by the rayes of the sight, which departing from the two places

A and E, meet in C, to wit, this angle ACE, is more narrow, or if we will say

more acute than the angle constituted in B, by the rayes AB and EB.


SIMP.


This I likewise understand very well.


SALV.


And also, the Earth beine very little and almost insensible, in respect of the

Firmament (or Starry Sphere;) and consequently the space AE, paced on the

Earth, being very small in comparison of the immense length of the lines EG

and EF, passing from the Earth unto the Firmament, you thereby collect that

the star C might rise and ascend so much and so much above the Earth, that

the angle therein made by the rayes which depart from the said stationary

points A and E, might become most acute, and as it were absolutely null and

insensible.SIMP.


And this also is most manifest to sense.


SALV.


Now you know Simplicius that Astronomers and Mathematicians have found

infallible rules by way of Geometry and Arithmetick, to be able by help of

the  quantity  of  these  angles  B  and  C,  and  of  their  differences,  with  the

additional knowledg of the distance of the two places A and E, to find to a

foot the remotenesse of sublime bodies; provided alwayes that the aforesaid

distance, and angles be exactly taken.


SIMP.


So that if the Rules dependent on Geometry and Astronomy be true, all the

fallacies and errours that might be met with in attempting to investigate those

altitudes of new Stars or Comets, or other things must of necessity depend on

the distance AE, and on the angles B and C, not well measured. And thus all

those differences which are found in these twelve workings depend, not on

the defects of the rules of the Calculations, but on the errours committed in

finding out those angles, and those distances, by means of the Instrumental

Observations.


SALV.


True; and of this there is no doubt to be made. Now it is necessary that you

observe intensely, how in removing the Star from B to C, whereupon the

angle alwayes grows more acute, the ray EBG goeth farther and farther off

from the ray ABD in the part beneath the angle, as you may see in the line

ECF, whose inferiour part EC is more remote from the part AC, than is the

part EB, but it can never happen, that by any whatsoever immense recession,

the lines AD and EF should totally sever from each other, they being finally

to go and conjoyn in the Star: and onely this may be said, that they would

separate, and reduce themselves to parallels, if so be the recession should be

infinite, which  case is not to be supposed. But because (observe well) the

distance of the Firmament, in relation to the smallnesse of the Earth, as hath

been  said,  is  to  be  accounted,  as  if  it  were  infinite;  therefore  the  angleconteined betwixt the two rayes, that being drawn from the points A and E,

go to determine in a fixed Star, is esteemed nothing, and those rayes held to

be two parallel lines; and therefore it is concluded, that then only may the

New Star be affirmed to have been in the Firmament, when from the collating

of the Observations made in divers places, the said angle is, by calculation,

gathered to be insensible, and the lines, as it were, parallels. But if the angle

be of a considerable quantity, the New Star must of necessity be lower than

those fixed; and also than the Moon, in case the angle ABE should be greater

than that which would be made in the Moons centre.


SIMP.


Then the remotenesse of the Moon is not so great, that a like angle should be 

insensible in her?


SALV.


No Sir; nay it is sensible, not onely in the Moon, but in the Sun also.


SIMP.


But if this be so, it’s possible that the said angle may be observed in the New

Star, without necessitating it to be inferiour to the Sun, aswell as to the Moon.


SALV.


This may very well be, yea, and is in the present case, as you shall see in due

place; that is, when I shall have made plain the way, in such manner that you

also, though not very perfect in Astronomical calculations, may clearly see,

and, as it were, with your hands feel how that this Author had it more in his

eye  to  write  in  complacency  of  the  Peripateticks,  by  palliating  and

dissembling sundry things, than to establish the truth, by producing them with

naked  sincerity:  therefore  let  us  proceed  forwards.  By  the  things  hitherto

spoken, I suppose that you comprehend very well how that the distance of the

new Star can never be made so immense, that the angle so often named shall

wholly disappear, and that the two rayes of the Observators at the places A

and  E,  shall  become  altogether  parallels:  and  you  may  consequently

comprehend  to  the  full,  that  if  the  calculations  should  collect  from  theobservations,  that  that  angle  was  totally  null,  or  that  the  lines  were  truly

parallels, we should be certain that the observations were at least in some

small particular erroneous: But, if the calculations should give us the said

lines to be separated not only to equidistance, that is, so as to be parallel, but

to have past beyond that terme, and to be dilated more above than below,

then must it be resolutely concluded, that the observations were made with

lesse  accuratenesse,  and  in  a  word,  to  be  erroneous;  as  leading  us  to  a

manifest impossibility. In the next place, you must believe me, and suppose it

for true, that two right lines  which depart from two points marked upon

another right line, are then wider above than below, when the angles included

between them upon that right line are greater than two right angles; and if

these angles should be equal to two right angles, the lines would be parallels;

but if they were less than two right angles, the lines would be concurrent, and

being continued out would undoubtedly intersect the triangle.


SIMP.


Without taking it upon trust from you, I know the same; and am not so very

naked of Geometry, as not to know a Proposition, which I have had occasion

of reading very often in Aristotle, that is, that the three angles of all triangles

are equall to two right angles: so that if I take in my Figure the triangle ABE,

it being supposed that the line EA is right; I very well conceive, that its three

angles A, E, B, are equal to two right angles; and that consequently the two

angles E and A are lesse than two right angles, so much as is the angle B.

Whereupon widening the lines AB and EB (still keeping them from moving

out of the points A and E) untill that the angle conteined by them towards the

parts B, disappear, the two angles beneath shall be equal to two right angles,

and those lines shall be reduced to parallels: and if one should proceed to

enlarge  them  yet  more,  the  angles  at  the  points  E  and  A  would  become

greater than two right angles.


SALV.


You are an Archimedes, and have freed me from the expence of more words

in declaring to you, that whensoever the calculations make the two angles A

and E to be greater than two right angles, the observations without more adoe

will  prove  erroneous.  This  is  that  which  I  had  a  desire  that  you  should

perfectly understand, and which I doubted that I was not able so to make out,as that a meer Peripatetick Philosopher might attain to the certain knowledg

thereof. Now let us go on to what remains. And re-assuming that which even

now you granted me, namely, that the new star could not possibly be in many

places,  but  in  one  alone,  when  ever  the  supputations  made  upon  the

observations  of  these  Astronomers  do  not  assign  it  the  same  place,  its

necessary that it be an errour in the observations, that is, either in taking the

altitudes of the pole, or in taking the elevations of the star, or in the one or

other  working.  Now  for  that  in  the  many  workings  made  with  the

combinations two by two, there are very few of the observations that do agree

to place the star in the same situation; therefore these few onely may happily

be the non-erroneous, but the others are all absolutely false.


SAGR.


It will be necessary then to give more credit to these few alone, than to all the

rest together, and because you say, that these which accord are very few, and

I amongst these 12, do find two that so accord, which both make the distance

of the  star from the centre of the Earth 4 semidiameters, which are these, the

fifth and sixth, therefore it is more probable that the new star was elementary,

than celestial.


SALV.


You  mistake  the  point;  for  if  you  note  well  it  was  not  written,  that  the

distance was exactly 4 semidiameters, but about 4 semidiameters; and yet

you  shall  see  that  those  two  distances  differed  from  each  other  many

hundreds of miles. Here they are; you see that this fifth, which is 13389

Italian miles, exceeds the sixth, which is 13100 miles, by almost 300 miles.


SAGR.


Which then are those few that agree in placing the star in the same situation?


SALV.


They are, to the disgrace of this Author five workings, which all place it in

the firmament, as you shall see in this note, where I have set down many

other combinations. But I will grant the Author more than peradventure hewould  demand  of  me,  which  is  in  sum,  that  in  each  combination  of  the

observations there is some error; which I believe to be absolutely necessary;

for the observations being four in number that serve for one working, that is,

two different altitudes of the Pole, and two different elevations of the star,

made by different obfervers, in different places, Astronomical Instruments

are  very  subject  to  errour.  with  different  instruments,  who  ever  hath  any

small knowledg of this art, will say, that amongst all the four, it is impossible

but there will be some error; and especially since we see that in taking but

one onely altitude of the Pole, with the same instrument, in the same place,

by the same observer, that hath repeated the observation a thousand times,

there will still be a titubation of one, or sometimes of many minutes, as in this

same book you may see in several places. These things presupposed, I ask

you  Simplicius  whether  you  believe  that  this  Authour  held  these  thirteen

observators  for  wise,  understanding  and  expert  men  in  using  those

instruments, or else for inexpert, and bunglers?


SIMP.


It must needs be that he esteemed them very acute and intelligent; for if he

had thought them unskilful in the businesse, he might have omitted his sixth

book as inconclusive, as being founded upon suppositions very erroneous;

and might take us for excessively simple, if he should think he could with

their inexpertnesse perswade us to believe a false position of his for truth.


SALV.


Therefore these observators being such, and that yet notwithstanding they did

erre, and so consequently needed correction, that so one might from their

observations infer the best hints that may be; it is convenient that we apply

unto them the least and neerest emendations and corrections that may be; so

that  they  do  but  suffice  to  reduce  the  observations  from  impossibility  to

possibility;  so  as  v.  gr.  if  one  may  but  correct  a  manifest  errour,  and  an

apparent  impossibility  of  one  of  their  observations    by  the  addition  or

substraction of two or three minutes, and with that amendment to reduce it to

possibility,  a  man  ought  not  to  essay  to  adjust  it  by  the  addition  or

substraction of fifteen, twenty, or fifty.


SIMP.I think the Author would not deny this: for granting that they are expert and

judicious men, it ought to be thought that they did rather erre little than much.


SALV.


Observe again; The places where the new Star is placed, are some of them

manifestly impossible, and others possible. Absolutely impossible it is, that it

should be an infinite space superiour to the fixed Stars, for there is no such

place in the world; and if there were, the Star there scituate would have been

imperceptible to us: it is also impossible that it should go creeping along the

superficies of the Earth; and much lesse that it should be within the said

Terrestrial  Globe.  Places  possible  are  these  that  be  in  controversie,  it  not

interferring vvith our understanding, that a visible object in the likenesse of a

Star might be aswell above the Moon, as below it. Now whilst one goeth

about to compute by the way of Observations and Calculations made with the

utmost certainty that humane diligence can attain unto what its place was, it is

found that the greatest part of those Calculations make it more than infinitely

superiour to the Firmament, others make it very neer to the surface of the

Earth,  and  some  also  under  the  same;  and  of  the  rest,  which  place  it  in

situations not impossible, none of them agree with each other; insomuch that

it must be confessed, hat all those observations are necessarily false; so that if

we  would  nevertheless  collect  some  fruit  from  so  many  laborious

calculations,  we  must  have  recourse  to  the  corrections,  amending  all  the

observations.


SIMP.


But the Authour will say, that of the observations that assign to the Star

impossible places, there ought no account to be made, as being extreamly

erroneous and false; and those onely ought to be accepted, that constitute it in

places not impossible: and amongst these a man ought to seek, by help of the

most probable, and most numerous concurrences, not if the particular and

exact situation, that is, its true distance from the centre of the Earth, at least,

whether it was amongst the Elements, or else amongst the Coelestial bodies.


SALV.The discourse which you now make, is the self same that the Author made, in

favour  of  his  cause,  but  with  too  unreasonable  a  disadvantage  to  his

adversaries; and this is that principal point that hath made me excessively to

wonder at the too great confidence that he expressed to have, no less of his

own authority, than of the blindness and inadvertency of the Astronomers; in

favour of whom I will speak, and you shall answer for the Author.  And first,

I ask you, whether the Astronomers, in observing with their Instruments, and

seeking v. gr. how great the elevation of a Star is above the Horizon, may

deviate from the truth, aswell in making it too great, as too little; that is, may

erroneously compute, that it is sometime higher than the truth, and sometimes

lower; or else whether the errour must needs be alwayes of one kinde, to wit,

that erring they alwayes make it too much, and never too little, or alwayes too

little, and never too much?


SIMP.


I doubt not, but that it is as easie to commit an errour the one way, as the

other.


SALV.


I believe the Author would answer the same. Now of these two kinds of

errours, which are contraries, and into which the observators of the new star

may equally have fallen, applied to calculations, one sort will make the star

higher, and the other lower than really it is. And because we have already

agreed,  that  all  the  observations  are  false;  upon  what  ground  would  this

Author have us to accept those for most congruous with the truth, that shew

the star to have been near at hand, than the others that shew it excessively

remote?


SIMP.


By what I have, as yet, collected of the Authors mind, I see not that he doth

refuse  those  observations,  and  indagations  that  might  make  the  star  more

remote than the Moon, and also than the Sun, but only those that make it

remote (as you your self have said) more than an infinite distance; the which

distance, because you also do refuse it as impossible, he also passeth over, as

being  convicted  of  infinite  falshood;  as  also  those  observations  are  ofimpossibility. Methinks, therefore, that if you would convince the Author,

you ought to produce supputations, more exact, or more in number, or of

more diligent observers, which constitute the star in such and such a distance

above the Moon, or above the Sun, and to be brief, in a place possible for it to

be in, like as he produceth these twelve, which all place the star beneath the

Moon in places that have a being in the world, and where it is possible for it

to be.


SALV.


But Simplicius yours and the Authors Equivocation lyeth in this, yours in one

respect, and the Authors in another; I discover by your speech that you have

formed a conceit to your self, that the exorbitancies that are commited in the

establishing the distance of the Star do encrease successively, according to

the proportion of the errors that are made by the Instrument, in taking the

observations, and that by conversion, from the greatness of the exorbitancies,

may be argued the greatnesse of the error; and that thereforefore hearing it to

be infered from such an observation, that the distance of the star is infinite, it

is necessary, that the errour in observing was infinite, and therefore not to be

amended,  and as such to be refused; but the businesse doth not succeed in

that manner, my Simplicius, and I excuse you for not having comprehended

the matter as it is, in regard of your small experience in such affairs; but yet

cannot I under that cloak palliate the error of the Author, who dissembling

the knowledge of this which he did perswade himself that we in good earnest

did not understand, hath hoped to make use of our ignorance, to gain the

better credit to his Doctrine, among the multitude of illiterate men. Therefore

for an advertisement to those who are more credulous then intelligent, and to

recover you from error, know that its possible (and that for the most part it

will come to passe) that an observation, that giveth you the star v. gr. at the

distance of Saturn, by the adition or substraction of but one sole minute from

the elevation taken with the instrument, shall make it to become infinitely

distant;  and  therefore  of  possible,  impossible,  and  by  conversion,  those

calculations which being grounded upon those observations, make the star

infinitely remote, may possibly oftentimes with the addition or subduction of

one sole minute, reduce it to a possible scituation: and this which I say of a

minute, may also happen in the correction of half a minute, a sixth part, and

less. Now fix it well in your mind, that in the highest distances, that is v. g.the height of Saturn, or that of the fixed Stars, very small errors made by the

Observator,  with  the  instrument,  render  the  scituation  determinate  and

possible,  infinite  &  impossible.  This  doth  not  so  evene  in  the  sublunary

distances, and near the earth, where it may happen that the observation by

which the Star is collected to be remote v. g. 4. Semidiameters terrestrial,

may encrease or diminish, not onely one minute but ten, and an hundred, and

many more, without being rendred by the calculation either infinitely remote,

or so much as superior to the Moon. You may hence comprehend that the

greatnesse of the error (to so speak) instrumental, are not to be valued by the

event of the calculation, but by the quantity it self of degrees and minutes

numbred upon the instrument, and these observations are to be called more

just  or  less  erroneous,  which  with  the  addition  or  substraction  of  fewer

minutes, restore the star to a possible situation; and amongst the possible

places, the true one may be believed to have been that, about which a greater

number of distances concurre upon calculating the more exact observations.


SIMP.


I  do  not  very  well  apprehend  this  which  you  say:  nor  can  I  of  my  self

conceive how it can be, that in greater distances, greater exorbitancies can

arise from the errour of one minute only, than in the smaller from ten or an

hundred; and therefore would gladly understand the same.


SALV.


You shall see it, if not Theorically, yet at least Practically,  by this short

assumption,  that  I  have  made  of  all  the  combinations,  and  of  part  of  the

workings pretermitted by the Author, which I have calculated upon this same

paper.


SAGR.


You must then from yesterday, till now, which yet is not above eighteen

hours, have done nothing but compute, without taking either food or sleep.


SALV.I  have  refreshed  my  self  both  those  wayes;  but  truth  is,  make  these

supputations with great brevity; and, if I may speak the truth, I have much

admired,  that  this  Author  goeth  so  farre  about,  and  introduceth  so  many

computations no wise necessary to the question in dispute. And for a full

knowledge of this, and also to the end it may soon be seen, how that from the

observations of the Astronomers, whereof this Author makes use, it is more

probably gathered, that the new star might have been above the Moon, and

also above all the Planets, yea amongst the fixed stars, and yet higher still

than they, I have transcribed upon this paper all the observations set down by

the said Authour, which were made by thirteen Astronomers, wherein are

noted the Polar altitude, and the altitudes of the star in the meridian, aswell

the lesser under the Pole, as the greater and higher, and they are these.


    Tycho.

 gr.m. 

    Altitude of the Pole5558 

                                                                                  the
    Altitude of the Star8400
                                                                              greatest.

                                                                                  the
 2757
                                                                              least.

  And  these  are,  according  to  the

first  paper:  but  according  to  the2745 

second, the greatest is —

    Hainzelius.

 gr.m.sec.

    Altitude of the
                                4822 
Pole

    Altitude of the
                                7634 
Star

 763345 7635 

 200940

 200930

 200920

 

    Peucerus and Sculerus.

 gr.m.

    Altitude of the pole5154

    Altitude of the Star7956

 2333

    Landgravius.

 gr.m.

    Altitude of the pole5118

    Altitude of the Star7930

 

    Camerarius.

 gr.m.

    Altitude of the pole5224

    Altitude of the Star8030

 8027

 8026

 2428

 2420

 2417

    Hagecius

 gr.m.    Altitude of the pole4822

    Altitude of the Star2015

 

    Maurolycus.

 gr.m.

    Altitude of the pole3830

    Altitude of the Star6200

    Munocius.

 gr.m.

    Altitude of the pole3930

    Altitude of the star6730

 1130

 

    Vrsinus.

 gr.m.

    Altitude of the pole4924

    Altitude of the star7900

 2200

    Reinholdus.

 gr.m.

    Altitude of the pole5118

    Altitude of the star7930

 2302

 

    Buchius.

 gr.m.

    Altitude of the pole5110    Altitude of the star7920

 2240

    Gemma.

 gr.m.

    Altitude of the pole5050

    Altitude of the star7945


 Now to see my whole proceeding, we may begin from these calculations,

which are four, omitted by the Author, perhaps because they make against

him, in regard they place the star above the moon by many semidiameters of

the Earth. The first of which is this, computed upon the observations of the

Landgrave of Hassia, and Tycho; which are, even by the Authors concession,

two of the most exact observers: and in this first, I will declare the order that I

hold in the working; which shall serve for all the rest, in that they are all

made by the same rule, not varying in any thing, save in the quantity of the

given summes, that is, in the number of the degrees of the Poles altitude, and

of the new Stars elevation above the Horizon, the distance of which from the

centre of the Earth, in proportion to the semidiameter of the terrestrial Globe

is sought, touching which it nothing imports in this case, to know how many

miles that semidiameter conteineth; whereupon the resolving that, and the

distance of places where the observations were made, as this Author doth, is

but time and labour lost; nor do I know why he hath made the same, and

especially why at the last he goeth about to reduce the miles found, into

semidiameters of the Terrestrial Globe.


SIMP.


Perhaps  he  doth  this  to  finde  with  such  small  measures,  and  with  their

fractions the distance of the Star terminated to three or four inches; for we

that do not understand your rules of Arithmetick, are stupified in hearing your

conclusions; as for instance, whilst we read; Therefore the new Star or Comet

was distant from the Earths centre three hundred seventy and three thousand

eight hundred and seven miles; and moreover, two hundred and eleven, four

thousand  ninety  sevenths  373807  21  /4097,  and  upon  these  precise

punctualities, wherein you take notice of such small matters, we do conceiveit to be impossible, that you, who in our calculations keep an account of an

inch, can at the close deceive us so much as an hundred miles.


SALV.


This  your  reason  and  excuse  would  passe  for  currant,  if  in  a  distance  of

thousands of miles, a yard over or under were of any great moment, and if the

suppositions that we take for true, were so certain, as that they could assure

us of producing an indubitable truth in the conclusion; but here you see in the

twelve workings of the Author, the distances of the Star, which from them

one may conclude to have been different from each other, (and therefore wide

of the truth) for many hundreds and thousands of miles: now whilst that I am

more than certain, that that which I seek must needs differ from the truth by

hundreds of miles, to what purppse is it to be so curious in our calculations,

for fear of missing the quantity of an inch? But let us proceed, at last, to the

working, which I resolve in this manner. Tycho, as may be  seen in that same

note observed the star in the polar altitude of 55 degrees and 58 mi. pri. And

the  polar  altitude  of  the  Landgrave  was  51  degrees  and  18  mi.  pri.  The

altitude of the star in the Meridian taken by Tycho was 27 degrees 45 mi. pri.

The Landgrave found its altitude 23 degrees 3 mi. pri. The which altitudes are

these noted here, as you see.


  gr.m. gr.m.

    Tycho.Pole5558*2745

    Landgr.Pole5118*233


This  done,  substract  the  lesse  from  the  greater,  and  there  remains  these

differences here underneath.


 gr.m.

 440

 442

    Parall. 2Where the difference of the poles altitudes 4 gr. 4 mi. pr. is lesse than the

difference of the altitudes of the Star 4 gr. 42 mi. pr. and therefore we have

the difference of parallaxes, 0 gr. 2 mi. pri. These things being found, take the

Authours own figure [Fig. 2. ] in which the point B is the station of the

Landgrave, D the station of Tycho, C the place of the star, A the centre of the

Earth, ABE the vertical line of the Landgrave, ADF  of Tycho, and the angle

BCD the difference of Parallaxes. And  because the angle BAD, conteined

between the vertical lines, is equal to the difference of the Polar altitudes, it

shall be 4gr. 40m. which I note here apart; and I finde the chord of it by the

Table of Arches and Chords, and set it down neer unto it, which is 8142

parts, of which the semidiameter AB is 100000. Next, I finde the angle BDC

with ease, for the half of the angle BAD, which is 2gr. 20 m. added to a right

angle, giveth the angle BDF 92gr. 20 m. to which adding the angle CDF,

which is the distance from the vertical point of the greatest altitude of the

Star, which here is 62 gr. 15 m. it giveth us the quantity of the angle BDC,

154 grad. 45 min. the which I set down together with its Sine, taken out of the

Table, which is 42657, and under this I note the angle of the Parallax BCD 0

gr. 2 m. with its Sine 58. And because in the Triangle BCD, the side DB is to

the side BC; as the sine of the opposite angle BCD, to the sine of the opposite

angle BDC: therefore, if the line BD were 58. BC would be 42657. And

because the Chord DB is 8142. of those parts whereof the semidiameter BA

is 100000. and we seek to know how many of those parts is BC; therefore we

will say, by the Golden Rule, if when BD is 58. BG is 42657. in case the said

DB were 8142. how much would BC be? I multiply the second term by the

third, and the product is 347313294. which ought to be divided by the first,

namely, by 58. and the quotient shall be the number of the parts of the line

BC,  whereof  the  semidiameter  AB  is  100000.  And  to  know  how  many

semidiameters BA, the said line BC doth contein, it will be necessary anew to

divide the said quotient so found by 100000. and we shall have the number of

semidiameters conteined in BC. Now the number 347313294. divided by 58.

giveth 5988160¼. as here you may see.


And this divided by 100000. the product is 59 88160/100000


But we may much abbreviate the operation, dividing the first quotient found,

that is, 347313294. by the product of the multiplication of the two numbers

58. and 100000. that is,And this way also there will come forth 59 5113294/5 00


And so many semidiameters are contained in the line BC, to which one being

added for the line AB, we shall have little lesse than 61. semidiameters for

the two lines ABC; and therefore the right distance from the centre A, to the

Star C, shall be more than 60. semidiameters, and therefore it is superiour to

the Moon, according to Ptolomy, more than 27. semidiameters, and according

to Copernicus, more than 8. supposing that the distance of the Moon from the

centre of the Earth by Copernicus his account is what the Author maketh it,

52  semidiameters.  With  this  same  working,  I  find  by  the  observations  of

Camerarius, and of Munosius, that the Star was situate in that same distance,

to wit, somewhat more than 60. semidiameters. These are the observations,

and these following next after them the calculations.


The next working is made upon two observations of Tycho, and of Munosius,

from which the Star is calculated to be distant from the Centre of the Earth

478 Semidiameters and more.


These workings following make the Star remote from the Centre, more than

358 Semidiameters.


From this other working the star is found to be distant from the centre more

than 716. semidiameters.


These as you see are five workings which place the star very much above the

Moon. And here I desire you to consider upon that particular, which even

now I told you, namely, that in great  distances, the mutations, or if you

please corrections, of a very few minutes, removeth the star a very great way

farther  off.  As  for  example,  in  the  first  of  these  workings,  where  the

calculation made the star 60. semidiameters remote from the centre, with the

Parallax of 2. minutes; he that would maintain that it was in the Firmament, is

to correct in the observations but onely two minutes, nay lesse, for then the

Parallax  ceaseth,  or  becommeth  so  small,  that  it  removeth  the  star  to  an

immense  distance,  which  by  all  is  received  to  be  the  Firmament.  In  the

second indagation, or working, the correction of lesse than 4 m. prim. d th the

same. In the third, and fourth, like as in the first, two minutes onely mount

the  star  even  above  the  Firmament.  In  the  last  preceding,  a  quarter  of  a

minute, that is 15. seconds, gives us the same. But it doth not so occur in thesublunary altitudes; for if you fancy to your self what distance you most like,

and go about to correct the workings made by the Authour, and adjust them

so as that they all answer in the same determinate distance, you will find how

much greater corrections they do require.


SAGR.


It  cannot  but  help  us  in  our  fuller  understanding  of  things,  to  see  some

examples of this which you speak of.


SALV.


Do you assign any whatsoever determinate sublunary distance at pleasure in

which to constitute the star, for with small ado we may assertain our selves

whether  corrections  like  to  these,  which  we  see  do  suffice  to  reduce  it

amongst the fixed stars, will reduce it to the place by you assigned.


SAGR.


To take a distance that may favour the Authour, we will suppose it to be that

which is the greatest of all those found by him in his 12 workings; for whilst

it is in controversie between him and Astronomers, and that they affirm the

star to have been superiour to the Moon, and he that it was inferiour, very

small space that he proveth it to have been lower, giveth him the victory.


SALV.


Let us therefore take the seventh working wrought upon the observations of

Tycho and Thaddaeus Hagecius, by which the Authour found the star to have

been  distant  from  the  centre  32.  semidiameters,  which  situation  is  most

favourable to his purpose; and to give him all advantages, let us moreover

place it in the distance most disfavouring the Astronomers, which is to situate

it above the Firmament. That therefore being supposed, let us seek in the next

place  what  corrections  it  would  be  necessary  to  apply  to  his  other  11

workings. And let us begin at the first calculated upon the observations of

Hainzelius and Mauroice; in which the Authour findeth the distance from the

centre about 3. semidiameters with the Parallax of 4 gr. 42 m. 30. sec. Let  us

see whether by withdrawing it 20. minutes onely, it will rise to the height of32. semidiameters: See the short and true operation. Multiply the sine of the

angle BDC, by the sine of the  chord BD, and divide the product, the five last

figures being cut off by the sine of the Parallax, and the quotient will be 28.

semidiameters, and an half, so that though you make a correction of 4 gr. 22

min. 30 sec. taken from 4 gr. 42 min. 30 sec. it shall not elevate the star to the

altitude  of  32.  semidiameters,  which  correction  for  Simplicius  his

understanding it, is of 262. minutes, and an half.


In  the  second  operation  made  upon  the  observations  of  Hainzelius,  and

Sculerus, with the Parallax of 0 gr. 8 min. 30 sec. the star is found in the

height of 25. semidiameters or thereabouts, as may be seen in the subsequent

working.


And bringing back the Parallax 0 gr. 8 m. 30 sec. to 7 gr. 7 m. whose sine is

204,  the  star  elevateth  to  30  semidiameters  or  thereabouts;  therefore  the

correction of 0 gr. 1 mi. 30 sec. doth not suffice.


Now let us see what correction is requisite for the third working made upon

the observations of Hainzelius and Tycho, which rendereth the star about 19

semidiameters high, with the Parallax of 10 m. pri. The usual angles and their

sines, and chord found by the Authour, are these next following; and they

remove the star (as also in the Authours working) 19 semidiameters from the

centre of the Earth. It is necessary therefore for the raising of it, to diminish

the Parallax according to the Rule which he likewise observeth in the ninth

working. Let us therefore suppose the Parallax to be 6 m. prim. whose sine is

175,  and  the  division  being  made,  there  is  found  likewise  lesse  than  31

semidiameters for the stars distance. And therefore the correction of 4 min.

prim. is too little to serve the Authours purpose.


Let us come to the fourth working, and the rest with the same rule, and with

the chords and sines found out by the Authour himself; in this the Parallax is

14  m.  prim.  and  the  height  found  lesse  than  10  semidiameters,  and

diminishing the Parallax from 14 min. to 4 min. yet neverthelesse you see

that the star doth not elevate full 31 semidiameters. Therefore 10 min. in 14

min. doth not suffice.


In the fifth operation of the Authour we have the sines and the chord as you

see, and the Parallax is 0 gr. 42 m. 30 sec. which rendereth the height of thestar about 4 semidiameters, and correcting the Parallax, with reducing it from

0 gr. 42 m. 30 sec. to 0 gr. 5 m. onely, doth not suffice to raise it to so much

as 28 semidiameters, the correction therefore of 0 gr. 37 m. 30 sec. is too

little.


In the sixth operation the chord, the sines and Parallax are as followeth, and

the star is found to be about 4. semidiameters; let us see whether it will be

reduced, abating the Parallax from 8 m. to 1 m. onely; Here is the operation,

and  the  star  raised  but  to  27.  semidiameters  or  thereabout;  therefore  the

correction of 7 m. in 8 m. doth not suffice.


In the eighth operation the chord, the sines, and the Parallax, as you see, are

these ensuing, and hence the Authour calculates the height of the star to be 1.

semidiameter and an half, with the Parallax of 43. min. which reduced to 1

min. yet notwithstanding giveth the star lesse remote than 24. semidiameters,

the correction therefore of 42. min. is not enough.


Let us now see the ninth. Here is the chord, the sines and the Parallax which

is 15 m. From whence the Authour calculates the distance of the star from the

superficies of the Earth to be lesse than aHere the Latine version is erroneous,

making it a fortieth part of, &c. seven and forteith part of a semidiameter, but

this is an errour in the calculation, for it cometh forth truly, as we shall see

here below, more than a fifth: See here the quotient is 90/4 , which is more

than one fifth.


That which the Authour presently after subjoyns in way of amending the

observations, that is, that it sufficeth not to reduce the difference of Parallax,

neither to a minute, nor yet to the eighth part of a minute is true. But I say,

that neither will the tenth part of a minute reduce the height of the star to 32.

semidiameters;  for  the  sine  of  the  tenth  part  of  a  minute,  that  is  of  six

seconds, is 3; by which if we according to our Rule should divide 90. or we

may say, if we should divide 9058672. by 300000. the quotient will be 30

58671/100000, that is little more than 30. semidiameters and an half.


The tenth giveth the altitude of the star one fifth of a semidiameter, with these

angles, sines, and Parallax, that is, 4 gr.  30 m. which I see that being reduced

from 4 gr. 30 min. to 2 min. yet neverthelesse it elevates not the star to 29.

semidiameters.The  eleventh  rendereth  the  star  to  the  Authour  remote  about  13.

semidiameters, with the Parallax of 55. min. let us see, reducing it to 20 min.

whether it will exalt the star: See here the calculation elevates it to little lesse

than 33. semidiameters, the correction therefore is little lesse than 35. min. in

55. min.


The twelfth with the Parallax of 1. gr. 36. min. maketh the star lesse high than

6. semidiameters, reducing the Parallax to 20 min. it carrieth the star to lesse

than 30. semidiameters distance, therefore the correction of 1 gr. 16. min.

sufficeth not.


 




These  are  the  Corrections  of  the  Parallaxes  of  the  ten

workings of the Author, to reduce the Star to the altitude

of 32 Semidiameters.




gr.m.sec. gr.m.sec.




042230in044230




000400in001000




001000in001400




003700in004230000700in001800




004200in004300




001450in001500




042800in043000




003500in005500




011600in013600


 


From hence we see, that to reduce the Star to 32. Semidiameters in altitude, it

is requisite from the sum of the Parallaxes 836. to subtract 756. and to reduce

them to 80. nor yet doth that correction suffice.


Here we see also, (as I have noted even now) that should the Authour consent

to assign the distance of 32. Semidiameters for the true height of the Star, the

correction of those his 10. workings, (I say 10. because the second being very

high,  is  reduced  to  the  height  of  32.  Semidiameters,  with  2.  minutes

correction) to make them all to restore the said Star to that distance, would

require such a reduction of Parallaxes, that amongst the whole number of

substractions  they  should  make  more  than  756  m.  pr.  whereas  in  the  5.

calculated by me, which do place the Star above the Moon, to correct them insuch sort, as to constitute it in the Firmament, the correction onely of 10.

minutes, and one fourth sufficeth.


Now adde to these, other 5. workings, that place the Star precisely in the

Firmament,  without  need  of  any  correction  at  all,  and  we  shall  have  ten

workings or indagations that agree to place it in the Firmament, with the

correction onely of 5. of them (as hath been seen) but 10. m. and 15 sec.

Whereas for the correction of those 10. of the Authour, to reduce them to the

altitude of 32. semidiameters, there will need the emendations of 756 minutes

in 836. that is, there must from the summe 836 be substracted 756. if you

would have the Star elevated to the altitude of 32. semidiameters, and yet that

correction doth not fully serve.


The  workings  that  immediately  without  any  correction  free  the  Star  from

Parallaxes,  and  therefore  place  it  in  the  Firmament,  and  that  also  in  the

remotest parts of it, and in a word, as high as the Pole it self, are these 5.

noted here.




  gr.m. gr.m.




Camerar.52248026

              PolarAltit. of the

              altit.Star

Peucerus51547956




  030 030




  gr.m. gr.m.Landgrav.5118Altit.  of  the7930

                Polar altit.Star




Hainzel.48227634




  256 256



 




  gr.m. gr.m.




Tycho55588400

              PolarAltit. of the

              altit.Star

Peucerus51547956




  44 44




  gr.m. gr.m.




Reinhold.51187930


              Polar altit.Altit. of the StarHainzel.48223634




  256 256



 




  gr.m. gr.m.




Camerar.52242417


              Polar altit.Altit. of the Star


Hagecius48222015




  42 42



Of the remaining combinations that might be made of the Observations of all

these Astronomers, those that make the Stars sublime to an infinite distance,

are many in number, namely, about 30. more than those who give the Star, by

calculation,  to  be  below  the  Moon;  and  because  (as  it  was  agreed  upon

between us) it is to be believed that the Observators have erred rather little

than much, it is a manifest thing that the corrections to be applied to the

Observaations, which make the star of an infinite altitude, to reduce it lower,

do  sooner,  and  with  lesser  amendment  place  it  in  the  Firmament,  than

beneath the Moon; so that all these applaud the opinion of those who put it

amongst  the  fixed  Stars.  You  may  adde,  that  the  corrections  required  for

those emendations, are much lesser than those, by which the Star from an

unlikely proximity may be removed to the height more favourable for thisAuthour,  as  by  the  foregoing  examples  hath  been  seen;  amongst  which

impossible proximities, there are three that seem to remove the Star from the

Earths centre, a lesse distance than one Semidiameter, making it, as it were,

to turn round under ground, and these are those combinations, wherein the

Polar altitude of one of the Observators being greater than the Polar altitude

of the other, the elevation of the Star taken by the first, is lesser than the

elation of the Star taken by the latter.


The first of these is this of the Landgrave with Gemma, where the Polar

altitude of the Landgrave 51 gr. 18 min. is greater than the Polar altitude of

Gemma, which is 50 gr. 50 m. But the altitude of the Star of the Landgrave

79 gr. 30 min. is lesser than that of the Star, of Gemma 79 gr. 45 min.




  gr.m. gr.m.




Landgrave51187930


                Polar altit.Altit. of the Star


Gemma50507945



The other two are these below.




  gr.m. gr.m.




Buschius.51107920


                  Polar AltitudeAltit. of the Star


Gemma.50507945Reinholdus.51187930


                  Polar AltitudeAltit. of the Star


Gemma.50507945



From what I have hitherto demonstrated, you may guesse how much this first

way  of  finding  out  the  distance  of  the  Star,  and  proving  it  sublunary

introduced  by  the  Authour,  maketh  against  himself,  and  how  much  more

probably and clearly the distance thereof is collected to have been amongst

the more remote fixed Stars.


SIMP.


As to this particular, I think that the inefficacy of the Authors demonstrations

is very plainly discovered; But I see that all this was comprised in but a few

leaves of his Book, and it may be, that some other of his Arguments are more

conclusive then these first.


SALV.


Rather they must needs be lesse valid, if we will take those that lead the way

for  a  proof  of  the  rest:  For  (as  it  is  clear)  the  uncertainty  and

inconclusivenesse of those, is manifestly observed to derive it self from the

errours committed in the instrumental observations, upon which the Polar

Altitude, and height of the Star was thought to have been justly taken, all in

effect  having  easily  erred;  And  yet  to  find  the  Altitude  of  the  Pole,

Astronomers have had Ages of time to apply themselves to it, at their leasure:

and the Meridian Altitudes of the Star are easier to be observed, as being

most terminate, and yielding the Observator some time to continue the same,

in regard they change not sensibly, in a short time, as those do that are remote

from the Meridian. And if this be so, as it is most certain, what credit shall we

give  to  Calculations  founded  upon  Observations  more  numerous,  more

difficult to be wrought, more momentary in variation, and we may add, with

Instruments more incommodious and erroneous? Upon a slight perusal of theensuing demonstrations, I see that the Computations are made upon Altitudes

of the Star taken in different Vertical Circles, which are called by the Arabick

name, Azimuths; in which observations moveable instruments are made use

of, not only in the Vertical Circles, but in the Horizon also, at the same time;

insomuch that it is requisite in the same moment that the altitude is taken, to

have observed, in the Horizon, the distance of the Virtical  point in which the

Star is, from the Meridian; Moreover, after a considerable interval of time,

the  operation  must  be  repeated,  and  exact  account  kept  of  the  time  that

passed, trusting either to Dials, or to other observations of the Stars. Such an

Olio  of  Observations  doth  he  set  befo    you,  comparing  them  with  such

another made by another observer in another place with another different

instrument, and at another time; and from this the Authour seeks to collect

what would have been, the Elevations of the Star, and Horizontal Latitudes

happened in the time and hour of the other first observations, and upon such a

coaequation he in the end grounds his account. Now I refer it to you, what

credit  is  to  be  given  to  that  which  is  deduced  from  such  like  workings.

Moreover, I doubt not in the least, but that if any one would torture himself

with such tedious computations, he would find, as in those aforegoing, that

there were more that would favour the adverse party, than the Authour: But I

think it not worth the while to take so much pains in a thing, which is not,

amongst those primary ones, by us understood.


SAGR.


I am of your Opinion in this particular: But this businesse being environed

with so many intricacies, uncertainties, and errours, upon what confidence

have so many Astronomers positively pronounced the new Star to have been

so high?


SALV.


Upon two sorts of observations most plain, most easie, and most certain; one

only of which is more than sufficient to assure us, that it was scituate in the

Firmament, or at least by a great distance superiour to the Moon. One of

which is taken from the equality, or little differing inequality of its distances

from the Pole, aswell whilst it was in the lowest part of the Meridian, as when

it was in the uppermost: The other is its having perpetually kept the same

distances from certain of the fixed Stars, adjacent to it, and particularly fromthe eleventh of Cassiopea, no more remote from it than one degree and an

half; from which two particulars is undoubtedly inferred, either the absolute

want of Parallax, or such a smalnesse thereof, that it doth assure us with very

expeditious Calculations of its great distance from the Earth.


SAGR.


But these things, were they not known to this Author? and if he saw them,

what doth he say unto them?


SALV.


We are wont to say, of one that having no reply that is able to cover his fault,

produceth frivolous excuses, cerca di attaccarsi alle funi del cielo, [He strives

to take hold of the Cords of Heaven; ] but this Authour runs, not to the Cords,

but to the Spiders Web of Heaven; as you shall plainly see in our examination

of these two particulars even now hinted. And first, that which sheweth us the

Polar distances of the Observators one by one, I have noted down in these

brief  Calculations;  For  a  full  understanding    of  which,  I  ought  first  to

advertise you, that when ever the new Star, or other Phaenomenon is near to

the earth, turning with a Diurnal motion about the Pole, it will seem to be

farther off from the said Pole, whilst it is in the lower part of the Meridian,

then whilst it is above, as in this Figure [being fig. third of this Dial. ] may be

seen. In which the point T. denotes the centre of the Earth; O. the place of the

Observator; the Arch VPC the Firmament; P. the Pole. The Phaenomenon,

[or appearance] moving along the Circle FS. is seen one while under the Pole

by the Ray OFC. and another while above, according to the Ray OSD. so that

the places seen in the Firmament are D. and C. but the true places in respect

of the Centre T, are B, and A, equidistant from the Pole. Where it is manifest

that the apparent place of the Phaenomenon S, that is the point D, is nearer to

the Pole than the other apparent place C, seen along the Line or Ray OFC,

which is the first thing to be noted. In the second place you must note that the

exces of the apparent inferiour distance from the Pole, over and above the

apparent superiour distance from the said Pole, is greater than the Inferiour

Parallax of the Phaenomenon, that is, I say, that the excesse of the Arch CP,

(the apparent inferior distance) over and above the Arch PD, (the apparent

superior distance) is greater then the Arch CA, (that is the inferiour Paralax.)

Which is easily proved; for the Arch CP. more exceedeth PD, then PB; PB,being bigger than PD, but PB. is equal to PA, and the excesse of CP, above

PA, is the arch, CA, therefore the excesse of the arch CP above the arch PD,

is greater than the arch CA, which is the parallax of the Phaenomenon placed

in F, which was to be demonstrated. And to give all advantages to the Author,

let us suppose that the parallax of the star in F, is the whole excesse of the

arch CP (that is of the inferiour distance from the pole) above the arch PD

(the inferiour distance.) I proceed in the next place to examine that which the

observations  of  all  Astronomers  cited  by  the  Authour  giveth  us,  amongst

which, there is not one that maketh not against himself and his purpose. And

let us begin with these of Buschius, who findeth the stars distance from the

pole, when it was superiour, to be 28 gr. 10 m. and the inferiour to be 28 gr.

30 m. so that the excesse is 0 gr. 20 m. which let us take (in favour of the

Author) as if it all were the parallax of the star in F, that is the angle TFO.

Then the distance from the Vertex [or Zenith] that is the arch CV, is 67 gr. 20

m. These two things being found, prolong the line CO, and from it let fall the

perpendicular TI, and let us consider the triangle TOI, of which the angle I is

right angle, and the angle IOT known, as being vertical to the angle VOC, the

distance of the star from the Vertex, Moreover in the triangle  TIF, which is

also rectangular, there is known the angle F, taken by the parallax. Then note

in some place apart the two angles IOT and IFT, and of them take the sines,

which are here set down to them, as you seen. And because in the triangle

IOT,  the  sine  TI  is  92276.  of  those  parts,  whereof  the  whole  sine  TO  is

100000; and moreover in the triangle IFT, the sine TI is 582. of those parts,

whereof the whole sine TF is 100000, to find how many TF is of those parts,

whereof TO is 100000; we will say by the Rule of three: If TI be 582. TF is

an 100000. but if T I were 92276. how much would T F be. Let us multiply

92276. by 100000. and the product will be 9227600000. and this must be

divided by 582. and the quotient will be 15854982. and so many shall there

be in TF of those parts, of which there are in TO an 100000. So that if it were

required to know how many lines TO, are in TF, we would divide 15854982

by 100000. and there will come forth 158. and very near an half; and so many

diameters  shall  be  the  distance  of  the  star  F,  from  the  centre  T,  and  to

abreviate the operation, we seeing, that the product of the multiplication of

92276. by 100000, ought to be divided first by 582, and then the quotient of

that division by 100000. we may without multiplying 92276. by 100000. and

with one onely division of the sine 92276. by the sine 582. soon obtain the

same solution, as may be seen there below; where 92276. divided by 582.giveth us the said 158 1/2, or thereabouts. Let us bear in mind therefore, that

the onely division of the sine TI, as the sine of the angle TOI by the sine TI,

as the sine of the angle IFT, giveth us the distance sought TF, in so many

diameters TO.


See next that which the observations of Peucerus giveth us, in which the

inferiour distance from the Pole is 28 gr. 21 m. and the superiour 28 gr. 2 m.

the difference 0 gr. 19 m. and the distance from the vertical point 66 gr. 27 m.

from which particulars is gathered the stars distance from the centre almost

166 semediameters.


Here take what Tycho his observation holdeth forth to us, interpreted with

greatest favour to the adversary; to wit, the inferiour distance from the pole is

28 gr. 13 m. and the superiour 28 gr. 2 m. omit ing the difference which is 0

gr. 11 m. as if all were one Parallax; the distance from the vertical point 62

gr. 15 m. Behold here below the operation, and the distance of the star from

the centre found to be 976 9/16 semidiameters.


The  observation  of  Reinholdus,  which  is  the  next  ensuing,  giveth  us  the

distance of the Star from the Centre 793. Semidiameters.


From the following observation of the Landgrave, the distance of the Star

from the Centre is made to be 1057, Semidiameters.


Two of the most favourable observations for the Authour being taken from

Camerarius, the distance of the Star from the Centre is found to be 3143

Semidiameters.


The Observation of Munosius giveth no Parallax, and therefore rendreth the

new  Star  amongst  the  highest  of  the  fixed.  That  of  Hainzelius  makes  it

infinitely  remote,  but  with  the  correction  of  an  half  min.  prim.  placeth  it

amongst the fixed Stars. And the same is collected from Vrsinus, with the

correction of 12. min. prim. The other Astronomers have not give us the

distance above and below the Pole, so that nothing can be concluded from

them. By this time you see, that all the observations of all these men conspire

against the Author, in placing the Star in the Heavenly and highest Regions.


SAGR.But what defence hath he for himself against so manifest contradictions?


SALV.


He betakes himself to one of those weak threads which I speak of; saying that

the  Parallaxes  come  to  be  lessened  by  means  of  the  refractions,  which

opperating  contrarily  sublimate  the  Phaenomenon,  whereas  the  Parallaxes

abase it. Now of what little stead this lamentable refuge is, judge by this, that

in case that effect of the refractions were of such an efficacy, as that which

not long time since some Astronomers have introduced, the most that they

could work touching the elevating a Phaeuomenon above the Horizon  more

than truth, when it is before hand 23. or 24. Degrees high, would be the

lessening its Parallax about 3. minutes, the which abatement is too small to

pull down the Star below the Moon, and in some cases is lesse than the

advantage  given  him  by  us  in  admitting  that  the  excesse  of  the  inferiour

distance  from  the  Pole  above  the  Superiour,  is  all  Parallax,  the  which

advantage is far more clear and palpable than the effect of Refracton, of the

greatnesse of which I stand in doubt, and not without reason. But besides, I

demand of the Author, whether he thinks that those Astronomers, of whose

observations he maketh use, had knowledge of these effects of Refractions,

and considered the same, or no; if they did know and consider them, it is

reasonable  to  think  that  the,  kept  account  of  them  in  assigning  the  true

Elevation of the Star, making in those degrees of Attitude discovered with the

Instruments,  such  abatements  as  were  convenient  on  the  account  of  the

alterations made by the Refractions; insomuch that the distances by them

delivered, were in the end those corrected and exact, and not the apparent and

false ones. But if he think that those Authors made no reflection upon the said

Refractions,  it  must  be  confessed,  that  they  had  in  like  manner  erred  in

determining  all  those  things  which  cannot  be  perfectly  adjusted  without

allowance  for  the  Refractions;  amongst  which  things  one  is  the  precise

investigation of the Polar Altitudes, which are commonly taken from the two

Meridian  Altitudes  of  some  of  the  fixed  Stars  that  are  constantly  visible,

which Altitudes will come to be altered by Refraction in the same manner,

just as those of the new Star; so that the Polar Altitude that is deduced from

them, will prove to be defective, and to partake of the self same want which

this Author assigns to the Altitudes ascribed to the new Star, to wit, both that

and these will be with equal falshood placed higher than really they are. Butany such errour, as far as concerns our present businesse, doth no prejudce at

all: For we not needing to know any more, but onely the difference between

the  two  distances  of  the  new  Star  from  the  Pole  at  such  time  as  it  was

inferiour and superiour, it is evident that such distances would be the same,

taking the alteration of Refraction commonly for the Star and for the Pole, or

for them when commonly amended. The Authors Argument would indeed

have had some strength, though very small, if he had assured us that the

Altitude of the Pole had been once precisely assigned, and corrected from the

errour depending on refraction, from which again the Astronomers had not

kept themselves in assigning the altitudes of the new Star; but he hath not

ascertained us of that, nor perhaps could he have done, nor haply, (and this is

more probable) was that caution wanting in the Observators.


SAGR.


This argument is in my judgment sufficiently answered;  therefore tell me

how he dis-ingageth himself in the next place from that particular of the Stars

having constantly kept the same distance from the fixed Stars circumjacent to

it.


SALV.


He betakes himself, in like manner, to two threads, yet more unable to uphold

him than the former: one of which is likewise fastened to refraction, but so

much less firmly, in that he saith, that refraction operating upon the new Star,

and sublimating it higher than its true situation, maketh the seeming distances

untain to be distinguished from the true, when compared to the circumposed

fixed  Stars  that  environ  it.  Nor  can  I  sufficiently  admire  how  he  can

dissemble his knowing how that the same refraction will work alike upon the

new Star, as upon the antient one its neighbour, elevating both equally, so as

that  such  a  like  accident  altereth  not  the  space  betwixt  them.  His  other

subterfuge is yet more unhappy, and carryeth with it much of ridiculous, it

being founded upon the errour that may arise in the instrumental operation it

self; whilst that the Observator not being able to constitute the centre of the

eyes pupil in the centre of the Sextant (an Instrument imployed in observing

the distance between two Stars) but holding it elevated above that centre, as

much as the said pupil is distant from I know not what bone of the cheek,

against which the end of the Instrument resteth, there is formed in the eye anangle more acute than that which is made by the sides of the Instrument;

which angle of rayes differeth also from it self, at such time as a man looketh

upon  Stars,  not  much  elevated  above  the  Horizon,  and  the  same  being

afterwards placed at a great height; that angle, saith he, is made different,

while  the  Instrument  goeth  ascending,  the  head  standing  still:  but  if  in

mounting the Instrument, the neck should bend backwards, and the head go

rising, together with the Instrument, the angle would then continue the same.

So  that  the  Authours  answer  supposeth  that  the  Observators  in  using  the

Instrument have not raised the head, as they ought to have done; a thing

which hath nothing of likelihood in it. But granting that so it had been, I leave

you  to  judge  what  difference  can  be  between  two  acute  angles  of  two

equicrural triangles, the sides of one of which triangles are each four [Italian]

Braces [i. e. about three English yards] and those of the other, four braces

within the quantity of the diameter of a Pea; for the differences cannot be

absolutely greater between the length of the two visive rayes, whilst the line

is drawn perpendicularly from the centre of the pupil, upon the plain of the

Rule of the Sextant (which line is no bigger than the breath of the thumb) and

the length of the same rayes, whilst elevating the Sextant, without raising the

head together with it, that same line no longer falleth perpendicularly upon

the said plane, but inclineth, making  the angle towards the circumference

something acute. But wholly to free this Authour from these unhappy lies, let

him  know,  (in  regard  it  appears  that  he  is  not  very  skilful  in  the  use  of

Astronomicall Instruments) that in the sides of the Sextant or Quadrant there

are placed twoTraguardi. Sights, one in the centre, and the other at the other

at the opposite end, which are raised an inch or more above the plane of the

Rule; and through the tops of those sights the ray of the eye is made to passe,

which eye likewise is held an hands breadth or two, or it may be more, from

the Instrument; so that neither the pupil, nor any bone of the cheek, nor of the

whole body toucheth or stayeth it self upon the Instrument, nor much lesse is

the Instrument upheld or mounted in the armes, especially if it be one of

those  great  ones,  as  is  usual,  which  weighing  tens,  hundreds,  and  also

thousands of pounds, are placed upon very strong feet or frames: so that the

whole objection vanisheth. These are the subterfuges of this Authour, which,

though they were all of steel, would not secure him the hundredth part of a

minute;  and  with  these  he  conceits  to  make  us  believe,  that  he  hath

compensated that difference, which importeth more than an hundred minutes;

I mean, that of the not observing a notable difference in the distances betweenone of the fixed stars, and the new star in in any of their circulations; which,

had it been neer to the Moon, it ought to have been very conspicuous to the

meer sight, without any Instrument, especially comparing it with the eleventh

of Cassiopeia, its neighbour, within 1 gr. 30 m. which ought to have varied

from  it  more  than  two  diameters  of  the  moon,  as  the  more  intelligent

Astronomers of those times do well note.


SAGR.


Methinks  I  see  that  unfortunate  Husbandman,  who  after  all  his  expected

crops, have been beaten down and destroyed by a storm, goeth up and down

with  a  languishing  and  down-cast  look,  gleaning  up  every  small  ear  that

would not suffice to keep a chicken alive one sole day.


SALV.


Truly, this Authour came out too slenderly provided with armes against the

assailants of the Heavens inalterability, and with too brittle a chain attempted

to pull down the new star of Cassiopeia from the highest Regions, to these so

low  and  elementary.  And  for  that  I  think  that  we  have  sufficiently

demonstrated  the  vast  difference  that  is  between  the  arguments  of  those

Astronomers, and of this their Antagonist, it will be convenient that we leave

this particular, and return to our principal matter; in which there presents it

self to our consideration the annual motion commonly ascribed to the Sun,

but by Aristarchus Samius first of all, and after by Copernicus taken from the

Sun, and transferred upon the Earth; against which Hypothesis, methinks I

see Simplicius to come strongly provided, and particularly with the sword

and    buckler  of  the  little  Treatise  of  Conclusions,  or  Disquisitions

Mathematical,  the  oppugnations  of  which  it  would  be  good  to  begin  to

produce.


SIMP.


I will, if you so please, reserve them to the last, as those that are of latest

invention.


SALV.It  will  therefore  be  necessary,  that  in  conformity  to  the  method  hitherto

observed,  you  do  orderly,  one  by  one,  propound  the  arguments,  on  the

contrary, aswell of Aristotle, as of the other ancients, which shall be my task

also, that so nothing may escape our strict consideration and examination;

and  likewise  Sagredus,  with  the  vivacity  of  his  wit,  shall  interpose  his

thoughts, as he shall finde himself inclined.


SAGR.


I will do it with my wonted freedome; and your commands shall oblige you

to excuse me in so doing.


SALV.


The favour will challenge thanks, and not an excuse. But now let Simplicius

begin to propose those doubts which disswade him from believing that the

Earth, in like manner, as the other planets, may move round about a fixed

centre.


SIMP.


The first and greatest difficulty is the repugnance and incompatibility that is

between being in the centre, and being far from it; for if the Terrestrial Globe

were to move in a year by the circumference of a circle, that is, under the

Zodiack, it is impossible that it should, at the same time, be in the centre of

the Zodiack; but that the Earth is in the said centre Aristotle, Ptolomy, and

others have many wayes proved.


SALV.


You very well argue, and there is no question but that one that would make

the Earth to move in the circumference of a circle, must first of necessity

prove, that it is not in the centre of that same circle; it now followeth, that we

enquire, whether the Earth be, or be not in that centre, about which, I say, that

it turneth, and you say that it is fixed; and before we speak of this, it is

likewise necessary that we declare our selves, whether you and I have both

the same conceit of this centre, or no. Therefore tell me, what and where is

this your intended centre?SIMP.


When I speak of the centre, I mean that of the Universe, that of the World,

that of the Starry Sphere.


SALV.


Although I might very rationally put it in dispute, whether there be any such

centre in nature, In hath not been hitherto proved by any, whether the World

be finite or infinite. or no; being that neither you nor any one else hath ever

proved,  whether  the  World  be  finite  and  figurate,  or  else  infinite  and

interminate; yet nevertheless granting you, for the present, that it is finite, and

of a terminate Spherical Figure, and that thereupon it hath its centre; it will be

requisite to see how credible it is that the Earth, and not rather some other

body, doth possesse the said centre.


SIMP.


That the world is finite, terminate, and spherical, Aristotle  proveth with an

hundred demonstrations.


SALV.


All  which  in  the  end  are  reduced  to  one  alone,  The  Demonstrations  of

Aristotle to p ove that the Vniverse is finite, are all nullified by denying it to

be moveable. and that one to none at all; for if I deny his assumption, to wit,

that the Universe is moveable, all his demonstrations come to nothing, for he

onely proveth the Universe to be finite and terminate, for that it is moveable.

But that we may not multiply disputes, let it be granted for once, that the

World is finite, spherical, and hath its centre. And seeing that that centre and

figure is argued from its mobility, it will, without doubt, be very reasonable,

if from the circular motions of mundane bodies we proceed to the particular

investigation of that centres proper place: Aristotle makes that point to be the

centre of the Universe about which all the Celestial Spheres do revolve. Nay

Aristotle himself hath argued and determined in the same manner, making

that same to be the centre of the Universe about which all the Coelelestial

Spheres revolve, and in which he beleived the Terrestrial Globe to have been

placed. A question is put, in case that if Aristotle were forced to receive oneof two propositions that make against his doctrine, which he would admit.

Now  tell  me  Simplicius,  if  Aristotle  should  be  constrained  by  evident

experience to alter in part this his disposure and order of the Universe, and

confesse himself to have been deceived in one of these two propositions,

namely,  either  in  placing  the  Earth  in  the  centre,  or  in  saying,  that  the

Coelestial Spheres do move about that centre, which of the two confessions

think you would he choose?


SIMP.


I believe, that if it should so fall out, the Peripateticks.


SALV.


I do not ask the Peripateticks, I demand of Aristotle, for as to those, I know

very well what they would reply; they, as observant and humble vassals of

Aristotle,  would  deny  all  the  experiments  and  all  the  observations  in  the

World, nay, would also refuse to see them, that they might not be forced to

acknowledg them, and would say that the World stands as Aristotle writeth,

and  not  as  nature  will  have  it,  for  depriving  them  of  the  shield  of  his

Authority, with what do you think they would appear in the field? Tell me

therefore what you are perswaded Aristotle himself would do in the case.


SIMP.


To  tell  you  the  truth,  I  know  not  how  to  resolve  which  of  the  two

inconveniences is to be esteemed the lesser.


SALV.


Apply not I pray you this term of inconvenience to a thing which possibly

may of necessity be so. It was an inconvenience to place the Earth in the

centre of the Coelestial revolutions; but seeing you know not to which part he

would incline, I esteeming him to be a man of great judgment, let us examine

which of the two choices is the more rational, and that we will hold that

Aristotle would have received. Reassuming therefore our discourse from the

beginning, we suppose with the good liking of Aristotle, that the World (of

the magnitude of which we have no sensible notice beyond the fixed stars) asbeing of a spherical  figure; and moveth circularly, hath necessarily, and in

respect of its figure a centre; and we being moreover certain, that within the

starry Sphere there are many Orbs, the one within another, with their stars,

which  likewise  do  move  circulary,  it  is  in  dispute  whether  it  is  most

reasonable to believe and to say that these conteined Orbs do move round the

said centre of the World, or else about some other centre far remote from

that? Tell me now Simplicius what you think concerning this particular.


SIMP.


If we could stay upon this onely supposition, Its more rational that the Orb

containing, and the parts contained, do move all about one centre, than u on

divers. and that we were sure that we might encounter nothing else that might

disturb us, I would say that it were much more reasonable to affirm that the

Orb  containing,  and  the  parts  contained,  do  all  move  about  one  common

centre, than about divers.


SALV.


Now if it were true that the centre of the World is the same about which the

Orbs of mundane bodies, If the centre of the World be the  that about which

the planets move, the Sun and not the Earth is placed in it. that is to say, of

the Planets, move, it is most certain that it is not the Earth, but the Sun rather

that is fixed in the centre of the World. So that as to this first simple and

general apprehension, the middle place belongeth to the Sun, and the Earth is

as far remote from the centre, as it is from that same Sun.


SIMP.


But from whence do you argue that not the Earth, but the Sun is in the centre

of the Planetary revolutions?


SALV.


I  infer  the  same  from  most  evident,  and  therefore  necessarily  concludent

observations, of which the most palpable to exclude the Earth from the said

centre, Observations from whence it is collected that the Sun and not the

Earth is in the centre of the Celestial revolutions. and to place the Sun therein,are, the seeing all the Planets one while neerer and another while farther off

from the Earth with so great differences, that for example, Venus when it is at

the farthest, is six times more remote from us, than when it is neerest, and

Mars riseth almost eight times as high at one time as at another. See therefore

whether Aristotle was not somewhat mistaken in thinking that it was at all

times equidistant from us.


SIMP.


What in the next place are the tokens that their motions are about the Sun?


SALV.


It is argued in the three superiour planets Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, in that we

find them alwayes neerest to the Earth when they are in opposition to the

Sun,  and  farthest  off  when  they  are  towards  the  conjunction,  and  this

approximatian and recession importeth thus much that Mars neer at hand,

appeareth very neer 60 times greater than when it is remote. The mutation of

figure in Venus argueth its motion to be about the Sun. As to Venus in the

next place, and to Mercury, we are certain that they revolve about the Sun, in

that they never move far from him, and in that we see them one while above

and another while below it, The Moon cannot seperate from the Earth. as the

mutations of figure in Venus necessarily argueth. To ching the Moon it is

certain, that she cannot in any way  seperate from the Earth, for the reasons

that shall be more distinctly alledged hereafter.


SAGR.


I expect that I shall hear more admirable things that depend upon this annual

motion of the Earth, than were those dependant upon the diurnal revolution.


SALV.


You do not therein erre: The annual motion of the Earth mixing with the

motions of the other Planets produce extravagant appearances. For as to the

operation of the diurnal motion upon the Celestial bodies, it neither was, nor

can be other, than to make the Universe seem to run precipitately the contrary

way; but this annual motion intermixing with the particular motions of all theplanets, produceth very many extravagancies, which have disarmed and non-

plust all the greatest Scholars in the World. But returning to our first general

apprehensions, I reply that the centre of the Celestial conversions of the ive

planets Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury, is the Sun; and shall be

likewise the centre of the motion of the Earth, if we do but succeed in our

attempt of placing it in Heaven. And as for the Moon, this hath a circular

motion about the Earth, from which (as I said before) it can by no means

alienate it self, but yet doth it not cease to go about the Sun together with the

Ear h in an annual motion.


SIMP.


I do not as yet very well apprehend this structure, but it may be, that with

making a few draughts thereof, one may better and more easily discourse

concerning the same.


SALV.


Tis very true: yea for your greater satisfaction and admiration together, I

desire you, that you would take the pains to draw the same; and to see that

although  you  think  you  do  not  apprehend  it,  yet  you  very  perfectly

understand it; And onely by answering to my interrogations you shall designe

it punctually. Take therefore a sheet of paper and Compasses; The Systeme of

the Universe designed from the appearances. And let this white paper be the

immense  expansion  of  the  Universe;  in  which  you  are  to  distribute  and

dispose its parts in order, according as reason shall direct you. And first, in

regard that without my instruction you verily believe that the Earth is placed

in this Universe, therefore note a point at pleasure, about which you intend it

to to be placed, and mark it with some characters.


SIMP.


Let this mark A be the place of the Terrestrial Globe.


SALV.


Very well. I know secondly, that you understand perfectly that the said Earth

is not within the body of the Sun, nor so much as contiguous to it, but distantfor some space from the same, and therefore assign to the Sun what other

place you best like, as remote from the Earth as you please, and mark this in

like manner.


SIMP.


Here it is done: Let the place of the Solar body be O.


SALV.


These two being constituted, I desire that we may  think of accomodating the

body of Venus in such a manner that its state and motion may agree with

what  sensible  experiments  do  shew  us;  and  therefore  recall  to  mind  that

which either by the past discourses, or your own observations you have learnt

to befal that star, and afterwards assign unto it that state which you think

agreeth with the same.


SIMP.


Supposing those Phaenomena expressed by you, and which I have likewise

read in the little treatise of Conclusions, to


[figure]


be true, namely, that that star never recedes from the Sun beyond such a

determinate space of 40 degrees or thereabouts, so as that it never cometh

either to apposition with the Sun, or so much as to quadrature, or yet to the

sextile aspect; and more than that, Venus very great towards the respective

conjunction and very small towards the maintine. supposing that it sheweth at

one time almost 40 times greater than at another; namely, very great, when

being retrograde, it goeth to the vespertine conjnnction of the Sun, and very

small  when  with  a    motion  straight  forwards,  it  goeth  to  the  matutine

conjunction; and moreover it being true, that when it appeareth bigge it shews

with  a  corniculate  figure,  and  when  it  appeareth  little,  it  seems  perfectly

round, these appearances, I say, being true, I do not see how one can choose

but affirm the said star to revolve in a circle about the Sun, Venus necessarily

proved to move about the Sun. for that the said circle cannot in any wise be

said to encompasse or to contain the Earth within it, nor to be inferiour to theSun, that is between it and the Earth, nor yet superiour to the Sun. That circle

cannot incompasse the Earth, because Venus would then sometimes come to

opposition with the Sun; it cannot be inferiour, for then Venus in both its

conjunctions with the Sun would seem horned; nor can it be superiour, for

then it would alwayes appear round, and never cornicular; and therefore for

receit of it I will draw the circle CH, about the Sun, without encompassing

the Earth.


SALV.


Having placed Venus, it is requisite that you think of Mercury, which, as you

know, alwayes keeping about the Sun, doth recede lesse distance from it than

Venus; therefore consider with your self, what place is most convenient to

assign it.


SIMP.


It is not to be questioned, The revolution of Mercury concluded to be about

the Sun, within the Orb of Venus. but that this Planet imitating Venus, the

most commodious place for it will be, a lesser circle within this of Venus, in

like manner about the Sun, being that of its greatest vicinity to the Sun, an

argument,  an  evidence  sufficiently  proving  the  vigour  of  its  illumination,

above that of Venus, and of the other Planets, we may therefore upon these

considerations draw its Circle, marking it with the Characters BG.


SALV.


But Mars, Mars necessarily includeth within its Orb the Earth, and also the

Sun. Where shall we place it?


SIMP.


Mars, Because it comes to an opposition with the Sun, its Circle must of

necessity encompass the Earth; But I see that it must necessarily encompass

the Sun also, for coming to conjunction with the Sun, if it did not move over

it, but were below it, it would appear horned, as Venus and the Moon; but it

shews alwayes round, and therefore it is necessary, that it no less includeth

the Sun within its circle than the Earth. Mars at its opposition to the Sunshews to be sixty times bigger than towards the conjunction. And because I

remember that you did say, that when it is in opposition with the Sun, it

seems 60 times bigger than when it is in the conjunction, me thinks that a

Circle about the Centre of the Sun, and that taketh in the earth, will very well

agree with these Phaenomena, which I do note and mark DI, where Mars in

the point D, is near to the earth, and opposite to the Sun; but when it is in the

point I, it is at Conjuction with the Sun, but very far from the Earth. And

because the same appearances are observed in Jupiter and Saturn, Jupiter and

Saturn do likewise encompasse the Earth, and the Sun. although with much

lesser difference in Jupiter than in Mars, and with yet lesse in Saturn than in

Jupiter; me thinks I  understand that we should very commodiously salve all

the  Phaenomena  of  these  two  Planets,  with  two  Circles,  in  like  manner,

drawn about the Sun, and this first for Jupiter, marking it EL, and another

above that for Saturn marked FM.


SALV.


You  have  behaved  your  self  bravely  hitherto.  The  approximation  and

recession of the three superiour Planets, importeth double the Suns distance.

And because (as you see) the approach and recession of the three Superiour

Planets is measured with double the distance between the Earth and Sun, this

maketh  greater  difference  in  Mars  than  in  Jupiter,  the  Circle  DI,  The

difference of the apparent magnitude lesse in Saturn, than in Jupiter, and 

Jupiter than in Mars, and why. of Mars, being lesser than the Circle EL, of

Jupiter, and likewise because this EL, is lesse than this Circle FM, of Saturn,

the  said  difference  is  also  yet  lesser  in  Saturn  than  in  Jupiter,  and  that

punctually answereth the Phaenomena. It remains now that you assign a place

to the Moon.


SIMP.


Following the same Method (which seems to me very conclusive) in regard

we see that the Moon cometh to conjunction and opposition with the Sun,

The Moons Orb invironeth the Earth, but not the Sun. it is necessary to say,

that its circle encompasseth the Earth, but yet doth it not follow, that it must

environ the Sun, for then at that time towards its conjunction, it would not

seem horned, but alwayes round and full of Light. Moreover it could never

make, as it often doth, the Eclipse of the Sun, by interposing betwixt it andus; It is necessary therefore to assign it a circle about the Earth, which should

be this NP, so that being constituted in P, it will appear from the Earth A, to

be in conjunction with the Sun, and placed in N, it appeareth opposite to the

Sun,  and  in  that  position  it  may  fall  under  the  Earths  shadow,  and  be

obscured.


SALV.


Now, Simplicius, what shall we do with the fixed stars? Shall we suppose

them  scattered  through  the  immense  abisses  of  the  Universe,  at  different

distances, from any one determinate point; or else placed in a superficies

spherically distended about a centre of its own, so that each of them may be

equidistant from the said centre?


SIMP.


I would rather take a middle way; The probable situation of the fixed stars.

and  would  assign  them  an  Orb  described  about  a  determinate  centre  and

comprized  within  two  spherical  superficies,  to  wit,  one  very  high,  and

concave, and the other lower, Which ought to be accounted the sphere of the

Vniverse.  and  convex,  betwixt  which  I  would  constitute  the  innumerable

multitude of stars, but yet at divers altitudes, and this might be called the

Sphere of the Universe, conteining within it the Orbs of the planets already

by us described.


SALV.


But now we have all this while, Simplicius, disposed the mundane bodies

exactly, according to the order of Copernicus, and we have done it with your

hand; and moreover to each of them you have assigned peculiar motions of

their own, except to the Sun, the Earth, and starry Sphere; and to Mercury

with Venus, you have ascribed the circular motion about the Sun,  without

encompassing the Earth; about the same Sun you make the three superiour

Planets Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, to move, comprehending the Earth within

their circles. The Moon in the next place can move in no other manner than

about the Earth, without taking in the Sun, and in all these motions you agree

also with the same Copernicus. There remains now three things to be decided

between the Sun, the Earth, and fixed stars, namely, Rest, Rest, the annualmotion and the diurnal ought to be distributed betwixt the Sun, Earth, and

Firmament. which seemeth to belong to the Earth; the annual motion under

the Zodiack, which appeareth to pertain to the Sun; and the diurnal motion,

which seems to belong to the Starry Sphere, and to be by that imparted to all

the rest of the Universe, the Earth excepted, And it being true that all the

Orbs of the Planets, I mean of Mercury, In a moveable sphere, it seemeth

more reasonable that its centre be stable, than any other of its parts. Venus,

Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, do move about the Sun as their centre; rest seemeth

with so much more reason to belong to the said Sun, than to the Earth, in as

much as in a moveable Sphere, it is more reasonable that the centre stand

still, than any other place remote from the said centre; to the Earth therefore,

which is constituted in the midst of moveable parts of the Universe, I mean

between  Venus  and  Mars,  one  of  which  maketh  its  revolution  in  nine

moneths,  and  the  other  in  two  years,  may  the  motion  of  a  year  very

commodiously be assigned, leaving rest to the Sun. Granting to the Earth the

annual, it must of necessity also have the diurnal motion assigned to it. And if

that be so, it followeth of necessary consequence, that likewise the diurnal

motion belongeth to the Earth; for, if the Sun standing still, the Earth should

not revolve about its self, but have onely the annual motion about the Sun,

our year would be no other than one day and one night, that is six moneths of

day, and six moneths of night, as hath already been said. You may consider

withal how commodiously the precipitate motion of 24 hours is taken away

from the Universe, and the fixed stars that are so many Suns, are made in

conformity  to  our  Sun  to  enjoy  a  perpetual  rest.  You  see  moreover  what

facility one meets with in this rough draught to render the reason of so great

appearances in the Celestial bodies.


SAGR.


I very well perceive that facility, but as you from this simplicity collect great

probabilities for the truth of that System, others haply could make thence

contrary deductions; doubting, not without reason, why that same being the

ancient  Systeme  of  Pythagoreans,  and  so  well  accommodated  to  the

Phaenomena, hath in the succession of so many thousand years had so few

followers, and hath been even by Aristotle himself refuted, and since that

Copernicus himself hath had no better fortune.SALV.


If you had at any time been assaulted, as I have been, many and many a time,

with  the  relation  of  such  kind  of  frivolous  reasons,  as  serve  to  make  the

vulgar contumacious, and difficult to be perswaded to hearken, (I will not say

to consent) to this novelty,  I believe that you wonder at the paucity of those

who are followers of that opinion would be much diminished. Discourses

more than childish, serve to keep fools in the opinion of the Earths stability.

But small regard in my judgement, ought to be had of such thick sculs, as

think it a most convincing proof to confirm, and steadfastly settle them in the

belief of the earths immobility, to see that if this day they cannot Dine at

Constantinople, nor Sup in Jappan, that then the Earth as being a most grave

body cannot clamber above the Sun, and then slide headlong down again; Of

such  as  these  I  say,  whose  number  is  infinite,  we  need  not  make  any

reckoning, nor need we to record their foolieries, or to strive to gain to our

side as our partakers in subul and sublime opinions, men in whose definition

the kind onely is concerned, and the difference is wanting. Moreover, what

ground do you think you could be able to gain, with all the demonstrations of

the World upon brains so stupid, as are not able of themselves to know their

down  right  follies?  But  my  admiration,  Sagredus,  is  very  different  from

yours, you wonder that so few are followers of the Pythagorean Opinion; and

I am amazed how there could be any yet left till now that do embrace and

follow it: A declaration of the improbability of Copernicus his opinion. Nor

can I sufficiently admire the eminencie of those mens wits that have received

and held it to be true, and with the sprightlinesse of their judgements offered

such violence to their own sences, as that they have been able to prefer that

which  their  reason  dictated  to  them,  to  that  which  sensible  experiments

represented most manifestly on the contrary. That the reasons against the

Diurnal virtiginous revolution of the Earth by you already examined, do carry

great  probability  with  them,  we  have  already  seen;  as  also  that  the

Ptolomaicks, and Aristotelicks, with all their Sectators did receive them for

true, is indeed a very great argument of their efficacie; but those experiments

which  apertly  contradict  the  annual  motion,  Reasons  and  discourse  in

Aristarcus and Copernicus prevailed over manifest sence. are of yet so much

more manifestly repugnant, that (I say it again) I cannot find any bounds for

my admiration, how that reason was able in Aristarchus and Copernicus, tocommit such a rape upon their Sences, as in despight thereof, to make her self

mistress of their credulity.


SAGR.


Are we then to have still more of these strong oppositions against this annual

motion?


SALV.


We are, and they be so evident and sensible, that if a sence more sublime and

excellent than those common and vulgar, did not take part with reason, I

much fear, that I also should have been much more averse to the Copernican

Systeem than I have been since the time that a clearer lamp than ordinary

hath enlightned me.


SAGR.


Now therefore Salviatus, let us come to joyn battail for every word that is

spent on any thing else, I take to be cast away.


SALV.


I am ready to serve you. You have already seen me draw the form of the

Copernican  Systeme;  Mars  makes  an  hot  assaults  upon  the  Coper  can

Systeme. against the truth of which Mars himself, in the first place, makes an

hot charge; who, in case it were true, that its distances from the earth should

so much vary, as that from the least distance to the greatest, there were twice

as much differences, as from the earth to the Sun; it would be necessary, that

when it is nearest unto us, its discus would shew more than 60. times bigger

than  it  seems,  when  it  is  farthest  from  us;  nevertheless  that  diversity  of

apparent magnitude is not to be seen, nay in its opposition with the Sun,

when its nearest to the Earth, it doth not shew so much as quadruple and

quintuple in bigness, to what it is, when towards the conjunction it cometh to

be occulted under the Suns rayes. Another and greater difficulty doth Venus

exhibit;  For  if  revolving  about  the  Sun,  as  Copernicus  affirmeth,  The

Phaenomena of Venus appear contrary to the Systeme of Copernicus. it were

one while above, & another while below the same, receding and approachingto us so much as the Diameter of the circle described would be, at such time

as it should be below the Sun, and nearest to us, its discus would shew little

less than 40 times bigger than when it is above the Sun, near to its other

conjunction; yet neverthelesse, Another difficulty raised by Venus against

Copernicus.  the  difference  is  almost  imperceptible  Let  us  add  another

difficulty, that in case the body of Venus be of it self dark, and onely shineth

as the Moon, by the illumination of the Sun, which seemeth most reasonable;

it would shew forked or horned at such time as it is under the Sun, as the

Moon doth when she is in like manner near the Sun; an accident that is not to

be discovered in her. Venus, according to Copernicus, either lucid in it self,

or  else  of  a  transparent  substance.  Whereupon  Copernicus  affirmeth,  that

either she is light of her self, or else that her substance is of such a nature,

that it can imbue the Solar light, and transmit the same through all its whole

depth, so as to be able to appear to us alwayes shining; and in this manner

Copernicus  excuseth  the  not  changing  figure  in  Venus:  but  of  her  small

variation of Magnitude, Copernicus speaketh nothing of the small variation of

bigness in Venus and in Mars. he maketh no mention at all; and much less of

Mars than was needful; I believe as being unable so well as he desired to

salve a Phaenomenon so contrary to his Hypothesis, and yet being convinced

by so many other occurrences and reasons he maintained, and held the same

Hypothesis to be true. Besides these things, to make the Planets, together

with the Earth, to move above the Sun as the Centre of their conversions, and

the Moon onely to break that order, The moon much disturbeth the order of

the other Planets. and to have a motion by it self about the earth; and to make

both her, the Earth, and the whole Elementary Sphere, to move all together

about the Sun in a year, this seemeth to pervert the order of this Systeme,

which rendreth it unlikely and false. These are those difficulties that make me

wonder  how  Aristarchus  and  Copernicus,  who  must  needs  have  observed

them,  not  having  been  able  for  all  that  to  salve  them,  have  yet

notwithstanding by other admirable occurrences been induced  to conside so

much in that which reason dictated to them, as that they have considently

affirmed that the structure of the Universe could have no other figure than

that which they designed to themselves. There are also several other very

serious and curious doubts, not so easie to be resolved by the middle sort of

wits, but yet penetrated and declared by Coperninus, which we shall defer till

by and by, after we have answered to other objections that seem to make

against this opinion. Now coming to the declarations and answers to thosethree  before  named  grand  Objections,  I  say,  that  the  two  first  not  onely

contradict not the Copernican Systeme, Answers to the three first objections

against the Copernican, Systeme. but greatly and absolutely favour it; For

both  Mars  and  Venus  seems  unequal  to  themselves,  according  to  the

proportions assigned; and Venus under the Sun seemeth horned, and goeth

changing figures in it self exactly like the Moon.


SAGR.


But how came this to be concealed from Copernicus, and revealed to you?


SALV.


These things cannot be comprehended, save onely by the sense of seeing, the

which by nature was not granted to man so perfect, as that it was able to

attain to the discovery of such differences; nay even the very instrument of

sight is an impediment to it self: But since that it hath pleased God in our age

to vouchsafe to humane ingenuity, so admirable an invention of perfecting

our sight, by multiplying it four, six, ten, twenty, thirty, and fourty times,

infinite objects, that either by reason of their distance, or for their extream

smallnesse  were  invisible  unto  us,  have  by  help  of  the  Telescope  been

rendered visible.


SAGR.


But Venus and Mars are none of the objects invisible for their distance or

smallnesse, yea, we do discern them with our bare natural sight; why then do

we not distinguish the differences of their magnitudes and figures?


SALV.


In this, The reason whence it happens that Venus and Mars do not appear to

vary magnitude so much as is requisite. the impediment of our very eye it self

hath a great share, as but even now I hinted, by which the resplendent and

remote objects are not represented to us simple and pure; but gives them us

fringed with strange and adventitious rayes, so long and dense, that their

naked body sheweth to us agrandized, ten twenty, an hundred, yea a thousand

times more than it would appear, if the capillitious rayes were taken away.SAGR.


Now  I  remember  that  I  have  read  something  on  this  subject,  I  know  not

whether in the Solar Letters, or in the Saggiatore of our common Friend, but

it would be very good, aswell for recalling it into my memory, as for the

information of Simplicius, who it may be never saw those writings, that you

would  declare  unto  us  more  distinctly  how  this  businesse  stands,  the

knowledge whereof I think to be very necessary for the assisting of us to

understand that of which we now speak.


SIMP.


I must confesse that all that which Salviatus hath spoken is new unto me, for

truth  is,  I  never  have  had  the  curiosity  to  read  those  Books,  nor  have  I

hitherto  given  any  great  credit  to  the  Telescope  newly  introduced;  The

operations of the Telescope accounted fallacies by the Peripateticks. rather

treading in the steps of other Peripatetick Philosophers my companions, I

have  thought  those  things  to  be  fallacies  and  delusions  of  the  Chrystals,

which others have so much admired for stupendious operations: and therefore

if I have hitherto been in an errour, I shall be glad to be freed from it, and

allured by these novelties already heard from you, I shall the more attentively

hearken to the rest.


SALV.


The confidence that these men have in their own apprehensivenesse, is no

less unreasonable than the small esteem they have of the judgment of others:

yet its much that should esteem themselves able to judge better of such an

instrument, without ever having made trial of it, than those who have made,

and daily do make a thousand experiments of the same: But I pray you, let us

leave this kind of pertinacious men, whom we cannot so much as tax without

doing them too great honour. And returning to our purpose, Shining objects

seem  environed  with  adventitious  rayes.  I  say,  that  resplendent  objects,

whether it is that their light doth refract on the humidity that is upon the

pupils, or that it doth reflect on the edges of the eye-browes, diffusing its

reflex rayes upon the said pupils, or whether it is for some other reason, they

do appear to our eye, as if they were environ’d with new rayes, and therefore

much bigger than their bodies would represent themselves to us, were theydivested  of  those  irradiations.  The  reason  why  luminous  bodies  appear

enlarged  much  the  more,  by  how  much  they  are  lesser.  And  this

aggrandizement is made with a greater and greater proportion, by how much

those lucid objects are lesser and lesser; in the same manner for all the world,

as if we should suppose that the augmentation of shining locks were v. g. four

inches,  which  addition  being  made  about  a  circle  that  hath  four  inches

diameter would increase its appearance to nine times its former bignesse: but

—


SIMP.


I believe you would have said three times; for adding four inches to this side,

and four inches to that side of the diameter of a circle, which is likewise four

inches, its quantity is thereby tripled, and not made nine times bigger.


SALV.


A  little  more  Geometry  would  do  well,  Superficial  figures  encreasing

proportion double to their lines. Simplicius. True it is, that the diameter is

tripled, but the superficies, which is that of which we speak, increaseth nine

times: for you must know, Simplicius, that the superficies of circles are to

one another, as the squares of their diameters; and a circle that hath four

inches diameter is to another that hath twelve, as the square of four to the

square of twelve; that is, as 16. is to 144. and therefore it shall be increased

nine times, and not three; this, by way of advertisement to Simplicius. And

proceeding forwards, if we should add  the said irradiation of four inches to a

circle  that  hath  but  two  inches  of  diameter  onely,  the  diameter  of  the

irradiation or Garland would be ten inches, and the superficial content of the

circle would be the area of the naked body, as 100. to 4. for those are the

squares of 10. and of 2. the agrandizement would therefore be 25. times so

much; and lastly, the four inches of hair or fringe, added to a small circle of

an  inch  in  diameter,  the  same  would  be  increased  81.  times;  and  so

continually the augmentations are made with a proportion greater and greater,

according as the real objects that increase, are lesser and lesser.


SAGR.The doubt which puzzled Simplicius never troubled me, but certain other

things indeed there are, of which I desire a more distinct understanding; and

in  particular,  I  would  know  upon  what  ground  you  affirm  that  the  said

agrandizement  is  alwayes  equal  in  all  visible  objects.  Objects  the  more

vigorous they are in light, the more they do seem to increase.


SALV.


I have already declared the same in part, when I said, that onely lucid objects

so increased, and not the obscure; now I adde what remaines, that of the

resplendent objects those that are of a more bright light, make the reflection

greater  and  more  resplendent  upon  our  pupil;  whereupon  they  seem  to

augment much more than the lesse lucid: and that I may no more inlarge my

self  upon  this  particular,  come  we  to  that  which  the  true  Mistris  of

Astronomy, Experience, teacheth us. Let us this evening, when the air is very

obscure, observe the star of Jupiter; we shall see it very glittering, An easie

experiment  that  sheweth  the  increase  in  the  stars,  by  means  of  the

adventitious rays. and very great; let us afterwards look through a tube, or

else through a small trunk, which clutching the hand close, and accosting it to

the eye, we lean between the palm of the hands and the fingers, or else by an

hole made with a small needle in a paper; and we shall see the said star

divested of its beams, but so small, that we shall judge it lesse, even than a

sixtieth part of its great glittering light seen with the eye at liberty: we may

afterwards behold the Dog-stars beautiful and bigger than any of the other

fixed stars, Jupiter augments lesse than the Dog-star. which seemeth to the

bare eye no great matter lesse than Jupiter; but taking from it, as before, the

irradiation,  its  Discus  will  shew  so  little,  that  it  will  not  be  thought  the

twentieth part of that of Jupiter, nay, he that hath not very good eyes, will

very hardly discern it; from whence it may be rationally inferred, that the said

star, as having a much more lively light than Jupiter, maketh its irradiation

greater than Jupiter doth his. In the next place, as to the irradiation of the Sun

and Moon, The Sun and Moon increase little. it is as nothing, by means of

their magnitude, which possesseth of it self alone so great a space in our eye,

that it leaveth no place for the adventitious rayes; so that their faces seem

close clipt, and terminate. We may assure our selves of the same truth by

another  experiment  which  I  have  often  made  triall  of;    we  may  assure

ourselves, It is seen by manifest experience, that the more splendid bodies domuch more irradiate than the lesse lucid. I say, that bodies shining with most

lively light do irradiate, or beam forth rayes more by far than those that are of

a more languishing light. I have many times seen Jupiter and Venus together

twenty or thirty degrees distant from the Sun, and the air being very dark,

Venus appeared eight or ten times bigger than Jupiter, being both beheld by

the eye at liberty; but being beheld afterwards with the Telescope, the Discus

of Jupiter discovered it self to be four or more times greater than that of

Venus, but the vivacity of the splendour of Venus was incomparably bigger

than  the  languishing  light  of  Jupiter;  which  was  only  because  of  Jupiters

being far from the Sun, and from us; and Venus neer to us, and to the Sun.

These things premised, it will not be difficult to comprehend, how Mars,

when it is in opposition to the Sun, and therefore neerer to the Earth by seven

times, and more, than it is towards the conjunction, cometh to appear scarce

four or five times bigger in that state than in this, when as it should appear

more than fifty times so much; of which the only irradiation is the cause; for

if we divest it of the adventitious rayes, we shall find it exactly augmented

with  the  due  proportion:  but  to  take  away  the  capillitious  border,  The

Telescope is the best means to take away the irradiations of the Stars. the

Telescope  is  the  best  and  only  means,  which  inlarging  its  Discus  nine

hundred or a thousand times, makes it to be seen naked and terminate, as that

of the Moon, Another second reason of the small apparent increase of Venus.

and different from it self in the two positions, according to its due proportions

to an hair. Again, as to Venus, that in its vespertine conjunction, when it is

below the Sun, ought to shew almost fourty times bigger than in the other

matutine  conjunction,  and  yet  doth  not  appear  so  much  as  doubled;  it

happeneth,  besides  the  effect  of  the  irradiation,  that  it  is  horned;  and  its

crescents,  besides  that  they  are  sharp,  they  do  receive  the  Suns  light

obliquely, and therefore emit but a faint splendour; so that as being little and

weak, its irradiation becometh the lesse ample and vivacious, than when it

appeareth  to  us  with  its  Hemisphere  all  shining:  but  now  the  Telescope

manifestly shews its hornes to have been as terminate and distinct as those of

the Moon, and appear, as it were, with a great circle, and in a proportion

those well neer fourty times greater than its same Discus, at such time as it is

superiour to the Sun in its ultimate matutine apparition.


SAGR.Oh, Nicholas Copernicus, how great would have been thy joy to have seen

this part of thy Systeme, confirmed with so manifest experiments!


SALV.


Tis true. Copernicus perswaded by reasons contrary to sensible experiments.

But how much lesse the fame of his sublime wit amongst the intelligent?

when as it is seen, as I also said before, that he did constantly continue to

affirm (being perswaded thereto by reason) that which sensible experiments

seemed to contradict; for I cannot cease to wonder that he should constantly

persist in saying, that Venus revolveth about the Sun, and is more than six 

times farther from us at one time, than at another; and also seemeth to be

alwayes of an equal bigness, although it ought to shew forty times bigger

when nearest to us, than when farthest off.


SAGR.


But in Jupiter, Saturn and Mercury, I believe that the differences of their

apparent  magnitudes,  should  seem  punctually  to  answer  to  their  different

distances.


SALV.


In the two Superiour ones, I have made precise observation yearly for this

twenty two years last past: Mercury admitteth not of clear observations. In

Mercury there can be no observation of moment made, by reason it suffers

not it self to be seen, save onely in its greatest dig ssieons from the Sun, in

which  its  distances  from  the  earth  are  insensibly  unequal,  and  those

differences consequently not to be observed; as also its mutations of figures

which must absolutely happen in it, as in Venus. And if we do see it, it must

of necessity appear in form of a Semicircle, as Venus likewise doth in her

greatest digressions; but its discns is so very small, and its splendor so very

great, by reason of its vicinity to the Sun, that the virtue of the Telescope doth

not suffice to clip its tresses or adventitious rayes, The difficulties removed

that arise from the Earths moving about the Sun, not solitarily, but in consort

with the Moon. so as to make them appear shaved round about. It remains,

that we remove that which seemed a great inconvenience in the motion of the

Earth, namely that all the Planets moving about the Sun, it alone, not solitaryas the rest, but in company with the Moon, and the whole Elementary Sphear,

should move round about the Sun in a year; and that the said Moon withal

should move every moneth about the earth. Here it is necessary once again to

exclaim and extol the admirable perspicacity of Copernicus, and withal to

condole his misfortune, in that he is not now alive in our dayes, when for

removing of the seeming absurdity of the Earth and Moons motion in consort

we see Jupiter, as if it were another Earth, not in consort with the Moon, but

accompanied by four Moons to rovolve about the Sun in 12. years together,

with  what  ever  things  the  Orbs  of  the  four  Medicaean  Stars  can  contain

within them.


SALV.


Why do you call the four jovial Planets, Moons?


SAGR.


Such they would seem to be to one that standing in Jupiter should behold

them; The Medicean Stars areas it were four Moons about Jupiter. for they

are  of  themselves  dark,  and  receive  their  light  from  the  Sun,  which  is

manifest from their being eclipsed, when they enter into the cone of Jupiters

shadow: and because onely those their Hemispheres, that look towards the

Sun are illuminated, to us that are without their Orbs, and nearer to the Sun,

they seem alwayes lucid, but to one that should be in Jupiter, they would

shew all illuminated, at such time as they were in the upper parts of their

circles; but in the parts inferiour, that is between Jupiter and the Sun, they

would from Jupiter be observed to be horned; and in a word they would, to 

the observators standing in Jupiter, make the self same changes of Figure,

that to us upon the Earth, the Moon doth make. You see now how these three

things,  which  at  first  seemed  dissonant,  do  admirably  accord  with  the

Copernican Systeme. Here also by the way may Simplicius see, with what

probability one may conclude, that the Sun and not the Earth, is in the Centre

of the Planetary conversions. And since the Earth is now placed amongst

mundane  Bodies,  that  undoubtedly  move  about  the  Sun,  to  wit,  above

Mercury and Venus, and below Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars; shall it not be in

like manner probable, and perhaps necessary to grant, that it also moveth

round?SIMP.


These accidents are so notable and conspicuous, that it is not possible, but

that Ptolomy and others his Sectators, should have had knowledge of them,

and having so, it is likewise necessary, that they have found a way to render

reasons of such, and so sensible appearances that were sufficient, and also

congruous  and  probable,  seeing  that  they  have  for  so  long  a  time  been

received by such numbers of learned men.


SALV.


You argue very well; The Principal scope of Astronomers, is to give a reason

of appearances. but you know that the principal scope of Astronomers, is to

render only reason for the appearances in the Caelestial Bodies, and to them,

and  to  the  motions  of  the  Stars,  to  accomodate  such  structures  and

compositions  of  Circles,  that  the  motions  following  those  calculations,

answer to the said appearances, little scrupling to admit of some exorbitances,

that indeed upon other accounts they would much stick at. And Copernicus

himself  writes,  Copernicus  restored  Astronomy  upon  the  suppositions  of

Ptolomy. that he had in his first studies restored the Science of Astronomy

upon the very suppositions of Ptolomy, and in such manner corrected the

motions of the Planets, that the computations did very exactly agree with the

Phaenomena, and the Phaenomena with the supputations, in case that he took

the Planets severally one by one. But he addeth, that in going about to put

together all the structures of the particular Fabricks, there resulted thence a

Monster and Chimaera, composed of members most disproportionate to one

another,  and  altogether  incompatible;  So  that  although  it  satisfied  an

Astronomer meerly Arithmetical, yet did it not afford satisfaction or content

to the Astronomer Phylosophical. What moved Copernicus to establish his

Systeme. And because he very well understood, that if one might salve the

Caelestial appearances with false assumptions in nature, it might with much

more ease be done by true suppositions, he set himself diligently to search

whether any amongst the antient men of fame, had ascribed to the World any

other structure, than that commonly received by Ptolomy; and finding that

some Pythagoreans had in particular assigned the Diurnal conversion to the

Earth,  and  others  the  annual  motion  also,  he  began  to  compare  the

appearances, and particularities  of the Planets motions, with these two newsuppositions, all which things jumpt exactly with his purpose; and seeing the

whole correspond, with admirable facility to its parts, he imbraced this new

Systeme, and it took up his rest.


SIMP.


But what great exorbitancies are there in the Ptolomaick Systeme, for which

there are not greater to be found in this of Copernicus?


SALV.


In the Ptolomaick Hypothesis there are diseases, Inconveniencies that are in

the Systeme of Ptolomy. and in the Copernican their cures. And first will not

all the Sects of Phylosophers, account it a great inconvenience, that a body

naturally moveable in circumgyration, should move irregularly upon its own

Centre, and regularly upon another point? And yet there are such deformed

motions as these in the Ptolomaean Hypothesis, but in the Copernican all

move evenly about their own Centres. In the Ptolomaick, it is necessary to

assign to the Caelestial bodies, contrary motions, and to make them all to

move, from East to West, and at the same time, from West to East; But in the

Copernican, all the Caelestial revolutions are towards one onely way, from

West to East. But what shall we say of the apparent motion of the Planets, so

irregular, that they not only go one while swift, and another while slow, but

sometimes wholly seace to move; and then after a long time return back

again? To salve which appearances Ptolomie introduceth very great Epicicles,

accommodating  them  one  by  one  to  each  Planet,  with  some  rules  of

incongruous motions, which are all with one single motion of the Earth taken

away. And would not you, Simplicius, call it a great absurditie, if in the

Ptolomaick Hypothesis, in which the particular Planets, have their peculiar

Orbs assigned them one above another, one must be frequently forced to say,

that Mars, constituted above the Sphaere of the Sun, doth so descend, that

breaking the Solar Orb, it goeth under it, and approacheth nearer to the Earth,

than to the Body of the Sun, and by and by immeasurably ascendeth above

the same? And yet this, and other exorbitancies are remedied by the sole and

single annual motion of the Earth.


SAGR.I would gladly be bettter informed how these stations, and retrograde and

direct motions, which did ever seem to me great improbalities, do accord in

this Copernican Systeme.


SALV.


You  shall  see  them  so  to  accord,  Its  a  great  Argument  in  favour  of

Copernicus, that he obviates the stations & retrogradations of the motions of

the  Planets.  Sagredus,  that  this  onely  conjecture  ought  to  be  sufficient  to

make one that is not more than pertinacious or stupid, yield, assent to all the

rest of this Doctrine. I tell you therefore, that nothing being altered in the

motion of Saturn, which is 30 years, in that of Jupiter, which is 12, in that of

Mars, which is 2, in that of Venus, which is 9. moneths, in that of Mercury,

which  is  80.    dayes,  or  thereabouts,  the  sole  annual  motion  of  the  Earth

between Mars and Venus, The sole annual motion of the Earth causeth great

inequality of motions in the five Planets. causeth the apparent inequalities in

all the five stars before named. And for a facile and full understanding of the

whole, I will describe this figure of it. Therefore suppose the Sun to be placed

in the centre O, about which we will draw the Orb described by the Earth,

with the annual motion BGM, and let the circle described, v. gr. by Jupiter

about the Sun in 12. years, be this BGM, and in the


[figure]


starry  sphere  let  us  imagine  the  Zodiack  YVS.  A  demonstration  of  the

inequalities of the three superiour Planets dependent on the annual motion of

the Earth. Again, in the annual Orb of the Earth let us take certain equal

arches, BC, CD, EF, FG, GH, HI, IK, KL, LM, and in the Sphere of Jupiter

let us make certain other arches, passed in the same times in which the Earth

passeth hers, which let be BC, CD, DE, EF, FG, GH, HI, IK, KL, LM, which

shall each be proportionally lesse than these marked in the Earths Orb, like as

the motion of Jupiter under the Zodiack is slower than the annual. Supposing

now, that when the Earth is in B, Jupiter is in B, it shall appear to us in the

Zodiack to be in P, describing  the right line BBP. Next suppose the Earth to

be moved from B to C, and Jupiter from B to C, in the same time; Iupiter

shall appear to have passed in the Zodiack to Q, and to have moved straight

forwards, according to the order of the signes PQ. In the next place, the Earth

passing to D, and Iupiter to D, it shall be seen in the Zodiack in R, and fromE, Iupiter being come to E; will appear in the Zodiack in S, having all this

while moved right forwards. But the Earth afterwards beginning to interpose

more directly between Iupiter and the Sun, she being come to F, and Iupiter

to F, he will appear in T, to have already begun to return apparently back

again under the Zodiack, and in that time that the Earth shall have pased the

arch EF, Iupiter shall have entertained himself between the points ST, and

shall have appeared to us almost motionlesse and stationary. The Earth being

afterwards come to G, and Iupiter to G, in opposition to the Sun, it shall be

visible in the Zodiack at V, and much returned backwards by all the arch of

the Zodiack TV; howbeit that all the way pursuing its even course it hath

really gone forwards not onely in its own circle, but in the Zodiack also in

respect to the centre of the said Zodiack, and to the Sun placed in the same.

The Earth and Iupiter again continuing their motions, when the Earth is come

to H, and Iupiter to H, it shall seem very much gone backward in the Zodiack

by all the arch VX. The Earth being come to I, and Iupiter to I, it shall be

apparently moved in the Zodiack by the little space XY, and there it will

seem stationary. When afterwards the Earth shall be come to K, and Iupiter to

K; in the Zodiack he shall have passed the arch YN in a direct motion; and

the Earth pursuing its course to L, shall see Iupiter in L, in the point Z. And

lastly Iupiter in M shall be seen from the Earth M, to have passed to A, with a

motion  still  right  forwards;  and  its  whole  apparent  retrogadation  in  the

Zodiack shall answer to the arch SY, made by Iupiter, whilst that he in his

own circle passeth the arch EI, and the Earth in hers the arch EI. And this

which  hath  been  said,  Retrogradations  more  frequent  in  Saturn,  lesse  in

Jupiter, and yet lesse in Mars, and why. is intended of Saturn and of Mars

also; and in Saturn those retrogradations are somewhat more frequent than in

Jupiter, by reason that its motion is a little slower than that of Jupiter, so that

the Earth overtaketh it it in a shorter space of time; in Mars again they are

more rare, for that its motion is more swift than that of Jupiter. Whereupon

the  Earth  consumeth  more  time  in  recovering  it.  Next  as  to  Venus  and

Mercury,  The  Retrogradation  of  Venus  and  Mercury  demonstrated  by

Apollonius and Copernicus. whose Circles are comprehended by that of the

Earth, their stations and regressions appear to be occasioned, not by their

motions that really are such, but by the anual motion of the said Earth, as

Copernicus exellently demonstrateth,  together with Appollonius Pergaeus in

lib. 5. of his Revolutions, Cha.You see, Gentlemen, with what facility and simplicity the annual motion, The

annual motion of the Earth most apt to render a reason of the exorbitances of

the five Planets. were it appertaining to the Earth, is accommodated to render

a reason of the apparent exorbitances, that are observed in the motions of the

five Planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury, taking them all away,

and reducing them to equal and regular motions. The Sun it self testifieth the

annual motion to belong to the Earth. And of this admirable effect, Nicholas

Copernicus, hath been the first that hath made the reason plain unto us. But of

another effect, no lesse admirable than this, and that with a knot, perhaps

more  difficult  to  unknit,  bindeth  the  wit  of  man,  to  admit  this  annual

conversion, and to leave it to our Terrestrial Globe; a new and unthought of

conjecture ariseth from the Sun it self, which sheweth that it is unwilling to

be singular in shifting, of this attestation of so eminent a conclusion, rather as

a testimony beyond all exception, it hath desired to be heard apart. Hearken

then to this great and new wonder.


The  first  discoverer  and  observer  of  the  Solar  spots,  The  Lyncaean

Academick the first discoverer of the Solar spots, and all the other celestial

novelties. as also of all the other Coelestial novelties, was our Academick

Lincaeus; and he discovered them anno 1610. being at that time Reader of the

Mathematicks,  in  the  Colledge  of  Padua,  and  there,  and  in  Venice,  The

history  of  the  proceedings  of  the  Academian  for  a  long  time  about  the

observation of the Solar spots. he discoursed thereof with several persons, of

which some are yet living: And the year following, he shewed them in Rome

to many great personages, as he relates in the first of his Letters to Marcus

Velserus, Duumviro. Sheriffe of Augusta. He was the first that against the

opinions  of  the  too  timorous  and  too  jealous  assertors  of  the  Heavens

inalterability, affirmed those spots to be matters, that in short times were

produced and dissolved: for as to place, they were contiguous to the body of

the Sun, and revolved about the same; or else being carried about by the said

Solar body, which revolveth in it selfe about its own Centre, in the space

almost of a moneth, do finish their course in that time; which motion he

judged at first to have been made by the Sun about an Axis erected upon the

plane of the Ecliptick; in regard that the arches described by the said spots

upon the Discus of the Sun appear unto our eye right lines, and parallels to

the plane of the Ecliptick: which therefore come to be altered, in part, with

some accidental, wandring, and irregular motions, to which they are subject,and whereby tumultuarily, and without any order they successively change

situations amongst themselves, one while crouding close together, another

while dissevering, and some dividing themselves into many and very much

changing figures, which, for the most part, are very unusual. And albeit those

so inconstant mutations did somewhat alter the primary periodick  course of

the said spots, yet did they not alter the opinion of our friend, so as to make

him believe, that they were any essential and fixed cause of those deviations,

but he continued to hold, that all the apparent alterations derived themselves

from those accidental mutations: in like manner, just as it would happen to

one that should from far distant Regions observe the motion of our Clouds;

which would be discovered to move with a most swift, great, and constant

motion,  carried  round  by  the  diurnal  Vertigo  of  the  Earth  (if  haply  that

motion belong to the same) in twenty four hours, by circles parallel to the

Equinoctial, but yet altered, in part, by the accidental motions caused by the

winds, which drive them, at all adventures, towards different quarters of the

World. While this was in agitation, it came to pass that Velserus sent him two

Letters, written by a certain person, under the feigned name ofThis Authors

true name is Christopher Scheinerus a Jesuit, and his Book here meant is

intituled,  Apelles  post  tabulam.  Apelles,  upon  the  subject  of  these  Spots,

requesting him, with importunity, to declare his thoughts freely upon those

Letters,  and  withall  to  let  him  know  what  his  opinion  was  touching  the

essence of those spots; which his request he satisfied in 3 Letters, shewing

first of all howvain the conjectures of Apelles were; & discovering, secondly,

his own opinions; withal foretelling to him, that Apelles would undoubtedly

be better advised in time, and turn to his opinion, as it afterwards came to

pass. And because that our Academian (as it was also the judgment of many

others that were intelligent in Natures secrets) thought he had in those three

Letters investigated and demonstrated, if not all that could be desired, or

required by humane curiosity, at least all that could be attained by humane

reason in such a matter, he, for some time (being bufied in other studies)

intermitted his continual observations, and onely in complacency to some

friend, joyned with him, in making now and then an abrupt observation: till

that he, and after some years, we, being then at myLa mia villa delle S lue.

Country-seat, met with one of the solitary Solar spots very big, and thick,

invited withal by a clear and constant serenity of the Heavens, he, at my

request, made observations of the whole progresse of the said spot, carefully

marking upon a sheet of paper the places that it was in every day at the timeof the Suns coming into the Meridian; and we having found that its course

was not in a right line, but somewhat incurvated, we came to resolve, at last,

to make other observations from time to time; to which undertaking we were

strongly induced by a conceit, that accidentally came into the minde of my

Guest, which he imparted to me in these or the like words.


In my opinion, Philip, there is a way opened to a business of very great

consequence.  For  if  the  Axis  about  which  the  Sun  turneth  be  not  erect

perpendicularly to the plane of the Ecliptick,  A conceipt that came suddenly

into the minde of the Academian Lyncaeus concerning the great consequence

that followed upon the motion of the Solar spots. but is inclined upon the

same, as its crooked course, but even now observed, makes me believe, we

shall be able to make such conjectures of the states of the Sun and Earth, as

neither so solid or so rational have been hitherto deduced from any other

accident whatsoever. I being awakened at so great a promise, importun’d him

to  make  a  free  discovery  of  his  conceit  unto  me.  And  he  continued  his

discourse  to  this  purpose.  Extravagant  mutations  to  be  observed  in  the

motions of the spots, foreseen by the Academick, in case the Earth had the

annual motion. If the Earths motion were along the Ecliptique about the Sun;

and the Sun were constituted in the centre of the said Ecliptick, and therein

revolved in its self, not about the Axis of the said Ecliptique (which would be

the Axis of the Earths annual motion) but upon one inclined, it must needs

follow, that strange changes will represent themselves to us in the apparent

motions  of  the  Solar  spots,  although  the  said  Axis  of  the  Sun  should  be

supposed to persist perpetually and immutably in the same inclination, and in

one  and  the  same  direction  towards  the  self-same  point  of  the  Universe.

Therefore the Terrestrial Globe in the annual motion moving round it, it will

first follow, that to us, carried about by the same, the courses of the spots

shall sometimes seem to be made in right lines, but this only twice a year, and

at all other times shall appear to be made by arches insensibly incurvated.

Secondly, the curvity of those arches for one half of the year, will shew

inclined the contrary way to what they will appear in the other half; that is,

for six moneths the convexity of the arches shall be towards the upper part of

the Solar Discus, and for the other six moneths towards the inferiour. Thirdly,

the spots beginning to appear, and (if I may so speak) to rise to our eye from

the left side of the Solar Discus, and going to hide themselves and to set in

the right side, the Oriental termes, that is, of their first appearings for sixmoneths, shall be lower than the opposite termes of their occultations; and for

other six moneths it shall happen contrarily, to wit, that the said spots rising

from more elevated points, and from them descending, they shall, in their

courses, go and hide themselves in lower points; and onely for two dayes in

all the year shall those termes of risings and settings be equilibrated: after

which freely beginning by small degrees the inclination of the courses of the

spots, and day by day growing bigger, in three moneths, it shall arrive at its

greatest obliquity, and from thence beginning to diminish, in such another

time it shall reduce it self to the other Aequilibrium. It shall happen, for a

fourth wonder, that the course of the greatest obliquity shall be the same with

the course made by the right line, and in the day of the Libration the arch of

the course shall seem more than ever incurvated. Again, in the other times,

according as the pendency shall successively diminish, and make it approach 

towards the Aequilibrium, the incurvation of the arches of the courses on the

contrary shall, by degrees, increase.


SAGR.


I confesse, Salviatus, that to interrupt you in your Discourse is ill manners,

but I esteem it no lesse rudeness to permit you to run on any farther in words,

whilst they are, as the saying is, cast into the air: for, to speak freely, I know

not how to form any distinct conceit of so much as one of these conclusions,

that you have pronounced; but because, as I thus generally and confusedly

apprehend them, they hold forth things of admirable consequence, I would

gladly, some way or other, be made to understand the same.


SALV.


The same that befalls you, befell me also, whilst my Guest transported me

with bare words; who afterwards assisted my capacity, The first Accident to

be observed in the motion of the Solar spots; and consequently all the rest

explained. by describing the businesse upon a material Instrument, which was

no other than a simple Sphere, making use of some of its circles, but to a

different purpose from that, to which they are commonly applied. Now I will

supply the defect of the Sphere, by drawing the same upon a piece of paper,

as need shall require. And to represent the first accident by me propounded,

which was, that the courses or journeys of the spots, twice a year, and no

more, might be seen to be made in right lines, let us suppose this point O [inFig. 4. ] to be the centre of the grand Orb, or, if you will, of the Ecliptick, and

likewise also of the Globe of the Sun it self; of which, by reason of the great

distance that is between it and the Earth, we that live upon the Earth, may

suppose that we see the one half: we will therefore describe this circle ABCD

about the said centre O, which representeth unto us the extream term that

divideth and separates the Hemisphere of the Sun that is apparent to us, from

the other that is occult. And because that our eye, no lesse than the centre of

the  Earth,  is  understood  to  be  in  the  plane  of  the  Ecliptick,  in  which  is

likewise the centre of the Sun, therefore, if we should fancy to our selves the

body of the Sun to be cut thorow by the said plane, the section will appear to

our eye a right line, which let be BOD, and upon that a perpendicular being

let fall AOC, it shall be the Axis of the said Ecliptick, and of the annual

motion of the Terrestrial Globe. Let us next suppose the Solar body (without

changing centre) to revolve in it self, not about the Axis AOC (which is the

erect Axis upon the plane of the Ecliptick) but about one somewhat inclined,

which let be this EOI, the which fixed and unchangeable Axis maintaineth it

self perpetually in the same inclination and direction towards the same points

of the Firmament, and of the Universe. And because, in the revolutions of the

Solar Globe, each point of its superficies (the Poles excepted) describeth the

circumference of a  circle, either bigger or lesser, according as it is more or

lesse remote from the said Poles, let us take the point F, equally distant from

them, and draw the diameter FOG, which shall be perpendicular to the Axis

EI, and shall be the diameter of the grand circle described about the Poles EI.

Supposing not that the Earth, and we with her be in such a place of the

Ecliptick, that the Hemisphere of the Sun to us apparent is determin’d or

bounded by the circle ABCD, which passing (as it alwayes doth) by the Poles

AC, passeth also by EI. It is manifest, that the grand circle, whose diameter is

FG, shall be erect to the circle ABCD, to which the ray that from our eye

falleth upon the centre O, is perpendicular; so that the said ray falleth upon

the plane of the circle, whose diameter is FG, and therefore its circumference

will appear to us a right line, and the self same with FG, whereupon if there

should be in the point F, a spot, it comming afterwards to be carried about by

the  Solar  conversion,  would,  upon  the  surface  of  the  Sun,  trace  out  the

circumference of that circle, which seems to us a right line. Its course or

passage will therefore seem straight. And straight also will the motion of the

other spots appear, which in the said revolution shall describe lesser circles,

as being all parallel to the greater, and to our eye placed at an immensedistance from them. Now, if you do but consider, how that after the Earth

shall in six moneths have run thorow half the grand Orb, and shall be situate

opposite to that Hemisphere of the Sun, which is now occult unto us, so as

that the boundary of the part that then shall be seen, may be the self same

ABCD, which also shall passe by the Poles EI; you shall understand that the

same will evene in the courses of the spots, as before, to wit, that all will

appear to be made by right lines. But because that that accident takes not

place, save onely when the teminator or boundary passeth by the Poles EI,

and the said terminator from moment to moment, by meanes of the Earths

annual motion, continually altereth, therefore its passage by the fixed Poles

EI, shall be momentary, and consequently momentary shall be the time, in

which the motions of those spots shall appear straight. From what hath been

hitherto  spoken  one  may  comprehend  also  how  that  the  apparition  and

beginning of the motion of the spots from the part F, proceeding towards G,

their passages or courses are from the left hand, ascending towards the right;

but the Earth being placed in the part diametrically opposite the appearance

of the spots about G, shall still be to the left hand of the beholder, but the

passage shall be descending towards the right hand F. Let us now describe

the Earth to be situate one fourth part farther distant from its present state,

and let us draw, as in the other figure, the terminator ABCD,  [as in Fig. 5. ]

and the Axis, as before AC, by which the plane of our Meridian would passe,

in which plane should also be the Axis of the Suns revolution, with its Poles,

one  towards  us,  that  is,  in  the  apparent  Hemisphere,  which  Pole  we  will

represent by the point E, and the other shall fall in the occult Hemisphere,

and I mark it I. Inclining therefore the Axis EI, with the superiour part E,

towards us, the great circle described by the Suns conversion, shall be this

BFDG, whose half by us seen, namely BFD, shall no longer seem unto us a

right line, by reason the Poles EI are not in the circumference ABCD, but

shall appear incurvated, and with its convexity towards the inferiour part C.

And it is manifest, that the same will appear in all the lesser circles parallel to

the  same  BFD.  It  is  to  be  understood  also,  that  when  the  Earth  shall  be

diametrically opposite to this state, so that it seeth the other Hemisphere of

the Sun, which now is hid, it shall of the said great circle behold the part

DGB  incurved,  with  its  convexity  towards  the  superiour  part  A;  and  the

courses of the spots in these constitutions shall be first, by the arch BFD, and

afterwards  by  the  other  DGB,  and  the  first  apparitions  and  ultimate

occultations made about the points B and D, shall be equilibrated, and notthose that are more or lesse elevated than these. But if we constitute the Earth

in such a place of the Ecliptick, that neither the boundary ABCD, nor the

Meridian AC, passeth by the Poles of the Axis EI, as I will shew you anon,

drawing this other Figure [viz. Fig. 6. ] wherein the apparent or visible Pole E

falleth between the arch of the terminator AB, and the section of the Meridian

AC; the diameter of the great circle shall be FOG, and the apparent semicircle

FNG, and the occult semicircle GSF, the one incurvated with its convexity N

towards the inferiour part, and the other also bending with its convexity S

towards the upper part of the Sun. The ingressions and exitions of the spots,

that is, the termes F and G shall not be librated, as the two others B and D;

but F shall be lower, and G higher: but yet with lesser difference than in the

first Figure. The arch also FNG shall be incurvated, but not so much as the

precedent BFD; so that in this position the passages or motions of the spots

shall be ascendent from the left side F, towards the right G, and shall be made

by curved lines. And imagining the Earth to be constituted in the position

diametrically opposite; so that the Hemisphere of the Sun, which was before

the  occult,  may  be  the  apparent,  and  terminated  by  the  same  boundary

ABCD, it will be manifestly discerned, that the course of the spots shall be by

the arch GSF, beginning from the upper point G, which shall then be likewise

from  the  left  hand  of  the  beholder,  and  going  to  determine,  descending 

towards the right, in the point F. What I have hitherto said, being understood,

I believe that there remains no difficulty in conceiving how from the passing

of  the  terminator  of  the  Solar  Hemispheres by  the  Poles  of  the  Suns

conversion, or neer or far from the same, do arise all the differences in the

apparent courses of the spots; so that by how much the more those Poles shall

be remote from the said terminator, by so much the more shall those courses

be incurvated, and lesse oblique; whereupon at the same distance, that is,

when  those  Poles  are  in  the  section  of  the  Meridian,  the  incurvation  is

reduced to the greatest, but the obliquity to the least, that is to Aequilibrium,

as the second of these three last figures [viz. Fig. 5. ] demonstrateth. On the

contrary, when the Poles are in the terminator, as the first of these three

figures  [viz.  Fig.  4.  ]  sheweth  the  inclination  is  at  the  greatest,  but  the

incurvation at the least, and reduced to rectitude. The terminator departing

from the Poles, the curvity begins to grow sensible, the obliquity all the way

encreasing, and the inclination growing lesser.These are those admirable and extravagant mutations, that my Guest told me

would from time to time appear in the progresses of the Solar spots, if so be it

should be true that the annual motion belonged to the Earth, and that the Sun

being constituted in the centre of the Ecliptick, were revolved in it self upon

an Axis, not erect, but inclined to the Plane of the said Ecliptick.


SAGR.


I do now very well apprehend these consequences, and believe that they will

be better imprinted in my fancy, when I shall come to reflect upon them,

accommodating a Globe to those inclinations, and then beholding them from

several  places.  It  now  remains  that  you  tell  us  what  followed  afterwards

touching the event of these imaginary consequences.


SALV.


It came to passe thereupon, The events being observed, were answerable to

the predictions. that continuing many several moneths to make most accurate

observations, noting down with great exactnesse the courses or transitions of

sundry spots at divers times of the year, we found the events punctually to

correspond to the predictions.


SAGR.


Simplicius, if this which Salviatus saith be true; (nor can we distrust him

upon  his  word)  the  Ptolomeans  and  Aristoteleans  had  need  of  solid

arguments,  strong  conjectures,  and  well  grounded  experiments  to

counterpoise an objection of so much weight, and to support their opinion

from its final overthrow.


SIMP.


Fair and softly good Sir, for haply you may not yet be got▪ so far as you

perswade your self you are gone. And though I am not an absolute master of

the subject of that narration  given us by Salviatus; Though the annual motion

assigned to the Earth answerth to the Phaenomena of the solar spots, yet doth

it not follow by conversion that from the Phaenomena of the spots one may

inf r the annual motion to belong to the Earth. yet do I not find that myLogick,  whilst  I  have  a  regard  to  form,  teacheth  me,  that  that  kind  of

argumentation affords me any necessary reason to conclude in favour of the

Copernican Hypothesis, that is, of the stability of the Sun in the centre of the

Zodiack,  and  of  the  mobility  of  the  Earth  under  its  circumference.  For

although it be true, that the said conversion of the Sun, and cirnition of the

Earth being granted, there be a necessity of discerning such and such strange

extravagancies as these in the spots of the Sun, yet doth it not follow that

arguing per conversum, from finding such like unusual accidents in the Sun,

one must of necssity conclude the Earth to move by the circumference, and

the Sun to be placed in the centre of the Zodiack. For who shall assertain me

that the like irregularities may not as well be visible in the Sun, it being

moveable  by  the  Ecliptick,  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  Earth,  it  being  also

immoveable in the centre of the same? Unlesse you demonstrate to me, that

there can be no reason given for that appearance, when the Sun is made

moveable, and the Earth stable, I will not alter my opinion and belief that the

Sun moveth, and the Earth standeth still.


SAGR.


Simplicius  behaveth  himself  very  bravely,  and  argueth  very  subtilly  in

defence of the cause of Aristotle and Ptolomy; and if I may speak the truth,

mythinks that the conversation of Salviatus, though it have been but of small

continuance, hath much farthered him in discoursing silogistically. An effect

which I know to be wrought in others as well as him. But as to finding and

judging  whether  competent  reason  may  be  rendered  of  the  apparent

exorbitancies and irregularities in the motions of the spots, supposing the

Earth to be immoveable, and the Sun moveable, I shall expect that Salviatus

manifest his opinion to us, for it is very probable that he he hath considered

of the same, and collected together whatever may be said upon the point.


SALV.


I have often thought thereon, and also discoursed thereof with my Friend and

Guest afore-named; and touching what is to be produced by Philosophers and

Astronomers, in defence of the ancient Systeme, we are on one hand certain,

certain I say, The Pure Peripatetick Philosophers will laugh at the spots and

their Phaenomena, as illusions of the Chrystals in the Telescope. that the true

and pure Peripateticks laughing at such as employ themselves in such, to theirthinking,  insipid  fooleries,  will  censure  all  these  Phaenomena  to  be  vain

illusions  of  the  Christals;  and  in  this  manner  will  with  little  trouble  free

themselves from the obligation of studying any more upon the same. Again,

as  to  the  Astronomical  Philosophers,  after  we  have  with  some  diligence

weighed that which may be alledged as a mean between those two others, we

have not been able to find out an  answer that sufficeth to satisfie at once the

course of the spots, and the discourse of the Mind. I will explain unto you so

much as I remember thereof, that so you may judge thereon as seems best

unto you.


Supposing that the apparent motions of the Solar spots are the same with

those  that  have  been  above  declared,  and  supposing  the  Earth  to  be

immoveable in the centre of the Ecliptick, in whose circumference let the

center of the Sun be placed; it is necessary that of all the differences that are

seen in those motions, the causes do reside in the motions that are in the body

of the Sun: Which in the first place must necessarily revolve in it self (i. e.

about  its  own  axis)  carrying  the  spots  along  therewith;  If  the  Earth  be

immoveable in the centre of the Zodiack, there must be ascribed to the Sun

four  several  motions,  as  is  declared  at  length.  which  spots  have  been

supposed, yea and proved to adhere to the Solar superficies. It must secondly

be confest, that the Axis of the Solar conversion is not parallel to the Axis of

the Ecliptick, that is as much as to say, that it is not perpendicularly erected

upon the Plane of the Ecliptick, because if it were so, the courses and exitions

of those spots would seem to be made by right lines parallel to the Ecliptick.

The said Axis therefore is inclining, in regard the said courses are for the

most part made by curve lines. It will be necessary in the third place to grant

that the inclination of this Axis is not fixed, and continually extended towards

one and the same point of the Universe, but rather that it doth alwayes from

moment to moment go changing its direction; for if the pendency should

always look towards the self same point, the courses of the spots would never

change appearance; but appearing at one time either right or curved, bending

upwards  or  downwards,  ascending  or  descending,  they  would  appear  the

same  at  all  times.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  say,  that  the  said  Axis  is

convertible; and is sometimes found to be in the Plane of the circle that is

extreme, terminate, or of the visible Hemisphere, I mean at such time as the

courses  of  the  spots  seem  to  be  made  in  right  lines,  and  more  than  ever

pendent, which happeneth twice a year; and at other times found to be in thePlane of the Meridian of the Observator, in such sort that one of its Poles

falleth in the visible Hemisphere of the Sun, and the other in the occult; and

both of them remote from the extreme points, or we may say, from the poles

of another Axis of the Sun, which is parallel to the Axis of the Ecliptick;

(which second Axis must necessarily be assigned to the Solar Globe) remote,

I say, as far as the inclination of the Axis of the revolution of the spots doth

import; and moreover that the Pole falling in the apparent Hemisphere, is one

while in the superiour, another while in the inferiour part thereof; for that it

must be so, the courses themselves do manifestly evince at such time as they

are  equilibrated, and in their greatest curvity, one while with their convexity

towards the upper part, and another while towards the lower part of the Solar

Discus. And because those positions are in continuall alteration, making the

inclinations and incurvations now greater, now lesser, and sometimes reduce

themselves,  the  first  sort  to  perfect  libration,  and  the  second  to  perfect

perpendicularity,  it  is  necessary  to  assert  that  the  self  same  Axis  of  the

monethly  revolution  of  the  spots  hath  a  particular  revolution  of  its  own,

whereby its Poles describe two circles about the Poles of another Axis, which

for  that  reason  ought  (as  I  have  said)  to  be  assigned  to  the  Sun,  the

semidiameter of which circles answereth to the quantity of the inclination of

the said Axis. And it is necessary, that the time of its Period be a year; for

that  such  is  the  time  in  which  all  the  appearances  and  differences  in  the

courses of the spots do return. And that the revolution of this Axis, is made

about the Poles of the other Axis parallel to that of the Ecliptick, & not about

other points, the greatest inclinations and greatest incurvations, which are

always of the same bigness, do clearly prove. So that finally, to maintain the

Earth  fixed  in  the  centre,  it  will  be  necessary  to  assign  to  the  Sun,  two

motions about its own centre, upon two several Axes, one of which finisheth

its  conversion  in  a  year,  and  the  other  in  lesse  than  a  moneth;  which

assumption seemeth, to my understanding, very hard, and almost impossible;

and this dependeth on the necessity of ascribing to the said Solar body two

other motions about the Earth upon different Axes, describing with one the

Ecliptick in a year, and with the other forming spirals, or circles parallel to

the Equinoctial one every day: whereupon that third motion which ought to

be assigned to the Solar Clobe about its own centre (I mean not that almost

monethly, which carrieth the spots about, but I speak of that other which

ought to passe thorow the Axis and Poles of this monethly one) ought not, for

any reason that I see, to finish its Period rather in a year, as depending on theannual motion by the Ecliptick, than in twenty four hours, as depending on

the diurnal motion upon the Poles of the Equinoctial. I know, that what I now

speak is very obscure, but I shall make it plain unto you, when we come to

speak of the third motion annual, assigned by Copernicus, to the Earth. Now

if these four motions, so incongruous with each other, (all which it would be

necessary to assign to the self same body of the Sun) may be reduced to one

sole and simple motion, assigned the Sun upon an Axis that never changeth

position, and that without innovating any thing in the motions for so many

other causes assigned to the Terrestrial Globe, may so easily salve so many

extravagant appearances in  the motions of the Solar spots, it seemeth really

that such an Hypothesis ought not to be rejected.


This, Simplicius, is all that came into the minds of our friend, and my self,

that  could  be  alledged  in  explanation  of  this  Phaenomenon  by  the

Copernicans, and by the Ptolomaeans, in defence of their opinions. Do you

inferre from thence what your judgment perswades you.


SIMP.


I acknowledge my self unable to interpose in so important a decision: And, as

to my particular thoughts, I will stand neutral; and yet neverthelesse I hope

that  a  time  will  come,  when  our  minds  being  illumin’d  by  more  lofty

contemplations than these our humane reasonings, we shall be awakened and

freed from that mist which now is so great an hinderance to our sight.


SAGR.


Excellent and pious is the counsel taken by Simplicius, and worthy to be

entertained and followed by all, as that which being derived from the highest

wisdome and supreamest authority, may onely, with security be received. But

yet  so  far  as  humane  reason  is  permitted  to  penetrate,  confining  my  self

within the bounds of conjectures, and probable reasons, I will say a little

more  resolutely  than  Simplicius  doth,  that  amongst  all  the  ingenuous

subtilties I ever heard, I have never met with any thing of greater admiration

to  my  intellect,  nor  that  hath  more  absolutely  captivated  my  judgment,

(alwayes excepting pure Geometrical and Arithmetical Demonstrations) than

these two conjectures taken, the one from the stations and retrogradations of

the five Planets, and the other from these irregularities of the motions of theSolar spots: and because they seem to me so easily and clearly to assign the

true reason of so extravagant appearances, shewing as if they were but one

sole simple motion, mixed with so many others, simple likewise, but different

from  each  other,  without  introducing  any  difficulty,  rather  with  obviating

those  that  accompany  the  other  Hypothesis;  I  am  thinking  that  I  may

rationally conclude, that those who contumaciously withstand this Doctrine,

either never heard, or never understood, these so convincing arguments.


SALV.


I will not ascribe unto them the title either of convincing, or non-convincing;

in regard my intention is not, as I have several times told you, to resolve any

thing  upon  so  high  a  question,  but  onely  to  propose  those  natural  and

Astronomicall  reasons,  which,  for  the  one  and  other  Systeme,  may  be

produced by me, leaving the determination to others; which determination

cannot at last, but be very manifest: for one of the two positions being of

necessity  to  be  true,  and  the  other  of  necessity  to  be  false,  it  is  a  thing

impossible that (alwayes confining our selves  within the limits of humane

doctrine) the reasons alledged for the true Hypothesis should not manifest

themselves as concludent as those for the contrary vain and ineffectual.


SAGR.


It will be time therefore, that we hear the objections of the little Book ofI

should  have  told  you,  that  the  true  name  of  this  concealed  Authour  is

Christopher  Scheinerus,  and  its  title  Disquisitiones  Mathematica.

Conclusions, or Disquisitions which Simplicius did bring with him.


SIMP.


Here  is  the  Book,  and  this  is  the  place  where  the  Author  first  briefly

describeth  the  Systeme  of  the  world,  according  to  the  Hypothesis  of

Copernicus,  saying,  Terram  igitur  unà  cum  Luna,  totoque  hoc  elementari

mundo Copernicus, &c.


SALV.Forbear  a  little,  Simplicius,  for  methinks  that  this  Authour,  in  this  first

entrance, shews himself to be but very ill verst in the Hypothesis which he

goeth about to confute, in regard, he saith that Copernicus maketh the Earth,

together with the Moon, to describe thei. e. the Ecliptick grand Orb in a year

moving from East to West; a thing that as it is false and impossible, so was it

never affirmed by Copernicus, who rather maketh it to move the contrary

way, I mean from West to East, that is, according to the order of the Signes;

whereupon we come to think the same to be the annual motion of the Sun,

constituted immoveable in the centre of the Zodiack. See the too adventurous

confidence of this man; to undertake the confutation of anothers Doctrine,

and yet to be ignorant of the primary fundamentals; upon which his adversary

layeth the greatest and most important part of all the Fabrick. This is a bad

beginning to gain himself credit with his Reader; but let us go on.


SIMP.


Having  explained  the  Universal  Systeme,  he  beginneth  to  propound  his

objections against this annual motion: and the first are these, which he citeth

Ironically,  and  in  derision  of  Copernicus,  Instances  of  a  certain  Book

Ironically propounded against Copernicus. and of his followers, writing that

in this phantastical Hypothesis of the World one must necessarily maintain

very grosse absurdities; namely, that the Sun, Venus, and Mercury are below

the  Earth;  and  that  grave  matters  go  naturally  upwards,  and  the  light

downwards; and that Christ, our Lord and Redeemer, ascended into Hell, and

descended into Heaven, when he approached towards the Sun, and that when

Joshuah commanded the Sun to stand still, the Earth stood still, or the Sun

moved  a  contrary  way  to  that  of  the  Earth;  and  that  when  the  Sun  is  in

Cancer,  the  Earth  runneth  through  Capricorn;  and  that  the  Hyemal  (or

Winter) Signes make the Summer, and the Aestival Winter; and that the Stars

do not rise and set to the Earth, but the Earth to the Stars; and that the East

beginneth in the West, and the West in the East; and, in a word, that almost

the whole course of the World is inverted.


SALV.


Every thing pleaseth me, except it be his having intermixed  places out of the

sacred Scriptures (alwayes venerable, and to be rever’d) amongst these, but

two scurrilous fooleries, and attempting to wound with holy Weapons, thosewho Philosophating in jest, and for divertisement, neither affirm nor deny,

but, some presupposals and positions being assumed, do familiarly argue.


SIMP.


Truth is, he hath displeased me also, and that not a little; and especially, by

adding presently after that, howbeit, the Copernichists answer, though but

very  impertinently  to  these  and  such  like  other  reasons,  yet  can  they  not

reconcile nor answer those things that follow.


SALV.


This  is  worse  than  all  the  rest;  for  he  pretendeth  to  have  things  more

efficacious and concludent than the Authorities of the sacred Leaves; But I

pray you, let us reverence them, and passe on to natural and humane reasons:

and  yet  if  he  give  us  amongst  his  natural  arguments,  things  of  no  more

solidity,  than  those  hitherto  alleadged,  we  may  wholly  decline  this

undertaking, for I as to my own parricular, do not think it fit to spend words

in answering such trifling impertinencies. And as to what he saith, that the

Copernicans  answer  to  these  objections,  it  is  most  false,  nor  may  it  be

thought, that any man should set him self to wast his time so unprofitably.


SIMP.


I concur with you in the same judgement; Supposing the annual motion to

belong to the Earth, it followeth, that one fixed Star, is bigger than the whole

grand Orb. therefore let us hear the other instances that he brings, as much

stronger. And observe here, how he with very exact computations concludeth,

that  if  the  grand  Orb  of  the  Earth,  or  the  ecliptick,  in  which  Copernicus

maketh it to run in a year round the Sun, should be as it were, insensible, in

respect  of  the  immensitie  of  the  Starry  Sphaere,  according  as  the  said

Copernicus, saith it is to be supposed, it would be necessary to grant and

confirm, that the fixed Stars were remote from us, an unconceivable distance,

and that the lesser of them, were bigger than the whole grand Orb aforesaid,

and  some  other  much  bigger  than  the  whole  Sphaere  of  Saturn;  Masses

certainly too excessively vast, unimaginable, and incredible.


SALV.I  have  heretofore  seen  such  another  objection  brought  by  Tycho  against

Copernicus, Tycho his Argument grounded upon a false Hypothesis. and this

is not the first time that I have discovered the fallacy, or, to say better, the

fallacies of this Argumemtation, founded upon a most false Hypothesis, and

upon  a  Proposition  of  the  said  Copernicus,  Litigious  Lawyers  that  are

extertained in an ill cause, keep close to s me ex ression fallen from the

adverse party at unawares. understood by his adversaries, with too punctual a

nicity, according to the practise of those pleaders, who finding the flaw to be

in the very merit of their cause, keep to some one word, fallen unawares from

the contrary partie, and fly out into loud and tedious descants upon that. But

for  your  better  information;  Copernicus  having  declared    those  admirable

consequences which are derived from the Earths annual motion, to the other

Planets, that is to say, of theOr progressions. directions and retrogradations of

the three uppermost in particular; The apparent diversity of motion in the

Planets,  is  insensible  in  the  fixed  Stars.  he  subjoyneth,  that  this  apparent

mutation (which is discerned more in Mars than in Jupiter, by reason Jupiter

is more remote, and yet lesse in Saturn, by reason it is more remote than

Jupiter)  in  the  fixed  Stars,  did  remain  imperceptible,  by  reason  of  their

immense remotenesse from us, in comparison of the distances of Jupiter or

Saturn. Here the Adversaries of this opinion rise up, and supposing that fore-

named imperceptibility of Copernicus, as if it had been taken by him, for a

real and absolute thing of nothing, and adding, that a fixed Star of one of the

lesser magnitudes, is notwithstanding perceptible, seeing that it cometh under

the sence of seeing, they go on to calculate with the intervention of other

false  assumptions,  and  concluding  that  it  is  necessary  by  the  Copernican

Doctrine, to admit, that a fixed Star is much bigger than the whole grand Orb.

Supposing that a fixed Star of the sixth magnitude is no bigger than the Sun,

the diversitie which is so great in the Planets, in the fixed Stars is almost

insensible. Now to discover the vanity of this their whole proceeding, I shall

shew that a fixed Star of the sixth magnitude, being supposed to be no bigger

than the Sun, one may thence conclude with true demonstrations, that the

distance of the said fixed Stars from us, cometh to be so great, that the annual

motion of the Earth, which causeth so great and notable variations in the

Planets,  appears  scarce  observable  in  them;  and  at  the  same  time,  I  will

distinctly  shew  the  gross  fallacies,  in  the  assumptions  of  Copernicus  his

Adversaries.And first of all, The distance of the Sun, containeth 1208 Semid. of the Earth.

I  suppose  with  the  said  Copernicus,  and  also  with  his  opposers,  that  the

Semidiameter of the grand Orb, which is the distance of the Earth from the

Sun, containeth 1208 Semidiameters of the said Earth. Secondly, I premise

with the allowance aforesaid, and of truth, that theThe Diameter of the Sun,

half a degree. apparent diameter of the Sun in its mean distance, to be about

half a degree, that is, 30. min. prim. which are 1800. seconds, that is, 108000.

thirds.  And  because  the  apparent  Diameter  of  a  fixed  Star  of  the  first

magnitude, The Diameter of a fixed Star, of the first magnitude, and of one of

the sixth. is no more than 5. seconds, that is, 300. thirds, and the Diameter of

a fixed Star of the sixth magnitude, 50. thirds, (and herein is the greatest

errour  of  the  Anti-Copernicans)  Therefore  the  Diameter  of  the  Sun,  The

apparent Diameter of the Sun, how much it is bigger than that of a fixed star.

containeth the Diameter of a fixed Star of the sixth magnitude 2160. times.

And therefore if a fixed Star of the sixth magnitude, were supposed to be

really equal to the Sun, and not bigger, which is the same as to say, if the Sun

were so far removed, that its Diameter should seem to be one of the 2160.

parts of what it now appeareth, its distance ought of necessity to be 2160.

times greater than now in effect it is, which is as much as to say, that the

distance of the fixed Stars of the sixth magnitude, is 2160. Semidiameters of

the grand  Orb. The distance of a fixed star of the sixth magnitude, how much

it is, the star being supposed to be equal to the Sun. And because the distance

of the Sun from the Earth, contains by common consent 1208. Semidiameters

of the said Earth, and the distance of the fixed Stars (as hath been said) 2160.

Semediameters of the grand Orb, therefore the Semidiameter of the Earth is

much greater (that is almost double) in comparison of the grand Orb, than the

Semidiameter  of  the  grand  Orb,  in  relation  to  the  distance  of  the  Starry

Sphaere; In the fixed stars the diversitie of aspect, caused by the grand Orb, is

little  more  then  that  caused  by  the  Earth  in  the  Sun.  and  therefore  the

variation of aspect in the fixed Stars, caused by the Diameter of the grand

Orb, can be but little more observable, than that which is observed in the Sun,

occasioned by the Semidiameter of the Earth.


SAGR.


This is a great fall for the first step.SALV.


It is doubtlesse an errour; for a fixed Star of the sixth magnitude, A star of the

sixth  magnitude,  supposed  by  Tycho  and  the  Authour  of  the  Book  of

Conclusions, an hundred and six milions of times bigger than needs. which

by the computation of this Authour, ought, for the upholding the proposition

of Copernicus, to be as big as the whole grand Orb, onely by supposing it

equal to the Sun, which Sun is lesse by far, than the hundred and six millionth

part of the said grand Orb, maketh the starry Sphaere so great and high as

sufficeth to overthrow the instance brought against the said Copernicus.


SAGR.


Favour me with this computation.


SALV.


The  supputation  is  easie  and  short.  The  Diameter  of  the  Sun,  The

computation of the magnitude of the fixed Stars, in respect to the grand Orb.

is eleven semidiameters of the Earth, and the Diameter of the grand Orb,

contains 2416. of those same semidiameters, by the ascent of both parties; so

that the Diameter of the said Orb, contains the Suns Diameter 220. times very

near.  And  because  the  Spheres  are  to  one  another,  as  the  Cubes  of  their

Diameters, let us make the Cube of 220. which is 106480000. and we shall

have the grand Orb, an hundred and six millions, four hundred and eighty

thousand times bigger than the Sun, to which grand Orb, a star of the sixth

magnitude, ought to be equal, according to the assertion of this Authour.


SAGR.


The errour then of these men, consisteth in being extreamly mistaken, in

taking the apparent Diameter of the fixed Stars.


SALV.


This is one, but not the onely errour of them; and indeed, A common errour

of all the Astronomers, touching the magnitude of the stars. I do very much

admire how so many Astronomers, and those very famous, as are Alfagranus,Albategnus, Tebizius, and much more modernly the Tycho’s and Clavins’s,

and in sum, all the predecessors of our Academian, should have been so

grosly mistaken, in determining the magnitudes of all the Stars, as well fixed

as moveable, the two Luminaries excepted out of that number; and that they

have  not  taken  any  heed  to  the  adventitious  irradiations  that  deceitfully

represent them an hundred and more times bigger, than when they are beheld,

without those capillious  rayes, nor can this their inadvertency be excused, in

regard that it was in their power to have beheld them at their pleasure without

those tresses, which is done, by looking upon them at their first appearance in

the  evening,  Venus  renders  the  errour  of  Astronomers  in  determining  the

magnitudes of stars inexcusable. or their last occultation in the comming on

of day; and if none of the rest, yet Venus, which oft times is seen at noon day,

so small, that one must sharpen the sight in discerning it; and again, in the

following night, seemeth a great flake of light, might advertise them of their

fallacy; for I will not believe that they thought the true Discus to be that

which is seen in the obscurest darknesses, and not that which is discerned in

the luminous Medium: for our lights, which seen by night afar off appear

great, and neer at hand shew their true lustre to be terminate and small, might

have easily have made them cautious; nay, if I may freely speak my thoughts,

I absolutely believe that none of them, no not Tycho himself, so accurate in

handling Astronomical Instruments, and that so great and accurate, without

sparing very great cost in their construction, did ever go about to take and

measure the apparent diameter of any Star, the Sun and Moon excepted; but I

think, that arbitrarily, and as we say, with the eye, some one of the more

antient  of  them  pronounced  the  thing  to  be  so  and  so,  and  that  all  that

followed him afterwards, without more ado, kept close to what the first had

said; for if any one of them had applied himself to have made some new

proof of the same, he would doubtlesse have discovered the fraud.


SAGR.


But if they wanted the Telescope, and you have already said, that our Friend

with that same Instrument came to the knowledge of the truth, they ought to

be excused, and not accused of ignorance.


SALV.This would hold good, if without the Telescope the businesse could not be

effected.  Its  true,  that  this  Instrument  by  shewing  the  Discus  of  the  Star

naked, and magnified an hundred or a thousand times, rendereth the operation

much more easie, but the same thing may be done, although not altogether so

exactly, without the Instrument, and I have many times done the same, and

my method therein was this. I have caused a rope to be hanged towards some

Star, A way to measure the apparent diameter of a star. and I have made use

of  the  Constellation,  called  the  Harp,  which  riseth  between  the  North

andRendred in Latine Corum, that is to say, North-west. North-east, and then

by going towards, and from the said rope, interposed between me and the

Star, I have found the place from whence the thicknesse of the rope hath just

hid the Star from me: this done, I have taken the distance from the eye to the

rope, which was one of the sides including the angle that was composed in

the eye, andi. e. Is subtended by. which insisteth upon the thicknesse of the

rope, and which is like, yea the same with the  angle in the Starry Sphere, that

insisteth upon the diameter of the Star, and by the proportion of the ropes

thicknesse to the distance from the eye to the rope, by the table of Arches and

Chords, I have immediately found the quantity of the angle; using all the

while the wonted caution that is observed in taking angles so acute, not to

forme the concourse of the visive rayes in the centre of the eye, where they

are onely refracted, but beyond the eye, where really the pupils greatnesse

maketh them to concur.


SAGR.


I apprehend this your cautelous procedure, albeit I have a kind of haesitancy

touching the same, but that which most puzzleth me is, that in this operation,

if it be made in the dark of night, methinks that you measure the diameter of

the irradiated Discus, and not the true and naked face of the Star.


SALV.


Not so, Sir, for the rope in covering the naked body of the Star, taketh away

the rayes, which belong not to it, but to our eye, of which it is deprived so

soon as the true Discus thereof is hid; and in making the observation, you

shall see, how unexpectedly a little cord will cover that reasonable big body

of light, which seemed impossible to be hid, unlesse it were with a much

broader Screene: to measure, in the next place, and exactly to find out, howmany of those thicknesses of the rope interpose in the distance between the

said rope and the eye, I take not onely one diameter of the rope, but laying

many pieces of the same together upon a Table, so that they touch, I take with

a pair of Compasses the whole space occupied by fifteen, or twenty of them,

and  with  that  measure  I  commensurate  the  distance  before  with  another

smaller cord taken from the rope to the concourse of the visive rayes. And

with this sufficiently-exact operation I finde the apparent diameter of a fixed

Star of the first magnitude, commonly esteemed to be 2 min. pri. and also 3

min. prim. by Tycho in his Astronomical Letters, The diameter of a fixed star

of the first magnitude not more than five sec. min. ca. to be no more than 5

seconds, which is one of the 24. or 36. parts of what they have held it: see

now upon what grosse errours their Doctrines are founded.


SAGR.


I see and comprehend this very well, but before we passe any further, I would

propound  the  doubt  that  ariseth  in  me  in  the  finding  the  concourse  [or

intersection] of the visual rayes beyond the eye, when observation is made of

objects comprehended between very acute angles; and my scruple proceeds

from thinking, that the said concourse may be sometimes more remote, and

sometimes lesse; and this not so much, by meanes of the greater or lesser

magnitude of the object that is beheld, as because that in observing objects of

the same bignesse, it seems to me that the concourse of the rayes, for certain

other respects  ought to be made more and lesse remote from the eye.


SALV.


I see already, whither the apprehension of Sagredus, a most diligent observer

of Natures secrets, tendeth; and I would lay any wager, The circle of the pupil

of the eye enlargeth and contracteth. that amongst the thousands that have

observed Cats to contract and inlarge the pupils of their eyes very much,

there  are  not  two,  nor  haply  one  that  hath  observed  the  like  effect  to  be

wrought by the pupils of men in seeing, whilst the medium is much or little

illumin’d,  and  that  in  the  open  light  the  circlet  of  the  pupil  diminisheth

considerably: so that in looking upon the face or Discus of the Sun, it is

reduced to a smallnesse lesser than a grain ofPanicum, a small grain like to

Mill,  I  take  it  to  be  the  same  with  that  called  Bird  Seed.  Panick,  and  in

beholding objects that do not shine, and are in a lesse luminous medium, it isinlarged to the bignesse of a Lintel or more; and in summe this expansion and

contraction  differeth  in  more  than  decuple  proportion:  From  whence  it  is

manifest, that when the pupil is much dilated, it is necessary that the angle of

the  rayes  concourse  be  more  remote  from  the  eye;  which  happeneth  in

beholding objects little luminated. This is a Doctrine which Sagredus hath,

just now, given me the hint of, whereby, if we were to make a very exact

observation,  and  of  great  consequence,  we  are  advertized  to  make  the

observation of that concourse in the act of the same, or just such another

operation;  but  in  this  our  case,  wherein  we  are  to  shew  the  errour  of

Astronomers, this accuratenesse is not necessary: for though we should, in

favour of the contrary party, suppose the said concourse to be made upon the

pupil it self, it would import little, their mistake being so great. I am not

certain, Sagredus, that this would have been your objection.


SAGR.


It is the very same, and I am glad that it was not altogether without reason, as

your concurrence in the same assureth me; but yet upon this occasion I would

willingly  hear  what  way  may  be  taken  to  finde  out  the  distance  of  the

concourse of the visual rayes.


SALV.


The method is very easie, and this it is, I take two longStrisce. How to find

the distance of the rays concourse from the pupil. labels of paper, one black,

and the other white, and make the black half as broad as the white; then I

stick up the white against a wall, and far from that I place the other upon a

stick, or other support, at a distance of fifteen or twenty yards, and receding

from  this,  second  another  such  a  space  in  the  same  right  line,  it  is  very

manifest, that at the said distance the right lines will concur, that departing

from the termes of the breadth of the white piece, shall passe close by the

edges of the other label placed in the mid-way; whence it followeth, that in

case the eye were placed in the point of the said concourse or intersection, the

black slip of paper in the midst would precisely hide the opposite  blank, if

the sight were made in one onely point; but if we should find, that the edges

of the white cartel appear discovered, it shall be a necessary argument that the

visual rayes do not issue from one sole point. And to make the white label to

be  hid  by  the  black,  it  will  be  requisite  to  draw  neerer  with  the  eye:Therefore, having approached so neer, that the intermediate label covereth the

other, and noted how much the required approximation was, the quantity of

that approach shall be the certain measure, how much the true concourse of

the visive rayes, is remote from the eye in the said operation, and we shall

moreover have the diameter of the pupil, or of that circlet from whence the

visive rayes proceed: for it shall be to the breadth of the black paper, as is the

distance from the concourse of the lines, that are produced by the edges of the

papers to the place where the eye standeth, when it first seeth the remote

paper to be hid by the intermediate one, as that distance is, I say, to the

distance that is between those two papers. And therefore when we would,

with exactnesse, measure the apparent diameter of a Star, having made the

observation in manner, as aforesaid, it would be necessary to compare the

diameter of the rope to the diameter of the pupil; and having found v. g. the

diameter of the rope to be quadruple to that of the pupil, and the distance of

the eye from the rope to be, for example, thirty yards, we would say, that the

true  concourse  of  the  lines  produced  from  the  ends  or  extremities  of  the

diameter of the star, by the extremities of the diameter of the rope, doth fall

out  to  be  fourty  yards  remote  from  the  said  rope,  for  so  we  shall  have

observed, as we ought, the proportion between the distance of the rope from

the concourse of the said lines, and the distance from the said concourse to

the place of the eye, which ought to be the same that is between the diameter

of the rope, and diameter of the pupil.


SAGR.


I have perfectly understood the whole businesse, and therefore let us hear

what Simplicius hath to alledge in defence of the Anti-Copernicans.


SIMP.


Albeit that grand and altogether incredible inconvenience insisted upon by

these  adversaries  of  Copernicus  be  much  moderated  and  abated  by  the

discourse of Salviatus, yet do I not think it weakened so, as that it hath not

strength  enough  left  to  foil  this  same  opinion.  For,  if  I  have  rightly

apprehended the chief and ultimate conclusion, in case, the stars of the sixth

magnitude were supposed to be as big as the Sun, (which yet I can hardly

think)  yet  it  would  still  be  true,  that  the  grand  Orb  [or  Ecliptick]  would

occasion a mutation and variation in the starry Sphere, like to that which thesemidiameter of the Earth produceth in the Sun, which yet is observable; so

that neither that, no  nor a lesse mutation being discerned in the fixed Stars,

methinks that by this means the annual motion of the Earth is destroyed and

overthrown.


SALV.


You might very well so conclude, Simplicius, if we had nothing else to say in

behalf of Copernicus: but we have many things to alledge that yet have not

been mentioned; and as to that your reply, nothing hindereth, but that we may

suppose the distance of the fixed Stars to be yet much greater than that which

hath  been  allowed  them,  and  you  your  self,  and  whoever  else  will  not

derogate from the propositions admitted by Piolomy’s sectators, must needs

grant it as a thing most requisite to suppose the Starry Sphere to be very

much  bigger  yet  than  that  which  even  now  we  said  that  it  ought  to  be

esteemed. All Astronomers agree that the greater magnitudes of the Orbes is

the cause of the tardity of the conversions. For all Astronomers agreeing in

this, that the cause of the greater tardity of the Revolutions of the Planets is,

the majority of their Spheres, and that therefore Saturn is more slow than

Jupiter, and Jupiter than the Sun, for that the first is to describe a greater

circle than the second, and that than this later, &c. confidering that Saturn v.

g. the altitude of whose Orb is nine times higher than that of the Sun, and that

for that cause the time of one Revolution of Saturn, is thirty times longer than

that of a conversion of the Sun, in regard that according to the Doctrine of

Ptolomy, one conversion of the starry Sphere is finished in 36000. years,

whereas that of Saturn is consummate in thirty, and that of the Sun in one, By

another supposition taken from Astronomers, the distance of the fixed Stars is

calculated to be 10800 semidiameters of the grand Orb. arguing with a like

proportion, and saying, if the Orb of Saturn, by reason it is nine times bigger

than that of the Sun, revolves in a time thirty times longer, by conversion,

how great ought that Orb to be, which revolves 36000. times more slowly? it

shall  be  found  that  the  distance  of  the  starry  Sphere  ought  to  be  10800

semidiameters of the grand Orb, which should be full five times bigger than

that, which even now we computed it to be, in case that a fixed Star of the

sixth magnitude were equal to the Sun. Now see how much lesser yet; upon

this account, the variation occasioned in the said Stars, by the annual motion

of the Earth, ought to appear. And if at the same rate we would argue thedistance of the starry Sphere from Jupiter, By the proportion of Jupiter and of

Mars, the starry Sphere is found to be yet more remo e. and from Mars, that

would give it us to be 15000. and this 27000 semidiameters of the grand Orb,

to wit, the first seven, and the second twelve times bigger than what the

magnitude of the fixed Star, supposed equal to the Sun, did make it.


SIMP.


Methinks that to this might be answered, that the motion of the starry Sphere

hath, since Ptolomy, been observed not to be so slow as he accounted it; yea,

if I mistake not, I have heard that Copernicus himself made the Observation.


SALV.


You say very well; but you alledge nothing in that which may favour the

cause of the Ptolomaeans in the least, who did never yet reject the motion of

36000. years in the starry Sphere, for that the said tardity would make it too

vast and immense. For if that the said immensity was not to be supposed in

Nature, they ought before now to to have denied a conversion so slow as that

it could not with good proportion adapt it self, save onely to a Sphere of

monstrous magnitude.


SAGR.


Pray you, Salviatus, let us lose no more time in proceeding, by the way of

these  proportions  with  people  that  are  apt  to  admit  things  most  dis-

proportionate; so that its impossible to win any thing upon them this way: and

what more disproportionate proportion can be imagined than that which these

men swallow down, and admit, in that writing, that there cannot be a more

convenient way to dispose the Coelestial Spheres, in order, than to regulate

them by the differences of the times of their periods, placing from one degree

to another the more slow above the more swift, when they have constituted

the  Starry  Sphere  higher  than  the  rest,  as  being  the  slowest,  they  frame

another higher still than that, and consequently greater, and make it revolve

in twenty four hours, whilst the next below, it moves not round under 36000.

years?


SALV.I could wish, Simplicius, that suspending for a time the affection rhat you

bear to the followers of your opinion, you would sincerely tell me, whether

you think that they do in their minds comprehend that magnitude, which they

reject  afterwards  as  uncapable  for  its  immensity  to  be  ascribed  to  the

Universe. For I, Imme se magnitudes and numbers are incomprehensible by

our understanding. as to my own part, think that they do not; But believe, that

like as in the apprehension of numbers, when once a man begins to passe

those millions of millions, the imagination is confounded, and can no longer

form a conceipt of the same, so it happens also in comprehending immense

magnitudes and distances; so that there intervenes to the comprehension an

effect like to that which befalleth the sense; For whilest that in a serene night

I look towards the Stars, I judge, according to sense, that their distance is but

a few miles, and that the fixed Stars are not a jot more remote than Jupiter or

Saturn, nay than the Moon. But without more ado, consider the controversies

that have past between the Astronomers and Peripatetick Philosophers, upon

occasion of the new Stars of Cassiopeia and of Sagittary, the Astronomers

placing them amongst the fixed Stars, and the Philosophers believing them to

be below the Moon. So unable is our sense to distinguish great distances from

the  greatest,  though  these  be  in  reality  many  thousand  times  greater  than

those.  In  a  word,  I  ask  of  thee,  O  foolish  man!  Doth  thy  imagination

comprehend  that vast magnitude of the Universe, wh ch thou afterwards

judgest to be too immense? If thou comprehendest it; wilt thou hold that thy

apprehension extendeth it self farther than the Divine Power? wilt thou say,

that thou canst imagine greater things than those which God can bring to

passe? But if thou apprehendest it not, why wilt thou passe thy verdict upon

things beyond thy comprehension?


SIMP.All this is very well, nor can it be denied, but that Heaven may in greatnesse

surpasse our imagination, as also that God might have created it thousands of

times vaster than now it is; but we ought not to grant any thing to have been

made  in  vain,  and  to  be  idle  in  the  Universe.  Now,  in  that  we  see  this

admirable  order  of  the  Planets,  disposed  about  the  Earth  in  distances

proportionate for producing their effects for our advantage, to what purpose

is it to interpose afterwards between the sublime Orb of Saturn and the starry

Sphere,  a  vast  vacancy,  without  any  star  that  is  superfluous,  and  to  no

purpose? To what end? For whose profit and advantage?


SALV.


Methinks we arrogate too much to our selves, Simplicius, whilst we will have

it, that the onely care of us, is the adaequate work, and bound, beyond which

the Divine Wisdome and Power doth, or disposeth of nothing. But I will not

consent, that we should so much shorten its hand, but desire that we may

content our selves with an assurance that God and Nature are so imployed in

the governing of humane affairs, God & Nature do imploy themselves in

caring for men, as if they minded nothing else. that they could not more apply

themselves  thereto,  although  they  had  no  other  care  than  onely  that  of

mankind; and this, I think, I am able to make out by a most pertinent and

most  noble  example,  taken  from  the  operation  of  the  Suns  light,  which

whilest  it  attracteth  these  vapours,  An  example  of  Gods  care  of  mankind

taken from the Sun. or scorcheth that plant, it attracteth, it scorcheth them, as

if it had no more to do; yea, in ripening that bunch of grapes, nay that one

single grape, it doth apply it self so, that it could not be more intense, if the

sum of all its business had been the only maturation of that grape. Now if this

grape  receiveth  all  that  it  is  possible  for  it  to  receive  from  the  Sun,  not

suffering the least injury by the Suns production of a thousand other effects at

the same time; it would be either envy or folly to blame that grape, if it

should think or wish that the Sun would onely appropriate its rayes to its

advantage. I am confident that nothing is omitted by the Divine Providence,

of what concernes the government of humane affairs; but that there may not

be other things in the Universe, that depend upon the same infinite Wisdome,

I cannot, of my self, by what my reason holds forth to me, bring my self to

believe. However, if it were not so, yet should I not forbear to believe the

reasons laid before me by  some more sublime intelligence. In the mean time,if one should tell me, that an immense space interposed between the Orbs of

the Planets and the Starry Sphere, deprived of stars and idle, would be vain

and uselesse, as likewise that so great an immensity for receipt of the fixed

stars, as exceeds our utmost comprehension would be superfluous, I would

reply, that it is rashnesse to go about to make our shallow reason judg of the

Works of God, and to call vain and superfluous, whatsoever thing in the

Universe is not subservient to us.


SAGR.


Say rather, It is great rashnesse to censure that to be superfluous in h ll verse,

which we do not perceive to be made for us. and I believe you would say

better, that we know not what is subservient to us; and I hold it one of the

greatest vanities, yea follies, that can be in the World, to say, because I know

not of what use Jupiter or Saturn are to me, that therefore these Planets are

superfluous, yea more, that there are no such things in rerum natura; when as,

oh foolish man! I know not so much as to what purpose the arteries, the

gristles, the spleen, the gall do serve; nay I should not know that I have a gall,

spleen, or kidneys, if in many desected Corps, they were not shewn unto me;

and then onely shall I be able to know what the spleen worketh in me, when it

comes to be taken from me. To be able to know what this or that Coelestial

body worketh in me (seeing you will have it that all their influences direct

themselves to us) it would be requisite to remove that body for some time; By

depriving Heaven of some star, one might come to know what influence it

hath  upon  us.  and  then  whatsoever  effect  I  should  find  wanting  in  me,  I

would say that it depended on that star. Moreover, who will presume to say

that the space which they call too vast and uselesse between Saturn and the

fixed stars, is void of other mundane bodies? Must it be so, Many things may

be in Heaven, that are invisible to us. because we do not see them? Then the

four Medicean Planets, and the companions of Saturn came first into Heaven,

when we began to see them, and not before? And by this rule the innumerable

other fixed stars had no existence before that men did look on them? and the

cloudy constellations called Nebulosae were at first only white flakes, but

afterwards with the Telescope we made them to become constellations of

many lucid and bright stars. Oh presumptious, rather oh rash ignorance of

man!SALV.


It’s to no purpose Sagredus, to sally out any more into these unprofitable

exaggerations: Let us pursue our intended designe of examining the validity

of  the  reasons  alledged  on  either  side,  without  determining  any  thing,

remitting  the  judgment  thereof  when  we  have  done,  to  such  as  are  more

knowing. Returning therefore to our natural and humane disquisitions, I say,

Great,  small,  immense,  &c.  are  relative  terms.  that  great,  little,  immense,

small, &c. are not absolute, but relative terms, so that the self same thing

compared with divers others, may one while be called immense, and another 

while imperceptible, not to say small. This being so, I demand in relation to

what  the  Starry  Sphere  of  Copernicus  may  be  called  over  vast.  In  my

judgment it cannot be compared, or said to be such, unlesse it be in relation to

some other thing of the same kind; Vanity of those mens discourse who judg

the starry sphere too vast in the Copernican Hypothesis. now let us take the

very least of the same kind, which shall be the Lunar Orb; and if the Starry

Orb may be so censured to be too big in respect to that of the Moon, every

other magnitude that with like or greater proportion exceedeth another of the

same kind, ought to be adjudged too vast, and for the same reason to be

denied that they are to be found in the World; and thus an Elephant, and a

Whale, shall without more ado be condemned for Chymaera’s, and Poetical

fictions, because that the one as being too vast in relation to an Ant, which is

a Terrestrial animal, and the other in respect to theSpelloncola, which is here

put for the l ast of Fishes. Gudgeon, which is a Fish, and are certainly seen to

be in rerum natura, would be too immeasurable; for without all dispute, the

Elephant  and  Whale  exceed  the  Ant  and  Gudgeon  in  a  much  greater

proportion than the Starry Sphere doth that of the Moon, although we should

fancy the said Sphere to be as big as the Copernican Systeme maketh it. The

space assigned to a fixed star, is much lesse than that of a Planet. Moreover,

how hugely big is the Sphere of Jupiter, or that of Saturn, designed for a

receptacle but for one single star; and that very small in comparison of one of

the fixed? Certainly if we should assign to every one of the fixed stars for its

receptacle so great a part of the Worlds space, it would be necessary to make

the  Orb  wherein  such  innumerable  multitudes  of  them  reside,  very  many

thousands of times bigger than that which serveth the purpose of Copernicus.

A star is called in respect of the space that environs it. Besides, do not you

call a fixed star very small, I mean even one of the most apparent, and notone of those which shun our sight; and do we not call them so in respect of

the vast space circumfused? Now if the whole Starry Sphere were one entire

lucid  body;  The  whole  starry  sphere  behold  from  a  great  distance  might

appear as small as one single star. who is there, that doth not know that in an

infinite space there might be assigned a distance so great, as that the said

lucid Sphere might from thence shew as little, yea lesse than a fixed star, now

appeareth beheld from the Earth? From thence therefore we should then judg

that self same thing to be little, which now from hence we esteem to be

immeasurably great.


SAGR.


Great in my judgment, is the folly of those who would have had God to have

made the World more proportinal to the narrow capacities of their reason,

than to his immense, rather infinite power.


SIMP.


All this that you say is very true; but that upon which the adversary makes a

scruple, is, to grant that a fixed star should be not onely equal to, but so much

bigger than the Sun; when as they both are particular bodies situate within

the  Starry Orb: And indeed in my opinion this Authour very pertinently

questioneth and asketh: ‘To what end, and for whose sake are such huge

machines  made?Instances  of  the  Authour  of  the  Conclusions  by  way  of

interogation. Were they produced for the Earth, for an inconsiderable point?

And why so remote? To the end they might seem so very small, and might

have no influence at all upon the Earth? To what purpose is such a needlesse

monstrousOr  Gulph.  immensity  between  them  and  Saturn?’  All  those

assertions fall to the ground that are not upheld by probable reasons.


SALV.


I conceive by the questions which this person asketh, that one may collect,

Answers to the interrogatories of the said Authour. that in case the Heavens,

the Stars, and the quantity of their distances and magnitudes which he hath

hitherto held, be let alone, (although he never certainly fancied to himself any

conceivable magnitude thereof) he perfectly discerns and comprehends the

benefits  that  flow  from  thence  to  the  Earth,  which  is  no  longer  aninconsiderable thing; nor are they any longer so remote as to appeare so very

small, but big enough to be able to operate on the Earth; and that the distance

between them and Saturn is very well proportioned, and that he, for all these

things, hath very probable reasons; of which I would gladly have heard some

one: The Authour of the Conclusions confound and contradicts himself in his

interrogations.  but  being  that  in  these  few  words  he  confounds  and

contradicts himself, it maketh me think that he is very poor and ill furnished

with those probable reasons, and that those which he calls reasons, are rather

fallacies, or dreams of an over-weening fancy. For I ask of him, whether

these Celestial bodies truly operate on the Earth, Interrogatories put to the

Authour of the Conclusions, by which the weaknesse of his is made appear.

and whether for the working of those effects they were produced of such and

such magnitudes, and disposed at such and such distances, or else whether

they have nothing at all to do with Terrene mattets. If they have nothing to do

with the Earth; it is a great folly for us that are Earth-born, to offer to make

our  selves  arbitrators  of  their  magnitudes,  and  regulators  of  their  local

dispositions, seeing that we are altogether ignorant of their whole businesse

and  concerns;  but  if  he  shall  say  that  they  do  operate,  and  that  they  are

directed to this end, he doth affirm the same thing which a little before he

denied, and praiseth that which even now he condemned, in that he said, that

the  Celestial  bodies  situate  so  far  remote  as  that  they  appear  very  small,

cannot have any influence at all upon the Earth. But, good Sir, in the Starry

Sphere pre-established at its present distance, and which you did acknowledg

to be in your judgment, well proportioned to have an influence upon these

Terrene bodies, many stars appear very small, and an hundred times as many

more are wholly invisible unto us (which is an appearing yet lesse than very

small) therefore it is necessary that (contradicting your self) you do  now

deny their operation upon the Earth; or else that (still contradicting your self)

you grant that their appearing very small doth not in the least lessen their

influence;  or  else  that  (and  this  shall  be  a  more  sincere  and  modest

concession) you acknowledg and freely confesse, that our passing judgment

upon their magnitudes and distances is a vanity, not to say presumption or

rashnesse.


SIMP.Truth is, I my self did also, in reading this passage perceive the manifest

contradiction, in saying, that the Stars (if one may so speak) of Copernicus

appearing so very small, could not operate on the Earth, and not perceiving

that he had granted an influence upon the Earth to those of Ptolomy, and his

sectators, which appear not only very small, but are, for the most part, very

invisible.


SALV.


But I proceed to another consideration: What is the reason, doth he say, why

the stars appear so little? Is it haply, because they seem so to us?That remote

objects appeare so small, is the defect of the eye, as is demonstrated. Doth not

he know, that this commeth from the Instrument that we imploy in beholding

them, to wit, from our eye? And that this is true, by changing Instrument, we

shall see them bigger and bigger, as much as we will. And who knows but

that to the Earth, which beholdeth them without eyes, they may not shew very

great, and such as in reality they are? But it’s time that, omitting these trifles,

we  come  to  things  of  more  moment;  and  therefore  I  having  already

demonstrated these two things: First, how far off the Firmament ought to be

placed to make, that the grand Orb causeth no greater difference than that

which the Terrestrial Orb occasioneth in the remotenesse of the Sun; And

next, how likewise to make that a star of the Firmament appear to us of the

same bignesse, as now we see it, it is not necessary to suppose it bigger than

the Sun; I would know whether Tycho, or any of his adherents hath ever

attempted  to  find  out,  by  any  means,  whether  any  appearance  be  to  be

discovered in the starry Sphere, upon which one may the more resolutely

deny or admit the annual motion of the Earth.


SAGR.


I would answer for them, that there is not, no nor is there any need there

should; Tycho nor his followers ever attempted to see whether there are any

appearances in the Firmament for or against the annual m tion. seeing that it

is Copernicus himself that saith, that no such diversity is there: and they,

arguing ad hominem, admit him the same; and upon this assumption they

demonstrate the improbability that followeth thereupon, namely, that it would

be necessary to make the Sphere so immense, that a fixed star, to appear unto

us  as  great  as  it  now  seems,  ought  of  necessity  to  be  of  so  immense  amagnitude, as that it would exceed the bignesse of the whole grand Orb, a

thing, which notwithstanding, as they say, is altogether incredible.


SALV.


I  am  of  the  same  judgment,  and  verily  believe  that  they  argue  contra

hominem, studying more to defend another man, than desiring to come to the

knowledge of the truth. And I do not only believe, Astronomers, perhaps,

have not known what appearances ought to follow upon the annual motion of

the  Earth.  that  none  of  them  ever  applied  themselves  to  make  any  such

observation, but I am also uncertain, whether any of them do know what

alteration the Earths annual motion ought to produce in the fixed stars, in

case  the  starry  Sphere  were  not  so  far  distant,  as  that  in  them  the  said

diversity,  by  reason  of  its  minuity  dis-appeareth;  for  their  surceasing  that

inquisition,  and  referring  themselves  to  the  meer  assertion  of  Copernicus,

may very well serve to convict a man, but not to acquit him of the fact:

Copernicus  understood  not  some  things  for  want  of  Instruments.  For  its

possible that such a diversity may be, and yet not have been sought for; or

that either by reason of its minuity, or for want of exact Instruments it was

not discovered by Copernicus; for though it were so, this would not be the

first thing, that he either for want of Instruments, or for some other defect

hath  not  known;  and  yet  he  proceeding  upon  other  solid  and  rational

conjectures, affirmeth that, which the things by him not discovered do seem

to contradict: for, as hath been said already, without the Telescope, neither

could Mars be discerned to increase 60. times; nor Venus 40. more in that

than in this position; yea, their differences appear much lesse than really they

are  and  yet  neverthelesse  it  is  certainly  discovered  at  length,  that  those

mutations are the same, to an hair that the Copernican Systeme required.

Tycho  and  others  argue  against  the  annual  motion,  from  the  invariable

elevation  of  the  Pole.  Now  it  would  be  very  well,  if  with  the  greatest

accuratenesse possible one should enquire whether such a mutation as ought

to  be  discoverable  in  the  fixed  stars,  supposing  the  annual  motion  of  the

Earth, would be observed really and in effect, a thing which I verily believe

hath never as yet been done by any; done, said I? no, nor haply (as I said

before) by many well understood how it ought to be done. Nor speak I this at

randome, for I have heretofore seen a certain Manuscript of one of these

Anti-Copernicans, which said, that there would necessarily follow, in casethat opinion were true, a continual rising and falling of the Pole from six

moneths to six moneths, according as the Earth in such a time, by such a

space as is the diameter of the grand Orb, retireth one while towards the

North,  and  another  while  towards  the  South;  and  yet  it  seemed  to  him

reasonable,  yea  necessary,  that  we,  following  the  Earth,  when  we  were

towards the North should have the Pole more elevated than when we are

towards the South. In this very error did one fall that was otherwise a very

skilful  Mathematician,  &  a  follower  of  Copernic.  as  Tycho  relateth  in

hisChristophorus Rothmannus. Progymnasma. pag. 684. which said, that he

had observed the Polar altitude to vary, and to differ in Summer from what it

is in Winter: and because Tycho denieth the merit  of the cause, but findeth

no fault with the method of it; that is, denieth that there is any mutation to be

seen in the altitude of the Pole, but doth not blame the inquisition, for not

being adapted to the finding of what is sought, he thereby sheweth, that he

also esteeemed the Polar altitude varied, or not varied every six moneths, to

be a good testimony to disprove or inferre the annual motion of the Earth.


SIMP.


In truth, Salviatus, my opinion also tells me, that the same must necessarily

ensue: for I do not think that you will deny me, but that if we walk only 60.

miles towards the North, the Pole will rise unto us a degree higher, and that if

we move 60. miles farther Northwards, the Pole will be elevated to us a

degree more, &c. Now if the approaching or receding 60. miles onely, make

so notable a change in the Polar altitudes, what alteration would follow, if the

Earth and we with it, should be transported, I will not say 60. miles, but 60.

thousand miles that way.


SALV.


It would follow (if it should proceed in the same proportion) that the Pole

shall be elevated a thousand degrees. See, Simplicius, what a long rooted

opinion can do. Yea, by reason you have fixed it in your mind for so many

years, that it is Heaven, that revolveth in twenty four hours, and not the Earth,

and that consequently the Poles of that Revolution are in Heaven, and not in

the Terrestrial Globe, cannot now, in an hours time shake off this habituated

conceipt, and take up the contrary, fancying to your self, that the Earth is that

which moveth, only for so long time as may suffice to conceive of whatwould follow, thereupon should that lye be a truth. If the Earth Simplicius, be

that which moveth in its self in twenty four hours, in it are the Poles, in it is

the Axis, in it is the Equinoctial, that is, the grand Circle, described by the

point, equidistant from the Poles, in it are the infinite Parallels bigger and

lesser described by the points of the superficies more and lesse distant from

the Poles, in it are all these things, and not in the starry Sphere, which, as

being  immoveable,  wants  them  all,  and  can  only  by  the  imagination  be

conceived to be therein, prolonging the Axis of the Earth so far, till that

determining, it shall mark out two points placed right over our Poles, and the

plane of the Equinoctial being extended, it shall describe in Heaven a circle

like it self. Now if the true Axis, the true Poles, the true Equinoctial, do not

change in the Earth so long as you continue in the same place of the Earth,

and  though  the  Earth  be  transported,  as  you  do  please,  yet  you  shall  not

change your habitude either to the Poles, or to the circles, or to any other

Earthly thing; and this because, that that transposition being common to you

and to all Terrestrial  things; Motion  it is common is as if it never were. and

that motion where it is common, is as if it never were; and as you change not

habitude to the Terrestrial Poles (habitude I say, whether that they rise, or

descend)  so  neither  shall  you  change  position  to  the  Poles  imagined  in

Heaven; alwayes provided that by Celestial Poles we understand (as hath

been already defined) those two points that come to be marked out by the

prolongation of the Terrestrial Axis unto that length. Tis true those points in

Heaven  do  change,  when  the  Earths  transportment  is  made  after  such  a

manner,  that  its  Axis  cometh  to  passe  by  other  and  other  points  of  the

immoveable Celestial Sphere, but our habitude thereunto changeth not, so as

that the second should be more elevated to us than the first. If any one will

have one of the points of the Firmament, which do answer to the Poles of the

Earth to ascend, and the other to descend, he must walk along the Earth

towards the one, receding from the other, for the transportment of the Earth,

and with it us our selves, (as I told you before) operates nothing at all.


SAGR.


Permit me, I beseech you Salviatus, to make this a little more clear by an

example,  which  although  grosse,  is  acommodated  to  this  purpose.  An

example fitted to prove that the altitude of the Pole ought not to vary by

means  of  the  Earths  annual  motion.  Suppose  your  self,  Simplicius,  to  beaboard a Ship, and that standing in the Poope, or Hin-deck; you have directed

a Quadrant, or some other Astronomical Instrument, towards the top of the

Top-gallant-Mast, as if you would take its height, which suppose it were v.

gr. 40. degrees, there is no doubt, but that if you walk along theCorsia, the

bank or bench on which slaves sit in a Gally. Hatches towards the Mast 25. or

30. paces; and then again direct the said Instrument to the same Top-Gallant-

Top. You shall find its elevation to be greater, and to be encreased v. gr. 10.

degrees; but if instead of walking those 25. or 30. paces towards the Mast,

you stand still at the Sterne, and make the whole Ship to move thitherwards,

do you believe that by reason of the 25. or 30. paces that it had past, the

elevation of the Top-Gallant-Top would shew 10. degrees encreased?


SIMP.


I believe and know that it would not gain an hairs breadth in the passing of

30. paces, nor of a thousand, no nor of an hundred thousand miles; but yet I

believe withal that looking through the sights at the Top and Top-Gallant, if I

should find a fixed Star that was in the same elevation, I believe I say, that,

holding still the Quadrant, after I had sailed towards the star 60. miles, the

eye would meet with the top of the said Mast, as before, but not with the star,

which would be elevated to me one degree.


SAGR.


Then you do not think that the sight would fall upon that point of the Starry

Sphere, that answereth to the direction of the Top-Gallant Top?


SIMP.


No: For the point would be changed, and would be beneath the star first

observed.


SAGR.


You are in the right. Now like as that which in this example answereth to the

elevation  of  the  Top-Gallant-Top,  is  not  the  star,  but  the  point  of  the

Firmament that lyeth in a right line with the eye, and the said top of the Mast,

so in the case exemplified, that which in the Firmament answers to the Poleof the Earth, is not a star, or other fixed thing in the Firmament; but is that

point in which the Axis of the Earth continued streight out, till it cometh

thither doth determine, which point is not fixed, but obeyeth the mutations

that the Pole of the Earth doth make. Upon the annual motion of the Earth,

alteration may ensue in some fixed star, not in the Pole. And therefore Tycho,

or who ever else that did alledg this objection, ought to have said that upon

that  same  motion  of  the  Earth,  were  it  true,  one  might  observe  some

difference in the elevation and depression (not of the Pole, but) of some fixed

star toward that part which answereth to our Pole.


SIMP.


I  already  very  well  understand  the  mistake  by  them  committed;  but  yet

therefore (which to me seems very great) of the argument brought on the

contrary is not lessened, supposing relation to be had to the variation of the

stars, and not of the Pole; for if the moving of the Ship but 60. miles, make a

fixed star rise to me one degree, shall I not find alike, yea and very much

greater mutation, if the Ship should sail towards the said star for so much

space as is the Diameter of the Grand Orb, which you affirm to be double the

distance that is between the Earth and Sun?


SAGR.


Herein Simplicius, there is another fallacy, which, truth is, The equivoke of

those who believe that in the annual motion great mutations are to be made

about the elevation of a fixed star, is confuted. you understand, but do not

upon  the  sudden  think  of  the  same,  but  I  will  try  to  bring  it  to  your

remembrance:  Tell  me  therefore;  if  when  after  you  have  directed  the

Quadrant to a fixed star, and found v. g. its elevation to be 40. degrees, you

should without stirring from the place, incline the side of the Quadrant, so as

that the star might remain elevated above that direction, would you thereupon

say that the star had acquired greater elevation?


SIMP.


Certainly no: For the mutation was made in the Instrument and not in the

Observer, that did change place, moving towards the same.SAGR.


But if you sail or walk along the surface of the Terrestrial Globe, will you say

that  there  is  no  alteration  made  in  the  said  Quadrant,  but  that  the  same

elevation is still retained in respect of the Heavens, so long as you your self

do not incline it, but let it stand at its first constitution?


SIMP.


Give me leave to think of it. I would say without more ado, that it would not

retain the same, in regard the progresse  I make is not in plano, but about the

circumference  of  the  Terrestrial  Globe,  which  at  every  step  changeth

inclination in respect to Heaven, and consequently maketh the same change

in the Instrument which is erected upon the same.


SAGR.


You say very well: And you know withal, that by how much the bigger that

circle shall be upon which you move, so many more miles you are to walk, to

make the said star to rise that same degree higher; and that finally if the

motion towards the star should be in a right line, you ought to move yet

farther, than if it were about the circumference of never so great a circle?


SALV.


True: The right line, and circumference of an infinite circle, are the same

thing. For in short the circumference of an infinite circle, and a right line are

the same thing.


SAGR.


But this I do not understand, nor as I believe, doth Simplicius apprehend the

same; and it must needs be concealed from us under some mistery, for we

know  that  Salviatus  never  speaks  at  random,  nor  proposeth  any  Paradox,

which  doth  not  break  forth  into  some  conceit,  not  trivial  in  the  least.

Therefore in due time and place I will put you in mind to demonstrate this,

that the right line is the same with the circumference of an infinite circle, but

at  present  I  am  unwilling  that  we  should  interrupt  the  discourse  in  hand.Returning then to the case, I propose to the consideration of Simplicius, how

the accession and recession that the Earth makes from the said fixed star

which is neer the Pole can be made as it were by a right line, for such is the

Diameter of the Grand Orb, so that the attempting to regulate the elevation

and depression of the Polar star by the motion along the said Diameter, as if it

were by the motion about the little circle of the Earth, is a great argument of

but little judgment.


SIMP.


But we continue still unsatisfied, in regard that the said small mutation that

should be therein, would not be discerned; and if this be null, then must the

annual motion about the Grand Orb ascribed to the Earth, be null also.


SAGR.


Here now I give Salviatus leave to go on, who as I believe will not overpasse

the elevation and depression of the Polar star or any other of those that are

fixed  as  null,  although  not  discovered  by  any  one,  and  affirmed  by

Copernicus himself to be, I will not say null, but unobservable by reason of

its minuity.


SALV.


I have already said above, that I do not think that any one did ever set himself

to  observe,  Enquiry  is  made  what  mutations,  &  in  what  stars,  are  to  be

discovered, by means of the annual motion of the Earth. whether in different

times of the year there is any mutation to be seen in the fixed stars, that may

have a dependance on the annual motion of the Earth, and added withal, that I

doubted least haply some might never have  understood what those mutations

are, and amongst what stars they should be discerned; therefore it would be

necessary  that  we  in  the  next  place  narrowly  examine  this  particular.

Astronomers having omitted to instance what alterations those are that may

be derived from the annual motion of the Earth, do thereby testifie that they

never rightly understood the same. My having onely found written in general

terms that the annual motion of the Earth about the Grand Orb, ought not to

be admitted, because it is not probable but that by means of the same there

would  be  discoverd  some  apparent  mutation  in  the  fixed  stars,  and  nothearing say what those apparent mutations ought to be in particular, and in

what stars, maketh me very reasonably to infer that they who rely upon that

general  position,  have  not  understood,  no  nor  possibly  endeavoured  to

understand,  how  the  businesse  of  these  mutations  goeth,  nor  what  things

those are which they say ought to be seen. The mutations of the fixed stars

ought to be in some greater, in others lesser, and in others nothing at all. And

to this judgment I am the rather induced; knowing that the annual motion

ascribed by Copernicus to the Earth, if it should appear sensible in the Starry

Sphere, is not to make apparent mutations equal in respect to all the stars, but

those appearances ought to be made in some greater, in others lesser, and in

others yet lesser; and lastly, in others absolutely nothing at all, by reason of

the vast magnitude that the circle of this annual motion is supposed to be of.

As for the mutations that should b  seen, they are of two kinds, one is the said

stars changing apparent magnitude, and the other their variation of altitudes

in the Meridian. Upon which necessarily followeth the mutation of risings

and settings, and of their distances from the Zenith, &c.


SAGR.


Methinks I see preparing for me such a skean of these revolutions, that I wish

it may never be my task to dis-intangle them, for to confesse my infirmity to

Salviatus, I have sometimes thought thereon, but could never find theBandola

that end of a skeen wherewith housewives fasten their hankes of yarn, thread

or silk. Lay-band of it, and I speak not so much of this which pertains to the

fixed  stars,  as  of  another  more  terrible  labour  which  you  bring  to  my

remembrance by maintaining these Meridian Altitudes, Ortive Latitudes and

distances  from  the  Vertex,  &c.  The  grand  difficulty  in  Copernicus  his

Doctrine, is that which concerns the Phaenomena of the Sun and fixed stars.

And that which puzzleth my brains, ariseth from what I am now about to tell

you. Copernicus supposeth the Starry Sphere immoveable, and the Sun in the

centre  thereof  immoveable  also.  Therefore  every  mutation  which  seemeth

unto us to be made in the Sun or in the fixed stars, must of necessity befall

the Earth and be ous. But the Sun riseth and declineth in our Meridian by a

very great arch of almost 47. degrees, and by arches yet greater and greatet,

varieth its Ortive and Occidual Latitudes in the oblique Horizons. Now how

can the Earth ever incline and elevate so notably to the Sun, and nothing at all

to the fixed stars, or so little, that it is not to be perceived? This is that knotwhich could never get thorow myPettine, it is the stay in a Weavets Loom,

that permitteth no knot or snarle to passe it, called by them the Combe of the

Loom. Loom-Combe; and if you shall  untie it, I shall hold you for more than

an Alexander.


SALV.


These are scruples worthy of the ingenuity of Sagredus, and this doubt is so

intricate,  that  even  Copernicus  himself  almost  despaired  of  being  able  to

explain the same, so as to render it intelligible, which we see as well by his

own confession of its obscurity, as also by his, at two several times, taking

two  different  wayes  to  make  it  out.  And,  I  ingenuously  confesse  that  I

understood not his explanation, till such time as another method more plain

and  manifest,  had  rendred  it  intelligible;  and  yet  neither  was  that  done

without a long and laborious application of my thoughts to the same.


SIMP.


Aristotle  saw  the  same  scruple,  Aristotles  argument  against  the  Ancients,

who held that the Earth was a Planet. and makes use thereof to oppose certain

of  the  Ancients,  who  held  that  the  Earth  was  a  Planet;  against  whom  he

argueth, that if it were so, it would follow that it also, as the rest of the

Planets, should have a plurality of motions, from whence would follow these

variations in the risings and settings of the fixed stars, and likewise in the

Meridian Altitudes. And in regard that he propoundeth the difficulty, and

doth not answer it, it must needs be, if not impossible, at least very difficult

to be resolved.


SALV.


The  stresse  and  strength  of  the  knot  rendereth  the  solution  thereof  more

commendable and admirable; but I do not promise you the same at this time,

and pray you to dispense with me therein till too morrow, and for the present

we will go considering and explaining those mutations and differences that

by means of the annual motion ought to be discerned in the fixed stars, like as

even now we said, for the explication whereof certain preparatory points offer

themselves,  which  may  facilitate  the  answer  to  the  grand  objection.  Now

reassuming the two motions ascribed to the Earth (two I say, for the third isno motion, as in its place I will declare) that is the annual and diurnal, The

annual motion made by the centre of the Earth under the Ecliptick and the

diurnal motion made by the Earth about its own centre. the first is to be

understood  to  be  made  by  the  centre  of  the  Earth  in  or  about  the

circumference of the grand Orb, that is of a very great circle described in the

plain of the fixed and immutable Ecliptick; the other, namely the diurnal, is

made by the Globe of the Earth in it self about its own centre, and own Axis,

not erect, but inclined to the Plane of the Ecliptick, with the inclination of 23.

degrees and an half, or thereabouts, the which inclination is maintained all the

year about, and that which ought especially to be observed, is alwayes situate

towards the same point of Heaven: The axis of the Earth continueth alwayes

parallel to it self, and describeth a Cylindraical superficies, inclining to the

grand  Orb.  in  so  much  that  the  Axis  of  the  diurnal  motion  doth  alwayes

remain parallel to it self; so that if we imagine that same Axis to be continued

out until it reach the fixed stars, whilst the centre of the Earth is encircling the

whole Ecliptick in a year, the said Axis describeth the superficies  of an

oblique Cylinder, which hath for one of its bases the said annual circle, and

for the other a like circle imaginarily described by its extremity, or, (if you

will) Pole, amongst the fixed stars. And this same cylinder is oblique to the

Plane of the Ecliptick, according to the inclination of the Axis that describeth

it, which we have said to be 23 degrees and an half, the which continuing

perpetually the same (save onely, that in many thousands of years it maketh

some very small mutation, which nothing importeth in our present businesse)

causeth that the Terrestrial Globe doth never more incline or elevate, The Orb

of the Earth never inclineth, but is immutably the same. but still conserveth

the  same  state  without  mutation.  From  whence  ensueth,  that  as  to  what

pertaineth to the mutations to be observed in the fixed stars dependant on the

sole annual motion, the same shall happen to any point whatsoever of the

Earths surface, as befalleth unto the centre of the Earth it self; and therefore

in the present explanations we will make use of the centre, as if it were any

whatsoever point of the superficies. And for a more facile understanding of

the whole, The fixed stars placed in the Ecliptick never elevate nor descend,

on account of the annual motion, but yet approach and recede. let us design

the same in lineal figures: And first of all let us describe in the Plane of the

Ecliptick the circle ANBO [in Fig. 7. ] and let us understand the points A and

B, to be the extreams towards the North and South; that is, the beginning of

[or entrance into] Cancer or Capricorn, and let us prolong the Diameter AB,indeterminately by D and C towards the Starry Sphere. I say now in the first

place, that none of the fixed stars placed in the Ecliptick, shall ever vary

elevation, by reason of any whatsoever mutation made by the Earth along the

said Plane of the Ecliptick, but shall alwayes appear in the same superficies,

although the Earth shall approach and recede as great a space as is that of the

diameter of the Grand Orb, as may plainly be seen in the said figure. For

whether the Earth be in the point A or in B, the star C alwayes appeareth in

the same line ABC; although the distance BC, be lesse than AC, by the whole

diameter AB. The most therefore that can be discovered in the star C, and in

any other placed in the Ecliptick, is the augmented or diminished apparent

magnitude, by reason of the approximation or recession of the Earth.


SAGR.


Stay  a  while  I  pray  you,  for  I  meet  with  a  certain  scruple,  which  much

troubleth me, and it is this: That the star C may be seen by the same line

ABC, as wel when the Earth is in A, as when it is in B, I understand very

well, as also furthermore I apprehend that the same would happen in all the

points of the line AB, Objections against the Earths annual motion taken from

the fixed stars placed in the Ecliptick. so long as the Earth should passe from

A to B by the said line; but it passing thither, as is to be supposed, by the arch

ANB, it is manifest that when it shall be in the  point N, and in any other

except those two A and B, the said star shall no longer be observed in the line

AB; but in others. So that, if the appearing under several lines ought to cause

apparent  mutations,  some  difference  must  needs  appear  in  this  case.  Nay

more, I will speak it with that Philosophical freedom, which ought to be

allowed amongst Philosophick friends, methinks that you, contradicting your

self, deny that now, which but even now to our admiration, you proved to be

really true, and considerable; I mean that which happeneth in the Planets, and

particularly in the three superiour ones, that being constantly in the Ecliptick,

or very near unto it, do not onely shew themselves one while near unto us,

and another while remote, but so deformed in their regular motions, that they

seem sometimes immoveable, and sometimes many degrees retrograde; and

all upon no other occasion than the annual motion of the Earth.


SALV.Though  by  a  thousand  accidents  I  have  been  heretofore  assured  of  the

wittinesse of Sagredus, yet I had a desire by this one experiment more to

ascertain me of what I may expect from his ingenuity, and all this for my own

interest, for in case my Propositions stand but proof against the hammer and

furnace of his judgment, I shall be confident that they will abide theOr will

prove  of  good  alloy.  test  of  all  Touch-stones.  I  say  therefore  that  I  had

purposely dissembled this objection, but yet not with any intent to deceive

you, and to put any falshood upon you, as it might have happened if the

objection  by  me  disguised,  and  by  you  over-lookt,  had  been  the  same  in

effect as it seemed to be in appearance, that is, really valid and conclusive;

but it is not so; nay I rather suspect that to try me, you make as if you did not

see its nullity. But I will herein be too hard for you, and force from your

tongue, that which you would so artificially conceal; and therefore tell me,

what  that  thing  should  be,  whereby  you  come  to  know  the  station  and

retrogradation of the Planets, which is derived from the annual motion, aud

which is so great, that at least some foot-steps of such an effect ought to

appear in the stars of the Ecliptick?


SAGR.


This demand of yours containeth two questions, to which it is necessary that I

make reply; the first relates to the imputation which you lay upon me of a

Dissembler; the other concerneth that which may appear in the stars, &c. As

to the first, I will say with your permission, that it is not true, that I have

dissembled my knowing the nullity of that objection; and to assure you of the

same, I now tell you that I very well understand the nullity thereof.


SALV.


But yet I do not understand how it can be, that you  spake not friendly, when

you said you did not know that same fallacy which you now confesse that

you know very well.


SAGR.


The very confession of knowing it may assure you that I did not dissemble,

when I said that I did not understand it; for if I had had a mind, and would

dissemble, who could hinder me from continuing in the same simulation, anddenying still that I understand the fallacy? I say therefore that I understood

not the same, at that time, but that I do now at this present apprehend it, for

that you have prompted my intellect, first by telling me resolutely that it is

null, and then by beginning to question me so at large what thing that might

be,  whereby  I  might  come  to  know  the  station  and  retrogradation  of  the

Planets; The station, direction and retrogradation of the Planets is known, in

relation to the fixed stars. and because this is known by comparing them with

the fixed stars, in relation to which, they are seen to vary their motions, one

while towards the West, and another towards the East, and sometimes to

abide  immoveable;  and  because  there  is  not  any  thing  above  the  Starry

Sphere, immensely more remote from us, and visible unto us, wherewith we

may compare our fixed stars, therefore we cannot discover in the fixed stars

any foot-steps of what appeareth to us in the Planets. This I believe is the

substance of that which you would force from me.


SALV.


It is so, An Indice is the fixed stars like to that which is  in the Plane s, is an

argument of the Earths annual motion. with the addition moreover of your

admirable ingenuity; and if with half a word I did open your eyes, you by the

like  have  remembred  me  that  it  is  not  altogether  impossible,  but  that

sometime or other something observable may be found amongst the fixed

stars, by which it may be gathered wherein the annual conversion resides, so

as that they also no lesse than the Planets and Sun it self, may appear in

judgment to bear witnesse of that motion, in favour of the Earth; for I do not

think that the sta s are spread in a spherical superficies equally remote from a

common centre, but hold, that their distances from us are so various, that

some of them may be twice and thrice as remote as others; so that if with the

Telescope one should observe a very small star neer to one of the bigger, and

which therefore was very exceeding high, it might happen, that some sensible

mutation might fall out between them, correspondent to that of the superiour

Planets. And so much shall serve to have spoken at this time touching the

stars placed in the Ecliptick. The fixed stars without the Ecliptick elevate and

descend more or lesse, according to their distance from the said Ecliptick▪ Let

us now come to the fixed stars, placed out of the Ecliptick, and let us suppose

a great circle erect upon [i. e. at right angles to] the Plane of thei. e. of the

Ecliptick. same; and let it, for example, be a circle that in the Starry Sphereanswers to the Solstitial Colure, and let us mark it CEH [in Fig. 8. ] which

shall happen to be withal a Meridian, and in it we will take a star without the

Ecliptick, which let be E. Now this star will indeed vary its elevation  upon

the Earths motion; for from the Earth in A it shall be seen according to the

ray AE, with the elevation of the angle EAC; but from the Earth placed in B,

it shall be seen according to the ray BE, with the elevation of the angle EBC,

bigger than the other EAC, that being extern, and this intern and opposite in

the triangle EAB, the distance therefore of the star E from the Ecliptick, shall

appear changed; and likewise its altitude in the Meridian shall become greater

in the position B, than in the place A, according as the angle EBC exceeds the

angle  EAC,  which  excesse  is  the  quantity  of  the  angle  AEB:  For  in  the

triangle EAB, the side AB being continued to C, the exteriour angle EBC (as

being equal to the two interiour and opposite E and A) exceedeth the said

angle A, by the quantity of the angle E. And if we should take another star in

the same Meridian, more remote from the Ecliptick, as for instance the star H,

the diversity in it shall be greater by being observed from the two stations A

and B, according as the angle AHB is greater than the other E; which angle

shall encrease continually according as the observed star shall be farther and

farther from the Ecliptick, till that at last the greatest mutation will appear in

that star that should be placed in the very Pole of the Ecliptick. As for a full

understanding  thereof  we  thus  demonstrate.  Suppose  the  diameter  of  the

Grand Orb to be AB, whose centre [in the same Figure] is G, and let it be

supposed to be continued out as far as the Starry Sphere in the points D and

C, and from the centre G let there be erected the Axis of the Ecliptick GF,

prolonged  till  it  arrive  at  the  said  Sphere,  in  which  a  Meridian  DFC  is

supposed  to  be  described,  that  shall  be  perpendicular  to  the  Plane  of  the

Ecliptick; and in the arch FC any points H and E, are imagined to be taken, as

places of fixed stars: Let the lines FA, FB, AH, HG, HB, AE, GE, BE, be

conjoyned. And let the angle of difference, or, if you will, the Parallax of the

star placed in the Pole F, be AFB, and let that of the star placed in H, be the

angle AHB, and let that of the star in E, be the angle AEB. I say, that the

angle of difference of the Polar star F, is the greatest, and that of the rest,

those that are nearer to the greatest are bigger than the more remote; that is to

say, that the angle F is bigger than the angle H, and this bigger than the angle

E. Now about the triangle FAB, let us suppose a circle to be described. And

because the angle F is acute, (by reason that its base AB is lesse than the

diameter DC, of the semicircle DFC) it shall be placed in the greater portionof the circumscribed circle cut by the base AB. And because the said AB is

divided  in  the  midst,  and  at  right  angles  by  FG,  the  centre  of  the

circumscribed  circle shall be in the line FG, which let be the point I; and

because that of such lines as are drawn from the point G, which is not the

centre, unto the circumference of the circumscribed circle, the biggest is that

which passeth by the centre, GF shall be bigger than any other that is drawn

from the point G, to the circumference of the said circle; and therefore that

circumference will cut the line GH (which is equal to the line GF) and cutting

GH, it will also cut AH. Let it cut it in L, and conjoyn the line LB. These two

angles, therefore, AFB and ALB shall be equal, as being in the same portion

of the circle circumscribed. But ALB external, is bigger than the internal H;

therefore the angle F is bigger than the angle H. And by the same method we

might demonstrate the angle H to be bigger than the angle E, because that of

the circle described about the triangle AHB, the centre is in the perpendicular

GF,  to  which  the  line  GH  is  nearer  than  the  line  GE,  and  therefore  the

circumference of it cutteth GE, and also AE, whereupon the proposition is

manifest. We will conclude from hence, that the difference of appearance,

(which with the proper term of art, we might call the Parallax of the fixed

stars) is greater, or lesse, according as the Stars observed are more or lesse

adjacent to the Pole of the Ecliptick, so that, in conclusion of those Stars that

are in the Ecliptick it self, the said diversity is reduced to nothing. In the next

place, The Earth approacheth or recedeth from the fixed stars of the Ecliptick,

the quantity of the Diameter of the Grand Orb. as to the Earths accession by

that motion to, or recession from the Stars, it appeareth to, and recedeth from

those that are in the Ecliptick, the quantity of the whole diameter of the grand

Orb, as we did see even now, but that accession or recession to, or from the

stars about the Pole of the Ecliptick, is almost nothing; and in going to and

from others, this difference groweth greater, according as they are neerer to

the Ecliptick. We may, The stars nearer to us make greater differences than

the more remote. in the third place, know, that the said difference of Aspect

groweth greater or lesser, according as the Star observed shall be neerer to us,

or farther from us. For if we draw another Meridian, lesse distant from the

Earth; as for example, this DFI [in Fig. 7. ] a Star placed in F, and seen by the

same ray AFE, the Earth being in A, would, in case it should be observed

from the Earth in B, appear according to the ray BF, and would make the

angle of difference, namely, BFA, bigger than the former AEB, being the

exteriour angle of the triangle BFE.SAGR.


With  great  delight,  and  also  benefit  have  I  heard  your  discourse;  The

Epilogue of the Phaenomena of the fixed stars caused by the annual motion

of the Earth. and that I may be certain, whether I have rightly understood the

same, I shall give you the summe of the Conclusions in a few words. As I

take it, you have explained to us the different appearances, that by means of

the Earths annual motion,  may be by us observed in the fixed stars to be of

two kinds: The one is, that of their apparent magnitudes varied, according as

we, transported by the Earth, approach or recede from the same: The other

(which  likewise  dependeth  on  the  same  accession  and  recession)  their

appearing  unto  us  in  the  same  Meridian,  one  while  more  elevated,  and

another while lesse. Moreover, you tell us (and I understand it very well) that

the one and other of these mutations are not made alike in all the stars, but in

some greater, and in others lesser, and in others not at all. The accession and

recession  whereby  the  same  star  ought  to  appear,  one  while  bigger,  and

another while lesser, is insensible, and almost nothing in the stars neer unto

the pole of the Ecliptick, but is greatest in the stars placed in the Ecliptick it

self, and indifferent in the intermediate: the contrary happens in the other

difference,  that  is,  the  elevation  or  depression  of  the  stars  placed  in  the

Ecliptick is nothing at all, greatest in those neerest to the Pole of the said

Ecliptick, and indifferent in the intermediate. Besides, both these differences

are more sensible in the Stars neerest to us, in the more remote lesse sensible,

and in those that are very far distant wholly disappear. This is, as to what

concerns my self; it remaineth now, as I conceive, that something be said for

the satisfaction of Simplicius, who, as I believe, will not easily be made to

over-passe those differences, as insensible that are derived from a motion of

the Earth so vast, and from a mutation that transports the Earth into places

twice as far distant from us as the Sun.


SIMP.


Truth is, to speak freely, I am very loth to confesse, that the distance of the

fixed Stars ought to be such, that in them the fore-mentioned differences

should be wholly imperceptible.


SALV.Do  not  throw  your  self  into  absolute  despair,  Simplicius,  for  there  may

perhaps yet some qualification be found for your difficulties. And first, that

the  apparent  magnitude  of  the  stars  is  not  seen  to  make  any  sensible

alteration, ought not to be judged by you a thing improbable, in regard you

see  the  guesses  of  men  in  this  particular  to  be  so  grossely  erroneous,

especially in looking upon splendid objects; and you your self beholding v. g.

a  lighted  Torch  at  the  distance  of  200  paces,  In  objects  far  remote,  and

luminous,  a  small  approach  or  recession  is  imperceptible.  if  it  approach

nearer to you 3. or 4. yards, do you think that it will shew any whit encreased

in  magnitude?  I  for  my  part  should  not  perceive  it  certainly,  although  it

should approach 20. or 30. yards nearer; nay it hath sometimes happened that

in seeing such a light at that distance I know not how to resolve whether it

came towards me, or retreated from me, when as it did in reality approach

nearer to me. But what need I speak of this? If the self same accession and

recession (I speak of a distance  twice as great as that from the Sun to us) in

the  star  of  Saturn  is  almost  totally  imperceptible,  and  in  Jupiter  not  very

observable, what shall we think of the fixed stars, which I believe you will

not scruple to place twice as far off as Saturn? In Mars, which for that it is

nearer to us —


SIMP.


Pray Sir, put your self to no farther trouble in this particular, for I already

conceive  that  what  hath  been  spoken  touching  the  unaltered  apparent

magnitude of the fixed stars may very well come to passe, but what shall we

say of the other difficulty that proceeds from not perceiving any variation in

the mutation of aspect?


SALV.


We will say that which peradventure may satisfie you also in this particular.

And to make short, would you not be satisfied if there should be discovered

in the stars face mutations that you think ought to be discovered, in case the

annual motion belonged to the Earth?


SIMP.


I should so doubtlesse, as to what concerns this particular.SALV.


I could wish you would say that in case such a difference were discovered, If

in the fixed stars one should discover any annual mutation, the motion of the

Earth would be undeniable. nothing more would remain behind, that might

render the mobility of the Earth questionable. But although yet that should

not  sensibly  appear▪  yet  is  not  its  mobility  removed,  nor  its  immobility

necessarily  proved,  it  being  possible,  (as  Copernicus  affirmeth)  that  the

immense  distance  of  the  Starry  Sphere  rendereth  such  very  small

Phaenomena unobservable; the which as already hath been said, may possibly

not have been hitherto so much as sought for, or if sought for, yet not sought

for in such a way as they ought, It is proved what small credit is to be given

to  Astronomical  Instruments  in  minute  observations.  to  wit,  with  that

exactnesse  which  to  so  minute  a  punctuality  would  be  necessary;  which

exactnesse is very difficult to obtain, as well by reason of the deficiency of

Astronomical Instruments, subject to many alterations, as also through the

fault  of  those  that  manage  them  with  less  diligence  then  is  requisite.  A

necessary argument how little credit is to be given to those observations may

be  deduced  from  the  differences  which  we  find  amongst  Astronomers  in

assigning the places, I will not say, of the new Stars or Comets, but of the

fixed stars themselves, even to the altitudes of the very Poles, in which, most

an end, they are found to differ from one another many minutes. And to

speak the truth, who can in a Quadrant, or Sextant, that at most shall have its

sideBraccia Italian. 3. or 4. yards long, ascertain himself in the incidence of

the perpendicular, or in the direction of the sights, not to erre two or three

minutes, which in its circumference shall not amount to the breadth of a grain

of Or Mi  Mylet? Besides that, it is almost impossible, that the Instrument

should be made, and kept with absolute exactnesse. Ptolomey  sheweth his

distrust of a Spherical Instrument composed by Archimedes hismelf to take

the  Suns  ingression  into  the  Aequinoctial.  Ptolomy  did  not  trust  to  an

Instrument made by Archimedes.


SIMP.


But if the Instruments be so suspitious, Instruments of Tycho made with great

expence. and the observations so dubious, how can we ever come to any

certainty of things, or free our selves from mistakes? I have heard strangethings of the Instruments of Tycho made with extraordinary cost, and of his

singular diligence in observations.


SALV.


All this I grant you; but neither one nor other of these is sufficient to ascertain

us  in  a  businesse  of  this  importance.  I  desire  that  we  may  make  use  of

Instruments  greater  by  far,  What  Instruments  are  apt  for  most  exact

observation. and by far certainer than those of Tycho, made with a very small

charge; the sides of which are of 4. 6. 20. 30. and 50. miles, so as that a

degree is a mile broad, a minute prim. 50Italian braces. yards, a second but

little  lesse  than  a  yard,  and  in  short  we  may  without  a  farthing  expence

procure them of what bignesse we please. I being in a Countrey Seat of mine

near to Florence, An exquisite observation of the approach and departure of

the Sun from the Summer Solstice. did plainly observe the Suns arrival at,

and departure from the Summer Solstice, whilst one Evening at the time of its

going  down  it  appeared  upon  the  top  of  a  Rock  on  the  Mountains  of

Pietrapana,  about  60.  miles  from  thence,  leaving  discovered  of  it  a  small

streak or filament▪ towards the North, whose breadth was not the hundredth

part of its Diameter; and the following Evening at the like setting, it shew’d

such another part of it, but notably more small, a necessary argument, that it

had begun to recede from the Tropick; and the regression of the Sun from the

first to the second observation, doth not import doubtlesse a second minute in

the East. A place accommodated for the observation of the fixed stars, as to

what  concers  the  annual  motion  of  the  Earth.  The  observation  made

afterwards with an exquisite Telescope, and that multiplyeth the Discus of the

Sun more than a thousand times, would prove easie, and with all delightful.

Now with such an Instrument as this, I would have observations to be made

in the fixed stars, making use of some of those wherein the mutation ought to

appear more conspicuous, such as are (as hath already been declared) the

more remote from the Ecliptick, amongst which the Harp a very great star,

and near to the Pole of the Ecliptick, would be very proper in Countries far

North, proceeding according to the manner that I shall shew by and by, but in

the use of another star; and I have already fancied to my self a place very well

adapted for such an observation. The place is an open Plane, upon which

towards the North there riseth a very eminent Mountain, in the apex or top

whereof is built a little Chappel, situate East and West, so as that the ridg ofits Roof may intersect at right angles, the meridian of some building standing

in the Plane. I will place a beam parallel to the said ridg, or top of the Roof, 

and distant from it a yard or thereabouts. This being placed, I will seek in the

Plain the place from whence one of the stars of Charls’s Waine, in passing by

the Meridian, cometh to hide it self behind the beam so placed, or in case the

beam should not be so big as to hide the star, I will finde a station where one

may see the said beam to cut the said star into two equal parts; an effect that

with an * exquisite Telescope may be perfectly discerned. And if in the place

where the said accident is discovered, there were some building, it will be the

more commodious; but if not, I will cause a Pole to be stuck very fast in the

ground, with some standing mark to direct where to place the eye anew, when

ever I have a mind to repeat the observation. The first of which observations I

will make about the Summer Solstice, to continue afterwards from Moneth to

Moneth,  or  when  I  shall  so  please,  to  the  other  Solstice;  with  which

observation one may discover the elevation and depression of the star, though

it be very small. And if in that operation it shall happen, that any mutation

shall discover it self, what and how great benefit will it bring to Astronomy?

Seeing that thereby, besides our being assured of the annual motion, we may

come to know the grandure and distance of the same star.


SAGR.


I very well comprehend your whole proceedings; and the operation seems to

me so easie, and so commodious for the purpose, that it may very rationally

be thought, that either Copernicus himself, or some other Astronomer had

made trial of it.


SALV.


But  I  judg  the  quite  contrary,  for  it  is  not  probable,  that  if  any  one  had

experimented it, he would not have mentioned the event, whether it fell out in

favour of this, or that opinion; besides that, no man that I can find, either for

this, or any other end, did ever go about to make such an Observation; which

also without an exact Telescope could but badly be effected.


SIMP.I am fully satisfied with what you say. But seeing that it is a great while to

night, if you desire that I shall passe the same quietly, let it not be a trouble to

you to explain unto us those Problems, the declaration whereof you did even

now request might be deferred until too morrow. Be pleased to grant us your

promised indulgence, and, laying aside all other discourses, proceed to shew

us, that the motions which Copernicus assigns to the Earth being taken for

granted, and supposing the Sun and fixed stars immoveable, there may follow

the  same  accidents  touching  the  elevations  and  depressions  of  the  Sun,

touching the mutations of the Seasons, and the inequality of dayes and nights,

&c. in the self same manner, just as they are with  facility apprehended in the

Ptolomaick Systeme.


SALV.


I neither ought, nor can deny any thing that Sagredus shall request: And the

delay by me desired was to no other end, save only that I might have time

once again to methodize those prefatory points, in my fancy, that serve for a

large  and  plain  declaration  of  the  manner  how  the  forenamed  accidents

follow, as well in the Copernican position, as in the Ptolomaick: nay, with

much  greater  facility  and  simplicity  in  that  than  in  this.  The  Copernican

Systeme difficult to be understood, but easie to be effected. Whence one may

manifestly conceive that Hypothesis to be as easie to be effected by nature, as

difficult to be apprehended by the understanding: yet neverthelesse, I hope by

making use of another kind of explanation, Necessary prepositions for the

better conceiving of the consequences of the Earths motion. than that used by

Copernicus,  to  render  likewise  the  apprehending  of  it  somewhat  lesse

obscure.  Which  that  I  may  do,  I  will  propose  certain  suppositions  of

themselves known and manifest, and they shall be these that follow.


First, I suppose that the Earth is a spherical body, turning round upon its own

Axis and Poles, and that each point assigned in its superficies, describeth the

circumference of a circle, greater or lesser, according as the point assigned

shall be neerer or farther from the Poles: And that of these circles the greatest

is that which is described by a point equidistant from the said Poles; and all

these circles are parallel to each other; and Parallels we will call them.


Secondly,  The  Earth  being  of  a  Spherical  Figure,  and  of  an  opacous

substance, it is continually illuminated by the Sun, according to the half of itssurface,  the  other  half  remaining  obscure,  and  the  boundary  that

distinguisheth the illuminated part from the dark being a grand circle, we will

call that circle the terminator of the light.


Thirdly, If the Circle that is terminator of the light should passe by the Poles

of the Earth, it would cut (being a grand and principal circle) all the parallels

into equal parts; but not passing by the Poles, it would cut them all in parts

unequal, except only the circle in the middle, which, as being a grand circle

will be cut into equal parts.


Fourthly, The Earth turning round upon its own Poles, the quantities of dayes

and  nights  are  termined  by  the  arches  of  the  Parallels,  intersected  by  the

circle, that is, the terminator of the light, and the arch that is scituate in the

illuminated Hemisphere prescribeth the length of the day, and the remainer is

the quantity of the night.


These  things  being  presupposed,  A  plain  Scheme  representing  the

Copernican  Hypothesis,  and  its  consequences.  for  the  more  clear

understanding of that which remaines to be said, we will lay it down in a

Figure.  And  first,  we  will  draw  the  circumference  of  a  circle,  that  shall

represent  unto  us  that  of  the  grand  Orb  described    in  the  plain  of  the

Ecliptick, and this we will divide into four equal parts with the two diameters

Capricorn Cancer, and Libra Aries, which, at the same time, shall represent

unto  us  the  four  Cardinal  points,  that  is,  the  two  Solstices,  and  the  two

Equinoctials; and in the centre of that circle we will place the Sun O, fixed

and immoveable.


[figure]


Let us next draw about the four points, Capricorn, Cancer, Libra and Aries, as

centres, four equal circles, which represent unto us the Earth placed in them

at four several times of the year. The which, with its centre, in the space of a

year,  passeth  through  the  whole  circumference,  Capricorn,  Aries,  Cancer,

Libra, moving from East to West, that is, according to the order of the Signes.

It is already manifest, that whilst the Earth is in Capricorn, The Suns annual

motion, how it comes to passe, according to Copernicus. the Sun will appear

in Cancer, and the Earth moving along the arch Capricorn Aries, the Sun will

seem to move along the arch Cancer Libra, and in short, will run thorow theZodiack according to the order of the Signes, in the space of a year; and by

this first assumption, without all question, full satisfaction is given for the

Suns apparent annual motion under the Ecliptick. Now, coming to the other,

that is, the diurnal motion of the Earth in it self, it is necessary to establish its

Poles  and  its  Axis,  the  which  must  be  understood  not  to  be  erect

perpendicularly upon the plain of the Ecliptick, that is, not to be parallel to

the Axis of the grand Orb, but declining from a right angle 23 degrees and an

half, or thereabouts, with its North Pole towards  the Axis of the grand Orb,

the  Earths  centre  being  in  the  Solstitial  point  of  Capricorn.  Supposing

therefore the Terrestrial Globe to have its centre in the point Capricorn, we

will describe its Poles and Axis AB, inclined upon the diameter Capricorn

Cancer 23 degrees and an half; so that the angle A Capricorn Cancer cometh

to be the complement of a Quadrant or Radius, that is, 66 degrees and an half;

and this inclination must be understood to be immutable, and we will suppose

the superiour Pole A to be Boreal, or North, and the other Austral, or South.

Now imagining the Earth to revolve in it self about the Axis AB in twenty

four hours, from West to East, there shall by all the points assigned in its

superficies, be circles described parallel to each other. We will draw, in this

first position of the Earth, the greatest CD, and those two distant from it gr.

23. and an half, EF above, and GM beneath, and the other two extream ones

IK and LM remote, by those intervals from the Poles A and B; and as we

have marked these five, so we may imagine innumerable others, parallel to

these, described by the innumerable points of the Terrestrial surface. Next let

us suppose the Earth, with the annual motion of its centre, to transferre it self

into the other places already marked; but to passe thither in such a manner,

that its own Axis AB shall not only not change inclination upon the plain of

the Ecliptick, but shall also never vary direction; so that alwayes keeping

parallel  to  it  self,  it  may  continually  tend  towards  the  same  part  of  the

Universe, or, if you will, of the Firmament, whereas, if we do but suppose it

prolonged, it will, with its extream termes, designe a Circle parallel and equal

to the grand Orb, Libra Capricorn Aries Cancer, as the superiour base of a

Cylinder described by it self in the annual motion above the inferiour base,

Libra Capricorn Aries Cancer. And therefore this immutability of inclination

continuing, we will design these other three figures about the centres Aries,

Cancer, and Libra, alike in every thing to that first described about the centre

Capricorn. Now we will consider the first figure of the Earth, in which, in

regard  the  Axis  AB  is  declined  from  perpendicularity  upon  the  diameterCapricorn Cancer 23 degrees and an half towards the Sun O, and the arch AI

being also 23 degrees and an half, the illumination of the Sun will illustrate

the Hemisphere of the Terrestrial Globe exposed towards the Sun (of which,

in  this  place,  half  is  to  be  seen)  divided  from  the  obscure  part  by  the

Terminator of the light IM, by which the parallel CD, as being a grand circle,

shall come to be divided into equal parts, but all the rest into parts unequal;

being that the terminator of the light IM passeth not by their Poles AB, and

the parallel IK, together with all the rest  described within the same, and

neerer to the pole A, shall wholly be included in the illuminated part; as on

the  contrary,  the  opposite  ones  towards  the  Pole  B,  contained  within  the

parallel LM, shall remain in the dark. Moreover, the arch AI being equal to

the arch FD, and the arch AF, common to them both, the two arches IKF and

AFD shall be equal, and each a quadrant or 90 degrees. And because the

whole arch IFM is a semicircle, the arch FM shall be a quadrant, and equal to

the other FKI; and therefore the Sun O shall be in this state of the Earth

vertical to one that stands in the point F. But by the revolution diurnal about

the standing Axis AB, all the points of the parallel EF passe by the same

point F: and therefore in that same day the Sun, at noon, shall be vertical to

all the inhabitants of the Parallel EF, and will seem to them to describe in its

apparent motion the circle which we call the Tropick of Cancer. But to the

inhabitants of all the Parallels that are above the parallel EF, towards the

North pole A, the Sun declineth from their Vertex or Zenith towards the

South; and on the contrary, to all the inhabitants of the Parallels that are

beneath EF, towards the Equinoctial CD, and the South Pole B, the Meridian

Sun is elevated beyond their Vertex towards the North Pole A. Next, it is

visible that of all the Parallels, only the greatest CD is cut in equal parts by

the Terminator of the light IM. But the rest, that are beneath and above the

said grand circle, are all intersected in parts unequal: and of the superiour

ones,  the  semidiurnal  arches,  namely  those  of  the  part  of  the  Terrestrial

surface, illustrated by the Sun, are bigger than the seminocturnal ones that

remain in the dark: and the contrary befalls in the remainder, that are under

the great one CD, towards the pole B, of which the semidiurnal arches are

lesser  than  the  seminocturnal,  It  is  likewise  apparently  manifest,  that  the

differences of the said arches go augmenting, according as the Parallels are

neerer to the Poles, till such time as the parallel IK comes to be wholly in the

part illuminated, and the inhabitants thereof have a day of twenty four hours

long, without any night; and on the contrary, the Parallel LM, remaining allin obscurity, hath a night of twenty four hours, without any day. Come we

next  to  the  third  Figure  of  the  Earth,  placed  with  its  centre  in  the  point

Cancer, where the Sun seemeth to be in the first point of Capricorn. We have

already seen very manifestly, that by reason the Axis AB doth not change

inclination, but continueth parallel to it self, the aspect and situation of the

Earth is the same to an hair with that in the first Figure; save onely that that

Hemisphere which in the first was illuminated by the Sun, in this remaineth

obtenebrated,  and  that  cometh  to  be  luminous,  which  in    the  first  was

tenebrous: whereupon that which happened before concerning the differences

of  dayes  and  nights,  touching  the  dayes  being  greater  or  lesser  than  the

nights, now falls out quite contrary. And first, we see, that whereas in the first

Figure the circle IK was wholly in the light, it is now wholly in the dark; and

the opposite arch LM is now wholly in the light, which was before wholly in

the dark. Of the parallels between the grand circle CD, and the Pole A, the

semidiurnal arches are now lesser than the seminocturnal, which before were

the  contrary.  Of  the  others  likewise  towards  the  Pole  B,  the  semidiurnal

arches are now bigger than the seminocturnal, the contrary to what happened

in the other position of the Earth. We now see the Sun made vertical to the

inhabitants of the Tropick GN, and to be depressed towards the South, with

those of the Parallel EF, by all the arch ECG, that is, 47 degrees; and in

summe,  to  have  passed  from  one  to  the  other  Tropick,  traversing  the

Equinoctial, elevating and declining in the Meridians the said space of 47

degrees. And all this mutation is derived not from the inclination or elevation

of the Earth, but on the contrary, from its not inclining or elevating at all; and

in  a  word,  by  continuing  always  in  the  same  position,  in  respect  of  the

Universe, onely with turning about the Sun situate iu the midst of the said

plane, in which it moveth it self about circularly with its annual motion. And

here is to be noted an admirable accident, An admirable accident depending

on the not inclining of the Earths axis which is, that like as the Axis of the

Earth conserving the same direction towards the Universe, or we may say,

towards the highest Sphere of the fixed stars, causeth the Sun to appear to

elevate and incline so great a space, namely, for 47 degrees, and the fixed

Stars to incline or elevate nothing at all; so, on the contrary, if the same Axis

of  the  Earth  should  maintain  it  self  continually  in  the  same  inclination

towards the Sun, or, if you will, towards the Axis of the Zodiack, no mutation

would  appear  to  be  made  in  the  Sun  about  its  elevating  or  declining,whereupon the inhabitants of one and the same place would alwayes have

one  and  the  same  difference  of  dayes  and  nights,  and  one  and  the  same

constitution  of  Seasons,  that  is,  some  alwayes  Winter,  others  alwayes

Summer, others Spring, &c. but, on the contrary, the alterations in the fixed

Stars would appear very great, as touching their elevation, and inclination to

us, which would amount to the same 47 degrees. For the understanding of

which let us return to consider the position of the Earth, in its first Figure,

where we see the Axis AB, with the superiour Pole A, to incline towards the

Sun; but in its third Figure, the same Axis having kept the same direction

towards the highest Sphere, by keeping parallel to it self, inclines no longer

towards the Sun with its superiour Pole A, but  on the contrary reclines from

its former position gr. 47. and inclineth towards the opposite part, so that to

restore the same inclination of the said Pole A towards the Sun, it would be

requisite  by  turning  round  the  Terrestrial  Globe,  according  to  the

circumference ACBD, to transport it towards E those same gr. 47. and for so

many degrees, any whatsoever fixed star observed in the Meridian, would

appear to be elevated, or inclined. Let us come now to the explanation of that

which remains, and let us consider the Earth placed in the fourth Figure, that

is, with its centre in the first point of Libra; upon which the Sun will appear

in the beginning of Aries. And because the Axis of


[figure]


the  Earth,  which  in  the  first  Figure  is  supposed  to  be  inclined  upon  the

diameter Capricorn Cancer, and therefore to be in that same plane, which

cutting the plane of the grand Orb, according to the line Capricorn Cancer,

was erected perpendicularly upon the same, transposed into the fourth Figure,

and maintained, as hath alwayes been said, parallel to it self, it shall come to

be in a plane in like manner erected to the superficies of the Grand Orbe, and

parallel  to  the  plane,  which  at  right  angles  cuts  the  same  superficies,

according to the diameter Capricorn Cancer. And therefore the line which

goeth from the centre of the Sunne to the centre of the Earth, that is, O Libra,

shall be perpendicular to the Axis BA: but the same line which goeth from

the  centre  of  the  Sunne  to  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  is  also  alwayes

perpendicular to the  circle that is the Terminator of the light; therefore this

same circle shall passe by the Poles AB in the fourth figure, and in its plainthe Axis AB shall fall, but the greatest circle passing by the Poles of the

Parallels, divideth them all in equal parts; therefore the arches IK, EF, CD,

GN, LM, shall be all semicircles, and the illumin’d Hemisphere shall be this

which looketh towards us, and the Sun, and the Terminator of the light shall

be one and the same circle ACBD, and the Earth being in this place shall

make it Equinoctial to all its Inhabitants. And the same happeneth in the

second figure, where the Earth having its illuminated Hemisphere towards the

Sun, sheweth us the other that is obscure, with its nocturnal arches, which in

like manner are all semicircles, and consequently, here also it maketh the

Equinoctial. And lastly in regard that the line produced from the centre of the

Sun to the centre of the Earth, is perpendicular to the Axis AB, to which the

greatest circle of the parallels CD, is likewise erect, the said line O Libra shall

passe  of  necessity  by  the  same  Plain  of  the  parallel  CD,  cutting  its

circumference in the midst of the diurnal arch CD; and therefore the Sun shall

be vertical to any one that shall stand where that intersection is made; but all

the Inhabitants of that Parallel shall passe the same, as being carried about by

the Earths diurnal conversion; therefore all thes upon that day shall have the

Meridian  Sun  in  their  vertex.  And  the  Sun  at  the  same  time  to  all  the

Inhabitants of the Earth shall seem to describe the Grand Parallel called the

Equinoctial. Furthermore, forasmuch as the Earth being in both the Solstitial

points of the Polar circles IK and LM, the one is wholly in the light, and the

other wholly in the dark; but when the Earth is in the Equinoctial points, the

halves of those same polar circles are in the light, the remainder of them

being in the dark; it should not be hard to understand, how that the Earth v.

gr. from Cancer (where the parallel IK is wholly in the dark) to Leo, one part

of the parallel towards the point I, beginneth to enter into the light, and that

the Terminator of the light IM beginneth to retreat towards the Pole AB,

intersecting the circle ACBD no longer in IM, but in two other points falling

between the terms IA and MB, of the arches IA and MB; whereupon the

Inhabitants of the circle begin to enjoy the light, and the other Inhabitants of

the  circle  LM  to  partake  of  night.  And  thus  you  see  that  by  two  simple

motions made in times proportionate to their bignesses, and not contrary to

one another, but performed, as all others that belong to moveable mundane

bodies, from West to East assigned to the Terrestrial Globe, adequate reasons

are rendred of all those Phaenomena or appearances, for the accommodating

of  which to the stability of the Earth it is necessary (forsaking that Symetry

which is observed to be between the velocities and magnitudes of moveables)to  ascribe  to  a  Sphere,  vast  above  all  others,  an  unconceiveable  celerity,

whilst the other lesser Spheres move extream slowly; and which is more, to

make that motion contrary to all their motions; and, yet again to adde to the

improbability,  to  make  that  superiour  Sphere  forcibly  to  transport  all  the

inferiour ones along with it contrary to their proper inclination. And here I

refer it to your judgment to determine which of the two is the most probable.


SAGR.


To  me,  as  far  as  concerneth  sense,  there  appeareth  no  small  difference

betwixt the simplicity and facility of operating effects by the means assigned

in this new constitution, and the multiplicity, confusion, and difficulty, that is

found in the ancient and commonly received Hypothesis. For if the Universe

were  disposed  according  to  this  multiplicity,  it  would  be  necessary  to

renounce many Maximes in Philosophy commonly received by Philosophers,

Axiomes  commonly  admitted  by  all  Philosophers.  as  for  instance,  That

Nature doth not multiply things without necessity; and, That She makes use

of the most facile and simple means in producing her effects; and, That She

doth nothing in vain, and the like. I do confesse that I never heard any thing

more admirable than this, nor can I believe that Humane Understanding ever

penetrated  a  more  sublime  speculation.  I  know  not  what  Simplicius  may

think of it.


SIMP.


These (if I may speak my judgment freely) do seem to me some of those

Geometrical  subtilties  which  Aristotle  finds  fault  with  in  Plato,  Aristotle

taxeth Plato for being too studious of Geometry. when he accuseth him that

by his too much studying of Geometry he forsook solid Philosophy; and I

have known and heard very great Peripatetick Philosophers to disswade their

Scholars from the Study of the Mathematicks, as those that render the wit

cavilous, and unable to philosophate well; an Institute diametrically contrary

to that of Plato, who admitted one to Philosophy, unlesse he was first well

entered in Geometry.


SALV.I commend the policy of these your Peripateticks, Peripatetick Philosophers

condemn the Study of Geometry, and why. in dehorting their Disciples from

the  Study  of  Geometry,  for  that  there  is  not  art  more  commodious  for

detecting  their  fallacies;  but  see  how  they  differ  from  the  Mathematical

Philosophers, who much more willingly converse with those that are well

verst  in  the  commune  Peripatetick  Philosophy,  than  with  those  that  are

destitute of that knowledg, who for want thereof cannot distinguish between

doctrine and doctrine. But passing by this, tell me I beseech you, what are

those extravagancies and those too affected subtilties that make you think this

Copernican Systeme the lesse plausible?


SIMP.


To tell you true, I do not very well know; perhaps, because I have not so

much as learnt the reasons that are by Ptolomy produced, of those effects, I

mean of those stations, retrogradations, accessions, recessions of the Planets;

lengthenings and shortnings of dayes, changes of seasons, &c. But omitting

the  consequences  that  depend  on  the  first  suppositions,  I  find  in  the

suppositions  themselves  no  small  difficulties;  which  suppositions,  if  once

they  be  overthrown,  they  draw  along  with  them  the  ruine  of  the  whole

fabrick. Now forasmuch as because the whole module of Copernicus seemeth

in my opinion to be built upon infirm foundations, in that it relyeth upon the

mobility of the earth, if this should happen to be disproved, there would be no

need of farther dispute. And to disprove this, the Axiom of Aristotle is in my

judgement most sufficient, That of one simple body, one sole simple motion

can  be  natural:  but  here  in  this  case,  to  the  Earth,  Four  several  motions

assigned to the Earth. a simple body, there are assigned 3. if not 4. motions,

and all very different from each other. For besides the right motion, as a

grave body towards its centre, which cannot be denied it, there is assigned to

it a circular motion in a great circle about the Sun in a year, and a vertiginous

conversion about its own centre in twenty four hours. And that in the next

place which is more exorbitant, & which happly for that reason you pass over

in silence, there is ascribed to it another revolution about its own centre,

contrary to the former of twenty four hours, and which finisheth its period in

a year. In this my understanding apprehendeth a very great contradiction.


SALV.As  to  the  motion  of  descent,  The  motion  of  descent  belongs  not  to  the

terrestrial Globe, but to its parts. it hath already been concluded not to belong

to the Terrestrial Globe which did never move with any such motion, nor

never shall do; but is (if there be such a thing) that propension of its parts to

reunite  themselves  to  their  whole.  As,  in  the  next  place,  to  the  Annual

motion, and the Diurnal, The annual and diurnal motion are compatible in the

Earth. these being both made towards one way, are very compatible, in the

same  manner  just  as  if  we  should  let  a  Ball  trundle  downwards  upon  a

declining superficies, it would in its descent along the same spontaneously

revolve in it self. As to the third motion assigned it by Copernicus, namely

about it self in a year, onely to keep its Axis inclined and directed towards the

same  part  of  the  Firmament,  I  will  tell  you  a  thing  worthy  of  great

consideration: namely ut tantum abest (although it be made contrary to the

other annual) it is so far from having any repugnance or difficulty in it, Every

pensil  and  librated,  body  carryed  round  in  the  circumference  of  a  circle,

acquireth of it self a motion in it self contrary to that. that naturally and

without  any  moving  cause,  it  agreeth  to  any  whatsoever  suspended  and

librated body, which if it shall be carried round in the circumference of a

circle, immediate of it self, it acquireth a conversion about its own centre,

contrary to that which carrieth it about, and of  such velocity, that they both

finish one revolution in the same time precisely. You may see this admirable,

and to our purpose accommodate experience, An Experiment which sensibly

shews that two contrary motions may naturally agree in the same moveable.

if putting in a Bason of water a Ball that will swim; and holding the Bason in

your hand, you turn round upon your toe, for you shall immediatly see the

Ball begin to revolve in it self with a motion, contrary to that of the Bason,

and it shall finish its revolution, when that of the Bason it shall finish. Now

what other is the Earth than a pensil Globe librated in tenuous and yielding

aire, which being carried about in a year along the circumference of a great

circle, The third motion ascribed to the Earth is rather a resting immoveable.

must needs acquire, without any other mover, a revolution about its own

centre, annual, and yet contrary to the other motion in like manner annual?

You shall see this effect I say, but if afterwards you more narrowly consider

it, you shall find this to be no real thing, but a meer appearance; and that

which you think to be a revolution in it self, you will find to be a not moving

at all, but a continuing altogether immoveable in respect of all that which

without you, and without the vessel is immoveable: for if in that Ball youshall make some mark, and consider to what part of the Room where you are,

or of the Field, or of Heaven it is situate, you shall see that mark in yours, and

the vessels revolution to look alwayes towards that same part; but comparing

it to the vessel and to your self that are moveable, it will appear to go altering

its direction, and with a motion contrary to yours, and that of the vessel, to go

seeking all the points of its circumgyration; so that with more reason you and

the bason may be said to turn round the immoveable Ball, than that it moveth

round in the bason. In the same manner the Earth suspended and librated in

the circumference of the Grand Orbe, and scituate in such sort that one of its

notes, as for example, its North Pole, looketh towards such a Star or other

part of the Firmament, it always keepeth directed towards the same, although

carried round by the annual motion about the circumference of the said Grand

Orbe. This alone is sufficient to make the Wonder cease, and to remove all

difficulties. But what will Simplicius say, if to this non-indigence of the co-

operating  cause  we  should  adde  an  admirable  intrinsick  vertue  f  the

Terrestrial  Globe,  An  admirable  intern  vertue  of  the  terrestrial  Globe  of

alwayes beholding the same part of Heaven. of looking with its determinate

parts towards determinate parts of the Firmament, I speak of the Magnetick

vertue constantly participated by any whatsoever piece of Loade-stone. And

if every minute particle of that S one have in it such a vertue, The terrestrial

Globe  made  of  Loade-stone.  who  will  question  but  that  the  same  more

powerfully  resides  in  this  whole  Terrestrial  Globe,  abounding  in  that

Magnetick matter, and which happily it self, as to its internal and primary

substance, is nothing else but a huge masse of Loade-stone.


SIMP.


Then  you  are  one  of  those  it  seems  that  hold  the  Magnetick  Phylosophy

William  An  eminent  Doctor  of  Physick,  our  Countreyman,  born  at

Colchester, and famous for this his learned Treatise, published about 60 years

since at London, The Magnetick Philosophy of William Gilbert. Gilbert.


SALV.


I am for certain, and think that all those that have seriously read his Book,

and  tried  his  experiments,  will  bear  me  company  therein;  nor  should  I

despair, that what hath befallen me in this case, might possibly happen to you

also, if so be a curiosity, like to mine, and a notice that infinite things inNature are still conceal’d from the wits of mankind, by delivering you from

being captivated by this or that particular writer in natural things, should but

slacken  the  reines  of  your  Reason,  and  mollifie  the  contumacy  and

tenaceousnesse of your sense; so as that they would not refuse to hearken

sometimes to novelties never before spoken of. The Pusillanimity of Popular

Wits. But (permit me to use this phrase) the pusillanimity of vulgar Wits is

come to that passe, that not only like blind men, they make a gift, nay tribute

of their own assent to whatsoever they find written by those Authours, which

in the infancy of their Studies were laid before them, as authentick by their

Tutors,  but  refuse  to  hear  (not  to  say  examine)  any  new  Proposition  or

Probleme, although it not only never hath been confuted, but not so much as

examined or considered by their Authours. Amongst which, one is this, of

investigating what is the true, proper, primary, interne, and general matter

and substance of this our Terrestrial Globe; For although it never came into

the mind either of Aristotle, or of any one else, before William Gilbert to

think  that  it  might  be  a  Magnet,  so  far  are  Aristotle  and  the  rest  from

confuting this opinion, yet neverthelesse I have met with many, that at the

very first mention of it, as a Horse at his own shadow, have start back, and

refused to discourse thereof, and censured the conceipt for a vain Chymaera,

yea, for a solemn madnesse: and its possible the Book of Gilbert had never

come to my hands, if a Peripatetick Philosopher, of great fame, as I believe,

to free his Library from its contagion, had not given it me.


SIMP.


I, who ingenuously confesse my self to be one of those vulgar Wits, and

never till within these few dayes that I have been admitted to a share in your

conferences, could I pretend to have in the least withdrawn from those trite

and popular paths, yet, for all that, I think I have advantaged my self so

much,  as  that  I  could  without  much  trouble  or  difficulty,  master  the

roughnesses of these novel and fantastical opinions.


SALV.


If that which Gilbert writeth be true, then is it no opinion, but the subject of

Science; nor is it new, but as antient as the Earth it self; nor can it (being true)

be rugged or difficult, but plain and easie; and when you please I shall make

you feel the same in your hand, for that you of your self fancy it to  be aGhost, and stand in fear of that which hath nothing in it of dreadfull, like as a

little child doth fear the Hobgoblin, without knowing any more of it, save the

name; as that which besides the name is nothing.


SIMP.


I should be glad to be informed, and reclaimed from an errour.


SALV.


Answer me then to the questions that I shall ask you. And first of all, Tell me

whether you believe, that this our Globe, which we inhabit and call Earth,

consisteth of one sole and simple matter, or else that it is an aggregate of

matters different from each other.


SIMP.


I  see  it  to  be  composed  of  substances  and  bodies  very  different;  The

Terrestrial Globe composed of sundry matters. and first, for the greatest parts

of the composition, I see the Water and the Earth, which extreamly differ

from one another.


SALV.


Let us, for this once, lay aside the Seas and other Waters, and let us consider

the solid parts, and tell me, if you think them one and the same thing, or else

different.


SIMP.


As to appearance, I see that they are different things, there being very great

heaps of unfruitful sands, and others of fruitful soiles; There are infinite sharp

and steril mountains, full of hard stones and quarries of several kinds, as

Porphyre, Alablaster, Jasper, and a thousand other kinds of Marbles: There

are vast Minerals of so many kinds of metals; and in a word, such varieties of

matters, that a whole day would not suffice only to enumerate them.


SALV.Now of all these different matters, do you think, that in the composition of

this grand masse, there do concur portions, or else that amongst them all there

is one part that far exceeds the rest, and is as it were the matter and substance

of the immense lump?


SIMP.


I believe that the Stones, Marbles, Metals, Gems, and the so many other

several matters are as it were Jewels, and exteriour and superficial Ornaments

of the primary Globe, which in grosse, as I believe, doth without compare

exceed all these things put together.


SALV.


And this principal and vast masse, of which those things above named are as

it were excressences and ornaments, of what matter do you think that it is

composed?


SIMP.


I think that it is the simple, or lesse impure element of Earth.


SALV.


But what do you understand by Earth? Is it haply that which is dispersed all

over the fields, which is broke up with Mattocks and Ploughs, wherein we

sowe corne, and plant fruits, and in which great boscages grow up, without

the help of culture,  and which is, in a word, the habitation of all animals, and

the womb of all vegetables?


SIMP.


Tis this that I would affirm to be the substance of this our Globe.


SALV.


But in this you do, in my judgment, affirm that which is not right: for this

Earth which is broke up, is sowed, and is fertile, is but one part, and that very

small of the surface of the Globe, which doth not go very deep, yea, its depthis very small, in comparison of the distance to the centre: and experience

sheweth us, that one shall not dig very low, but one shall finde matters very

different  from  this  exteriour  scurf,  more  solid,  and  not  good  for  the

production of vegetables. Besides the interne parts, as being compressed by

very huge weights that lie upon them, are, in all probability, slived, and made

as hard as any hard rock. One may adde to this, that fecundity would be in

vain conferred upon those matters which never were designed to bear fruit,

but to rest eternally buried in the profound and dark abysses of the Earth.


SIMP.


But who shall assure us, that the parts more inward and near to the centre are

unfruitful?  They  also  may,  perhaps,  have  their  productions  of  things

unknown to us?


SALV.


You may aswell be assured thereof, as any man else, as being very capable to

comprehend, that if the integral bodies of the Universe be produced onely for

the benefit of Mankind, this above all the rest ought to be destin’d to the sole

conveniences  of  us  its  inhabitants.  But  what  benefit  can  we  draw  from

matters so hid and remote from us, as that we shall never be able to make use

of them?The interne parts of the terrestrial Globe must of necessity be solid.

Therefore  the  interne  substance  of  this  our  Globe  cannot  be  a  matter

frangible, dissipable, and non-coherent, like this superficial part which we

callOr MOULD. EARTH: but it must, of necessity, be a most dense and solid

body, and in a word, a most hard stone. And, if it ought to be so, what reason

is  there  that  should  make  you  more  scrupulous  to  believe  that  it  is  a

Loadstone than a Porphiry, a Jasper, or other hard Marble? Happily if Gilbert

had written, that this Globe is all compounded within ofOf which with the

Latin translatour, I must once more professe my self ignorant. Pietra Serena,

or of Chalcedon, the paradox woul  have seemed to you lesse exorbitant?


SIMP.


That the parts of this Globe more intern are more compressed, and so more

slived together and solid, and more and more so, according as they lie lower,

I  do  grant,  and  so  likewise  doth  Aristotle,  but  that  they  degenerate  andbecome other than Earth, of the same sort with this of the superficial parts, I

see nothing that obliegeth me to believe.


SALV.


I undertook not this discourse with an intent to prove demonstratively that the

primary and real substance of this our  Globe is Load-stone; but onely to

shew that no reason could be given why one should be more unwilling to

grant that it is of Load-stone, Our Globe would have been called stone, in

stead of Earth, of that name had been giuen it in the beginning. than of some

other matter. And if you will but seriously consider, you shall find that it is

not improbable, that one sole, pure, and arbitrary name, hath moved men to

think that it consists of Earth; and that is their having made use commonly

from the beginning of this word Earth, as well to signifie that matter which is

plowed and sowed, as to name this our Globe. The denomination of which if

it had been taken from stone, as that it might as well have been taken from

that as from the Earth; the saying that its primary substance was stone, would

doubtlesse have found no scruple or opposition in any man. And is so much

the more probable, in that I verily believe, that if one could but pare off the

scurf of this great Globe, taking away but one full thousand or two thousand

yards; and afterwards seperate the Stones from the Earth, the accumulation of

the stones would be very much biger than that of the fertile Mould. But as for

the reasons which concludently prove de facto, that is our Globe is a Magnet,

I have mentioned none of them, nor is this a time to alledg them, and the

rather,  for  that  to  your  benefit  you  may  read  them  in  Gilbert;  onely  to

encourage you to the perusal of them, I will set before you, in a similitude of

my  own,  The  method  of  Gilbert  in  his  Philosophy.  the  method  that  he

observed in his Philosophy. I know you understand very well how much the

knowledg of the accidents is subservient to the investigation of the substance

and essence of things; therefore I desire that you would take pains to informe

your self well of many accidents and properties that are found in the Magnet,

Many properties in the Magnet. and in no other stone, or body; as for instance

of attracting Iron, of conferring upon it by its sole presence the same virtue,

of communicating likewise to it the property of looking towards the Poles, as

it  also  doth  it  self;  and  moreover  endeavour  to  know  by  trial,  that  it

containeth in it a virtue of conferring upon the magnetick needle not onely

the direction under a Meridian towards the Poles, with an Horizontal motion,(a property a long time ago known) but a new found accident, of declining

(being ballanced under the Meridian before marked upon a little spherical

Magnet) of declining I say to determinate marks more or lesse, according as

that needle is held nearer or farther from the Pole, till that upon the Pole it

self it erecteth perpendicularly, whereas in the middle parts it is parallel to the

Axis.  Furthermore  procure  a  proof  to  be  made,  whether  the  virtue  of

attracting Iron, residing much more vigorously about the Poles, than about

the middle parts, this force be not notably more vigorous in one Pole than in

the other, and that in all pieces of Magnet; the  stronger of which Poles is that

which looketh towards the South. Observe, in the next place, that in a little

Magnet this South and more vigorous Pole, becometh weaker, when ever it is

to take up an iron in presence of the North Pole of another much bigger

Magnet: and not to make any tedious discourse of it, assertain your self, by

experience, of these and many other properties described by Gilbert, which

are all so peculiar to the Magnet, as that none of them agree with any other

matter.  Tell me now, Simplicius, if there were laid before you a thousand

pieces of several matters, but all covered and concealed in a cloth, under

which it is hid, and you were required, without uncovering them,  a guesse,

by external signes, at the matter of each of them, and that in making trial, you

should hit upon one that should openly shew it self to have all the properties

by you already acknowledged to reside onely in the Magnet, and in no other

matter,  what  judgment  would  you  make  of  the  essence  of  such  a  body?

Would you say, that it might be a piece of Ebony, or Alablaster, o  Tin.


SIMP.


I would say, without the least haesitation, that it was a piece of Load-stone.


SALV.


If it be so, say resolutely, that under this cover and scurf of Earth, stones,

metals, water, &c. there is hid a great Magnet, forasmuch as about the same

there may be seen by any one that will heedfully observe the same, all those

very accidents that agree with a true and visible Globe of Magnet; but if no

more  were  to  be  seen  than  that  of  the  Declinatory  Needle,  which  being

carried about the Earth, more and more inclineth, as it approacheth to the

North  Pole,  and  declineth  lesse  towards  the  Equinoctial,  under  which  it

finally is brought to an Aequilibrium, it might serve to perswade even themost scrupulous judgment. I forbear to mention that other admirable effect,

which  is  sensibly  observed  in  every  piece  of  Magnet,  of  which,  to  us

inhabitants  of  the  Northern  Hemisphere,  the  Meridional  Pole  of  the  said

Magnet is more vigorous than the other; and the difference is found greater,

by how much one recedeth from the Equinoctial; and under the Equinoctial

both  the  parts  are  of  equal  strength,  but  notably  weaker.  But,  in  the

Meridional Regions, far distant from the Equinoctial, it changeth nature, and

that part which to us was more weak, acquireth more strength than the other:

and all this I confer with that which we see to be done by a small piece of

Magnet, in the presence of a great one, the vertue of which superating the

lesser, maketh it to become obedient to it, and according as it is held, either

on this or on that side the Equinoctial of the great one, maketh the self same

mutations, which I have said are made by every Magnet, carried on this  side,

or that side of the Equinoctiall of the Earth.


SAGR.


I  was  perswaded,  at  the  very  first  reading  of  the  Book  of  Gilbertus;  and

having met with a most excellent piece of Magnet, The Magnet armed takes

up  much  more  Iron,  than  when  armed.  I,  for  a  long  time,  made  many

Observations, and all worthy of extream wonder; but above all, that seemeth

to me very stupendious of increasing the faculty of taking up Iron so much by

arming it, like as the said Authour teacheth; and with arming that piece of

mine, I multiplied its force in octuple proportion; and whereas unarmed it

scarce took up nine ounces of Iron, it being armed did take up above six

pounds: And, it may be, you have seen this Loadstone in theOr Closet of

rarities. Gallery of your Most Serene Grand Duke (to whom I presented it)

upholding two little Anchors of Iron.


SALV.


I saw it many times, and with great admiration, till that a little piece of the

like stone gave me greater cause of wonder, that is in the keeping of our

Academick, which being no more than of six ounces weight, and sustaining,

when unarmed, hardly two ounces, doth, when armed, take up 160. ounces,

so as that it is of 80. times more force armed than unarmed, and takes up a

weight 26. times greater than its own; a much greater wonder than Gilbertcould ever meet with, who writeth, that he could never get any Loadstone that

could reach to take up four times its own weight.


SAGR.


In  my  opinion,  this  Stone  offers  to  the  wit  of  man  a  large  Field  to

Phylosophate in; and I have many times thought with my self, how it can be

that it conferreth on that Iron, which armeth it, a strength so superiour to its

own; and finally, I finde nothing that giveth me satisfaction herein; nor do I

find any thing extraordinary in that which Gilbert writes about this particular;

I know not whether the same may have befallen you.


SALV.


I  extreamly  praise,  admire,  and  envy  this  Authour,  for  that  a  conceit  so

stupendious should come into his minde, touching a thing handled by infinite

sublime wits, and hit upon by none of them: I think him moreover worthy of

extraordinary applause for the many new and true Observations that he made,

to the disgrace of so many fabulous Authours, that write not only what they

do not know, but what ever they hear spoken by the foolish vulgar, never

seeking to assure themselves of the same by experience, perhaps, because

they are unwilling to diminish the bulk of their Books. That which I could

have desired in Gilbert, is, that he had been a little greater Mathematician,

and particularly well grounded in Geometry, the practice whereof would have

rendered  him  less  resolute  in  accepting  those  reasons  for  true

Demonstrations, which he produceth for true  causes of the true conclusions

observed by himself. Which reasons (freely speaking) do not knit and bind so

fast,  as  those  undoubtedly  ought  to  do,  in  that  of  natural,  necessary,  and

lasting conclusions may be alledged. And I doubt not, but that in processe of

time this new Science will be perfected with new observations, and, which is

more,  with  true  and  necessary  Demonstrations.  The  first  observers  and

inventers  of  things  ought  to  be  admired.  Nor  ought  the  glory  of  the  first

Inventor to be thereby diminished; nor do I lesse esteem, but rather more

admire,  the  Inventor  of  the  Harp  (although  it  may  be  supposed  that  the

Instrument at first was but rudely framed, and more rudely fingered) than an

hundred other Artists, that in the insuing Ages reduced that profession to

great  perfection.  And  methinks,  that  Antiquity  had  very  good  reason  to

enumerate the first Inventors of the Noble Arts amongst the Gods; seeing thatthe common wits have so little curiosity, and are so little regardful of rare and

elegant  things,  that  though  they  see  and  hear  them  exercitated  by  the

exquisite professors of them, yet are they not thereby perswaded to a desire

of learning them. Now judge, whether Capacities of this kind would ever

have attempted to have found out the making of the Harp, or the invention of

Musick, upon the hint of the whistling noise of the dry sinews of a Tortois, or

from  the  striking  of  four  Hammers.  The  application  to  great  inventions

moved by small hints, and the thinking that under a primary and childish

appearance admirable Arts may lie hid, is not the part of a trivial, but of a

super-humane spirit. Now answering to your demands, I say, that I also have

long thought upon what might possibly be the cause of this so tenacious and

potent union, that we see to be made between the one Iron that armeth the

Magnet, and the other that conjoyns it self unto it. And first, The true cause

of the multiplication of vertue in the Magnet, by means of the arming. we are

certain, that the vertue and strength of the stone doth not augment by being

armed, for it neither attracts at greater distance, nor doth it hold an Iron the

faster, if between it, and the arming or cap, a very fine paper, or a leaf of

beaten gold, be interposed; nay, with that interposition, the naked stone takes

up more Iron than the armed. There is therefore no alteration in the vertue,

and yet there is an innovation in the effect. And because its necessary, Of a

new effect its necessary that the cause be likewise new. that a new effect have

a new cause, if it be inquired what novelty is introduced in the act of taking

up with the cap or arming, there is no mutation to be discovered, but in the

different  contact;  for  whereas  before  Iron  toucht  Loadstone,  now  Iron

toucheth Iron. Therefore it is necessary to conclude, It is proved, that Iron

consists of parts more subtil, pure, and compact than the magnet. that the

diversity  of  contacts  is  the  cause  of  the  diversity  of  effects.  And  for  the

difference of contacts it cannot, as I see, be derived from any thing else, save

from that the substance of the Iron is of parts more subtil, more pure, and

more compacted  than those of the Magnet, which are more grosse, impure,

and rare. From whence it followeth, that the superficies of two Irons that are

to touch, by being exquisitely plained, filed, and burnished, do so exactly

conjoyn, that all the infinite points of the one meet with the infinite points of

the other; so that the filaments, if I may so say, that collegate the two Irons,

are many more than those that collegate the Magnet to the Iron, by reason

that the substance of the Magnet is more porous, and lesse compact, which

maketh that all the points and filaments of the Loadstone do not close withthat  which  it  unites  unto.  In  the  next  place,  that  the  substance  of  Iron

(especially the well refined, as namely, the purest steel) is of parts much more

dense, subtil, and pure than the matter of the Loadstone, is seen, in that one

may  bring  its  edge  to  an  extraordinary  sharpnesse,  such  as  is  that  of  the

Rasor,  which  can  never  be  in  any  great  measure  effected  in  a  piece  of

Magnet. A sensible proof of the impurity of the Magnet. Then, as for the

impurity of the Magnet, and its being mixed with other qualities of stone, it is

first sensibly discovered by the colour of some little spots, for the most part

white; and next by presenting a needle to it, hanging in a thread, which upon

those  stonynesses  cannot  find  repose,  but  being  attracted  by  the  parts

circumfused, seemeth to fly from The Author hereby meaneth that the stone

doth not all consist of magnetick matter, but that the whiter specks being

weak, those other parts of the Loadstone of a more dark & constant colour,

contain all that vertue wherewith bodies are attracted. those, and to leap upon

the Magnet contiguous to them: and as some of those Heterogeneal parts are

for their magnitude very visible, so we may believe, that there are others, in

great  abundance,  which,  for  their  smallnesse,  are  imperceptible,  that  are

disseminated throughout the whole masse. That which I say, (namely, that the

multitude of contacts that are made between Iron and Iron, is the cause of the

so solid conjunction) is confirmed by an experiment, which is this, that if we

present the sharpned point of a needle to the cap of a Magnet, it will stick no

faster to it, than to the same stone unarmed: which can proceed from no other

cause, than from the equality of the contacts that are both of one sole point.

But what then? Let a A common sewing needle. Needle be taken and placed

upon a Magnet, so that one of its extremities hang somewhat over, and to that

present  a  Nail;  to  which  the  Needle  will  instantly  cleave,  insomuch  that

withdrawing the Nail, the Needle will stand in suspense, and with its two

ends touching the Magnet and the Iron; and withdrawing the Nail yet a little

further, the Needle will forsake the Magnet; provided that the eye of the

Needle be towards the Nail, and the point towards the Magnet; but if the eye

be towards the Loadstone, in withdrawing the Nail the Needle will cleave to

the Magnet; and this, in my judgment, for no other reason, save onely that the

Needle, by reason it is bigger towards the eye, toucheth in much more points

than its sharp point doth.


SAGR.Your whole discourse hath been in my judgment very concluding, and this

experiment  of  the  Needle  hath  made  me  think  it  little  inferiour  to  a

Mathematical  Demonstration;  and  I  ingenuously  confesse,  that  in  all  the

Magnetick Philosophy, I never heard or read any thing, that with such strong

reasons gave account of its so many admirable accidents, of which, if the

causes were with the same perspicuity laid open, I know not what sweeter

food our Intellects could desire.


SALV.


In seeking the reasons of conclusions unknown unto us, it is requisite to have

the good fortune to direct the discourse from the very beginning towards the

way of truth; in which if any one walk, it will easily happen, that one shall

meet with several other Propositions known to be true, either by disputes or

experiments, from the certainty of which the truth of ours acquireth strength

and evidence; as it did in every respect happen to me in the present Probleme,

for being desirous to assure my self, by some other accident, whether the

reason  of  the  Proposition,  by  me  found,  were  true;  namely,  whether  the

substance of the Magnet were really much lesse continuate than that of Iron

or of Steel, I made the Artists that work in the Gallery of my Lord the Grand

Duke, to smooth one side of that piece of Magnet, which formerly was yours,

and then to polish and burnish it; upon which to my satisfaction I found what

I desired. For I discovered many specks of colour different from the rest, but

as splendid and bright, as any of the harder sort of stones; the rest of the

Magnet was polite, but to the tact onely, not being in the least splendid; but

rather as if it were smeered over with foot; and this was the substance of the

Load-stone, and the shining part was the fragments of other stones intermixt

therewith, as was sensibly made known by presenting the face thereof to

filings of Iron, the which in great number leapt to the Load-stone, but not so

much as one grain did stick to the said spots, which were many, some as big

as the fourth part of the nail of a mans finger, others somewhat lesser, the

least of all very many, and those that were scarce visible almost innumerable.

So that I did assure my self, that my conjecture was true, when I first thought

that the substance of the Magnet was not close and compact, but porous, or to

say better, spongy; but with this difference, that whereas the sponge in its

cavities and little cels conteineth Air or Water, the Magnet hath its pores full

of  hard  and  heavy  stone,  as  appears  by  the  exquisite  lustre  which  thosespecks receive. Whereupon, as I have said from the beginning, applying the

surface of the Iron to the superficies of the Magnet the minute particles of the

Iron, though perhaps more continuate than these of any other body (as its 

shining more than any other matter doth shew) do not all, nay but very few of

them incounter pure Magnet; and the contacts being few, the union is but

weak. But because the cap of the Load-stone, besides the contact of a great

part  of  its  superficies,  invests  its  self  also  with  the  virtue  of  the  parts

adjoyning, although they touch not; that side of it being exactly smoothed to

which the other face, in like manner well polisht of the Iron to be attracted, is

applyed, the contract is made by innumerable minute particles, if not haply

by the infinite points of both the superficies, whereupon the union becometh

very strong. This observation of smoothing the surfaces of the Irons that are

to  touch,  came  not  into  the  thoughts  of  Gilbert,  for  he  makes  the  Irons

convex, so that their contact is very small; and thereupon it cometh to passe

that the tenacity, wherewith those Irons conjoyn, is much lesser.


SAGR.


I am, as I told you before, little lesse satisfied with this reason, that if it were

a  pure  Geometrical  Demonstration;  and  because  we  speak  of  a  Physical

Problem, I believe that also Simplicius will find himself satisfied as far as

natural science admits, in which he knows that Geometrical evidence is not to

be required.


SIMP.


I think indeed, Sympathy and Antipathy, terms used by Philosophers to give

a  reason  easily  of  many  natural  effests▪  that  Salviatus  with  a  fine

circumlocution hath so manifestly displayed the cause of this effect, that any

indifferent wit, though not verst in the Sciences, may apprehend the same;

but we, confining our selves to the terms of Art, reduce the cause of these and

other the like natural effects to Sympathy, which is a certain agreemet and

mutual  appetite  which  ariseth  between  things  that  are  semblable  to  one

another in qualities; as likewise on the contrary that hatred & enmity for

which other things shun & abhor one another we call Antipathy.


SAGR.And  thus  with  these  two  words  men  come  to  render  reasons  of  a  great

number of accidents and effects which we see not without admiration to be

produced in nature. But this kind of philosophating seems to me to have great

sympathy  with  a  certain  way  of  Painting  that  a  Friend  of  mine  used,  A

pleasant  example  declaring  the  invalidity  of  some  Phylosophical

argumentations. who writ upon the Tele or Canvasse in chalk, here I will

have the Fountain with Diana and her Nimphs, there certain Hariers, in this

corner I will have a Hunts-man with the Head of a Stag, the rest shall be

Lanes, Woods, and Hills; and left the remainder for the Painter to set forth

with Colours; and thus he perswaded himself that he had painted the Story of

Acteon, when as he had contributed thereto nothing of his own more than the

names. But whether are we wandred with so long a digression, contrary to

our former resolutions? I have almost forgot what the point was that we were

upon when we fell into this magnetick discourse▪  and yet I had something in

my mind that I intended to have spoken upon that subject.


SALV.


We were about to demonstrate that third motion ascribed by Copernicus to

the  Earth  to  be  no  motion  but  a  quiescence  and  maintaining  of  it  self

immutably  directed  with  its  determinate  parts  towards  the  same  &

determinate parts of the Universe, that is a perpetual conservation of the Axis

of its diurnal revolution parallel to it self, and looking towards such and such

fixed stars; which most constant position we said did naturally agree with

every  librated  body  suspended  in  a  fluid  and  yielding  medium,  which

although carried about, yet did it not change directionin respect of things

external, but onely seemed to revolve in its self, in respect of that which

carryed it round, and to the vessel in which it was transported. And then we

added to this simple and natural accident the magnetick virtue, whereby the

self Terrestrial Globe might so much the more constantly keep it immutable,

—


SAGR.


Now I remember the whole businesse; and that which then came into my

minde, & which I would have intimated, was a certain consideration touching

the scruple and objection of Simplicius, which he propounded against the

mobility of the Earth, taken from the multiplicity of motions, The severalnatural motions of the Magnet. impossible to be assigned to a simple body, of

which but one sole and simple motion, according to the doctrine of Aristotle,

can be natural; and that which I would have proposed to consideration, was

the Magnet, to which we manifestly see three motions naturally to agree: one

towards  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  as  a  Grave;  the  second  is  the  circular

Horizontal  Motion,  whereby  it  restores  and  conserves  its  Axis  towards

determinate parts of the Universe; and the third is this, newly discovered by

Gilbert, of inclining its Axis, being in the plane of a Meridian towards the

surface of the Earth, and this more and lesse, according as it shall be distant

from the Equinoctial, under which it is parallel to the Axis of the Earth.

Besides  these  three,  it  is  not  perhaps  improbable,  but  that  it  may  have  a

fourth, of revolving upon its own Axis, in case it were librated and suspended

in  the  air  or  other  fluid  and  yielding  Medium,  so  that  all  external  and

accidental  impediments  were  removed,  and  this  opinion  Gilbert  himself

seemeth  also  to  applaud.  So  that,  Simplicius,  you  see  how  tottering  the

Axiome of Aristotle is.


SIMP.


This doth ot only not make against the Maxime, but not so much as look

towards it: for that he speaketh of a simple body, and of that which may

naturally consist therewith; but you propose that which befalleth a mixt body;

nor do you tell us of any thing that is new to the doctrine of Aristotle, for that 

he likewise granteth to mixt bodies compound motions by —


SAGR.


Stay  a  little,  Simplicius,  &  answer  me  to  the  questions  I  shall  ask  you.

Aristole grants a compound motion to mixt bodies. You say that the Load-

stone is no simple body, now I desire you to tell me what those simple bodies

are, that mingle in composing the Load-stone.


SIMP.


I  know  not  how  to  tell  you  th’ingredients  nor  simples  precisely,  but  it

sufficeth that they are things elementary.


SALV.So much sufficeth me also. And of these simple elementary bodies, what are

the natural motions?


SIMP.


They are the two right and simple motions, sursum and deorsum.


SAGR.


Tell me in the next place? Do you believe that the motion, that shall remain

natural to that same mixed body, should be one that may result from the

composition  of  the  two  simple  natural  motions  of  the  simple  bodies

compounding, or that it may be a motion impossible to be composed of them.

The  motion  of  mixt  bodies  ought  to  be  such  as  may  result  from  the

composition of the motions of the simple bodies compounding.


SIMP.


I believe that it shall move with the motion resulting from the composition of

the  motions  of  the  simple  bodies  compounding,  and  that  with  a  motion

impossible to be composed of these, it is impossible that it should move.


SAGR.


But, Simplicius, with two right and simple motions, you shall never be able

to compose a circular motion, With two right motions one cannot compose

circular  motions.  such  as  are  the  two,  or  three  circular  motions  that  the

magnet hath: you see then into what absurdities evil grounded Principles, or,

to  say  better,  Philosophers  are  forced  to  confesse  that  the  Magnet  is

compounded  of  coelestial  substances,  and  of  elementary.  the  ill-inferred

consequences of good Principles carry a man; for you are now forced to say,

that  the  Magnet  is  a  mixture  compounded  of  substances  elementary  and

coelestial, if you will maintain that the straight motion is a peculiar to the

Elements, and the circular to the coelestial bodies. Therefore if you will more

safely argue, you must say, that of the integral bodies of the Universe, those

that are by nature moveable, do all move circularly, and that therefore the

Magnet,  as  a  part  of  the  true  primary,  The  errour  of  those  who  call  the

Magnet a mixt body, and the terrestrial Globe a simble body. and integralsubstance of our Globe, pertaketh of the same qualities with it. And take

notice  of  this  your  fallacy,  in  calling  the  Magnet  a  mixt  body,  and  the

Terrestrial Globe a simple body, which is sensibly perceived to be a thousand

times more compound: for, besides that it containeth an hundred an hundred

matters, exceeding different from one another, it containeth great abundance

of this which you call mixt, I mean of the Load-stone. This seems to me just

as if one should call bread a mixt body, andOgliopotrida a Spanish dish of

many ingredients boild together. Pannada a simple body, in which there is put

no small quantity of bread, besides many other things edible. This seemeth to

me  a  very  admirable  thing,  amongst  others    of  the  Peripateticks,  The

Discourses of Peripateticks, full of errours and contradictions. who grant (nor

can  it  be  denied)  that  our  Terrestrial  Globe  is,  de  facto,  a  compound  of

infinite  different  matters;  and  grant  farther  that  of  compound  bodies  the

motion ought to be compound: now the motions that admit of composition

are the right and circular: For the two right motions, as being contrary, are

incompatible together, they affirm, that the pure Element of Earth is no where

to be found; they confesse, that it never hath been moved with a local motion;

and yet they will introduce in Nature that body which is not to be found, and

make it move with that motion which it never exercised, nor never shall do,

and to that body which hath, and ever had a being, they deny that motion,

which before they granted, ought naturally to agree therewith.


SALV.


I beseech you, Sagredus, let us not weary our selves any more about these

particulars, and the rather, because you know that our purpose was not to

determine resolutely, or to accept for true, this or that opinion, but only to

propose for our divertisement such reasons, and answers as may be alledged

on  the  one  side,  or  on  the  other;  and  Simplicius  maketh  this  answer,  in

defence of his Peripateticks, therefore let us leave the judgment in suspense,

and remit the determination into the hands of such as are more known than

we. And because I think that we have, with sufficient prolixity, in these three

dayes,  discoursed  upon  the  Systeme  of  the  Universe,  it  will  now  be

seasonable,  that  we  proceed  to  the  grand  accident,  from  whence  our

Disputations took beginning, I mean, of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea,

the cause whereof may, in all probability, be referred to the motion of the

Earth. But that, if you so please, we will reserve till to morrow. In the meantime, that I may not forget it, I will speak to one particular, to which I could

have wished, that Gilbert had not lent an ear; An improbable effect admired

by Gilbertus in the Loadstone. I mean that of admitting, that in case a little

Sphere of Loadstone might be exactly librated, it would revolve in it self;

because there is no reason why it should do so; For if the whole Terrestrial

Globe hath a natural faculty of revolving about its own centre in twenty four

hours, and that all its parts ought to have the same, I mean, that faculty of

turning round together with their whole, about its centre in twenty four hours;

they already have the same in effect, whilst that, being upon the Earth, they

turn round along with it: And the assigning them a revolution about their

particular  centres,  would  be  to  ascribe  unto  them  a  second  motion  much

different from the first: for so they would have two, namely, the revolving in

twenty four hours about the centre of their whole; and the turning about their

own: now this second is arbitrary, nor is there any  reason for the introducing

of it: If by plucking away a piece of Loadstone from the whole natural masse,

it were deprived of the faculty of following it, as it did, whilst it was united

thereto, so that it is thereby deprived of the revolution about the universal

centre  of  the  Terrestrial  Globe,  it  might  haply,  with  somewhat  greater

probability be thought by some, that the said Magnet was to appropriate to it

self a new conversion about its particular centre; but if it do no lesse, when

separated, than when conjoyned, continue always to pursue its first, eternal,

and natural course, to what purpose should we go about to obtrude upon it

another new one?


SAGR.


I understand you very well, and this puts me in mind of a Discourse very like

to this for the vanity of it, The vain argumentation of some to prove the

Element  of  Water  to  be  of  a  Spherical  superficies.  falling  from  certain

Writers upon the Sphere, and I think, if I well remember, amongst others

from Sacrobosco, who, to shew how the Element of Water, doth, together

with the Earth, make a compleat Spherical Figure, and so between them both

compose this our Globe, writeth, that the seeing the small * particles of water

shape  themselves  into  rotundity,  as  in  the  drops,  and  in  the  dew  daily

apparent upon the leaves of several herbs, is a strong argument; and because,

according to the trite Axiome, there is the same reason for the whole, as for

the parts, the parts affecting that same figure, it is necessary that the same isproper to the whole Element: and truth is, methinks it is a great oversight that

these men should not perceive so apparent a vanity, and consider that if their

argument had run right, it would have followed, that not only the small drops,

but that any whatsoever greater quantity of water separated from the whole

Element,  should  be  reduced  into  a  Globe:  Which  is  not  seen  to  happen;

though indeed the Senses may see, and the Understanding perceive that the

Element of Water loving to form it self into a Spherical Figure about the

common centre of gravity, to which all grave bodies tend (that is, the centre

of the Terrestrial Globe) it therein is followed by all its parts, according to the

Axiome; so that all the surfaces of Seas, Lakes, Pools, and in a word, of all

the parts of Waters conteined in vessels, distend themselves into a Spherical

Figure, but that Figure is an arch of that Sphere that hath for its centre the

centre  of  the  Terrestrial  Globe,  and  do  not  make  particular  Spheres  of

themselves.


SALV.


The errour indeed is childish; and if it had been onely the single mistake of

Sacrobosco, I would easily have allowed him in it; but to pardon it also to his

Commentators, and to other famous men, and even to Ptolomy  himselfe; this

I cannot do, without blushing for their reputation. But it is high time to take

leave, it now being very late, and we being to meet again to morrow, at the

usual hour, to bring all the foregoing Discourses to a final conclusion.


Place this Plate at the end of the third Dialogue                        THE FOURTH DIALOGUE.


INTERLOCVTORS. SALVIATUS, SAGREDUS, & SIMPLICIUS.


SAGR.


I know not whether your return to our accustomed conferences hath really

been  later  than  usual,  or  whether  the  desire  of  hearing  the  thoughts  of

Salviatus, touching a matter so curious, hath made me think it so: But I have

tarried  a  long  hour  at  this  window,  expecting  every  moment  when  the

Gondola would appear that I sent to fetch you.


SALV.


I verily believe that your imagination more than our tarriance hath prolonged

the  time:  Nature  in  sport  maketh  the  ebbing  and  flowing  of  the  Sea,  to

approve the Earth  mobility. and to make no longer demurre, it would be

well, if without interposing more words, we came to the matter it self; and

did shew, that nature hath permitted (whether the business in rei veritate be

so, or else to play  and sport with our Fancies) hath, The tide, and mobility of

the Earth mutually confirm each other. I say, hath permitted that the motions

for every other respect, except to resolve the ebbing and flowing of the Sea,

assigned  long  since  to  the  earth,  should  be  found  now  at  last  to  answer

exactly to the cause thereof; and, as it were, All terrene effects, indifferently

confirm the motion or rest of the Earth, except the ebbing and flowing of the

Sea.  with  mutual  a  emulation,  the  said  ebbing  and  flowing  to  appear  in

confirmation of the Terrestrial motion: the judices whereof have hitherto been

taken  from  the  coelestial  Phaenomena,  in  regard  that  of  those  things  that

happen on Earth, not any one was of force to prove one opinion more than

another, as we already have at large proved, by shewing that all the terrene

occurrences upon which the stability of the Earth and mobility of the Sun and

Firmament is commonly inferred, are to seem to us performed in the same

manner, though we supposed the mobility of the Earth, and the immobility of

them. The Element of Water onely, as being most vast, and which is not

annexed and concatenated to the Terrestrial Globe as all its other solid parts

are; yea, rather which by reason of its fluidity remaineth apart sui juris, and

free, is to be ranked amongst those sublunary things, from which we may

collect some hinte and intimation of what the Earth doth in relation to motionand rest. After I had many and many a time examined with my self the effects

and accidents, partly seen and partly understood from others, that are to be

observed in the motions of waters: and moreover read and heard the great

vanities produced by many, as the causes of those accidents, The first general

conclusion of the impossibility of the ebbing and flowing the immobility of

the  terrestrial  Globe  being  granted.  I  have  been  induced  upon  no  slight

reasons to omit these two conclusions (having made withal the necessary

presupposals) that in case the terrestrial Globe be immoveable, the flux and

reflux  of  the  Sea  cannot  be  natural;  and  that,  in  case  those  motions  be

conferred upon the said Globe, which have been long since assigned to it, it is

necessary that the Sea be subject to ebbing and flowing, according to all that

which we observe to happen in the same.


SAGR.


The Proposition is very considerable, as well for it self as for what followeth

upon  the  same  by  way  of  consequence,  so  that  I  shall  the  more  intensly

hearken to the explanation and confirmation of it.


SALV.


Because in natural questions, The knowledge of the effests contributes to the

investigation of the causes. of which number this which we have in hand is

one, the knowledge of the effects is a means to guide us to the investigation

and discovery of the causes, and without which we should walk in the dark,

nay  with  more  uncertainty,  for  that  we  know  not  whither  we  would  go,

whereas the blind, at least, know where they desire to arrive; therefore first of

all it is necessary to know the effects whereof we enquire the causes: of

which effects you, Sagredus, ought more abundantly and more certainly to be

informed than I am,  as one, that besides your being born, and having, for a

long  time,  dwelt  in  Venice,  where  the  Tides  are  very  notable  for  their

greatnesse,  have  also  sailed  into  Syria,  and,  as  an  ingenuous  and

apprehensive  wit,  must  needs  have  made  many  Observations  upon  this

subject: whereas I, that could onely for a time, and that very short, observe

what happened in these extream parts of the Adriatick Gulph, and in our Seas

below  about  the  Tyrrhene  shores,  must  needs  take  many  things  upon  the

relation  of  others,  who,  for  the  most  part,  not  very  well  agreeing,  and

consequently  being  very  uncertain,  contribute  more  of  confusion  thanconfirmation to our speculations. Neverthelesse, from those that we are sure

of, and which are the principal, I think I am able to attain to the true and

primary causes; not that I pretend to be able to produce all the proper and

adequate  reasons  of  those  effects  that  are  new  unto  me,  and  which

consequently I could never have thought upon. And that which I have to say,

I propose only, as a key that openeth the door to a path never yet trodden by

any, in certain hope, that some wits more speculative than mine, will make a

further progresse herin, and penetrate much farther than I shall have done in

this my first Discovery: And although that in other Seas, remote from us,

there  may  appen  several  accidents,  which  do  not  happen  in  our

Mediterranean Sea, yet doth not this invalidate the reason and cause that I

shall produce, if so be that it verifie and fully resolve the accidents which

evene in our Sea: for that in conclusion there can be but one true and primary

cause of the effects that are of the same kind. I will relate unto you, therefore,

the effects that I know to be true, and assigne the causes thereof that I think to

be true, and you also, Gentlemen, shall produce such others as are known to

you, besides mine, and then we will try whether the cause, by me alledged,

may  satisfie  them  also.  Three  Periods  of  ebbings  and  flowings,  diurnal,

monethly, and annual.


I therefore affirm the periods that are observed in the fluxes and refluxes of

the  Sea-waters  to  be  three:  the  first  and  principal  is  this  great  and  most

obvious one; namely, the diurnal, according to which the intervals of some

hours with the waters flow and ebbe; and these intervals are, for the most

part, in the Mediterrane from six hours to six hours, or thereabouts, that is,

they  for  six  hours  flow,  and  for  six  hours  ebbe.  The  second  period  is

monethly, and it seemes to take its origen from the motion of the Moon, not

that it introduceth other motions, but only altereth the greatnesse of those

before mentioned, with a notable difference, according as it shall wax or

wane, or come to the Quadrature with the Sun. The third Period is annual,

and is seen to depend on the Sunne, and onely altereth the diurnal  motions,

by making them different in the times of the Solstices, as to greatnesse, from

what they are in the Equinoxes.


We will speak (in the first place, of the diurnal motion, as being the principal,

and upon which the Moon and Sun seem to exercise their power secondarily,

Varieties  that  appen  in  the  diur    period.  in  their  monethly  and  annualalterations. Three differences are observable in these horary mutations; for in

some places the waters rise and fall, without making any progressive motion;

in others, without rising or falling they run one while towards the East, and

recur another while towards the West; and in others they vary the heights and

course also, as happeneth here in Venice, where the Tides in coming in rise,

and in going out fall; and this they do in the extermities of the lengths of

Gulphs that distend from West to East, and terminate in open shores, up

along which shores the Tide at time of flood hath room to extend it self: but if

the course of the Tide were intercepted by Cliffes and Banks of great height

and steepnesse, there it will flow and ebbe without any progressive motion.

Again, it runs to and again, without changing height in the middle parts of the

Mediterrane, as notably happeneth in theA Strair, so called. Faro de Messina,

between  Scylla  and  Carybdis,  where  the  Currents,  by  reason  of  the

narrownesse of the Channel, are very swift; but in the more open Seas, and

about the Isles that stand farther into the Mediterranean Sea, as the Baleares,

Corsica, Sardignia, Or Ilva. Elba, Sicily towards the Affrican Coasts, Malta,

Or  Crets.  Candia,  &c.  the  changes  of  watermark  are  very  small;  but  the

currents indeed are very notable, and especially when the Sea is pent between

Islands, or between them and the Continent.


Now these onely true and certain effects, were there no more to be observed,

do,  in  my  judgment,  very  probably  perswade  any  man,  that  will  contain

himself  within  the  bounds  of  natural  causes,  to  grant  the  mobility  of  the

Earth: for to make the vessel (as it may be called) of the Mediterrane stand

still, and to make the water contained therein to do, as it doth, exceeds my

imagination, and perhaps every mans else, who will but pierce beyond the

rinde in these kind of inquiries.


SIMP.


These accidents, Salviatus, begin not now, they are most ancient, and have

been observed by very many, and several have attempted to assigne, some

one, some another cause for the same: and there dwelleth not many miles

from  hence  a  famous  Peripatetick,  The  cause  of  the  ebbing  and  flowing

alledged by a certain modern Philosopher. that alledgeth a cause for the same

newly fished out of a certain Text of Aristotle, not well understood by his

Expositors,  from  which  Text  he  collecteth,  that  the  true  cause  of  thesemotions doth only proceed from the different profundities of Seas  waters of

greatest depth being greater in  abundance, and therefore more grave, drive

back  the  Waters  of  lesse  depth,  which  being  afterwards  raised,  desire  to

descend, and from this continual colluctation or contest proceeds the ebbing

and flowing. The cause of the ebbing and flowing ascribed to the Moon by a

certain Prelate. Again those that referre the same to the Moon are many,

saying  that  she  hath  particular  Domination  over  the  Water;  and  at  last  a

certain Prelate hath published a little Treatise, wher in he saith that the Moon

wandering too and fro in the Heavens attracteth and draweth towards it a

Masse of Water, which goeth continually following it, so that it is full Sea

alwayes in that part which lyeth under the Moon; and because, that though

she be under the Horizon, yet neverthelesse the Tide returneth, he saith that

no more can be said for the salving of that particular, save onely, that the

Moon doth not onely naturally retain this faculty in her self; but in this case

hath power to confer it upon that degree of the Zodiack that is opposite unto

it.  Others,  Hieronymus  Borrius  and  other  Peripateticks  refer  it  to  the

temperate heat of the Moon, as I believe you know, do say that the Moon is

able with her temperate heat to rarefie the Water, which being rarefied, doth

thereupon flow. Nor hath there been wanting some that —


SAGR.


I pray you Simplicius let us hear no more of them, for I do not think it is

worth  the  while  to  wast  time  in  relating  them,  or  to  spend  our  breath  in

confuting them; and for your part, if you gave your assent to any of these or

the  like  foole  ies,  you  did  a  great  injury  to  your  judgment,  which

neverthelesse I acknowledg to be very piercing.


SALV.


But  I  that  am  a  little  more  flegmatick  than  you,  Answers  to  the  vanities

alledged as causes of the ebbing and flowing. Sagredus, will spend a few

words in favour of Simplicius, if haply he thinks that any probability is to be

found  in  those  things  that  he  hath  related.  I  say  therefore:  The  Waters,

Simplicius, that have their exteriour superficies higher, repel those that are

inferiour to them, and lower; but so do not those Waters that are of greatest

profundity; and the higher having once driven back the lower, they in a short

time  grow  quiet  andOr  rather  smooth.  level.  This  your  Peripatetick  mustneeds be of an opinion, that all the Lakes in the World that are in a calme,

and that all the Seas where the ebbing and flowing is insensible, are level in

their bottoms; but I was so simple, that I perswaded my self that had we no

other plummet to sound with, The Isles are tokens of the unevennesse of the

bottomes of Seas. the Isles that advance so high above Water, had been a

sufficient evidence of the unevennesse of their bottomes. To that Prelate I

could say that the Moon runneth every day along the whole Mediterrane, and

yet its Waters do not rise thereupon, save onely in the very extream bounds of

it Eastward, and here to us at Venice. And for those that make the Moons

temperate heat able to make the Water swell, bid them put fire under a Kettle

full of Water, and hold  their right hand therein till that the Water by reason

of the heat do rise but one sole inch, and then let them take it out, and write

off the tumefaction of the Sea. Or at least desire them to shew you how the

Moon doth to rarefie a certain part of the Waters, and not the remainder; as

for instance, these here of Venice, and not those of Ancona, Naples, Genova:

the truth is Poetick Wits are of two kinds, Poetick wits of two kinds. some are

ready and apt to invent Fables, and others disposed and inclined to believe

them.


SIMP.


I believe that no man believeth Fables, so long as he knows them to be so;

and of the opinions concerning the causes of ebbing and flowing, which are

many, because I know that of one single effect there is but one single cause

that is true and primary, I understand very well, and am certain that but one

alone at the most can be true, and for all the rest I am sure that they are

fabulous, and false; and its possible that the true one may not be among those

that have been hitherto produced; nay I verily believe that it is not, for it

would be very strange that the truth should have so little light, Truth hath not

so little light as not to be discovered amidst the umbrages of falshoods. as

that it should not be visible amongst the umbrages of so many falshoods. But

this  I  shall  say  with  the  liberty  that  is  permitted  amongst  us,  that  the

introduction of the Earths motion, and the making it the cause of the ebbing

and flowing of Tides, seemeth to me as yet a conjecture no lesse fabulous

than the rest of those that I have heard; and if there should not be proposed to

me reasons more conformable to natural matters, I would without any more

ado  proceed  to  believe  this  to  be  a  supernatural  effect,  and  thereforemiraculous, and unsearchable to the understandings of men, as infinite others

there are, that immediately depend on the Omnipotent hand of God.


SAGR.


You argue very prudently, Aristotle holdeth those effects to be miraculous, of

which the causes are unknown. and according to the Doctrine of Aristotle,

who you know in the beginning of his mechanical questions referreth those

things to a Miracle, the causes whereof are occult. But that the cause of the

ebbing and flowing is one of those that are not to be found out, I believe you

have no greater proof than onely that you see, that amongst all those that have

hitherto been produced for true causes thereof, there is not one wherewith,

working by what artifice you will, we are able to represent such an effect; in

regard  that  neither  with  the  light  of  the  Moon  nor  of  the  Sun,  nor  with

temperate  heats,  nor  with  different  profundities,  shall  one  ever  artificially

make  the  Water  conteined  in  an  immoveable  Vessel  to  run  one  way  or

another, and to ebbe and flow in one place, and not in another. But if without

any  other  artifice,  but  with  the  onely  moving  of  the  Vessel,  I  am  able

punctually to represent all those mutations that are observed in the Sea Water,

why will you refuse this reason and run to a Miracle?


SIMP.


I will run to a Miracle still, if you do not with some other natural causes,

besides that of the motion of the Vessels of the Sea-water disswade me from

it;  for  I  know  that  those  Vessels  move  not,  in  regard  that  all  the  entire

Terrestrial Globe is naturally immoveable.


SALV.


But do not you think, that the Terrestrial Globe might supernaturally, that is,

by the absolute power of God, be made moveable?


SIMP.


Who doubts it?


SALV.