 
       

                              The Collected Works of

                                GALILEO GALILEI

                                        (1564-1642)












                                      Contents


The Books

THE STARRY MESSENGER

LETTER TO THE GRAND DUCHESS CHRISTINA

DISCOURSE ON FLOATING BODIES

DIALOGUE CONCERNING THE TWO CHIEF WORLD SYSTEMS

DISCOURSES AND MATHEMATICAL DEMONSTRATIONS

RELATING TO TWO NEW SCIENCES


The Biographies

LIFE OF GALILEO by Sir David Brewster

THE TRIAL OF GALILEO by A. Mézières

GALILEO by Robert S. Ball

BRIEF BIOGRAPHY: GALILEO GALILIEI


The Delphi Classics Catalogue






                              © Delphi Classics 2017                                          Version 1        



                            The Collected Works of


                          GALILEO GALILEI






















                              By Delphi Classics, 2017


                              With new introductions by

                    Professor Kenneth Richard Seddon, OBE

                    (QUILL, The Queen’s University of Belfast)                                    COPYRIGHT


                      Collected Works of Galileo Galilei


              First published in the United Kingdom in 2017 by Delphi Classics.

                                  © Delphi Classics, 2017.

All rights reserved.  No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior permission in writing of the publisher, nor
          be otherwise circulated in any form other than that in which it is published.


                                  ISBN: 978 1 78656 058 2


                                    Delphi Classics

                                      is an imprint of

                                    Delphi Publishing Ltd

                                    Hastings, East Sussex

                                      United Kingdom

                              Contact: sales@delphiclassics.com


                              www.delphiclassics.com  


          Other classic Science and Philosophy eBooks available















These comprehensive editions are beautifully illustrated and offer eReaders

                some of the greatest scientific works ever written.


                      Explore Non-Fiction at Delphi Classics                                  The Books




























                      Pisa, Tuscany, central Italy — Galileo’s birthplace                                  The birthplace of Galileo                        Drawing of Pisa in the Renaissance, c. 1540                  THE STARRY MESSENGER




                      Translated by Edward Stafford Carlos


The Oxford  English  Dictionary  defines  genius  (noun)  as  the  “innate

intellectual or creative power of an exceptional or exalted type, such as is

attributed to those people considered greatest in any area of art, science, etc.;

instinctive  and  extraordinary  capacity  for  imaginative  creation,  original

thought, invention, or discovery”.  The modern media, with their love of

superlatives,  have  devalued  this  term,  but  its  original  meaning  remains

unsullied in academic circles.  There are few genii in our history, but perhaps
                                                                                  th
the first that is universally recognised was Leonardo da Vinci (15 April
        nd
1452 – 2 May 1519): a true genius and polymath – scientist, artist, inventor

-  with  footprints  in  almost  all  areas  of  academic  endeavour  –  including

painting,  sculpture,  architecture,  music,  literature,  science,  mathematics,

engineering, anatomy, geology, astronomy, botany, writing, history, and even

map making.  He was the archetype of Renaissance man.  A century later,
                                                                thth
another genius was born in Italy - Galileo Galilei (15 February 1564 – 8

January 1642; see Figure 1) - astronomer, physicist, engineer, philosopher

and mathematician.  Albert Einstein and Stephen Hawking – two modern

genii - credit him with being the progenitor of modern science, and his work

had a profound influence on Sir Isaac Newton, laying the basis of his Laws of

Motion, and later Einstein’s Theory of Special Relativity.

  Galileo’s first landmark book was published, in Latin, in 1610 (see Figure

2),  revolutionising  the  science  of  astronomy.    It  was  entitled Sidereus

Nuncius: this is translated variously as Sidereal Messenger (see Figure 3),

Starry Messenger, or Sidereal Message (the most accurate translation).  It

was the first astronomical book based on observations made with a telescope,

and included studies of the moon, and of hundreds of previously unobserved

stars.  Galileo built his own telescope for this study, improving on the design

available at the time. His observations of the moon (Figure 4) resulted in his

deducing the existence of mountains and valleys on the lunar surface.  His

observations of the stars, especially the constellations of Orion (Figure 5) and

the Pleiades (Figure 6) resulted in the number of observable stars being up toten  times  the  number  previously  observed.    He  also  examined  the  Milky

Way, and his comments, reproduced here, are both elegant and perceptive. “I

have observed the essence or substance of the MILKY WAY circle. By the

aid of a telescope anyone may behold this in a manner which so distinctly

appeals to the senses that all the disputes which have tormented philosophers

through so many ages are exploded at once by the unquestionable evidence of

our eyes, and we are freed from wordy disputes upon this subject, for the

GALAXY is nothing else but a mass of innumerable stars planted together in

clusters. Upon whatever part of it you direct the telescope straightway a vast

crowd of stars presents itself to view; many of them are tolerably large and

extremely  bright,  but  the  number  of  small  ones  is  quite  beyond

determination.”

  Another  key  feature  of  this  landmark  volume  is  the  discovery  of  the

moons of Jupiter, which Galileo referred to as “Medicean Stars”, named for

the four Medici brothers.  He wrote: “I therefore concluded, and decided

unhesitatingly, that there are three stars in the heavens moving about Jupiter,

as Venus and Mercury round the Sun; which at length was established as

clear  as  daylight  by  numerous  other  subsequent  observations.  These

observations also established that there are not only three, but four, erratic

sidereal bodies performing their revolutions round Jupiter, observations of

whose changes of position made with more exactness on succeeding nights.” 

They  are  now  known  as  “Galilean  moons”,  and  named  Io,  Europa,

Ganymede, and Callisto (all lovers of Zeus, or Jupiter) by Simon Marius

(who independently discovered them a few days after Galileo).

  And so the seeds were sown.  Enlightened scientists, philosophers and

artists  greeted Sidereus  Nuncius with  acclaim.  But  many  rejected  the

findings,  ascribing  them  to  lens  defects  in  the  telescope,  and  denied  the

existence  of  Jupiter’s  moons.  Independent  verification  of  Galileo’s

observations  soon  followed,  confirming  his  conclusions  that  four  moons

orbited Jupiter.

  Naming the moons after the Medici brothers moved the content of the

book  from  scientific  discourse  to  a  political  issue.    Moreover,  this  book

challenged the Church’s position – the proof that the Milky Way consisted of

a multitude of stars, and not “the fiery exhalation of stars” (the Aristotelian

view),  that  Earth’s  moon  was  not  a  perfect  sphere,  and  his  belief  in  the

absolute truth of the Copernican heliocentric system (already downgraded to

a hypothesis by the Church) were all seen to challenge scripture.  In the current post-truth (relating to, or denoting, circumstances in which

objective facts are less influential in shaping public opinion than appeals to

emotion and personal belief) era, we see a parallel for Galileo’s situation.  In

contradiction  to  the  compelling  weight  of  scientific  evidence,  in  1616  or

2016, it is possible to ignore or arbitrarily select data and arguments, and

come  to  whatever  conclusion  you  desire.    Post-truth,  then  as  now,  is  a

weapon of ignorance and superstition, wielded by unscrupulous politicians

and  religious  leaders.    Whether  it  is  a  Church  unwilling  to  accept  a

heliocentric system, creationists, or climate-change deniers, the same forces

of ignorance and bigotry pervade public opinion.Figure 1:  A painting of Galileo Galilei (1636) by Justus Sustermans (1597–1681), currently displayed
                    in the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, London.            Figure 2:  The title page of Sidereus Nuncius, published 13 March, 1610.            Figure 3:  The title page of' ‘The Sidereal Messenger’, published 1880.                                    CONTENTS


PREFATORY NOTE.

INTRODUCTION.

THE ASTRONOMICAL MESSENGER

A PART OF THE PREFACE TO KEPLER’S DIOPTRICS FORMING A

CONTINUATION OF GALILEO’S SIDEREAL MESSENGER.

ENDNOTES.

         Figure 4:  A composite of Galileo’s sketches of the moon from ‘Sidereus Nuncius’Figure 5:  The Belt and Sword of the Orion Constellation.  According to Galileo, “The well known or
old stars, for the sake of distinction, I have depicted of larger size, and I have outlined them with a
double line; the others, invisible to the naked eye, I have marked smaller and with one line only.”Figure 6:  The Pleiades Constellation. According to Galileo, “The well known or old stars, for the sake
of distinction, I have depicted of larger size, and I have outlined them with a double line; the others,
            invisible to the naked eye, I have marked smaller and with one line only.”                              PREFATORY NOTE.


About five years ago I was engaged in preparing a catalogue of the ancient

books  which  belong  to  Christ’s  Hospital.  One  portion  of  these  books

consisted of a collection of ancient mathematical works presented at various

times for the use of that part of the school which is known as the Royal

Mathematical Foundation of King Charles II. Amongst them were some well

known by name to every mathematical student, but which few have ever

seen. Perhaps the most interesting of them all was a little volume, printed in

London in 1653, containing Gassendi’s Explanation of the Ptolemaic and

Copernican Systems of Astronomy, as well as that of Tycho Brahe, Galileo’s

Sidereus Nuncius, and Kepler’s Dioptrics. I found Galileo’s account of his

astronomical discoveries so interesting, both in matter and in style, that I

translated it as a recreation from school-work. I venture to think that others

also will be interested in following Galileo through the apprehension of his

famous  discoveries,  and  in  reading  the  language  in  which  he  announced

them.                                INTRODUCTION.


In 1609, Galileo, then Professor of Mathematics at Padua, in the service of

the Venetian Republic, heard from a correspondent at Paris of the invention

of a telescope, and set to work to consider how such an instrument could be

made. The result was his invention of the telescope known by his name, and

identical in principle with the modern opera-glass. In a maritime and warlike

State,  the  advantages  to  be  expected  from  such  an  invention  were

immediately recognised, and Galileo was rewarded with a confirmation of his

Professorship for life, and a handsome stipend, in recognition of his invention

and construction of the first telescope seen at Venice. In his pamphlet, The

Sidereal Messenger, here translated, Galileo relates how he came to learn the

value of the telescope for astronomical research; and how his observations

were  rewarded  by  numerous  discoveries  in  rapid  succession,  and  at[viii]

length by that of Jupiter’s satellites. Galileo at once saw the value of this

discovery as bearing upon the establishment of the Copernican system of

astronomy,  which  had  met  with  slight  acceptance,  and  indeed  as  yet  had

hardly any recommendation except that of greater simplicity. Kepler had just

published at Prague his work on the planet Mars (Commentaria de motibus

Stellæ Martis), on which he had been engaged apparently for eight years;

there he heard of Galileo’s discoveries, and at length was invited by Galileo

himself, through a common friend, Giuliano de’ Medici, ambassador of the

Grand-Duke of Tuscany, Cosmo de’ Medici II., to the Emperor Rudolph II.,

to correspond with Galileo on the subject of these discoveries. The Emperor

also  requested  his  opinion,  and  Kepler  accordingly  examined  Galileo’s

Sidereal Messenger in a pamphlet, entitled A Discussion with the Sidereal

Messenger (Florence, 1610).

  In  this Discussion  Kepler  gives  reasons  for  accepting  Galileo’s

observations — although he was not able to verify them from want of a

telescope — and entirely supports Galileo’s views and conclusions, adducing

his own previous speculations, or pointing out, as in the case of Galileo’s idea

of earth-light on the moon, the previous conception of the same explanation

of the phenomenon. He rejects, however, Galileo’s explanation of the copper

colour  of  the  moon  in  eclipses.  Kepler  ends  by  expressing  unbounded

enthusiasm  at  the  discovery  of  Jupiter’s  satellites,  and  the  argument  it

furnishes in support of the Copernican theory.  Soon after, in 1611, Kepler published another pamphlet, his Narrative,

giving an account of actual observations made in verification of Galileo’s

discoveries by himself and several friends, whose names he gives, with a

telescope made by Galileo, and belonging to Ernest, Elector and Archbishop

of Cologne. Kepler and his friends saw the lunar mountains and three of the

satellites of Jupiter, but failed to make out any signs of the ring of Saturn

corresponding to the imperfect description of Galileo.

  Kepler had previously published a treatise on Optics (Frankfort, 1604). He

now  extended  it  to  the  consideration  of  the  theory  of  the  telescope,  and

explained  the  principle  of  Galileo’s  telescope;  he  also  showed  another

combination of lenses which would produce a similar effect. This was the

principle  of  the  common  astronomical  telescope,  often  called,  from  this

circumstance, Kepler’s telescope, though he did not construct it. The account

of Galileo’s later astronomical discoveries of Saturn’s ring and the phases of

Venus  is  taken  from  the  preface  of  this  work.  —  (Kepler’s Dioptrics;

Augsburg, 1611.)

  In 1612 Galileo published a series of observations of solar spots, and in

1618  some  observations  of  three  comets.  There  exist  also  long  series  of

minute  observations  of  Jupiter  and  his  satellites,  continued  to  November

1619. — (Galileo’s Works; Florence, 1845.)

  Further astronomical researches may have been hindered by failing sight.

One more astronomical discovery, however, that of the moon’s librations,

was made as late as 1637, and the announcement of it is dated “dalla mia

carcere di Arcetri.” Galileo died January 8, 1642.

  The following editions have been used for the translation: —

  Galileo’s Works.


1. Florence, 1718.

2. Padua, 1744.

3. Florence, 1842-56.


  Sidereus Nuncius.


1. Venice, 1610.

2. London, 1653.


   Kepler’s Works, ed. C. Frisch. Frankfurt a. M., 1858-71.

  Prodromus  dissertationum  mathematicarum  continens  Mysterium

Cosmographicum  de  admirabili  proportione  orbium  cœlestium.  Tübingen,

1596.

  Astronomia nova αἰτιολογητός (Commentaria de motibus stellæ Martis).

[Prague,] 1609.                                          THE


                              SIDEREAL MESSENGER


            UNFOLDING GREAT AND MARVELLOUS SIGHTS,


    AND PROPOSING THEM TO THE ATTENTION OF EVERY ONE,


        BUT ESPECIALLY PHILOSOPHERS AND ASTRONOMERS,


              BEING SUCH AS HAVE BEEN OBSERVED BY


                                GALILEO GALILEI


                      A GENTLEMAN OF FLORENCE,


PROFESSOR OF MATHEMATICS IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PADUA,


                                WITH THE AID OF A


                                      TELESCOPE


                                lately invented by him,


  Respecting the Moon’s Surface, an innumerable number of Fixed Stars,


        the Milky Way, and Nebulous Stars, but especially respecting


            Four Planets which revolve round the Planet Jupiter at


            different distances and in different periodic times, with


                  amazing velocity, and which, after remaining


                      unknown to every one up to this day, the


                          Author recently discovered, and                                determined to name the


                                MEDICEAN STARS.


                                    Venice 1610.                              TO THE MOST SERENE


                    COSMO DE’ MEDICI, THE SECOND,


                    FOURTH GRAND-DUKE OF TUSCANY.


THERE is certainly something very noble and large-minded in the intention

of those who have endeavoured to protect from envy the noble achievements

of distinguished men, and to rescue their names, worthy of immortality, from

oblivion and decay. This desire has given us the lineaments of famous men,

sculptured in marble, or fashioned in bronze, as a memorial of them to future

ages; to the same feeling we owe the erection of statues, both ordinary and
                                  1
equestrian; hence, as the poet says, has originated expenditure, mounting to

the stars, upon columns and pyramids; with this desire, lastly, cities have

been built, and distinguished by the names of those men, whom the gratitude

of posterity thought worthy of being handed down to all ages. For the state of

the  human  mind  is  such,  that  unless  it  be  continually  stirred  by  the
            2
counterparts  of  matters,  obtruding  themselves  upon  it  from  without,  all

recollection of the matters easily passes away from it.

  But others, having regard for more stable and more lasting monuments,

secured  the  eternity  of  the  fame  of  great  men  by  placing  it  under  the

protection, not of marble or bronze, but of the Muses’ guardianship and the

imperishable monuments of literature. But why do I mention these things, as

if human wit, content with these regions, did not dare to advance further;

whereas, since she well understood that all human monuments do perish at

last by violence, by weather, or by age, she took a wider view, and invented

more imperishable signs, over which destroying Time and envious Age could

claim no rights; so, betaking herself to the sky, she inscribed on the well-

known orbs of the brightest stars — those everlasting orbs — the names of

those who, for eminent and god-like deeds, were accounted worthy to enjoy

an eternity in company with the stars. Wherefore the fame of Jupiter, Mars,

Mercury, Hercules, and the rest of the heroes by whose names the stars are

called, will not fade until the extinction of the splendour of the constellations

themselves.

  But  this  invention  of  human  shrewdness,  so  particularly  noble  and

admirable, has gone out of date ages ago, inasmuch as primeval heroes are in

possession of those bright abodes, and keep them by a sort of right; intowhose  company  the  affection  of  Augustus  in  vain  attempted  to  introduce

Julius Cæsar; for when he wished that the name of the Julian constellation

should be given to a star, which appeared in his time, one of those which the

Greeks  and  the  Latins  alike  name,  from  their  hair-like  tails,  comets,  it

vanished in a short time and mocked his too eager hope. But we are able to

read the heavens for your highness, most Serene Prince, far more truly and

more happily, for scarcely have the immortal graces of your mind begun to

shine  on  earth,  when  bright  stars  present  themselves  in  the  heavens,  like

tongues to tell and celebrate your most surpassing virtues to all time. Behold

therefore, four stars reserved for your famous name, and those not belonging

to the common and less conspicuous multitude of fixed stars, but in the bright

ranks of the planets — four stars which, moving differently from each other,

round the planet Jupiter, the most glorious of all the planets, as if they were

his  own  children,  accomplish  the  courses  of  their  orbits  with  marvellous

velocity,  while  all  the  while  with  one  accord  they  complete  all  together

mighty revolutions every ten years round the centre of the universe, that is,

round the Sun.

  But the Maker of the Stars himself seemed to direct me by clear reasons to

assign these new planets to the famous name of your highness in preference

to all others. For just as these stars, like children worthy of their sire, never

leave the side of Jupiter by any appreciable distance, so who does not know

that clemency, kindness of heart, gentleness of manners, splendour of royal

blood, nobleness in public functions, wide extent of influence and power over

others,  all  of  which  have  fixed  their  common  abode  and  seat  in  your

highness, — who, I say, does not know that all these qualities, according to

the providence of God, from whom all good things do come, emanate from

the benign star of Jupiter? Jupiter, Jupiter, I maintain, at the instant of the

birth of your highness having at length emerged from the turbid mists of the

horizon, and being in possession of the middle quarter of the heavens, and

illuminating the eastern angle, from his own royal house, from that exalted

throne, looked out upon your most happy birth, and poured forth into a most

pure atmosphere all the brightness of his majesty, in order that your tender

body and your mind — though that was already adorned by God with still

more splendid graces — might imbibe with your first breath the whole of that

influence and power. But why should I use only plausible arguments when I

can  almost  absolutely  demonstrate  my  conclusion?  It  was  the  will  of

Almighty  God  that  I  should  be  judged  by  your  most  serene  parents  notunworthy to be employed in teaching your highness mathematics, which duty

I discharged, during the four years just passed, at that time of the year when it

is customary to take a relaxation from severer studies. Wherefore, since it

evidently fell to my lot by God’s will, to serve your highness, and so to

receive the rays of your surpassing clemency and beneficence in a position

near your person, what wonder is it if you have so warmed my heart that it

thinks about scarcely anything else day and night, but how I, who am indeed

your subject not only by inclination, but also by my very birth and lineage,

may be known to be most anxious for your glory, and most grateful to you?

And  so,  inasmuch  as  under  your  patronage,  most  serene  Cosmo,  I  have

discovered these stars, which were unknown to all astronomers before me, I

have,  with  very  good  right,  determined  to  designate  them  with  the  most

august name of your family. And as I was the first to investigate them, who

can rightly blame me if I give them a name, and call them the Medicean

Stars, hoping that as much consideration may accrue to these stars from this

title, as other stars have brought to other heroes? For not to speak of your

most  serene  ancestors,  to  whose  everlasting  glory  the  monuments  of  all

history bear witness, your virtue alone, most mighty sire, can confer on those

stars an immortal name; for who can doubt that you will not only maintain

and preserve the expectations, high though they be, about yourself, which

you have aroused by the very happy beginning of your government, but that

you will also far surpass them, so that when you have conquered others like

yourself, you may still vie with yourself, and become day by day greater than

yourself and your greatness?

  Accept,  then,  most  clement  Prince,  this  addition  to  the  glory  of  your

family, reserved by the stars for you; and may you enjoy for many years

those good blessings, which are sent to you not so much from the stars as

from God, the Maker and Governor of the stars.

  Your Highness’s most devoted servant,

  Galileo Galilei.

  Padua, March 12, 1610.                THE ASTRONOMICAL MESSENGER


Containing and setting forth Observations lately made with the

aid of a newly invented Telescope respecting the Moon’s

Surface, the Milky Way, Nebulous Stars, an

innumerable multitude of Fixed Stars, and

also respecting Four Planets never before

seen, which have been named

                                                            3
                            THE COSMIAN STARS.


                                      Introduction.


IN the present small treatise I set forth some matters of great interest for all

observers of natural phenomena to look at and consider. They are of great

interest, I think, first, from their intrinsic excellence; secondly, from their

absolute novelty; and lastly, also on account of the instrument by the aid of

which they have been presented to my apprehension.

  The number of the Fixed Stars which observers have been able to see

without artificial powers of sight up to this day can be counted. It is therefore

decidedly a great feat to add to their number, and to set distinctly before the

eyes other stars in myriads, which have never been seen before, and which

surpass the old, previously known, stars in number more than ten times.

  Again, it is a most beautiful and delightful sight to behold the body of the
                                                                      4
Moon, which is distant from us nearly sixty semi-diameters of the Earth, as

near as if it was at a distance of only two of the same measures; so that the

diameter of this same Moon appears about thirty times larger, its surface

about nine hundred times, and its solid mass nearly 27,000 times larger than

when it is viewed only with the naked eye; and consequently any one may

know with the certainty that is due to the use of our senses, that the Moon

certainly does not possess a smooth and polished surface, but one rough and

uneven, and, just like the face of the Earth itself, is everywhere full of vast

protuberances, deep chasms, and sinuosities.

  Then to have got rid of disputes about the Galaxy or Milky Way, and to

have made its nature clear to the very senses, not to say to the understanding,

seems  by  no  means  a  matter  which  ought  to  be  considered  of  slightimportance. In addition to this, to point out, as with one’s finger, the nature of

those stars which every one of the astronomers up to this time has called

nebulous, and to demonstrate that it is very different from what has hitherto

been believed, will be pleasant, and very fine. But that which will excite the

greatest astonishment by far, and which indeed especially moved me to call

the attention of all astronomers and philosophers, is this, namely, that I have

discovered  four  planets,  neither  known  nor  observed  by  any  one  of  the

astronomers before my time, which have their orbits round a certain bright

star, one of those previously known, like Venus and Mercury round the Sun,

and are sometimes in front of it, sometimes behind it, though they never

depart from it beyond certain limits. All which facts were discovered and
                                                            5
observed a few days ago by the help of a telescope devised by me, through

God’s grace first enlightening my mind.

  Perchance other discoveries still more excellent will be made from time to

time by me or by other observers, with the assistance of a similar instrument,

so I will first briefly record its shape and preparation, as well as the occasion

of its being devised, and then I will give an account of the observations made

by me.


                Galileo’s account of the invention of his telescope.


About  ten  months  ago  a  report  reached  my  ears  that  a  Dutchman  had

constructed a telescope, by the aid of which visible objects, although at a

great distance from the eye of the observer, were seen distinctly as if near;

and some proofs of its most wonderful performances were reported, which

some gave credence to, but others contradicted. A few days after, I received

confirmation  of  the  report  in  a  letter  written  from  Paris  by  a  noble

Frenchman, Jaques Badovere, which finally determined me to give myself up

first to inquire into the principle of the telescope, and then to consider the

means by which I might compass the invention of a similar instrument, which

a little while after I succeeded in doing, through deep study of the theory of

Refraction; and I prepared a tube, at first of lead, in the ends of which I fitted

two glass lenses, both plane on one side, but on the other side one spherically

convex, and the other concave. Then bringing my eye to the concave lens I

saw objects satisfactorily large and near, for they appeared one-third of the

distance off and nine times larger than when they are seen with the natural

eye  alone.  I  shortly  afterwards  constructed  another  telescope  with  morenicety, which magnified objects more than sixty times. At length, by sparing

neither  labour  nor  expense,  I  succeeded  in  constructing  for  myself  an

instrument so superior that objects seen through it appear magnified nearly a

thousand  times,  and  more  than  thirty  times  nearer  than  if  viewed  by  the

natural powers of sight alone.


                  Galileo’s first observations with his telescope.


It  would  be  altogether  a  waste  of  time  to  enumerate  the  number  and

importance of the benefits which this instrument may be expected to confer,

when  used  by  land  or  sea.  But  without  paying  attention  to  its  use  for

terrestrial objects, I betook myself to observations of the heavenly bodies;

and first of all, I viewed the Moon as near as if it was scarcely two semi-
          6
diameters of the Earth distant. After the Moon, I frequently observed other

heavenly bodies, both fixed stars and planets, with incredible delight; and,

when I saw their very great number, I began to consider about a method by

which I might be able to measure their distances apart, and at length I found

one.  And  here  it  is  fitting  that  all  who  intend  to  turn  their  attention  to

observations of this kind should receive certain cautions. For, in the first

place, it is absolutely necessary for them to prepare a most perfect telescope,

one which will show very bright objects distinct and free from any mistiness,

and will magnify them at least 400 times, for then it will show them as if only

one-twentieth  of  their  distance  off.  For  unless  the  instrument  be  of  such

power, it will be in vain to attempt to view all the things which have been

seen by me in the heavens, or which will be enumerated hereafter.

  But in order that any one may be a little more certain about the magnifying

power of his instrument, he shall fashion two circles, or two square pieces of

paper, one of which is 400 times greater than the other, but that will be when

the diameter of the greater is twenty times the length of the diameter of the

other. Then he shall view from a distance simultaneously both surfaces, fixed

on the same wall, the smaller with one eye applied to the telescope, and the

larger  with  the  other  eye  unassisted;  for  that  may  be  done  without

inconvenience at one and the same instant with both eyes open. Then both

figures will appear of the same size, if the instrument magnifies objects in the

desired proportion.

  After such an instrument has been prepared, the Method of measuring

small angular distances between heavenly bodies by the size of the apertureof the telescope.method of measuring distances remains for inquiry, and this

we shall accomplish by the following contrivance: —

 

  For the sake of being more easily understood, I will suppose a tube A B C
7
D. Let E be the eye of the observer; then, when there are no lenses in the

tube rays from the eye to the object F G would be drawn in the straight lines

E C F, E D G, but when the lenses have been inserted, let the rays go in the

bent  lines  E  C  H,  E  D  I,  —  for  they  are  contracted,  and  those  which

originally, when unaffected by the lenses, were directed to the object F G,

will include only the part H I. Hence the ratio of the distance E H to the line

H I being known, we shall be able to find, by means of a table of sines, the

magnitude of the angle subtended at the eye by the object H I, which we shall

find to contain only some minutes. But if we fit on the lens C D thin plates of

metal, pierced, some with larger, others with smaller apertures, by putting on

over the lens sometimes one plate, sometimes another, as may be necessary,

we shall construct at our pleasure different subtending angles of more or

fewer minutes, by the help of which we shall be able to measure conveniently

the intervals between stars separated by an angular distance of some minutes,

within an error of one or two minutes. But let it suffice for the present to have

thus slightly touched, and as it were just put our lips to these matters, for on

some  other  opportunity  I  will  publish  the  theory  of  this  instrument  in

completeness.

  Now let me review the observations made by me during the two months

just past, again inviting the attention of all who are eager for true philosophy

to the beginnings which led to the sight of most important phenomena.

  The Moon. Ruggedness of its surface. Existence of lunar mountains and

valleys.  Let  me  speak  first  of  the  surface  of  the  Moon,  which  is  turned

towards us. For the sake of being understood more easily, I distinguish two

parts in it, which I call respectively the brighter and the darker. The brighter

part seems to surround and pervade the whole hemisphere; but the darker

part, like a sort of cloud, discolours the Moon’s surface and makes it appear

covered  with  spots.  Now  these  spots,  as  they  are  somewhat  dark  and  of

considerable  size,  are  plain  to  every  one,  and  every  age  has  seen  them,

wherefore I shall call them great or ancient spots, to distinguish them from

other spots, smaller in size, but so thickly scattered that they sprinkle the

whole surface of the Moon, but especially the brighter portion of it. These

spots  have  never  been  observed  by  any  one  before  me;  and  from  myobservations of them, often repeated, I have been led to that opinion which I

have expressed, namely, that I feel sure that the surface of the Moon is not

perfectly  smooth,  free  from  inequalities  and  exactly  spherical,  as  a  large

school  of  philosophers  considers  with  regard  to  the  Moon  and  the  other

heavenly bodies, but that, on the contrary, it is full of inequalities, uneven,

full of hollows and protuberances, just like the surface of the Earth itself,

which is varied everywhere by lofty mountains and deep valleys.

  Sketches by Galileo to shew: —





























  the indentation of the terminator and illuminated summits of mountains in

the dark part of the moon;the shape of a lunar mountain and of a walled plain.

Galileo:’Sidereus Nuncius,’ Venice 1610.


  The appearances from which we may gather these conclusions are of the

following nature: — On the fourth or fifth day after new-moon, when the

Moon presents itself to us with bright horns, the boundary which divides the

part in shadow from the enlightened part does not extend continuously in an

ellipse, as would happen in the case of a perfectly spherical body, but it is

marked out by an irregular, uneven, and very wavy line, as represented in the

figure given, for several bright excrescences, as they may be called, extend

beyond the boundary of light and shadow into the dark part, and on the other

hand pieces of shadow encroach upon the light: — nay, even a great quantity

of  small  blackish  spots,  altogether  separated  from  the  dark  part,  sprinkle

everywhere almost the whole space which is at the time flooded with theSun’s light, with the exception of that part alone which is occupied by the

great and ancient spots. I have noticed that the small spots just mentioned

have this common characteristic always and in every case, that they have the

dark part towards the Sun’s position, and on the side away from the Sun they

have  brighter  boundaries,  as  if  they  were  crowned  with  shining  summits.

Now we have an appearance quite similar on the Earth about sunrise, when

we  behold  the  valleys,  not  yet  flooded  with  light,  but  the  mountains

surrounding them on the side opposite to the Sun already ablaze with the

splendour of his beams; and just as the shadows in the hollows of the Earth

diminish in size as the Sun rises higher, so also these spots on the Moon lose

their blackness as the illuminated part grows larger and larger. Again, not

only are the boundaries of light and shadow in the Moon seen to be uneven

and  sinuous,  but  —  and  this  produces  still  greater  astonishment  —  there

appear very many bright points within the darkened portion of the Moon,

altogether divided and broken off from the illuminated tract, and separated

from it by no inconsiderable interval, which, after a little while, gradually

increase in size and brightness, and after an hour or two become joined on to

the  rest  of  the  bright  portion,  now  become  somewhat  larger;  but  in  the

meantime others, one here and another there, shooting up as if growing, are

lighted up within the shaded portion, increase in size, and at last are linked on

to the same luminous surface, now still more extended. An example of this is

given in the same figure. Now, is it not the case on the Earth before sunrise,

that  while  the  level  plain  is  still  in  shadow,  the  peaks  of  the  most  lofty

mountains are illuminated by the Sun’s rays? After a little while does not the

light spread further, while the middle and larger parts of those mountains are

becoming  illuminated;  and  at  length,  when  the  Sun  has  risen,  do  not  the

illuminated parts of the plains and hills join together? The grandeur, however,

of such prominences and depressions in the Moon seems to surpass both in

magnitude  and  extent  the  ruggedness  of  the  Earth’s  surface,  as  I  shall

hereafter show. And here I cannot refrain from mentioning what a remarkable

spectacle  I  observed  while  the  Moon  was  rapidly  approaching  her  first

quarter, a representation of which is given in the same illustration, placed

opposite page 16. A protuberance of the shadow, of great size, indented the

illuminated part in the neighbourhood of the lower cusp; and when I had

observed this indentation longer, and had seen that it was dark throughout, at

length, after about two hours, a bright peak began to arise a little below the

middle  of  the  depression;  this  by  degrees  increased,  and  presented  atriangular  shape,  but  was  as  yet  quite  detached  and  separated  from  the

illuminated surface. Soon around it three other small points began to shine,

until, when the Moon was just about to set, that triangular figure, having now

extended and widened, began to be connected with the rest of the illuminated

part, and, still girt with the three bright peaks already mentioned, suddenly

burst into the indentation of shadow like a vast promontory of light.

  At the ends of the upper and lower cusps also certain bright points, quite

away from the rest of the bright part, began to rise out of the shadow, as is

seen depicted in the same illustration.

  In  both  horns  also,  but  especially  in  the  lower  one,  there  was  a  great

quantity of dark spots, of which those which are nearer the boundary of light

and shadow appear larger and darker, but those which are more remote less

dark and more indistinct. In all cases, however, just as I have mentioned

before,  the  dark  portion  of  the  spot  faces  the  position  of  the  Sun’s

illumination, and a brighter edge surrounds the darkened spot on the side

away from the Sun, and towards the region of the Moon in shadow. This part

of the surface of the Moon, where it is marked with spots like a peacock’s tail

with its azure eyes, is rendered like those glass vases which, through being

plunged while still hot from the kiln into cold water, acquire a crackled and

wavy surface, from which circumstance they are commonly called frosted
        8
glasses. The lunar spots are suggested to be possibly seas bordered by ranges

of mountains.

  Now the great spots of the Moon observed at the same time are not seen to

be at all similarly broken, or full of depressions and prominences, but rather

to be even and uniform; for only here and there some spaces, rather brighter

than the rest, crop up; so that if any one wishes to revive the old opinion of

the  Pythagoreans,  that  the  Moon  is  another  Earth,  so  to  say,  the  brighter

portion may very fitly represent the surface of the land, and the darker the

expanse of water. Indeed, I have never doubted that if the sphere of the Earth

were seen from a distance, when flooded with the Sun’s rays, that part of the

surface which is land would present itself to view as brighter, and that which

is water as darker in comparison. Moreover, the great spots in the Moon are

seen to be more depressed than the brighter tracts; for in the Moon, both

when  crescent  and  when  waning,  on  the  boundary  between  the  light  and

shadow, which projects in some places round the great spots, the adjacent

regions are always brighter, as I have noticed in drawing my illustrations, and

the  edges  of  the  spots  referred  to  are  not  only  more  depressed  than  thebrighter  parts,  but  are  more  even,  and  are  not  broken  by  ridges  or

ruggednesses. But the brighter part stands out most near the spots, so that

both before the first quarter and about the third quarter also, around a certain

spot in the upper part of the figure, that is, occupying the northern region of

the Moon, some vast prominences on the upper and lower sides of it rise to

an enormous elevation, as the illustrations show. This same spot before the

third quarter is seen to be walled round with boundaries of a deeper shade,

which just like very lofty mountain summits appear darker on the side away

from the Sun, and brighter on the side where they face the Sun; but in the

case of the cavities the opposite happens, for the part of them away from the

Sun appears brilliant, and that part which lies nearer to the Sun dark and in

shadow. After a time, when the enlightened portion of the Moon’s surface

has diminished in size, as soon as the whole or nearly so of the spot already

mentioned  is  covered  with  shadow,  the  brighter  ridges  of  the  mountains

mount  high  above  the  shade.  These  two  appearances  are  shown  in  the

illustrations which are given.
                                                          9
  Description of a lunar crater, perhaps Tycho. There is one other point

which I must on no account forget, which I have noticed and rather wondered

at. It is this: — The middle of the Moon, as it seems, is occupied by a certain

cavity larger than all the rest, and in shape perfectly round. I have looked at

this depression near both the first and third quarters, and I have represented it

as well as I can in the second illustration already given. It produces the same

appearance as to effects of light and shade as a tract like Bohemia would

produce on the Earth, if it were shut in on all sides by very lofty mountains

arranged on the circumference of a perfect circle; for the tract in the Moon is

walled in with peaks of such enormous height that the furthest side adjacent

to  the  dark  portion  of  the  Moon  is  seen  bathed  in  sunlight  before  the

boundary between light and shade reaches half-way across the circular space.

But  according  to  the  characteristic  property  of  the  rest  of  the  spots,  the

shaded portion of this too faces the Sun, and the bright part is towards the

dark  side  of  the  Moon,  which  for  the  third  time  I  advise  to  be  carefully

noticed as a most solid proof of the ruggednesses and unevennesses spread

over the whole of the bright region of the Moon. Of these spots, moreover,

the darkest are always those which are near to the boundary-line between the

light and the shadow, but those further off appear both smaller in size and

less decidedly dark; so that at length, when the Moon at opposition becomesfull,  the  darkness  of  the  cavities  differs  from  the  brightness  of  the

prominences with a subdued and very slight difference.


  Reasons for believing that there is a difference of constitution in various

                            parts of the Moon’s surface.


These phenomena which we have reviewed are observed in the bright tracts

of the Moon. In the great spots we do not see such differences of depressions

and  prominences  as  we  are  compelled  to  recognise  in  the  brighter  parts,

owing to the change of their shapes under different degrees of illumination by

the Sun’s rays according to the manifold variety of the Sun’s position with

regard to the Moon. Still, in the great spots there do exist some spaces rather

less dark than the rest, as I have noted in the illustrations, but these spaces

always have the same appearance, and the depth of their shadow is neither

intensified nor diminished; they do appear indeed sometimes a little more

shaded,  sometimes  a  little  less,  but  the  change  of  colour  is  very  slight,

according  as  the  Sun’s  rays  fall  upon  them  more  or  less  obliquely;  and

besides, they are joined to the adjacent parts of the spots with a very gradual

connection, so that their boundaries mingle and melt into the surrounding

region. But it is quite different with the spots which occupy the brighter parts

of  the  Moon’s  surface,  for,  just  as  if  they  were  precipitous  crags  with

numerous  rugged  and  jagged  peaks,  they  have  well-defined  boundaries

through the sharp contrast of light and shade. Moreover, inside those great

spots certain other tracts are seen brighter than the surrounding region, and

some of them very bright indeed, but the appearance of these, as well as of

the darker parts, is always the same; there is no change of shape or brightness

or depth of shadow, so that it becomes a matter of certainty and beyond doubt

that  their  appearance  is  owing  to  real  dissimilarity  of  parts,  and  not  to

unevennesses  only  in  their  configuration,  changing  in  different  ways  the

shadows of the same parts according to the variations of their illumination by

the  Sun,  which  really  happens  in  the  case  of  the  other  smaller  spots

occupying the brighter portion of the Moon, for day by day they change,

increase, decrease, or disappear, inasmuch as they derive their origin only

from the shadows of prominences.

  Explanation of the evenness of the illuminated part of the circumference

of the Moon’s orb by the analogy of terrestrial phenomena, or by a possible

lunar atmosphere. But here I feel that some people may be troubled withgrave doubt, and perhaps seized with a difficulty so serious as to compel

them to feel uncertain about the conclusion just explained and supported by

so many phenomena. For if that part of the Moon’s surface which reflects the

Sun’s rays most brightly is full of sinuosities, protuberances, and cavities

innumerable, why, when the Moon is increasing, does the outer edge which

looks  toward  the  west,  when  the  Moon  is  waning,  the  other  half-

circumference towards the east, and at full-moon the whole circle, appear not

uneven, rugged, and irregular, but perfectly round and circular, as sharply

defined  as  if  marked  out  with  a  pair  of  compasses,  and  without  the

indentations  of  any  protuberances  or  cavities?  And  most  remarkably  so,

because the whole unbroken edge belongs to that part of the Moon’s surface

which possesses the property of appearing brighter than the rest, which I have

said to be throughout full of protuberances and cavities. For not one of the

Great Spots extends quite to the circumference, but all of them are seen to be

together away from the edge. Of this phenomenon, which affords a handle for

such  serious  doubt,  I  produce  two  causes,  and  so  two  solutions  of  the

difficulty.

  The first solution which I offer is this: — If the protuberances and cavities

in the body of the Moon existed only on the edge of the circle that bounds the

hemisphere which we see, then the Moon might, or rather must, show itself to

us with the appearance of a toothed wheel, being bounded with an irregular

and  uneven  circumference;  but  if,  instead  of  a  single  set  of  prominences

arranged along the actual circumference only, very many ranges of mountains

with their cavities and ruggednesses are set one behind the other along the

extreme edge of the Moon, and that too not only in the hemisphere which we

see, but also in that which is turned away from us, but still near the boundary

of the hemisphere, then the eye, viewing them afar off, will not at all be able

to  detect  the  differences  of  prominences  and  cavities,  for  the  intervals

between the mountains situated in the same circle, or in the same chain, are

hidden by the jutting forward of other prominences situated in other ranges,

and especially if the eye of the observer is placed in the same line with the

tops of the prominences mentioned. So on the Earth, the summits of a number

of mountains close together appear situated in one plane, if the spectator is a

long way off and standing at the same elevation. So when the sea is rough,

the tops of the waves seem to form one plane, although between the billows

there is many a gulf and chasm, so deep that not only the hulls, but even the

bulwarks,  masts,  and  sails  of  stately  ships  are  hidden  amongst  them.Therefore, as within the Moon, as well as round her circumference, there is a

manifold arrangement of prominences and cavities, and the eye, regarding

them from a great distance, is placed in nearly the same plane with their

summits, no one need think it strange that they present themselves to the

visual  ray  which  just  grazes  them  as  an  unbroken  line  quite  free  from

unevennesses. To this explanation may be added another, namely, that there

is round the body of the Moon, just as round the Earth, an envelope of some

substance denser than the rest of the ether, which is sufficient to receive and

reflect the Sun’s rays, although it does not possess so much opaqueness as to

be  able  to  prevent  our  seeing  through  it  —  especially  when  it  is  not

illuminated. That envelope, when illuminated by the Sun’s rays, renders the

body of the Moon apparently larger than it really is, and would be able to

stop our sight from penetrating to the solid body of the Moon, if its thickness

were greater; now, it is of greater thickness about the circumference of the

Moon,  greater,  I  mean,  not  in  actual  thickness,  but  with  reference  to  our

sight-rays, which cut it obliquely; and so it may stop our vision, especially

when it is in a state of brightness, and may conceal the true circumference of

the Moon on the side towards the Sun.













  This may be understood more clearly from the adjoining figure, in which

the body of the Moon, A B C, is surrounded by an enveloping atmosphere, D

E G. An eye at F penetrates to the middle parts of the Moon, as at A, through

a thickness, D A, of the atmosphere; but towards the extreme parts a mass of

atmosphere of greater depth, E B, shuts out its boundary from our sight. An

argument  in  favour  of  this  is,  that  the  illuminated  portion  of  the  Moon

appears of larger circumference than the rest of the orb which is in shadow.

  Perhaps  also  some  will  think  that  this  same  cause  affords  a  very

reasonable explanation why the greater spots on the Moon are not seen toreach to the edge of the circumference on any side, although it might be

expected that some would be found about the edge as well as elsewhere; and

it  seems  credible  that  there  are  spots  there,  but  that  they  cannot  be  seen

because they are hidden by a mass of atmosphere too thick and too bright for

the sight to penetrate.

  Calculation to show that the height of some lunar mountains exceeds four
              10
Italian miles (22,000 British feet). I think that it has been sufficiently made

clear, from the explanation of phenomena which have been given, that the

brighter part of the Moon’s surface is dotted everywhere with protuberances

and cavities; it only remains for me to speak about their size, and to show that

  the ruggednesses of the Earth’s surface are far smaller than those of the

  Moon’s; smaller, I mean, absolutely, so to say, and not only smaller in

proportion to the size of the orbs on which they are. And this is plainly shown

thus: — As I often observed in various positions of the Moon with reference

to the Sun, that some summits within the portion of the Moon in shadow

appeared illumined, although at some distance from the boundary of the light

(the terminator), by comparing their distance with the complete diameter of

the Moon, I learnt that it sometimes exceeded the one-twentieth (1/20th) part











of the diameter. Suppose the distance to be exactly

1/20th part of the diameter, and let the diagram represent the Moon’s orb, of

    which C A F is a great circle, E its centre, and C F a diameter, which

consequently bears to the diameter of the Earth the ratio 2:7; and since the

  diameter of the Earth, according to the most exact observations, contains

7000 Italian miles, C F will be 2000, and C E 1000, and the 1/20th part of the

whole, C F, 100 miles. Also let C F be a diameter of the great circle which

divides the bright part of the Moon from the dark part (for, owing to the very

great distance of the Sun from the Moon this circle does not differ sensibly

from a great one), and let the distance of A from the point C be 1/20th part ofthat diameter; let the radius E A be drawn, and let it be produced to cut the

tangent line G C D, which represents the ray that illumines the summit, in the

point D. Then the arc C A or the straight line C D will be 100 of such units,

  as C E contains 1000. The sum of the squares of D C, C E is therefore

1,010,000, and the square of D E is equal to this; therefore the whole E D will

  be more than 1004; and A D will be more than 4 of such units, as C E

contained 1000. Therefore the height of A D in the Moon, which represents a

    summit reaching up to the Sun’s ray, G C D, and separated from the

extremity C by the distance C D, is more than 4 Italian miles; but in the Earth

there are no mountains which reach to the perpendicular height even of one

mile. We are therefore left to conclude that it is clear that the prominences of

                  the Moon are loftier than those of the Earth.

The faint illumination of the Moon’s disc about new-moon explained to be

                                  due to earth-light.


I wish in this place to assign the cause of another lunar phenomenon well

worthy of notice, and although this phenomenon was observed by me not

lately, but many years ago, and has been pointed out to some of my intimate

friends  and  pupils,  explained,  and  assigned  to  its  true  cause,  yet  as  the

observation of it is rendered easier and more vivid by the help of a telescope,

I have considered that it would not be unsuitably introduced in this place, but

I wish to introduce it chiefly in order that the connection and resemblance

between the Moon and the Earth may appear more plainly.

  When the Moon, both before and after conjunction, is found not far from

the Sun, not only does its orb show itself to our sight on the side where it is

furnished with shining horns, but a slight and faint circumference is also seen

to mark out the circle of the dark part, that part, namely, which is turned away

from the Sun, and to separate it from the darker background of the sky. But if

we examine the matter more closely, we shall see that not only is the extreme

edge of the part in shadow shining with a faint brightness, but that the entire

face of the Moon, that side, that is, which does not feel the Sun’s glare, is

illuminated with a pale light of considerable brightness. At the first glance

only a fine circumference appears shining, on account of the darker part of

the sky adjacent to it; whereas, on the contrary, the rest of the surface appears

dark, on account of the contiguity of the shining horns, which destroys the

clearness of our sight. But if any one chooses such a position for himself, that

by the interposition of a roof, or a chimney, or some other object between hissight and the Moon, but at a considerable distance from his eye, the shining

horns are hidden, and the rest of the Moon’s orb is left exposed to his view,

then  he  will  find  that  this  tract  of  the  Moon  also,  although  deprived  of

sunlight, gleams with considerable light, and particularly so if the gloom of

the night has already deepened through the absence of the Sun; for with a

darker background the same light appears brighter. Moreover, it is found that

this  secondary  brightness  of  the  Moon,  as  I  may  call  it,  is  greater  in

proportion as the Moon is less distant from the Sun; for it abates more and

more in proportion to the Moon’s distance from that body, so much so that

after the first quarter, and before the end of the second, it is found to be weak

and very faint, although it be observed in a darker sky; whereas, at an angular

distance  of  60°  or  less,  even  during  twilight,  it  is  wonderfully  bright,  so

bright indeed that, with the help of a good telescope, the great spots may be

distinguished in it.

  This strange brightness has afforded no small perplexity to philosophical

minds; and some have published one thing, some another, as the cause to be

alleged for it. Some have said that it is the inherent and natural brightness of

the Moon; some that it is imparted to that body by the planet Venus; or, as

others maintain, by all the stars; while some have said that it comes from the

Sun, whose rays, they say, find a way through the solid mass of the Moon.

But  statements  of  this  kind  are  disproved  without  much  difficulty,  and

convincingly  demonstrated  to  be  false.  For  if  this  kind  of  light  were  the

Moon’s own, or were contributed by the stars, the Moon would retain it,

particularly in eclipses, and would show it then, when left in an unusually

dark sky, but this is contrary to experience. For the brightness which is seen

on the Moon in eclipses is far less intense, being somewhat reddish, and

almost  copper-coloured,  whereas  this  is  brighter  and  whiter;  besides,  the

brightness seen during an eclipse is changeable and shifting, for it wanders

over the face of the Moon, so that that part which is near the circumference of

the circle of shadow thrown by the Earth is bright, but the rest of the Moon is

always seen to be dark. From which circumstance we understand without

hesitation  that  this  brightness  is  due  to  the  proximity  of  the  Sun’s  rays

coming into contact with some denser region which surrounds the Moon as

an envelope; owing to which contact a sort of dawn-light is diffused over the

neighbouring regions of the Moon, just as the twilight spreads in the morning
                              11
and evening on the Earth: but I will treat more fully of this matter in my
                                            12
book upon the System of the Universe.  Again, to assert that this sort of light is imparted to the Moon by the planet

Venus is so childish as to be undeserving of an answer; for who is so ignorant

as not to understand that at conjunction and within an angular distance of 60°

it is quite impossible for the part of the Moon turned away from the Sun to be

seen by the planet Venus?

  But that this light is derived from the Sun penetrating with its light the

solid mass of the Moon, and rendering it luminous, is equally untenable. For

then  this  light  would  never  lessen,  since  the  hemisphere  of  the  Moon  is

always illumined by the Sun, except at the moment of a lunar eclipse, yet

really it quickly decreases while the Moon is drawing near to the end of her

first quarter, and when she has passed her first quarter it becomes quite dull.

Since, therefore, this kind of secondary brightness is not inherent and the

Moon’s own, nor borrowed from any of the stars, nor from the Sun, and since

there now remains in the whole universe no other body whatever except the

Earth, what, pray, must we conclude? What must we assert? Shall we assert

that the body of the Moon, or some other dark and sunless orb, receives light

from the Earth? Why should it not be the Moon? And most certainly it is. The

Earth, with fair and grateful exchange, pays back to the Moon an illumination

like that which it receives from the Moon nearly the whole time during the

darkest  gloom  of  night.  Let  me  explain  the  matter  more  clearly.  At

conjunction, when the Moon occupies a position between the Sun and the

Earth, the Moon is illuminated by the Sun’s rays on her half towards the Sun

which is turned away from the Earth, and the other half, with which she

regards the Earth, is covered with darkness, and so in no degree illumines the

Earth’s  surface.  When  the  Moon  has  slightly  separated  from  the  Sun,

straightway she is partly illumined on the half directed towards us; she turns

towards us a slender silvery crescent, and slightly illumines the Earth; the

Sun’s  illumination  increases  upon  the  Moon  as  she  approaches  her  first

quarter, and the reflexion of that light increases on the Earth; the brightness in

the Moon next extends beyond the semicircle, and our nights grow brighter;

at length the entire face of the Moon looking towards the Earth is irradiated

with the most intense brightness by the Sun, which happens when the Sun

and Moon are on opposite sides of the Earth; then far and wide the surface of

the  Earth  shines  with  the  flood  of  moonlight;  after  this  the  Moon,  now

waning,  sends  out  less  powerful  beams,  and  the  Earth  is  illumined  less

powerfully; at length the Moon draws near her first position of conjunction

with the Sun, and forthwith black night invades the Earth. In such a cycle themoonlight  gives  us  each  month  alternations  of  brighter  and  fainter

illumination. But the benefit of her light to the Earth is balanced and repaid

by the benefit of the light of the Earth to her; for while the Moon is found

near the Sun about the time of conjunction, she has in front of her the entire

surface of that hemisphere of the Earth which is exposed to the Sun, and

vividly illumined with his beams, and so receives light reflected from the

Earth. Owing to such reflexion, the hemisphere of the Moon nearer to us,

though deprived of sunlight, appears of considerable brightness. Again, when

removed from the Sun through a quadrant, the Moon sees only one-half of

the Earth’s hemisphere illuminated, namely the western half, for the other,

the eastern, is covered with the shades of night; the Moon is, therefore, less

brightly  enlightened  by  the  Earth,  and  accordingly  that  secondary  light

appears fainter to us. But if you imagine the Moon to be set on the opposite

side of the Earth to the Sun, she will see the hemisphere of the Earth, now

between the Moon and the Sun, quite dark, and steeped in the gloom of night;

if, therefore, an eclipse should accompany such a position of the Moon, she

will receive no light at all, being deprived of the illumination of the Sun and

Earth together. In any other position, with regard to the Earth and the Sun, the

Moon receives more or less light by reflexion from the Earth, according as

she  sees  a  greater  or  smaller  portion  of  the  hemisphere  of  the  Earth

illuminated by the Sun; for such a law is observed between these two orbs,

that at whatever times the Earth is most brightly enlightened by the Moon, at

those times, on the contrary, the Moon is least enlightened by the Earth; and

contrariwise. Let these few words on this subject suffice in this place; for I

will consider it more fully in my System of the Universe, where, by very

many arguments and experimental proofs, there is shown to be a very strong

reflexion of the Sun’s light from the Earth, for the benefit of those who urge

that the Earth must be separated from the starry host, chiefly for the reason

that it has neither motion nor light, for I will prove that the Earth has motion,

and surpasses the Moon in brightness, and is not the place where the dull

refuse of the universe has settled down; and I will support my demonstration

by a thousand arguments taken from natural phenomena.

  Stars. Their appearance in the telescope. Hitherto I have spoken of the

observations which I have made concerning the Moon’s body; now I will

briefly announce the phenomena which have been, as yet, seen by me with

reference to the Fixed Stars. And first of all the following fact is worthy of

consideration:  —  The  stars,  fixed  as  well  as  erratic,  when  seen  with  atelescope,  by  no  means  appear  to  be  increased  in  magnitude  in  the  same

proportion as other objects, and the Moon herself, gain increase of size; but in

the  case  of  the  stars  such  increase  appears  much  less,  so  that  you  may

consider  that  a  telescope,  which  (for  the  sake  of  illustration)  is  powerful

enough to magnify other objects a hundred times, will scarcely render the

stars magnified four or five times. But the reason of this is as follows: —

When  stars  are  viewed  with  our  natural  eyesight  they  do  not  present

themselves to us of their bare, real size, but beaming with a certain vividness,

and fringed with sparkling rays, especially when the night is far advanced;

and from this circumstance they appear much larger than they would if they

were stripped of those adventitious fringes, for the angle which they subtend

at  the  eye  is  determined  not  by  the  primary  disc  of  the  star,  but  by  the

brightness which so widely surrounds it. Perhaps you will understand this

most clearly from the well-known circumstance that when stars rise just at

sunset, in the beginning of twilight, they appear very small, although they

may be stars of the first magnitude; and even the planet Venus itself, on any

occasion when it may present itself to view in broad daylight, is so small to

see that it scarcely seems to equal a star of the last magnitude. It is different

in the case of other objects, and even of the Moon, which, whether viewed in

the light of midday or in the depth of night, always appears of the same size.

We conclude therefore that the stars are seen at midnight in uncurtailed glory,

but their fringes are of such a nature that the daylight can cut them off, and

not only daylight, but any slight cloud which may be interposed between a

star and the eye of the observer. A dark veil or coloured glass has the same

effect, for, upon placing them before the eye between it and the stars, all the

blaze that surrounds them leaves them at once. A telescope also accomplishes

the same result, for it removes from the stars their adventitious and accidental

splendours before it enlarges their true discs (if indeed they are of that shape),

and so they seem less magnified than other objects, for a star of the fifth or

sixth magnitude seen through a telescope is shown as of the first magnitude

only.

  The difference between the appearance of the planets and the fixed stars

seems  also  deserving  of  notice.  The  planets  present  their  discs  perfectly

round, just as if described with a pair of compasses, and appear as so many

little moons, completely illuminated and of a globular shape; but the fixed

stars do not look to the naked eye bounded by a circular circumference, but

rather like blazes of light, shooting out beams on all sides and very sparkling,and with a telescope they appear of the same shape as when they are viewed

by simply looking at them, but so much larger that a star of the fifth or sixth
                                                                            13
magnitude seems to equal Sirius, the largest of all the fixed stars.























  Orion’s Belt and Sword; 83 Stars  Pleiades; 36 Stars

  Galileo: “Sidereus Nuncius.”


  Telescopic Stars: their infinite multitude. As examples, Orion’s Belt and

          Sword and the Pleiades are described as seen by Galileo.


But beyond the stars of the sixth magnitude you will behold through the

telescope  a  host  of  other  stars,  which  escape  the  unassisted  sight,  so

numerous as to be almost beyond belief, for you may see more than six other

differences of magnitude, and the largest of these, which I may call stars of

the seventh magnitude, or of the first magnitude of invisible stars, appear

with the aid of the telescope larger and brighter than stars of the second

magnitude seen with the unassisted sight. But in order that you may see one

or  two  proofs  of  the  inconceivable  manner  in  which  they  are  crowded

together, I have determined to make out a case against two star-clusters, that

from them as a specimen you may decide about the rest.

  As my first example I had determined to depict the entire constellation of

Orion, but I was overwhelmed by the vast quantity of stars and by want of

time, and so I have deferred attempting this to another occasion, for there are

adjacent to, or scattered among, the old stars more than five hundred newstars within the limits of one or two degrees. For this reason I have selected

the three stars in Orion’s Belt and the six in his Sword, which have been long

well-known groups, and I have added eighty other stars recently discovered

in their vicinity, and I have preserved as exactly as possible the intervals

between them. The well-known or old stars, for the sake of distinction, I have

depicted  of  larger  size,  and  I  have  outlined  them  with  a  double  line;  the

others, invisible to the naked eye, I have marked smaller and with one line

only. I have also preserved the differences of magnitude as much as I could.

  As a second example I have depicted the six stars of the constellation

Taurus,  called  the  Pleiades  (I  say six  intentionally,  since  the  seventh  is

scarcely  ever  visible),  a  group  of  stars  which  is  enclosed  in  the  heavens

within  very  narrow  precincts.  Near  these  there  lie  more  than  forty  others

invisible to the naked eye, no one of which is much more than half a degree

off any of the aforesaid six; of these I have noticed only thirty-six in my

diagram.  I  have  preserved  their  intervals,  magnitudes,  and  the  distinction

between the old and the new stars, just as in the case of the constellation

Orion.

  The  Milky  Way  consists  entirely  of  stars  in  countless  numbers  and  of

various magnitudes. The next object which I have observed is the essence or

substance of the Milky Way. By the aid of a telescope any one may behold

this in a manner which so distinctly appeals to the senses that all the disputes

which have tormented philosophers through so many ages are exploded at

once by the irrefragable evidence of our eyes, and we are freed from wordy

disputes  upon  this  subject,  for  the  Galaxy  is  nothing  else  but  a  mass  of

innumerable stars planted together in clusters. Upon whatever part of it you

direct the telescope straightway a vast crowd of stars presents itself to view;

many of them are tolerably large and extremely bright, but the number of

small ones is quite beyond determination.  Star-cluster in Orion’s Head  Star-cluster of Praesepe in Cancer

  Galileo: “Sidereus Nuncius,” Venice, 1610.

  Nebulæ resolved into clusters of stars: as examples, the nebulæ in Orion’s

Head and Præsepe. And whereas that milky brightness, like the brightness of

a white cloud, is not only to be seen in the Milky Way, but several spots of a

similar colour shine faintly here and there in the heavens, if you turn the

telescope upon any of them you will find a cluster of stars packed close

together. Further — and you will be more surprised at this, — the stars which

have been called by every one of the astronomers up to this day nebulous, are

groups of small stars set thick together in a wonderful way, and although

each one of them on account of its smallness, or its immense distance from

us, escapes our sight, from the commingling of their rays there arises that

brightness  which  has  hitherto  been  believed  to  be  the  denser  part  of  the

heavens, able to reflect the rays of the stars or the Sun.

  I have observed some of these, and I wish to subjoin the star-clusters of

two of these nebulæ. First, you have a diagram of the nebula called that of

Orion’s Head, in which I have counted twenty-one stars.

  The second cluster contains the nebula called Præsepe, which is not one

star only, but a mass of more than forty small stars. I have noticed thirty-six

stars, besides the Aselli, arranged in the order of the accompanying diagram.

  Discovery  of  Jupiter’s  satellites,  Jan.  7,  1610:  record  of  Galileo’s

observations during two months. I have now finished my brief account of the

observations which I have thus far made with regard to the Moon, the Fixed

Stars,  and  the  Galaxy.  There  remains  the  matter,  which  seems  to  me  to

deserve  to  be  considered  the  most  important  in  this  work,  namely,  that  I

should disclose and publish to the world the occasion of discovering and

observing four PLANETS, never seen from the very beginning of the world

up to our own times, their positions, and the observations made during the

last two months about their movements and their changes of magnitude; and I

summon all astronomers to apply themselves to examine and determine their

periodic times, which it has not been permitted me to achieve up to this day,

owing to the restriction of my time. I give them warning however again, so

that they may not approach such an inquiry to no purpose, that they will want

a very accurate telescope, and such as I have described in the beginning of

this account.
                                                                                14
  On the 7th day of January in the present year, 1610, in the first hour of

the following night, when I was viewing the constellations of the heavensthrough a telescope, the planet Jupiter presented itself to my view, and as I

had prepared for myself a very excellent instrument, I noticed a circumstance

which I had never been able to notice before, owing to want of power in my

other telescope, namely, that three little stars, small but very bright, were near

the planet; and although I believed them to belong to the number of the fixed

stars,  yet  they  made  me  somewhat  wonder,  because  they  seemed  to  be
                                                                    15
arranged exactly in a straight line, parallel to the ecliptic, and to be brighter

than the rest of the stars, equal to them in magnitude. The position of them

with reference to one another and to Jupiter was as follows (Fig. 1).

  On the east side there were two stars, and a single one towards the west.

The star which was furthest towards the east, and the western star, appeared

rather larger than the third.

  I scarcely troubled at all about the distance between them and Jupiter, for,

as I have already said, at first I believed them to be fixed stars; but when on

January 8th, led by some fatality, I turned again to look at the same part of

the heavens, I found a very different state of things, for there were three little

stars all west of Jupiter, and nearer together than on the previous night, and

they  were  separated  from  one  another  by  equal  intervals,  as  the

accompanying illustration (Fig. 2) shows.

  At  this  point,  although  I  had  not  turned  my  thoughts  at  all  upon  the

approximation  of  the  stars  to  one  another,  yet  my  surprise  began  to  be

excited, how Jupiter could one day be found to the east of all the aforesaid

fixed  stars  when  the  day  before  it  had  been  west  of  two  of  them;  and

forthwith I became afraid lest the planet might have moved differently from

the  calculation  of  astronomers,  and  so  had  passed  those  stars  by  its  own

proper motion. I therefore waited for the next night with the most intense

longing, but I was disappointed of my hope, for the sky was covered with

clouds in every direction.

  But  on  January  10th  the  stars  appeared  in  the  following  position  with

regard to Jupiter; there were two only, and both on the east side of Jupiter, the

third, as I thought, being hidden by the planet (Fig. 3). They were situated

just as before, exactly in the same straight line with Jupiter, and along the

Zodiac.

  When I had seen these phenomena, as I knew that corresponding changes

of position could not by any means belong to Jupiter, and as, moreover, I

perceived that the stars which I saw had been always the same, for there were

no others either in front or behind, within a great distance, along the Zodiac,—  at  length,  changing  from  doubt  into  surprise,  I  discovered  that  the

interchange of position which I saw belonged not to Jupiter, but to the stars to

which my attention had been drawn, and I thought therefore that they ought

to be observed henceforward with more attention and precision.

  Accordingly, on January 11th I saw an arrangement of the following kind

(Fig. 4), namely, only two stars to the east of Jupiter, the nearer of which was

distant from Jupiter three times as far as from the star further to the east; and

the star furthest to the east was nearly twice as large as the other one; whereas

on  the  previous  night  they  had  appeared  nearly  of  equal  magnitude.  I

therefore concluded, and decided unhesitatingly, that there are three stars in

the heavens moving about Jupiter, as Venus and Mercury round the Sun;

which  at  length  was  established  as  clear  as  daylight  by  numerous  other

subsequent observations. These observations also established that there are

not only three, but four, erratic sidereal bodies performing their revolutions

round Jupiter, observations of whose changes of position made with more

exactness  on  succeeding  nights  the  following  account  will  supply.  I  have

measured also the intervals between them with the telescope in the manner

already  explained.  Besides  this,  I  have  given  the  times  of  observation,

especially when several were made in the same night, for the revolutions of

these planets are so swift that an observer may generally get differences of

position every hour.

  Jan. 12. — At the first hour of the next night I saw these heavenly bodies
                                                    16
arranged in this manner (Fig. 5). The satellite furthest to the east was greater

than the satellite furthest to the west; but both were very conspicuous and

bright;  the  distance  of  each  one  from  Jupiter  was  two  minutes.  A  third

satellite, certainly not in view before, began to appear at the third hour; it

nearly touched Jupiter on the east side, and was exceedingly small. They

were all arranged in the same straight line, along the ecliptic.

  Jan. 13. — For the first time four satellites were in view in the following

position with regard to Jupiter (Fig. 6).

 

  There were three to the west, and one to the east; they made a straight line

nearly, but the middle satellite of those to the west deviated a little from the

straight  line  towards  the  north.  The  satellite  furthest  to  the  east  was  at  a

distance of 2´ from Jupiter; there were intervals of 1´ only between Jupiter

and  the  nearest  satellite,  and  between  the  satellites  themselves,  west  ofJupiter. All the satellites appeared of the same size, and though small they

were very brilliant, and far outshone the fixed stars of the same magnitude.

  Jan. 14. — The weather was cloudy.

  Jan. 15. — At the third hour of the night the four satellites were in the

state depicted in the next diagram (Fig. 7) with reference to Jupiter.

  All were to the west, and arranged nearly in the same straight line; but the

satellite which counted third from Jupiter was raised a little to the north. The

nearest to Jupiter was the smallest of all; the rest appeared larger and in order

of magnitude; the intervals between Jupiter and the three nearest satellites

were all equal, and were of the magnitude of 2´ each; but the satellite furthest

to the west was distant 4´ from the satellite nearest to it. They were very

brilliant, and not at all twinkling, as they have always appeared both before

and since. But at the seventh hour there were only three satellites, presenting

with Jupiter an appearance of the following kind (Fig. 8). They were, that is

to say, in the same straight line to a hair; the nearest to Jupiter was very

small, and distant from the planet 3´; the distance of the second from this one

was 1´; and of the third from the second 4´ 30´´. But after another hour the

two middle satellites were still nearer, for they were only 30´´, or less, apart.

  Jan. 16. — At the first hour of the night I saw three satellites arranged in

this order (Fig. 9). Jupiter was between two of them, which were at a distance

of 0´ 40´´ from the planet on either side, and the third was west of Jupiter at a

distance  of  8´.  The  satellites  near  to  Jupiter  appeared  brighter  than  the

satellite further off, but not larger.

  Jan. 17, after sunset 0 hours 30 minutes, the configuration was of this kind

(Fig. 10). There was one satellite only to the east, at a distance of 3´ from

Jupiter; to the west likewise there was only one satellite, distant 11´ from

Jupiter. The satellite on the east appeared twice as large as the satellite to the

west; and there were no more than these two. But four hours after, that is,

nearly at the fifth hour, a third satellite began to emerge on the east side,

which, before its appearance, as I think, had been joined with the former of

the  two  other  satellites,  and  the  position  was  of  this  kind  (Fig.  11).  The

middle satellite was very near indeed to the satellite on the east, and was only

20´´ from it; and was a little towards the south of the straight line drawn

through the two extreme satellites and Jupiter.

  Jan. 18, at 0 h. 20 m. after sunset, the appearance was such as this (Fig.

12). The satellite to the east was larger than the western one, and was at a

distance from Jupiter of 8´, the western one being at a distance of 10´.  Jan. 19. — At the second hour of the night the relative position of the

satellites was such as this (Fig. 13); that is, there were three satellites exactly

in a straight line with Jupiter, one to the east, at a distance of 6´ from Jupiter;

between  Jupiter  and  the  first  satellite  to  the  west  in  order,  there  was  an

interval of 5´; this satellite was 4´ off the other one more to the west. At that

time I was doubtful whether or no there was a satellite between the satellite to

the east and Jupiter, but so very close to Jupiter as almost to touch the planet;

but at the fifth hour I saw this satellite distinctly, by that time occupying

exactly the middle position between Jupiter and the eastern satellite, so that

the configuration was thus (Fig. 14). Moreover, the satellite which had just

come into view was very small; yet at the sixth hour it was nearly as large as

the rest.

 

  Jan. 20: 1 h. 15 m. — A similar arrangement was seen (Fig. 15). There

were three satellites, so small as scarcely to be distinguishable; their distances

from Jupiter, and from one another, were not more than 1´. I was doubtful

whether on the western side there were two satellites or three. About the sixth

hour they were grouped in this way (Fig. 16). The eastern satellite was twice

as far away from Jupiter as before, that is 2´; on the western side, the satellite

in the middle was distant from Jupiter 0´ 40´´, and from the satellite still

further to the west 0´ 20´´; at length, at the seventh hour, three satellites were

seen on the western side (Fig. 17). The satellite nearest to Jupiter was distant

from the planet 0´ 20´´; between this one and the satellite furthest to the west

there was an interval of 40´´, but between these another satellite was in view

slightly southward of them, and not more than 10´´ off the most westerly

satellite.

  Jan. 21: 0 h. 30 m. — There were three satellites on the east side; the

satellites and Jupiter were at equal distances apart (Fig. 18). The intervals

were by estimation 50´´ each. There was also one satellite on the west, distant

4´ from Jupiter. The satellite on the east side nearest to Jupiter was the least

of all.

  Jan. 22: 2 h. — The grouping of the satellites was similar (Fig. 19). There

was an interval of 5´ from the satellite on the east to Jupiter; from Jupiter to

the satellite furthest to the west 7´. The two interior satellites on the western

side were 0´ 40´´ apart, and the satellite nearer to Jupiter was 1´ from the

planet. The inner satellites were smaller than the outer ones, but they were

situated all in the same straight line, along the ecliptic, except that the middleof the three western satellites was slightly to the south of it, but at the sixth

hour of the night they appeared in this position (Fig. 20). The satellite on the

east was very small, at a distance from Jupiter of 5´ as before; but the three

satellites on the west were separated by equal distances from Jupiter and from

each other; and the intervals were nearly 1´ 20´´ each. The satellite nearest

Jupiter appeared smaller than the other two on the same side, but they all

appeared arranged exactly in the same straight line.

  Jan. 23, at 0 h. 40 m. after sunset, the grouping of the satellites was nearly

after  this  fashion  (Fig.  21).  There  were  three  satellites  with  Jupiter  in  a

straight line along the ecliptic, as they always have been; two were on the

east of the planet, one on the west; the satellite furthest to the east was 7´

from the next one, and this satellite 2´ 40´´ from Jupiter; Jupiter was 3´ 20´´

from the satellite on the west; and they were all of nearly the same size. But

at the fifth hour the two satellites which had been previously near Jupiter

were no longer visible, being, as I suppose, hidden behind Jupiter, and the

appearance presented was such as this (Fig. 22).

  Jan. 24. — Three satellites, all on the east side, were visible, and nearly,

but not quite, in the same straight line with Jupiter, for the satellite in the

middle was slightly to the south of it (Fig. 23). The satellite nearest to Jupiter

was 2´ distant from the planet; the next in order 0´ 30´´ from this satellite,

and the third was 9´ further off still; they were all very bright. But at the sixth

hour two satellites only presented themselves to view in this position, namely

in the same straight line with Jupiter exactly, and the distance of the nearest

to the planet was lengthened to 3´; the next was 2´ further off, and unless I

am mistaken, the two satellites previously observed in the middle had come

together, and appeared as one.

  Jan. 25, at 1 h. 40 m., the satellites were grouped thus (Fig. 24). There

were only two satellites on the east side, and these were rather large. The

satellite furthest to the east was 5´ from the satellite in the middle, and it was

6´ from Jupiter.

  Jan. 26, at 0 h. 40 m., the relative positions of the satellites were thus (Fig.

25). Three satellites were in view, of which two were east and the third west

of  Jupiter;  this  one  was  distant  3´  from  the  planet.  On  the  east  side  the

satellite in the middle was at a distance of 5´ 20´´; the further satellite was 6´

beyond; they were arranged in a straight line, and were of the same size. At

the fifth hour the arrangement was nearly the same, with this difference only,

that the fourth satellite was emerging on the east side near Jupiter. It wassmaller than the rest, and was then at a distance of 0´ 30´´ from Jupiter; but

was  raised  a  little  above  the  straight  line  towards  the  north,  as  the

accompanying figure shows (Fig. 26).

  Jan. 27, 1 h. after sunset, a single satellite only was in view, and that on

the east side of Jupiter in this position (Fig. 27). It was very small, and at a

distance of 7´ from Jupiter.

  Jan. 28 and 29. — Owing to the intervention of clouds, I could make no

observation.

  Jan.  30.  —  At  the  first  hour  of  the  night  the  satellites  were  in  view,

arranged in the following way (Fig. 28). There was one satellite on the east

side, at a distance of 2´ 30´´ from Jupiter; and there were two satellites on the

west, of which the one nearer to Jupiter was 3´ off the planet, and the other

satellite 1´ further. The places of the outer satellites and Jupiter were in the

same straight line; but the satellite in the middle was a little above it to the

north. The satellite furthest to the west was smaller than the rest.

  On the last day of the month, at the second hour, two satellites on the east

side were visible, and one on the west (Fig. 29). Of the satellites east of the

planet, the one in the middle was 2´ 20´´ distant from Jupiter; and the satellite

further to the east was 0´ 30´´ from the middle satellite; the satellite on the

west was at a distance of 10´ from Jupiter. They were in the same straight line

nearly, and would have been exactly so, only the satellite on the east nearest

to Jupiter was raised a little towards the north. At the fourth hour, the two

satellites on the east were still nearer together, for they were only 20´´ apart

(Fig.  30).  The  western  satellite  appeared  rather  small  in  these  two

observations.

  Feb. 1. — At the second hour of the night the arrangement was similar

(Fig. 31). The satellite furthest to the east was at a distance of 6´ from Jupiter,

and the western satellite 8´. On the east side there was a very small satellite,

at a distance of 20´´ from Jupiter. They made a perfectly straight line.

  Feb. 2. — The satellites were seen arranged thus (Fig. 32). There was one

only on the east, at a distance of 6´ from Jupiter. Jupiter was 4´ from the

nearest satellite on the west; between this satellite and the satellite further to

the  west  there  was  an  interval  of  8´;  they  were  in  the  same  straight  line

exactly, and were nearly of the same magnitude. But at the seventh hour four

satellites  were  there  —  two  on  each  side  of  Jupiter  (Fig.  33).  Of  these

satellites, the most easterly was at a distance of 4´ from the next; this satellite

was 1´ 40´´ from Jupiter; Jupiter was 6´ from the nearest satellite on the west,and this one from the satellite further to the west, 8´; and they were all alike

in the same straight line, drawn in the direction of the Zodiac.

  Feb. 3: 7 h. — The satellites were arranged in the following way (Fig. 34):

— The satellite on the east was at a distance of 1´ 30´´ from Jupiter; the

nearest satellite on the west, 2´, and there was a long distance, 10´, from this

satellite to the satellite further to the west. They were exactly in the same

straight line, and of equal magnitude.

  Feb. 4: 2 h. — Four satellites attended Jupiter, two on the east and two on

the west, arranged in one perfectly straight line, as in the adjoining figure

(Fig. 35). The satellite furthest to the east was at a distance of 3´ from the

next satellite. This one was 0´ 40´´ from Jupiter; Jupiter 4´ from the nearest

satellite on the west; and this one from the satellite further to the west 6´. In

magnitude they were nearly equal; the satellite nearest to Jupiter was rather

smaller in appearance than the rest. But at the seventh hour (Fig. 36) the

eastern satellites were at a distance of only 0´ 30´´ apart. Jupiter was 2´ from

the nearest satellite on the east; and from the satellite on the west, next in

order, 4´; this one was distant 3´ from the satellite further to the west. They

were all equal in magnitude, and in a straight line, drawn in the direction of

the ecliptic.

  Feb. 5. — The sky was cloudy.

  Feb. 6. — Two satellites only appeared, with Jupiter between them, as is

seen in the accompanying figure (Fig. 37). The satellite on the east was 2´

from Jupiter, and that on the west 3´. They were in the same straight line with

Jupiter, and were equal in magnitude.

  Feb. 7. — There were two satellites by the side of Jupiter, and both of

them  on  the  east  of  the  planet,  arranged  in  this  manner  (Fig.  38).  The

intervals between the satellites and Jupiter were equal, and of 1´ each; and a

straight line would go through them and the centre of Jupiter.

  Feb. 8: 1 h. — Three satellites were there, all on the east side of Jupiter, as

in  the  diagram  (Fig.  39).  The  nearest  to  Jupiter,  a  rather  small  one,  was

distant from the planet 1´ 20´´; the middle one was 4´ from this satellite, and

was rather large; the satellite furthest to the east, a very small one, was at a

distance of 0´ 20´´ from this satellite. It was doubtful whether there was one

satellite near to Jupiter or two, for sometimes it seemed that there was another

satellite by its side towards the east, wonderfully small, and only 10´´ from it.

They were all situated at points in a straight line drawn in the direction of the

Zodiac. At the third hour the satellite nearest to Jupiter was almost touchingthe planet, for it was only distant 10´´ from it; but the others had become

further off, for the middle one was 6´ from Jupiter. At length, at the fourth

hour, the satellite which was previously the nearest to Jupiter joined with the

planet and disappeared.

  Feb. 9: 0 h. 30 m. — There were two satellites on the east side of Jupiter,

and one on the west, in an arrangement such as this (Fig. 40). The satellite

furthest to the east, which was a rather small one, was distant 4´ from the next

satellite; the satellite in the middle was larger, and at a distance of 7´ from

Jupiter. Jupiter was distant 4´ from the western satellite, which was a small

one.

  Feb. 10: 1 h. 30 m. — A pair of satellites, very small, and both on the east

of the planet, were visible, in the following position (Fig. 41). The further

satellite was distant from Jupiter 10´, the nearer 0´ 20´´, and they were in the

same straight line; but at the fourth hour the satellite nearest to Jupiter no

longer appeared, and the other seemed so diminished that it could scarcely be

kept in sight, although the atmosphere was quite clear, and the satellite was

further from Jupiter than before, since its distance was now 12´.

  Feb. 11: 1 h. — There were two satellites on the east, and one on the west

(Fig. 42). The western satellite was at a distance of 4´ from Jupiter. The

satellite on the east, nearest to the planet, was likewise 4´ from Jupiter; but

the satellite further to the east was at a distance from this one of 8´; they were

fairly clear to view, and in the same straight line; but at the third hour the

fourth satellite was visible near to Jupiter on the east, less in magnitude than

the rest, separated from Jupiter by a distance of 0´ 30´´, and slightly to the

north out of the straight line drawn through the rest (Fig. 43). They were all

very bright and extremely distinct, but at 5 h. 30 m. the satellite on the east

nearest  to  Jupiter  had  moved  further  away  from  the  planet,  and  was

occupying  a  position  midway  between  the  planet  and  the  neighbouring

satellite further to the east. They were all in the same straight line exactly,

and of the same magnitude, as may be seen in the accompanying diagram

(Fig. 44).

  Feb. 12: 0 h. 40 m. — A pair of satellites on the east, a pair likewise on the

west, were near the planet (Fig. 45). The satellite on the east furthest removed

from Jupiter was at a distance of 10´, and the further of the satellites on the

west was 8´ off. They were both fairly distinct. The other two were very near

to Jupiter, and very small, especially the satellite to the east, which was at a

distance of 0´ 40´´ from Jupiter. The distance of the western satellite was 1´.But at the fourth hour the satellite which was nearest to Jupiter on the east

was visible no longer.

  Feb. 13: 0 h. 30 m. — Two satellites were visible in the east, two also in

the west (Fig. 46). The satellite on the east near Jupiter was fairly distinct; its

distance from the planet was 2´. The satellite further to the east was less

noticeable; it was distant 4´ from the other. Of the satellites on the west, the

one furthest from Jupiter, which was very distinct, was parted from the planet

4´. Between this satellite and Jupiter intervened a small satellite close to the

most westerly satellite, being not more than 0´ 3´´ off. They were all in the

same straight line, corresponding exactly to the direction of the ecliptic.

 

  Feb. 15 (for on the 14th the sky was covered with clouds), at the first hour,

the  position  of  the  satellites  was  thus  (Fig.  47);  that  is,  there  were  three

satellites on the east, but none were visible on the west. The satellite on the

east nearest to Jupiter was at a distance of 0´ 50´´ from the planet; the next in

order was 0´ 20´´ from this satellite, and the furthest to the east was 2´ from

the second satellite, and it was larger than the others, for those nearer to

Jupiter were very small. But about the fifth hour only one of the satellites

which had been near to Jupiter was to be seen; its distance from Jupiter was 0

´  30´´.  The  distance  of  the  satellite  furthest  to  the  east  from  Jupiter  had

increased, for it was then 4´ (Fig. 48). But at the sixth hour, besides the two

situated as just described on the east, one satellite was visible towards the

west, very small, at a distance of 2´ from Jupiter (Fig. 49).

  Feb. 16: 6 h. — Their places were arranged as follows (Fig. 50); that is,

the satellite on the east was 7´ from Jupiter, Jupiter 5´ from the next satellite

on the west, and this 3´ from the remaining satellite still further to the west.

They were all of the same magnitude nearly, rather bright, and in the same

straight line, corresponding accurately to the direction of the Zodiac.

  Feb. 17: 1 h. — Two satellites were in view, one on the east, distant 3´

from  Jupiter;  the  other  on  the  west,  distant  10´  (Fig.  51).  The  latter  was

somewhat less than the satellite on the east; but at the sixth hour the eastern

satellite was nearer to Jupiter, being at a distance of 0´ 50´´, and the western

satellite was further off, namely 12´. At both observations they were in the

same straight line with Jupiter, and were both rather small, especially the

eastern satellite in the second observation.

  Feb. 18: 1 h. — Three satellites were in view, of which two were on the

west and one on the east; the distance of the eastern satellite from Jupiter was3´, and of the nearest satellite on the west 2´; the remaining satellite, still

further to the west, was 8´ from the middle satellite (Fig. 52). They were all

in the same straight line exactly, and of about the same magnitude. But at the

second hour the satellites nearest to the planet were at equal distances from

Jupiter, for the western satellite was now also 3´ from the planet. But at the

sixth hour the fourth satellite was visible between the satellite on the east and

Jupiter, in the following configuration (Fig. 53). The satellite furthest to the

east was at a distance of 3´ from the next in order; this one was at a distance

of 1´ 50´´ from Jupiter; Jupiter was at a distance of 3´ from the next satellite

on the west, and this 7´ from the satellite still further to the west. These were

nearly equal in magnitude, only the satellite on the east nearest to Jupiter was

a  little  smaller  than  the  rest,  and  they  were  all  in  the  same  straight  line

parallel to the ecliptic.

  Feb. 19: 0 h. 40 m. — Two satellites only were in view, west of Jupiter,

rather large, and arranged exactly in the same straight line with Jupiter, in the

direction of the ecliptic (Fig. 54). The nearer satellite was at a distance of 7´

from Jupiter and of 6´ from the satellite further to the west.

  Feb. 20. — The sky was cloudy.

  Feb. 21: 1 h. 30 m. — Three satellites, rather small, were in view, placed

thus (Fig. 55). The satellite to the east was 2´ from Jupiter; Jupiter was 3´

from the next, which was on the west; and this one was 7´ from the satellite

further to the west. They were exactly in the same straight line parallel to the

ecliptic.

  Feb. 25: 1 h. 30 m. (for on the three previous nights the sky was overcast).

— Three satellites appeared, two on the east, which were at a distance of 4´

apart, the same as the distance of the nearer satellite from Jupiter; on the west

there was one satellite at a distance of 2´ from Jupiter. They were exactly in

the same straight line in the direction of the ecliptic (Fig. 56).

  Feb. 26: 0 h. 30 m. — A pair of satellites only were present, one on the

east, distant 10´ from Jupiter; the other was on the west, at a distance of 6´

(Fig. 57). The eastern satellite was slightly smaller than the western. At the

fifth hour three satellites were visible; for, besides the two already noticed, a

third  satellite  was  in  view,  on  the  west,  near  Jupiter,  very  small,  which

previously had been hidden behind Jupiter, and it was at a distance of 1´ from

the planet (Fig. 58).

  But the satellite on the east was seen to be further off than before, being at

a distance of 11´ from Jupiter. On this night, for the first time, I determined toobserve the motion of Jupiter and the adjacent planets (his satellites) along

the zodiac, by reference to some fixed star; for there was a fixed star in view,

eastwards of Jupiter, at a distance of 11´ from the satellite on the east, and a

little to the south, in the following manner (Fig. 59).

  Feb.  27:  1  h.  4  m.  —  The  satellites  appeared  in  the  following

configuration. The satellite furthest to the east was at a distance of 10´ from

Jupiter; the next in order was near Jupiter, being at a distance of 0´ 30´´ from

the planet. The next satellite was on the western side, at a distance of 2´ 30´´

from Jupiter; and the satellite further to the west was at a distance of 1´ from

this. The two satellites near to Jupiter appeared small, especially the satellite

on the east; but the satellites furthest off were very bright, particularly that on

the west, and they made a straight line in the direction of the ecliptic exactly.

The motion of the planets towards the east was plainly seen by reference to

the aforesaid fixed star, for Jupiter and his attendant satellites were nearer to

it, as may be seen in the accompanying figure (Fig. 60). At the fifth hour the

satellite on the east, near to Jupiter, was 1´ from the planet.

  Feb. 28: 1 h. — Only two satellites were visible, one on the east, at a

distance of 9´ from Jupiter, and another on the west, at a distance of 2´; they

were both rather bright, and in the same straight line with Jupiter, and a

straight line drawn from the fixed star perpendicular to this straight line fell

upon the satellite on the east, as in the figure (Fig. 61). At the fifth hour a

third satellite was seen at a distance of 2´ from Jupiter, on the east, in the

position shown in the figure (Fig. 62).

  March 1: 0 h. 40 m. — Four satellites, all on the east of the planet, were

seen; the satellite nearest to Jupiter was 2´ from the planet; the next 1´ from

this; the third was 0´ 20´´ from the second, and was brighter than the others;

and the satellite still further to the east was at a distance of 4´ from it, and was

smaller than the others (Fig. 63). They made a straight line very nearly, only

the satellite third from Jupiter was slightly above the line. The fixed star

formed with Jupiter and the most easterly satellite an equilateral triangle, as

in the figure.

  March 2: 0 h. 40 m. — Three satellites were in attendance, two on the east

and one on the west, in the configuration shown in the diagram (Fig. 64). The

satellite furthest to the east was 7´ from Jupiter; from this satellite the next

was distant 0´ 30´´, and the satellite on the west was separated from Jupiter

by an interval of 2´. The satellites furthest off were brighter and larger than

the remaining satellite, which appeared very small. The satellite furthest tothe east seemed to be raised a little towards the north, out of the straight line

drawn through the other satellites and Jupiter.

  The fixed star already noticed was at a distance of 8´ from the western

satellite,  that  is,  from  the  perpendicular  drawn  from  that  satellite  to  the

straight line drawn through all the system, as shown in the figure given.

  These determinations of the motion of Jupiter and the adjacent planets (his

satellites) by reference to a fixed star, I have thought well to present to the

notice of astronomers, in order that any one may be able to understand from

them  that  the  movements  of  these  planets  (Jupiter’s  satellites)  both  in

longitude and in latitude agree exactly with the motions [of Jupiter] which are

extracted from tables.

  These  are  my  observations  upon  the  four  Medicean  planets,  recently

discovered for the first time by me; and although it is not yet permitted me to

deduce by calculation from these observations the orbits of these bodies, yet I

may be allowed to make some statements, based upon them, well worthy of

attention.

  Deductions  from  the  previous  observations  concerning  the  orbits  and

periods of Jupiter’s satellites. And, in the first place, since they are sometimes

behind, sometimes before Jupiter, at like distances, and withdraw from this

planet towards the east and towards the west only within very narrow limits

of divergence, and since they accompany this planet alike when its motion is

retrograde and direct, it can be a matter of doubt to no one that they perform

their revolutions about this planet, while at the same time they all accomplish

together  orbits  of  twelve  years’  length  about  the  centre  of  the  world.

Moreover, they revolve in unequal circles, which is evidently the conclusion

to  be  drawn  from  the  fact  that  I  have  never  been  permitted  to  see  two

satellites in conjunction when their distance from Jupiter was great, whereas

near Jupiter two, three, and sometimes all (four), have been found closely

packed together. Moreover, it may be detected that the revolutions of the

satellites which describe the smallest circles round Jupiter are the most rapid,

for the satellites nearest to Jupiter are often to be seen in the east, when the

day before they have appeared in the west, and contrariwise. Also the satellite

moving  in  the  greatest  orbit  seems  to  me,  after  carefully  weighing  the

occasions of its returning to positions previously noticed, to have a periodic
                        17
time of half a month. Besides, we have a notable and splendid argument to

remove the scruples of those who can tolerate the revolution of the planets

round the Sun in the Copernican system, yet are so disturbed by the motion ofone Moon about the Earth, while both accomplish an orbit of a year’s length

about the Sun, that they consider that this theory of the constitution of the

universe must be upset as impossible; for now we have not one planet only

revolving about another, while both traverse a vast orbit about the Sun, but

our sense of sight presents to us four satellites circling about Jupiter, like the

Moon about the Earth, while the whole system travels over a mighty orbit

about the Sun in the space of twelve years.

  Explanation of the variations in brightness of Jupiter’s satellites. Lastly, I

must not pass over the consideration of the reason why it happens that the

Medicean  stars,  in  performing  very  small  revolutions  about  Jupiter,  seem

sometimes more than twice as large as at other times. We can by no means

look  for  the  explanation  in  the  mists  of  the  Earth’s  atmosphere,  for  they

appear increased or diminished, while the discs of Jupiter and neighbouring

fixed stars are seen quite unaltered. That they approach and recede from the

Earth at the points of their revolutions nearest to and furthest from the Earth

to  such  an  extent  as  to  account  for  so  great  changes  seems  altogether

untenable,  for  a  strict  circular  motion  can  by  no  means  show  those

phenomena; and an elliptical motion (which in this case would be nearly

rectilinear) seems to be both untenable and by no means in harmony with the

phenomena  observed.  But  I  gladly  publish  the  explanation  which  has

occurred to me upon this subject, and submit it to the judgment and criticism

of all true philosophers. It is certain that when atmospheric mists intervene

the Sun and Moon appear larger, but the fixed stars and planets less than they

really are; hence the former luminaries, when near the horizon, are larger than

at other times, but stars appear smaller, and are frequently scarcely visible;

also they are still more diminished if those mists are bathed in light; so stars

appear very small by day and in the twilight, but the Moon does not appear

so, as I have previously remarked. Moreover, it is certain that not only the

Earth, but also the Moon, has its own vaporous sphere enveloping it, for the

reasons which I have previously mentioned, and especially for those which

shall be stated more fully in my System; and we may consistently decide that

the same is true with regard to the rest of the planets; so that it seems to be by

no means an untenable opinion to place round Jupiter also an atmosphere
                                        18
denser  than  the  rest  of  the  ether,  about  which,  like  the  Moon  about  the

sphere of the elements, the Medicean planets (Jupiter’s satellites) revolve;

and that by the intervention of this atmosphere they appear smaller when they

are in apogee; but when in perigee, through the absence or attenuation of thatatmosphere, they appear larger. Want of time prevents my going further into

these matters; my readers may expect further remarks upon these subjects in a

short time.

  Original Configurations of Jupiter’s Satellites observed by Galileo in the

months of January, February, and March 1610, and published with the 1st

edition of his book Sidereus Nuncius, Venice, 1610.A PART OF THE PREFACE TO KEPLER’S DIOPTRICS

FORMING A CONTINUATION OF GALILEO’S SIDEREAL

                                    MESSENGER.


In the preface to Kepler’s Dioptrics there are introduced letters of Galileo

about the new and astonishing discoveries which he had made in the heavens

by the aid of the telescope since the publication of his work, The Sidereal

Messenger. The portion of the preface which refers to Galileo, containing

these letters and Kepler’s remarks upon them, is added here, as continuing

the original account of Galileo’s astronomical discoveries.


      Extract from the Preface of Kepler’s Dioptrics. Augsburg, 1611.


Kepler  remarks  on  the  importance  of  the  application  of  the  telescope  to

astronomical investigations as indicated by Galileo’s discoveries, published

in his Sidereal Messenger. “The Sidereal Messenger” of Galileo has been for

a long time in everybody’s hands, also my “Discussion, such as it is, with this

Messenger,” and my Brief Narrative in confirmation of Galileo’s Sidereal

Messenger,  so  any  reader  may  briefly  weigh  the  chief  points  of  that

Messenger and see the nature and the value of the discoveries made by the

aid of the telescope, the theory of which I am intending to demonstrate in this

treatise. Actual sight testified that there is a certain bright heavenly body

which we call the Moon. It was demonstrated from the laws of optics that this

body is round; also Astronomy, by some arguments founded upon optics, had

built up the conclusion that its distance from the earth is about sixty semi-

diameters of the earth. Various spots showed themselves in that body; and the

result  was  a  dubious  opinion  among  a  few  philosophers,  derived  from
                                                                                    19
Hecatæus’ account of the stories about the island of the Hyperboreans, that

the reflected images of mountains and valleys, sea and land, were seen there;

but now the telescope places all these matters before our eyes in such a way

that he must be an intellectual coward who, while enjoying such a view, still

thinks that the matter is open to doubt. Nothing is more certain than that the

southern parts of the moon teem with mountains, very many in number, and

vast in size; and that the northern parts, inasmuch as they are lower, receive

in  most  extensive  lakes  the  water  flowing  down  from  the  south.  The

conclusions  which  previously  Pena  published  as  disclosed  by  the  aid  ofoptics, started indeed from certain slight supports, rather than foundations,

afforded by actual sight, but were proved by long arguments depending one

upon another, so that they might be assigned to human reason rather than to

sight; but now our very eyes, as if a new door of heaven had been opened, are

led to the view of matters once hidden from them. But if it should please any

one to exhaust the force of reasoning upon these new observations, who does

not see how far the contemplation of nature will extend her boundaries, when

we ask, “What is the use of the tracts of mountains and valleys, and the very

wide expanse of seas in the moon?” and “May not some creature less noble

than man be imagined such as might inhabit those tracts?”

  With no less certainty also do we decide by the use of this instrument even

that famous question, which, coeval with philosophy itself, is disputed to this

day by the noblest intellects — I mean, whether the earth can move (as the

theory of the Planets greatly requires) without the overthrow of all bodies that

have weight, or the confusion of the motion of the elements? For if the earth

were banished from the centre of the universe, some fear lest the water should

leave the orb of the earth and flow to the centre of the universe; and yet we

see that in the moon, as well as in the earth, there is a quantity of moisture

occupying the sunken hollows of that globe; and although this orb revolves

actually in the ether, and outside the centres not merely of the universe, but

even of our earth, yet the mass of water in the moon is not at all hindered

from cleaving invariably to the orb of the moon, and tending to the centre of

the body to which it belongs. So, by this instance of the phenomena of the

moon, the science of optics amends the received theory of mechanics, and

confirms  on  this  point  my  introduction  to  my Commentaries  upon  the
                                20
Motions of the Planet Mars.

  The followers of the Samian philosophy (for I may use this epithet to

designate  the  philosophy  originated  by  the  Samians,  Pythagoras  and

Aristarchus) have a strong argument against the apparent immobility of the

earth provided in the phenomena of the moon. For we are taught by optics

that if any one of us was in the moon, to him the moon, his abode, would

seem quite immovable, but our earth and sun and all the rest of the heavenly

bodies movable; for the conclusions of sight are thus related.

  Pena has noticed how astronomers, using the principles of optics, have by

most  laborious  reasoning  removed  the  Milky  Way  from  the  elementary

universe, where Aristotle had placed it, into the highest region of the ether;

but  now,  by  the  aid  of  the  telescope  lately  invented,  the  very  eyes  ofastronomers are conducted straight to a thorough survey of the substance of

the Milky Way; and whoever enjoys this sight is compelled to confess that

the Milky Way is nothing else but a mass of extremely small stars.

  Again,  up  to  this  time  the  nature  of  nebulous  stars  had  been  entirely

unknown; but if the telescope be directed to one of such nebulous balls, as

Ptolemy calls them, it again shows, as in the case of the Milky Way, three or

four very bright stars clustered very close together.

  Again, who without this instrument would have believed that the number

of the fixed stars was ten times, or perhaps twenty times, more than that

which is given in Ptolemy’s description of the fixed stars? And whence, pray,

should we seek for conclusive evidence about the end or boundary of this

visible universe, proving that it is actually the sphere of the fixed stars, and

that there is nothing beyond, except from this very discovery by the telescope

of this multitude of fixed stars, which is, as it were, the vaulting of the mobile

universe? Again, how greatly an astronomer would go wrong in determining

the magnitude of the fixed stars, except he should survey the stars all over

again with a telescope, also may be seen in Galileo’s treatise, and we will

also hereafter produce in proof a letter from a German astronomer.

  But no words can express my admiration of that chapter of the Sidereal

Messenger where the story is told of the discovery, by the aid of a very

highly finished telescope, of another world, as it were, in the planet Jupiter.

The mind of the philosopher almost reels as he considers that there is a vast

orb, which is equal in mass to fourteen orbs like the earth (unless on this

point the telescope of Galileo shall shortly reveal something more exact than

the measurements of Tycho Brahe) round which circle four moons, not unlike

this moon of ours; the slowest revolving in the space of fourteen of our days,

as Galileo has published; the next to this, by far the brightest of the four, in

the space of eight days, as I detected in last April and May; the other two in

still shorter periods. And here the reasoning of my Commentaries about the

Planet Mars, applied to a similar case, induces me to conclude also that the

actual orb of Jupiter rotates with very great rapidity, most certainly faster

than once in the space of one of our days; so that this rotation of the mighty

orb  upon  its  own  axis  is  accompanied  wherever  it  goes  by  the  perpetual

circuits of those four moons. Moreover, this sun of ours, the common source

of heat and light for this terrestrial world as well as for that world of Jupiter,

which  we  consider  to  be  of  the  angular  magnitude  of  30´  at  most,  there

scarcely subtends more than 6´ or 7´, and is found again in the same positionamong the fixed stars, having completed the zodiac in the interval, after a
                                  21
period of twelve of our years. Accordingly, the creatures which live on that

orb of Jupiter, while they contemplate the very swift courses of those four

moons among the fixed stars, while they behold them and the sun rising and

setting day by day, would swear  by Jupiter-in-stone, like the Romans (for I

have  lately  returned  from  those  parts),  that  their  orb  of  Jupiter  remains

immovable in one spot, and that the fixed stars and the sun, which are the

bodies really at rest, no less than those four moons of theirs, revolve round

that abode of theirs with manifold variety of motions. And from this instance

now, much more than before from the instance of the moon, any follower of

the  Samian  philosophy  will  learn  what  reply  may  be  made  to  any  one

objecting to the theory of the motion of the earth as absurd, and alleging the

evidence  of  our  sight.  O  telescope,  instrument  of  much  knowledge,  more

precious than any sceptre! Is not he who holds thee in his hand made king

and lord of the works of God? Truly

 

  “All that is overhead, the mighty orbs

  With all their motions, thou dost subjugate

  To man’s intelligence.”

 

  If there is any one in some degree friendly to Copernicus and the lights of

the Samian philosophy, who finds this difficulty only, that he doubts how it

can happen, supposing the earth to perform again and again her course among

the  planets  through  the  ethereal  plains,  that  the  moon  should  keep  so

constantly by her side, like an inseparable companion, and at the same time

fly round and round the actual orb of the earth, just like a faithful dog which

goes round and round his master on some journey, now running in front, now

deviating to this side or that, in ever-varying mazes, let him look at the planet

Jupiter, which, as this telescope shows, certainly carries in its train not one

such companion only, like the earth, as Copernicus showed, but actually four,

that never leave it, though all the time hastening each in its own orbit.

  But enough has been said about these matters in my Discussion with the

Sidereal Messenger. It is time that I should turn to those discoveries which

have been made since the publication of Galileo’s Sidereal Messenger, and

since my Discussion with it, by means of this telescope.

  Galileo’s discovery of Saturn’s ring (imperfectly). It is now just a year

since  Galileo  wrote  to  Prague,  and  gave  full  notice  that  he  had  detectedsomething new in the heavens beyond his former discoveries; and that there

might not be any one who, with the intention of detracting from his credit,

should  try  to  pass  himself  off  as  an  earlier  observer  of  the  phenomenon,

Galileo  gave  a  certain  space  of  time  for  the  publication  of  the  new

phenomena which any one had seen; he himself meanwhile described his

discovery in letters transposed in this manner: s m a i s m r m i l m e p o e t a

l e u m i b u n n u g t t a u i r a s. Out of these letters I made an uncouth verse

which I inserted in my Short Account in the month of September of last year:

—
                        22
  Salve umbistineum geminatum Martia proles.

  Hail, twin companionship, children of Mars.

  But I was a very long way from the meaning of the letters; it contained

nothing to do with Mars; and, not to detain you, reader, here is the solution of
                                                                    23
the riddle in the words of Galileo himself, the author of it: —

  “Di Firenze li 13 di Novembre 1610. — Ma passando ad altro, giacchè il

Sig. Keplero ha in questa sua ultima narrazione stampate le lettere che io

mandai  trasposte  a  Vostra  Signoria  Illustrissima  e  Reverendissima

venendomi anco significato come Sua Maestà ne desidera il senso, ecco che

io lo mando a Vostra Signoria Illustrissima per participarlo con Sua Maestà

col Sig. Keplero e con chi piacerà a Vostra Signoria Illustrissima bramando

io  che  lo  sappia  ognuno.  Le  lettere  dunque  combinate  nel  lor  vero  senso

dicono così,

 

  Altissimum planetam tergeminum observavi.

 

  Questo  è,  che  Saturno  con  mia  grandissima  ammirazione  ho  osservato

essere non una stella sola, ma tre insieme, le quali quasi si toccano; e sono trà

di loro totalmente immobili, e constituite in questa guisa Quella di mezzo è

assai  più  grande  delle  laterali;  sono  situate  una  da  oriente,  l’altra  da

occidente,  nella  medesima  linea  retta  a  capello;  non  sono  giustamente

secondo la dirittura del Zodiaco, ma l’occidentale si eleva alquanto verso

Borea;  forse  sono  parallele  all’  Equinoziale?].  Se  si  guarderanno  con  un

occhiale  che  non  sia  di  grandissima  moltiplicazione,  non  appariranno  tre

stelle ben distinte, ma parrà, che Saturno sia una stella lunghetta in forma di

un’ oliva, così, Ma servendosi di un occhiale che moltiplichi più di mille

volte in superficie, si vedranno tre globi distintissimi, che quasi si toccano,

non apparendo trà essi maggior divisione di un sottil filo oscuro. Or eccotrovata  la  corte  a  Giove,  e  due  Servi  a  questo  Vecchio  che  l’aiutano  a

camminare nè mai se gli staccano dal fianco. Intorno agli altri Pianeti non ci è

novità alcuna, ec.”

  Although these words differ little from Latin, yet I will translate them that

no difficulty may hinder my reader from following me. Thus then Galileo

writes:— “But to come now to my second topic. Since Kepler has published

in that recent ‘Narrative’ of his the letters which I sent as an anagram to your

illustrious  Lordship,  and  since  an  intimation  has  been  given  me  that  his

Majesty desires to be taught the meaning of those letters, I send it to your

illustrious Lordship, that your Lordship may communicate it to his Majesty,

to Kepler, and to any one your Lordship may wish.

  “The letters when joined together as they ought to be, say this,

  ‘Altissimum planetam tergeminum observavi,’

  ‘I have observed the most distant of the planets to have a triple form.’

  “For in truth I have found out with the most intense surprise that the planet

Saturn is not merely one single star, but three stars very close together, so

much so that they are all but in contact one with another. They are quite

immovable with regard to each other, and are arranged in this manner, The

middle star of the three is by far greater than the two on either side. They are

situated one towards the east, the other towards the west, in one straight line

to a hair’s-breadth; not, however, exactly in the direction of the Zodiac, for

the star furthest to the west rises somewhat towards the north; perhaps they

are parallel to the equator. If you look at them through a glass that does not

multiply much, the stars will not appear clearly separate from one another,

but Saturn’s orb will appear somewhat elongated, of the shape of an olive,

thus, But if you should use a glass which multiplies a surface more than a

thousand times, there will appear very distinctly three orbs, almost touching

one another; and they will be thought to be not farther apart than the breadth

of a very fine and scarcely visible thread. So you see a guard of satellites has

been found for Jupiter, and for the decrepit little old man two servants to help

his steps and never leave his side. Concerning the rest of the planets I have

found nothing new.”

  So says Galileo; but if I may do so, I will not make an old dotard out of

Saturn, and two servants for him out of his companion orbs, but rather out of

those three united bodies I will make a triple Geryon, out of Galileo Hercules,

and out of the telescope his club, armed with which, Galileo has conquered

that most distant of the planets, drawn it out of the furthest recesses of nature,dragged it down to earth, and exposed it to the gaze of us all. It pleases me

too, now that the nest has been found, to consider with curiosity what kind of

brood must be in it, what kind of life, if there be any life there, between orbs

which all but touch each other two and two, where not even

  “a space
                                                          24
  Of sky extends not more than three ells wide,”

  but where there is scarcely a chink of a nail’s-breadth all round.

  Do indeed the astrologers rightly ascribe to Saturn the guardianship of

miners,  who,  accustomed  to  spend  their  lives,  like  moles,  underground,

seldom breathe the free air under the open sky? Although the darkness here is

rather more supportable than in Saturn, because the sun, which appears there

only as large as Venus appears to us on the earth, continually casts its rays

through  the  spaces  between  the  different  orbs  in  such  a  way  that  those

inhabitants who are situated on one orb are covered by the other as by a

ceiling; while those on the latter orb, on the top of this roof of theirs, exposed

as it is to the full light of the sun, receive a glare as if from very firebrands.

But I must draw in the reins and check my mind in its enjoyment of the free

fields of ether; for fear, perchance, later observations should report something
                                                                                  25
different from the first account, something changed in course of time.


            Account of Galileo’s discovery of the phases of Venus.


At the end of his letter Galileo seemed to think that he had come to the end of

his reports about the planets, and observations of new phenomena respecting

them, but ever on the watch, that eye of his, that one not of Nature’s making

— I mean his telescope — in a short time made more discoveries, concerning

which read the following letter of Galileo: —

  “Di Firenze li 11 di Decembre 1610. — Sto con desiderio, attendendo la

risposta a due mie scritte ultimamente per sentire quello, che averà detto il

Sig. Keplero della stravaganza di Saturno. Intanto mando [a Vostra Signoria

Illustrissima e Reverendissima] la cifra di un altro particolare osservato da

me nuovamente, il quale si tira dietro la decisione di grandissime controversie

in Astronomia, ed in particolare contiene in se un gagliardo argomento per la

constitutione  [Pitagorica  e  Copernicana]  dell’Universo;  e  a  suo  tempo

pubblicherò la deciferazione ed altri particolari. Spero che averò trovato il

metodo per definire i periodi dei quattro Pianeti Medicei, stimati con gran

ragione quasi inesplicabili dal Sig. Keplero, al quale piacerà, ec.  “Le lettere trasposte sono queste:

  “Haec immatura a me jam frustra leguntur, o.y.”

  Which may be translated thus: —

  “I am anxiously looking for an answer to my last two letters, that I may

learn what Kepler says about the marvels of Saturn’s orb. In the meantime I

send him a riddle concerning a certain new and splendid observation which

tends to decide great controversies in astronomy; and especially contains a

fine argument in favour of the Pythagorean and Copernican system of the

universe. At the proper time I will publish the solution of the riddle, and

some other particulars. I hope that I have found a method of determining the

periodic times of the four Medicean planets, which Kepler, not without very

good reason, thought inexplicable, etc.

  “The letters turned into an anagram, are these:

  “Haec immatura a me jam frustra leguntur, o.y.”

  So far Galileo. But if, reader, this letter has filled you with a desire to

know the meaning contained in those letters, then you must read another

letter of Galileo which follows.

  Fig. 1.  E the Earth (centre of universe). S the Sun. C centre of eccentric. D centre

of planet’s epicycle. VV’ stationary points. s v v’ projections of SVV’ on the

ecliptic of which E is the centre.

  Fig. 2  S the Sun, centre of solar system. v e positions of planet and Earth at

conjunction. VV’ stationary points of planet. EE’ corresponding positions of

the Earth.

  But before you do so, I should like you to notice, by the way, what Galileo

says about the Pythagorean and Copernican system of the universe. For he
                                                26
points  to  my Mystery  of  the  Universe,  published  fourteen  years  ago,  in

which  I  took  the  dimensions  of  the  Planetary  orbits  according  to  the

astronomy of Copernicus, who makes the sun immovable in the centre, and

the earth movable both round the sun and upon its own axis; and I showed

that  the  differences  of  their  orbits  corresponded  to  the  five  regular

Pythagorean  figures,  which  had  been  already  distributed  by  their  author

among the elements of the world, though the attempt was admirable rather

than happy or legitimate, and for which figures’ sake Euclid wrote the whole

of his Geometry. Now, in that Mystery you may find a sort of combination of

Astronomy  and  Euclid’s  Geometry,  and  through  this  combination  a  most

thorough completion and finishing of them both; and this was the reason why

I waited with intense longing to see what sort of an argument Galileo wouldproduce  in  favour  of  the  Pythagorean  system  of  the  universe.  After  this

explanation, Galileo’s letter about this argument was as follows: —

  “Illustrissimo e Reverendissimo Signore mio colendissimo.

  “È tempo che io deciferi a Vostra Signoria Illustrissima e Reverendissima

e per lei al Sig. Keplero le lettere trasposte le quali alcune settimane sono le

inviai; è tempo dico, giacchè sono interamente chiaro della verità del fatto,

sicchè non ci resta un minimo scrupolo, o dubbio. Sapranno dunque come

circa  a  tre  mesi  fa  vedendosi  Venere  vespertina  la  cominciai  ad  osservar

diligentemente coll’occhiale, per veder col senso stesso quello di che non

dubitava punto l’intelletto. La vidi dunque sul principio di figura rotonda,

pulita  e  terminata,  ma  molto  picciola;  di  tal  figura  si  mantenne  sino  che

cominciò  ad  avvicinarsi  alla  sua  massima  digressione,  ma  tra  tanto  andò

crescendo in mole. Cominciò poi a mancare dalla rotondità nella sua parte

orientale ed avversa al Sole, e in pochi giorni si ridusse ad esser un mezzo

cerchio  perfettissimo,  e  tale  si  mantenne,  senza  punto  alterarsi,  finchè

incominciò  à  ritirarsi  verso  il  Sole,  allontanandosi  dalla  tangente.  Ora  va

calando dal mezzo cerchio, e si mostra cornicolata, e anderà assottigliandosi

sino  all’occultazione,  riducendosi  allora  con  corna  sottilissime.  Quindi

passando all’apparizione mattutina, la vedremo pur falcata, e sottilissima e

colle  corna  avverse  al  Sole;  anderà  poi  crescendo  fino  alla  massima

digressione, dove apparirà semicircolare, e tale senza alterarsi si manterrà

molti giorni, e poi dal mezzo cerchio passerà presto al tutto tondo, e così

rotonda  si  conserverà  poi  per  molti  mesi.  Il  suo  diametro  adesso  è  circa

cinque volte maggiore di quello, che si mostrava nella sua prima apparizione

vespertina;  dalla  quale  mirabile  esperienza  abbiamo  sensata,  e  certa

dimostrazione  di  due  gran  questioni  state  fin  qui  dubbie  trà  i  maggiori

ingegni del Mondo. L’una è, che i Pianeti tutti son di lor natura tenebrosi

(accadendo anco a Mercurio l’istesso, che a Venere). L’altra, che Venere

necessarissimamente si volge intorno al Sole, come anco Mercurio, cosa, che

degli altri Pianeti, fu creduta da’ Pitagorici, dal Copernico, dal Keplero e da’

loro  seguaci,  ma  non  sensatamente  provata,  come  ora  in  Venere,  ed  in

Mercurio.

  “Averanno dunque il Sig. Keplero, e gli altri Copernicani da gloriarsi di

aver creduto e filosofato bene, sebbene ci è toccato, e ci è per toccare ancora

ad esser reputati dall’ università dei Filosofi in libris, per poco intendenti, e

poco meno che stolti.

  “Le parole dunque, che mandai trasposte, e che dicevano,  Haec immatura a me jam frustra leguntur, o.y.

  dicono ordinate

  Cynthiae figuras aemulatur mater amorum.

  “Cioè,  che  Venere  imita  le  figure  della  Luna.  Osservai  tre  notti  sono

l’ecclisse, nella quale non vi è cosa notabile, solo si vede il taglio dell’ombra

indistinto, confuso e come annebbiato, e questo per derivare essa ombra dalla

Terra lontanissima da essa Luna. Voleva scrivere altri particolari, ma essendo

stato trattenuto molto da alcuni gentiluomini, ed essendo l’ora tardissima, son

forzato a finire. Favoriscami salutare in mio nome i SS. Keplero, Asdale e

Segheti, ed a Vostra Signoria Illustrissima con ogni reverenza bacio le mani,

e dal Signore Dio gli prego felicità. Di Firenze il primo di Gennaio 1610. Ab

Incarnatione.

  “Di  Vostra  Signoria  Illustrissima  e  Reverendissima  Servidore

obbligatissimo.

  Galileo Galilei.”

  Such is Galileo’s letter; but let me give you the substance of it: —

  “It is time for me to disclose the method of reading the letters which some

weeks since I sent you as an anagram. It is time now, I mean, after I have

become quite certain about the matter, so much so that I have no longer even

a shadow of doubt. You must know then that about three months ago, when

the star of Venus could be seen, I began to look at it through a telescope with

great attention, so that I might grasp with my physical senses an idea which I

was entertaining as certain. At first then you must know the planet Venus

appeared of a perfectly circular form, accurately so, and bounded by a distinct

edge, but very small; this figure Venus kept until it began to approach its

greatest distance from the sun, and meanwhile the apparent size of its orb

kept  on  increasing.  From  that  time  it  began  to  lose  its  roundness  on  the

eastern  side,  which  was  turned  away  from  the  sun,  and  in  a  few  days  it

contracted  its  visible  portion  into  an  exact  semicircle;  that  figure  lasted

without the smallest alteration until it began to return towards the sun where
                                                        27
it  leaves  the  tangent  drawn  to  its  epicycle.  At  this  time  it  loses  the

semicircular form more and more, and keeps on diminishing that figure until

its conjunction, when it will wane to a very thin crescent. After completing its

passage past the sun, it will appear to us, at its appearance as a morning star,

as  only  sickle-shaped,  turning  a  very  thin  crescent  away  from  the  sun;

afterwards the crescent will fill up more and more until the planet reaches its

greatest distance from the sun, in which position it will appear semicircular,and that figure will last for many days without appreciable variation. Then by

degrees, from being semicircular it will change to a full orb, and will keep

that  perfectly  circular  figure  for  several  months;  but  at  this  instant  the

diameter of the orb of Venus is about five times as large as that which it

showed at its first appearance as an evening star.

  “From  the  observation  of  these  wonderful  phenomena  we  are  supplied

with a determination most conclusive, and appealing to the evidence of our

senses, of two very important problems, which up to this day were discussed

by the greatest intellects with different conclusions. One is that the planets

are  bodies  not  self-luminous  (if  we  may  entertain  the  same  views  about

Mercury  as  we  do  about  Venus).  The  second  is  that  we  are  absolutely

compelled to say that Venus (and Mercury also) revolves round the sun, as do

also all the rest of the planets. A truth believed indeed by the Pythagorean

school, by Copernicus, and by Kepler, but never proved by the evidence of

our senses, as it is now proved in the case of Venus and Mercury. Kepler

therefore  and  the  rest  of  the  school  of  Copernicus  have  good  reason  for

boasting that they have shown themselves good philosophers, and that their

belief was not devoid of foundation; however much it has been their lot, and

may even hereafter be their lot, to be regarded by the philosophers of our

times, who philosophise on paper, with an universal agreement, as men of no

intellect, and little better than absolute fools.

  “The words which I sent with their letters transposed, and which said,

  Haec immatura a me jam frustra leguntur, o.y.

  when reduced to their proper order, read thus,

  Cynthiae figuras aemulatur mater amorum:

  The mother of the Loves rivals the phases of Cynthia:

  that is,

  Venus imitates the phases of the Moon.

  “Three  days  ago  I  observed  an  eclipse  of  the  moon,  but  not  anything

worthy of special notice occurred in it. Only the edge of the shadow appeared

indistinct, blurred, and hazy; the cause of the phenomenon no doubt is that

the shadow has its origin at the earth, at a great distance from the body of the

moon.

  “I have some other particulars, but I am prevented by time from writing

about them, etc.”

  So writes Galileo.

   What now, dear reader, shall we make out of our telescope? Shall we

make  a  Mercury’s  magic-wand  to  cross  the  liquid  ether  with,  and,  like
      28
Lucian,  lead  a  colony  to  the  uninhabited  evening  star,  allured  by  the

sweetness of the place? or shall we make it a Cupid’s arrow, which, entering

by our eyes, has pierced our inmost mind, and fired us with a love of Venus?

For what language is too strong for the marvellous beauty of this orb, if,

having no light of its own, it can attain simply by the borrowed light of the

sun to such splendour, as Jupiter has not, nor the moon, though enjoying a

proximity to the sun as close as Venus; for if the moon’s light be compared

with the light of Venus, it will be seen to be certainly greater on account of

the apparent magnitude of the moon, but, in comparison with the light of

Venus, dull, dead, and leaden. O truly golden Venus! Will any one doubt any

more that the whole orb of Venus is wrought most smoothly out of pure

unalloyed gold, since its surface, when only placed in the sunlight, reflects a

splendour  so  intense!  And  here  let  me  add  my  experiments  about  the

alteration of the light of Venus on blinking the eye, which I have examined in

the part of my Astronomy which treats of Optics. Reasoning will be able to

conclude nothing else but this, that the orb of Venus turns on its own axis

with  an  exceedingly  swift  rotation,  displaying  one  after  another  different

parts of its surface which are more or less capable of retaining the sun’s
    29
light.


Galileo’s conclusions with regard to the inherent nature of the brightness of

                                      the stars.


But enough of my own conclusions. Let us now hear as an epilogue Galileo’s

conclusions built up out of all the observations which he has made with his

telescope, and announced from time to time. Thus he writes once more: —

  “Illustrissimo e Reverendissimo Signore mio colendissimo.

  “Ho ricevuto gusto, e contento particolarissimo nella lettura dell’ ultima di

Vostra Signoria Illustrissima e Reverendissima delli 7 stante, ed in particolare

in quella parte dove ella m’accenna la favorevole inclinazione dell’ Illustriss.

Sig.  Cons.  Wackher,  verso  di  me,  la  quale  io  infinitamente  stimo,  ed

apprezzo; e poichè quella ha principalmente origine dall’ aver io incontrate

osservazioni necessariamente dimostranti conclusioni per avanti tenute vere

da sua Signoria Illustrissima per confermarmi maggiormente il possesso di

grazia  tanto  pregiata  da  me,  prego  Vostra  Signoria  Illustrissima  eReverendissima a fargli intendere per mia parte come conforme alla credenza

di  Sua  Signoria  Illustrissima  ho  dimostrazione  certa,  che  siccome  tutti  i

Pianeti ricevono il lume dal Sole, essendo per se stessi tenebrosi, e opachi;

così  le  Stelle  fisse  risplendono  per  lor  natura,  non  bisognose  dell’

illustrazione de’ raggi solari, li quali, Dio sa, se arrivino a tanta altezza, più di

quello, che arrivi a noi il lume di una di esse fisse. Il principal fondamento

del mio discorso è nell’ osservare io molto evidentemente con gli occhiali che

quei Pianeti di mano in mano, che si trovano più vicini a noi, o al Sole,

ricevono maggiore splendore, e più illustremente ce lo riverberano; e perciò

Marte perigeo, e a noi vicinissimo si vede assai più splendido, che Giove;

benchè  a  quello  di  mole  assai  inferiore;  e  difficilmente  se  gli  può  coll’

occhiale  levare  quella  irradiazione,  che  impedisce  il  vedere  il  suo  disco

terminato, e rotondo; il che in Giove non accade, vedendosi esquisitamente

circolare.  Saturno  poi  per  la  sua  gran  lontananza  si  vede  esattamente

terminato, sì la Stella maggiore di mezzo, come le due piccole laterali; ed

appare il suo lume languido, ed abbacinato e senza niuna irradiazione, che

impedisca il distinguere i suoi tre piccoli globi terminatissimi. Ora poichè

apertamente  veggiamo,  che  il  Sole  molto  splendidamente  illustra  Marte

vicino,  e  che  molto  più  languido  è  il  lume  di  Giove  (sebbene  senza  lo

strumento appare assai chiaro, il che accade per la grandezza, e candore della

Stella) languidissimo, e fosco quello di Saturno, come molto più lontano,

quali doveriano apparirci le Stelle fisse lontane indicibilmente più di Saturno,

quando il lume loro derivasse dal Sole? Certamente debolissime, torbide e

smorte. Ma tutto l’opposito si vede, perocchè se rimireremo per esempio il

Cane, incontreremo un fulgore vivissimo, che quasi ci toglie la vista, con una

vibrazione di raggi tanto fiera, e possente, che in comparazione di quello

rimangono i Pianeti, e dico Giove e Venere stessa, come un impurissimo

vetro appresso un limpidissimo e finissimo diamante. E benchè il disco di

esso  Cane  apparisca  non  maggiore  della  cinquantesima  parte  di  quello  di

Giove, tuttavia la sua irradiazione è grande, e fiera in modo, che l’istesso

globo tra i proprii crini s’implica, e quasi si perde, e con qualche difficoltà si

distingue; dove che Giove (e molto più Saturno) si vedono e terminati, e di

una  luce  languida,  e  per  così  dire  quieta.  E  per  tanto  io  stimo,  che  bene

filosoferemo,  referendo  la  causa  della  scintillazione  delle  Stelle  fisse,  al

vibrare,  che  elle  fanno  dello  splendore  proprio  e  nativo  dall’intima  loro

sustanza; dove che nella superficie de’ Pianeti termina più presto, e si finisce

l’illuminazione,  che  dal  Sole  deriva,  e  si  parte.  Se  io  sentirò  qualcheparticolare  questione  ricevuta  dal  medesimo  Sig.  Wackher,  non  resterò

d’affaticarmivi  intorno,  per  dimostrarmi,  quale  io  sono  desiderosissimo  di

servire un tanto Signore, e non già con isperanza di aggiungere al termine

conseguito dal suo discorso, perchè benissimo comprendo, che a quanto sia

passato per lo finissimo cribro del giudizio di esso, e del Sig. Keplero, non si

può aggiungere di squisitezza; nè io pretenderei altro, che col dubitare, e mal

filosofare,  eccitar  loro  al  ritrovamento  di  nuove  sottigliezze.  Gl’ingegni

singolari,  che  in  gran  numero  fioriscono  nell’Alemagna,  mi  hanno  lungo

tempo tenuto in desiderio di vederla, il qual desiderio ora si raddoppia per la

nuova  grazia  dell’Illustrissimo  Sig.  Wackher,  la  quale  mi  farebbe  divenir

grande ogni picciola occasione, che mi si presentasse. Ma ho di soverchio

occupata Vostra Signoria Illustrissima e Reverendissima. Degnisi per fine di

offerirmi e dedicarmi devotissimo servidore all’Illustrissimo Sig. Wackher,

salutando anco caramente il Sig. Keplero, ed a lei con ogni riverenza bacio le

mani, e dal Signore Dio le prego somma felicità.

  “[Di  Firenze  li  26]  di  Marzo  1611.  Di  Vostra  Signoria  Illustrissima  e

Reverendissima obbligatissimo Servidore,

  Galileo Galilei.”

  When translated, the meaning is as follows: —

  “Your last letter has exceedingly pleased me, especially that part which

assures  me  of  the  friendly  feeling  entertained  towards  me  by  the  most

illustrious  Imperial  Counsellor,  Wagher,  which  I  for  my  part  highly

appreciate.  And  since  the  cause  of  this  friendliness  is,  that  I  have

incontestably demonstrated by some observations of mine certain conclusions

which he had long held as true, I wish to confirm my possession of favour,

which I value so much, and accordingly I ask you to give him this piece of

news from me; that I have most conclusive arguments ready, showing clearly

that, just as he holds, all the planets receive their light from the sun, being by
                                                    30
constitution bodies dark and devoid of light; but that the fixed stars shine by

their own proper light, not needing to be illuminated by the sun’s rays, since

God knows whether they reach the very remote region of the fixed stars with

intensity even equal to the small intensity with which the rays of the fixed

stars come down to us.

  “My demonstration depends chiefly on this fact, that with the telescope I

have  distinctly  observed  that  the  planets  receive  greater  brightness,  and

reflect it more intensely, in proportion as each one is nearer to us and to the

sun. So Mars in perigee, that is, when nearest to the earth, greatly surpassesJupiter in brightness, although in actual size it is far inferior to Jupiter; and in

consequence  it  is  difficult  to  receive  the  effulgence  of  this  planet  in  the

telescope,  for  it  is  so  great  as  to  prevent  the  eye  from  being  able  to

distinguish the circular termination of the planet’s disc. This does not happen

in the case of Jupiter, for it appears quite circular. The next planet, Saturn, on

account of its great distance likewise — for indeed it is the most remote of

the planets, — appears bounded by a well-defined edge, both the greater orb

in the middle and the two small orbs at its sides. Indeed, it appears to shine

with a faint and delicate light, without any effulgence to prevent an observer

recognising the well-defined termination of its three orbs. Since, then, we see

that Mars, the nearest of the three, is illumined by the sun with very great

splendour, and that the light of Jupiter, at a greater distance, is much more

faint (although without the use of an instrument it appears tolerably bright,

which is due to the size and brilliancy of its body), and that the light of

Saturn, at the greatest distance, is most faint, and almost watery, of what

kind, do you think, would appear the light of the fixed stars, which are at an

immeasurable distance further from the sun than Saturn, if they only received

light from the sun? Most certainly, extremely feeble, indistinct, and pallid.

And yet we find quite the contrary; for, let us look with our eyes at the Dog-

Star, for example. We shall encounter a most vivid brilliancy, which almost

pricks the eye with the rapid sparkling of its rays, of such intensity that, in

comparison  with  it,  the  planets,  even  Jupiter,  and  Venus  too,  are  as

thoroughly  outshone  as  common  and  bad  glass  compared  with  a  highly

polished and most sparkling diamond. And although the orb of the Dog-Star

appears  no  larger  than  the  fiftieth  part  of  Jupiter’s  disc,  nevertheless  its

brilliancy is great and very strong; so that the form of its disc, which you

expect to see, hides itself among the rays of its own refulgence, envelops

itself in them, and almost disappears; and it is not distinguished without some

difficulty from the rays which surround it. Whereas Jupiter, and still more

Saturn, are seen well defined; and their light is without intensity, and, if I

may  say  so,  quiescent.  Wherefore  I  think  that  we  shall  rightly  apply  our

philosophy  if  we  refer  the  cause  of  the  twinkling  of  the  fixed  stars  to

vibrations of a brilliancy, which is their own, belonging to their constitution,

and  inherent  in  their  substance,  and  say,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the

illumination of the planets, which is derived from the sun, and distributed to

the world, is limited to their surface.”

  These are the scientific conclusions in Galileo’s letter; the rest I omit.  You  see  then,  studious  reader,  how  the  subtle  mind  of  Galileo,  in  my

opinion the first philosopher of the day, uses this telescope of ours like a sort

of ladder, scales the furthest and loftiest walls of the visible world, surveys all

things with his own eyes, and, from the position he has gained, darts the

glances of his most acute intellect upon these petty abodes of ours — the

planetary spheres I mean, — and compares with keenest reasoning the distant

with the near, the lofty with the deep.

  VALE  ET  DEUM  IN  OPERIBUS  SUIS  CELEBRARE  NUNQUAM

DESINE.

  Kepler, Narratio.                                    ENDNOTES.

1
 Propertius, iii. 2. 17-22.

2
 Compare Lucretius iv. 881:

Dico animo nostro primum simulacra meandi

Accidere, atque animum pulsare.

3
 The satellites of Jupiter are here called “the Cosmian Stars” in honour of Cosmo de’ Medici, but
elsewhere Galileo calls them “the Medicean Stars.” Kepler sometimes calls them “the Medicean Stars,”
but more often “satellites.”

4
  Galileo  says,  “per  sex  denas  fere  terrestres diametros  a  nobis  remotum”  by  mistake  for semi-
diametros, and the same mistake occurs in p. 11.

5
 The words used by Galileo for “telescope” are perspicillum, specillum instrumentum, organum, and
occhiale (Ital.). Kepler uses also oculare tubus, arundo dioptrica. The word “telescopium” is used by
Gassendi, 1647.

6
 “Vix per duas Telluris diametros,” by mistake for “semi-diametros.”

7










The line C H in Galileo’s figure represents the small pencil of rays from H which, after refraction
through the telescope, reach the eye E. The enlarged figure shows that if O P be the radius of the
aperture employed, the point H of the object would be just outside the field of view. The method,
however, is at best only a very rough one, as the boundary of the field of view in this telescope is
unavoidably indistinct.

8
 Specimens of frosted or crackled Venetian glass are to be seen in the Slade  Collection, British
Museum, and fully justify Galileo’s comparison.9
 Webb, Celestial Objects for Common Telescopes, p. 104, suggests this identification.

10
 In the list of the heights of lunar mountains determined by Beer and Maedler, given in their work
Der Mond (Berlin, 1837), there are six which exceed 3000 toises, or 19,000 British feet.

11
 The illumination of the Moon in eclipses, noticed by Galileo, is now referred to the refraction of the
sunlight  by  the  earth’s  atmosphere,  and  the  reddish  colour  of  the  light  is  explained  by  Herschel
(Outlines of Astronomy, ch. vii.) to be due to the absorption of the violet and blue rays by the aqueous
vapour of the Earth’s atmosphere. The idea of a sensible lunar atmosphere is not in accordance with the
observed phenomena of the occultations of stars.

12
  Galileo’s Systema Mundi.  Owing  to  the  violent  opposition  provoked  by  the  discussion  of  the
discoveries of Galileo, and their bearing on the Copernican system of astronomy, Galileo seems to have
found it necessary to delay the publication of this work until 1632, when, believing himself safe under
the friendship and patronage of Pope Urban VIII. and others in power at Rome, he at length published
it. Urban, however, now turned against him, denounced the book and its author, and summoned him to
Rome, where the well-known incidents of his trial and condemnation took place.

13
 The immense distance of stars makes it impossible for them to be magnified by any telescope,
however powerful; the apparent or spurious disc is an optical effect, which depends on the telescope
used, and is smallest with the largest aperture.

14
 The times of Galileo’s observations are to be understood as reckoned from sunset.

15
 The satellites of Jupiter revolve in planes very nearly, although not exactly, coincident with that of
the equator of the planet, which is inclined 3° 5´ 30´´ to the orbit of the planet, and the plane of the orbit
is inclined 1° 18´ 51´´ to the ecliptic.

16
 Galileo continues to call these bodies stars, perhaps meaning “Medicean stars,” throughout the
description of their configurations, but as he had now detected their nature, it is more convenient to call
them satellites, the term introduced by Kepler.

17
 In the edition of Galileo’s works published at Florence, 1854, there are given the tables of the hourly
movements of the satellites of Jupiter, from which Galileo determined their periods of revolution. In the
beginning of his treatise on floating bodies, Discorso intorno i Galleggianti, 1611-12, Galileo gives the
times of rotation as approximately, (i.) 1 d. 18-1/2 h.; (ii.) 3 d. 13-1/3 h.; (iii.) 7 d. 4 h.; (iv.) 16 d. 18 h.;
he also published configurations of the satellites calculated for March, April, and a part of May 1613.
The periodic times of the satellites, as corrected by later observers, are, (i.) 1 d. 18 h. 28 m.; (ii.) 3 d. 13
h. 15 m.; (iii.) 7 d. 3 h. 43 m.; (iv.) 16 d. 16 h. 32 m.

18
  Modern  astronomers  agree  in  assigning  an  atmosphere  to  Jupiter,  but  consider  it  not  extensive
enough to affect the brightness of the satellites. — (Webb, Celestial Objects for Common Telescopes.)
Their absolute magnitudes are different, and their surfaces have been observed to be obscured by spots,
which may account for the variations of their brightness. These spots, like the lunar spots, are probably
due to variations of reflective power at different parts of their surfaces, for as they always turn the same
face to Jupiter, they present different portions of their surfaces to us periodically, and it has beenascertained by observation that “these fluctuations in their brightness are periodical, depending on their
position with respect to the Sun.” — (Herschel, Outlines of Astronomy; Arago, Astronomie Populaire,
1854.)

19
 Diodorus Siculus, ii. 47.

20
 Kepler says in his introduction to his Commentaries upon the Motions of the Planet Mars, that the
theory of gravitation depends on certain axioms, one of which is that “heavy bodies do not tend to the
centre of the universe, supposing the earth to be placed there, because that point is the centre of the
universe, but because it is the centre of the earth. So, wherever the earth be set, or whithersoever it be
transported, heavy bodies have a continual tendency to it.” Kepler’s object in this work was to correct
the methods for determining the apparent places of the planets according to the three theories then
current — the Ptolemaic, the Copernican, and that of Tycho Brahe.

In 1593 the observed place of the planet Mars differed by nearly 5° from the place calculated for it.
Kepler accordingly studied the motions of this planet, and “by most laborious demonstrations and
discussions of many observations,” arrived at the conclusions known as Kepler’s first and second laws;
according to which the Copernican system of eccentrics and epicycles was replaced by an ellipse whose
centre and eccentricity were the same as the centre and eccentricity of the eccentric in the older method,
and the Sun therefore was in one of the foci. Also the motion of the planet in its orbit was such that
equal areas were described about the Sun by the radius vector of the planet in equal times. — Kepler,
Astronomia Nova αἰτιολογητός (Prague), 1609.

21
 The degree of accuracy attained by Kepler and Galileo with their imperfect instruments will be
appreciated by comparing these statements with the determinations of later astronomers. Jupiter is
about 1300 times the size of the Earth. Its diameter is about 87,000 miles; time of rotation, 9 h. 55 m.
21 sec.; time of revolution, 4333 days nearly. The angular diameter of the sun, seen from Jupiter, is
between 6´ and 7´. The times of revolution of the four satellites are, as already given: (i.) 1 d. 18 h. 28
m., (ii.) 3 d. 13 h. 15 m., (iii.) 7 d. 3 h. 43 m., (iv.) 16 d. 16 h. 32 m.

22
 Umbistineum. Apparently this is some German word with a Latin ending, such as um-bei-stehn;
Kepler fancied that Galileo had discovered two satellites of Mars.

23
 The text of the four letters of Galileo followed here is that given in the edition of Galileo’s works
published at Florence, 1842-56; that in the edition of Kepler’s Dioptrics, published at Augsburg, 1611,
is very inaccurate. These letters were written to Giuliano de’ Medici, ambassador of the Grand-Duke of
Tuscany to the Emperor Rudolf II. at Prague.

24
 Virgil, Eclog. iii. 105.

25
 The completion of Galileo’s observations on Saturn depended on the improvement of astronomical
instruments, as will be evident from the following sketch. Galileo made out the first indications of
Saturn’s ring in 1610, as narrated in his letter, with a power of thirty; but in December 1612 he wrote to
one of his friends, Marco Velseri, that he could no longer see these indications, and began to imagine
that his telescope had deceived him, and apparently abandoned further researches. Hevelius in 1642
saw the ring more clearly, but figured it as two crescents attached to Saturn by their cusps. At length, in
1653, Huyghens provided himself with a power of one hundred, having made the lenses with his ownhands,  and  immediately  discovered  the  explanation  of  the  phenomena  which  had  baffled  previous
observers. He published his explanation of Saturn’s ring, and his discovery of the first satellite, in his
Systema Saturnium, 1659. Cassini, with still more powerful instruments, discovered four more satellites
in 1671, 1672, 1684. Sir William Herschel in 1789 detected two more, “which can only be seen with
telescopes  of  extraordinary  power  and  perfection,  and  under  the  most  favourable  atmospheric
circumstances.” — (Herschel, Outlines of Astronomy, § 548.) And the last of the eight satellites was
discovered in 1848 by Lassell of Liverpool, and Bond of Cambridge, U.S., simultaneously.

26
 Kepler, in his Mystery of the Universe, endeavoured to connect the orbits of the planets with the five
regular solids, thus: If in a sphere (i.) a cube be inscribed, and in the cube a sphere (ii.); and in that
sphere a tetrahedron, and in the tetrahedron a sphere (iii.); and in that sphere a dodecahedron, and in the
dodecahedron a sphere (iv.); and in that sphere an icosahedron, and in the icosahedron a sphere (v.);
and in that sphere an octahedron, and in the octahedron a sphere (vi.), the diameters of these six spheres
will be proportional to the diameters of the orbits of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Earth, Venus, and
Mercury respectively; or, as Kepler expresses it, the common centre of these spheres represents the
position of the Sun, and the six spheres represent the spheres of the planets.

By these considerations, however, Kepler was led to enunciate his third law, that the squares of the
periodic times of planets are proportional to the cubes of their mean distances from the sun. — Kepler,
Prodromus Dissertationum Mathematicarum continens Mysterium Cosmographicum, etc. (Tübingen,
1596.)

27
 In the Ptolemaic system the earth’s centre was regarded as the centre of the universe, and the
movements of the heavenly bodies were explained by eccentrics and epicycles. The sun was conceived
to describe a circle about a point not exactly coinciding with the centre of the earth, called the sun’s
eccentric. The planets described epicycles (circles) whose centres described eccentrics (circles), and the
centres of these eccentrics coincided with the centre of the sun’s eccentric. In the case of Mercury and
Venus the centre of the epicycle was always on the line drawn from the centre of the eccentric to the
sun’s centre. In the case of the other planets the construction was more complicated. The stationary
points were determined by drawing tangents from the earth’s centre (or the observer) to the epicycle, as
in the figure (1). — (Gassendi, Institutio Astronomica, 1647.) This will explain Kepler’s description of
the stationary points as the points where the planet leaves the tangent to its epicycle, supposing that he
uses the terms of the current (i.e. Ptolemaic) astronomy. Copernicus placed the sun instead of the earth
at the centre of the universe, but to determine the positions of the planets at any given time with as
much accuracy as was attainable with the Ptolemaic system, he was obliged to use a similar method of
eccentrics and epicycles, so that Kepler’s expression may be understood to describe the stationary
points according to the Copernican theory, though it is still strange that he should not recognise the
elliptical form of the planetary orbits, which he had lately demonstrated after most laborious reasoning
in his Commentaries on the Motion of the Planet Mars, 1609. Galileo’s own expression seems to
describe the stationary points according to the Copernican system, as would be expected, as the points
where the planet leaves the tangent drawn to its orbit from the earth (Fig. 2).

28
 Lucian, Ver. Hist. i. 12.

29
 The first scientific determination of the period of the rotation of Venus was made by Dominique
Cassini in 1666, from observations of spots on the planet, and concluded to be about 24 hours; but in
1726 Bianchini deduced a period of 24 d. 8 h. from similar observations. The true period is consideredto be 23 h. 21 m., determined by Schroeter by a series of observations lasting from 1788 to 1793 on the
periodicity of the deformation of the horns of Venus. — (Arago, Astronomie Populaire, 1854.)

Kepler’s statements can only be regarded as anticipations of phenomena not yet actually observed.

30
 Proctor (Other Worlds than Ours, 1875) has given some reasons for believing that Jupiter and Saturn
shine in part with their own light, owing to their great internal heat.          LETTER TO THE GRAND DUCHESS

                                  CHRISTINA




                          Translated by Thomas Salusbury


The  Grand  Duchess  Christina  (see  Figure  1)  was  granddaughter  to  the

infamous Catherine de’ Medici, daughter of Charles III of Lorraine, and wife

of  Duke  Ferdinando  I  de’  Medici  of  Tuscany  –  a  powerful  political  and

societal figure.  With a perfect storm of (unjustified) criticism over Sidereus

Nuncius arising from jealous scientists, scheming politicians and the Church,

Galileo  needed  a  powerful  protector.    Having  heard  that  Christina  was

somewhat sympathetic to his astronomical arguments, he wrote a letter to her

in  1615  (five  years  after  the  book  appeared)  —  an  expanded  and  more

detailed version of an earlier letter to Benedetto Castelli.  Manuscript copies

of this letter circulated, and it finally appeared in print in 1636 (see Figure 2).

The letter is far clearer about Galileo’s views than the book, as can be seen in

the following two extracts:


“Some years ago, as Your Serene Highness well knows, I discovered in the

heavens many things that had not been seen before our own age. The novelty

of these things, as well as some consequences which followed from them in

contradiction  to  the  physical  notions  commonly  held  among  academic

philosophers, stirred up against me no small number of professors - as if I had

placed these things in the sky with my own hands in order to upset nature and

overturn  the  sciences.  They  seemed  to  forget  that  the  increase  of  known

truths stimulates the investigation, establishment, and growth of the arts; not

their diminution or destruction.”


“Persisting in their original resolve to destroy me and everything mine by any

means they can think of, these men are aware of my views in astronomy and

philosophy.  They  know  that  as  to  the  arrangement  of  the  parts  of  the

universe, I hold the sun to be situated motionless in the centre of the

revolution of the celestial orbs while the earth revolves about the sun.

They  know  also  that  I  support  this  position  not  only  by  refuting  the

arguments  of  Ptolemy  and  Aristotle,  but  by  producing  many  counter-arguments; in particular, some which relate to physical effects whose causes

can  perhaps  be  assigned  in  no  other  way. In  addition  there  are

astronomical arguments derived from many things in my new celestial

discoveries that plainly confute the Ptolemaic system while admirably

agreeing with and confirming the contrary hypothesis. Possibly because

they are disturbed by the known truth of other propositions of mine which

differ from those commonly held, and therefore mistrusting their defence so

long as they confine themselves to the field of philosophy, these men have

resolved to fabricate a shield for their fallacies out of the mantle of pretended

religion and the authority of the Bible. These they apply with little judgement

to the refutation of arguments that they do not understand and have not even

listened to.”Figure 1:  A painting of Christine of Lorraine, Duchess of Tuscany, wife of Duke Ferdinando I de’
Medici of Tuscany, mother of Duke Cosimo II de’ Medici of Tuscany (1600-1605), by Tiberio di Tito
                                        (1573–1627).Figure 2:  The title page of the first published version of the ‘Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina’.    TO HER MOST SERENE HIGHNES THE GRAN DUCHESS

                                      MOTHER.


SOme  years  since,  as  Your  most  Serene  Highness  well  knoweth,  I  did

discover many particulars in Heaven that had been unseen and unheard of

untill  this  our  Age;  which,  as  well  for  their  novelty,  as  for  certain

consequences  which  depend  upon  them,  clashing  with  some  Physical

Propositions commonly received by the Schools, did stir up against me no

small number of such as professed the vulgar Philosophy in the Universities;

as if I had with my own hand newly placed these things in Heaven to obscure

and disturb Nature and the Sciences: who forgetting that the multitude of

Truths  contribute,  and  concur  to  the  investigation,  augmentation,  and

establishment of the Arts, and not to their diminution, and destruction; and at

the same time shewing themselves more affectionate to their own Opinions,

than to Truth, went about to deny, and to disprove those Novelties; of which

their very sense, had they but pleased to have intentsly beheld them, would

have  rendered  them  thorowly  assured.  And  to  this  purpose  they  alledged

sundry things, and published certain Papers fraughted with vain discourses;

and which was a more gross errour, interwoven with the attestations of the

Sacred Scriptures, taken from places by them not rightly understood, and

which did not any thing concern the point for which they were produced Into

which  errour  perhaps  they  would  not  have  run,  if  they  had  but  been

advertised  of  a  most  profitable  Document  which  S.  Augustine  giveth  us,

concerning  our  proceeding  warily,  in  making  positive  determinations  in

points  that    are  obscure  and  hard  to  be  understood  by  the  meer  help  of

ratiocination;  where  treating  (as  we)  of  a  certain  natural  conclusion

concerning  Celestial  Bodies,  he  thus  writes:  But  now  having  evermore  a

respect  to  the  moderation  of  pious  Gravity,  we  ought  to  believe  nothing

unadvisedly in a doubtful point; lest we conceive a prejudice against that, in

favour  to  our  Errour,  which  Truth  hereafter  may  discover  to  be  no  wise

contrary to the Sacred Books either of the Old or New Testament.


Nunc autem servatâ semper moderatione praegravitatis, nihil credere de re

observá  temerè  debemus,  [...]  forie,  quod  postea  veritas  p  [...]efecerit,

quamvis Libris Sanctis, sive Testamen [...] Vetris, sive Novi, nullo modó esse

possit adversum, tamen propter amorem nostri erroris, oderimus.Lib. 2. Genesi ad Literam in fine.


  It hath since come to pass, that Time hath by degrees discovered to every

one the truths before by me indicated: and together with the truth of the fact,

a discovery hath been made of the difference of humours between those who

simply and without passion did refuse to admit such like Phaenomena for

true,  and  those  who  to  their  incredulity  had  added  some  discomposed

affection:  For  as  those  who  were  better  grounded  in  the  Science  of

Astronomy,  and  Natural  Philosophy,  became  satisfied  upon  my  first

intimation of the news; so all those who stood not in the Negative, or in doubt

for any other reason, but because it was an unlookt-for-Novelty, and because

they had not an occasion of seeing a sensible experiment thereof, did by

degrees come to satisfie themselves: But those, who besides the love they

bore  to  to  their  first  Errour,  have  I  know  not  what  imaginary  interess  to

render  them  disaffected;  not  so  much  towards  the  things,  as  towards  the

Author of them, not being able any longer to deny them, conceal themselves

under an obstinate silence; and being exasperated more than ever by that

whereby those others were satisfied and convinced, they divert their thoughts

to other projects, and seek to prejudice me some other wayes: of whom I

profess that I would make no more account than I have done of those who

heretofore have contradicted me (at whom I alwaies laugh, as being assured

of  the  issue  that  the  business  is  to  have)  but  that  I  see  that  those  new

Calumnies  and  Persecutions  do  not  determine  in  our  greater  or  lesser

Learning (in which I will scarce pretend to any thing) but extend so far as to

attempt to asperse me with Crimes which ought to be, and are more abhorred

by me than Death it self: Nor ought I to content my self that they are known

to  be  unjust  by  those  onely  who  know  me  and  them,  but  by  all  men

whatsoever. They persisting therefore in their first Resolution, Of ruining me

and whatsoever is mine, by all imaginable waies; and knowing how that I in

my Studies of Astronomy and Philosophy hold, as to the Worlds Systeme,

That  the  Sun,  without  changing  place,  is  situate  in  the  Centre  of  the

Conversion of the Celestial Orbes; and that the Earth, convertible about its

own Axis, moveth it self about the Sun: And moreover understanding, that I

proceed  to  maintain  this  Position,    not  onely  by  refuting  the  Reasons  of

Ptolomy  and  Aristotle,  but  by  producing  many  on  the  contrary;  and  in

particular, some Physical pertaining to Natural Effects, the causes of which

perhaps can be by no other way assigned; and others Astronomical dependingupon  many  circumstances  and  encounters  of  new  Discoveries  in  Heaven,

which manifestly confute the Ptolomaick Systeme, and admirably agree with

and confirm this other Hypothesis: and possibly being ashamed to see the

known truth of other Positions by me asserted, different from those that have

been commonly received; and therefore distrusting their defence so long as

they should continue in the Field of Philosophy: for th [...]se respects, I say,

they have resolved to try whether they could make a Shield for the fallacies

of their Arguments of the Mantle of a feigned Religion, and of the Authority

of  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  applyed  by  them  with  little  judgment  to  the

confutation of such Reasons of mine as they had neither understood, nor so

much as heard.

  And first, they have indeavoured, as much as in them lay, to divulge an

opiniou thorow the Universe, that those Propositions are contrary to the Holy

Letters,  and  consequently  Damnable  and  Heretical:  And  thereupon

perceiving, that for the most part, the inclination of Mans Nature is more

prone to imbrace those enterprizes, whereby his Neighbour may, although

unjustly,  be  oppressed,  than  those  from  whence  he  may  receive  just

incouragement; it was no hard matter to find those Complices, who for such

(that is, for Damnable and Heretical) did from their Pulpits with unwonted

confidence preach it, with but an unmerciful and less considerate injury, not

only  to  this  Doctrine,  and  to  its  followers,  but  to  all  Mathematicks  and

Mathematicians together. Hereupon assuming greater confidence, and vainly

hoping that that Seed which first took root in their unsound mindes, might

spread  its  branches,  and  ascend  towards  Heaven,  they  went  scattering

rumours  up  and  down  among  the  People,  That  it  would,  ere  long  be

condemned by Supreme Authority: and knowing that such a Censure would

supplant not onely these two Conclusions of the VVorlds Systeme, but would

make  all  other  Astronomical  and  Physical  Observations  that  have

correspondence and necessary connection therewith to become damnable, to

facilitate the business they seek all they can to make this opinion (at least

among the vulgar) to seem new, and peculiar to my self, not owning to know

that Nicholas Copernicus was its Authour, or rather Restorer and Confirmer:

a  person  who  was  not  only  a  Catholick,  but  a  Priest,  Canonick,  and  so

esteemed, that there being a Dispute in the Lateran Council, under Leo X.

touching the correction of the Ecclesiastick Calender,  he was sent for to

Rome from the remotest parts of Germany, for to assist in this Reformation,

which for that time was left imperfect, onely because as then the true measureof the Year and Lunar Moneth was not exactly known: whereupon it was

given him in charge by the Bishop of Sempronia, at that time Super-intendent

in that Affair, to search with reiterated studies and pains for greater light and

certainty, touching those Coelestial Motions. Upon which, with a labour truly

Atlantick and with his admirable Wit, setting himself again to that Study, he

made such a progress in these Sciences, and reduced the knowledge of the

Coelestial Motions to such exactnesse, that he gained the title of an Excellent

Astronomer. And, according unto his Doctrine, not only the Calendar hath

been since regulated, but the Tables of all the Motions of the Planets have

also been calculated: and having reduced the said Doctrine into six Books, he

published them to the World at the instance of the Cardinal of Capua, and of

the Bishop of Culma. And in regard that he had re-assumed this so laborious

an  enterprize  by  the  order  of  The  Pope;  he  dedicated  his  Book  De

Revolutionibus Coelestibus to His Successour, namely Paul III. which, being

then also Printed, hath been received by The Holy Church, and read and

studied by all the World, without any the least umbrage of scruple that hath

ever been conceived at his Doctrine; The which, whilst it is now proved by

manifest  Experiments  and  necessary  Demonstrations  to  have  been  well

grounded, there want not persons that, though they never saw that same Book

intercept the reward of those many Labours to its Authour, by causing him to

be censured and pronounced an Heretick; and this, only to satisfie a particular

displeasure conceived, without any cause, against another man, that hath no

other interest in Copernicus, but only as he is an approver of his Doctrine.

  Now in regard of these false aspersions, which they so unjustly seek to

throw upon me, I have thought it necessary for my justification before the

World (of whose judgment in matters of Religion and Reputation I ought to

make great esteem) to discourse concerning those Particulars, which these

men  produce  to  scandalize  and  subvert  this  Opinion,  and  in  a  word,  to

condemn it, not only as false, but also as Heretical; continually making an

Hipocritical Zeal for Religion their shield; going about moreover to interest

the Sacred Scriptures in the Dispute, and to make them in a certain sense

Ministers of their deceiptful purposes: and farthermore desiring, if I mistake

not, contrary to the intention of them, and of the Holy Fathers to extend (that

I may not say abuse) their Authority, so as that even in Conclusions meerly

Natural, and not de Fide, they would have us altogether  leave Sense and

Demonstrative Reasons, for some place of Scripture which sometimes under

the apparent words may contain a different sense. Now I hope to shew withhow much greater Piety and Religious Zeal I proceed, than they do, in that I

propose not, that the Book of Copernicus is not to be condemned, but that it

is not to be condemned, as they would have it; without understanding it,

hearing it, or so much as seeing it; and especially he being an Author that

never  treateth  of  matters  of  Religion  or  Faith;  nor  by  Reasons  any  way

depending on the Authority of Sacred Scriptures whereupon he may have

erroniously interpreted them; but alwaies insists upon Natural Conclusions

belonging  to  the  Celestial  Motions,  handled  with  Astronomical  and

Geometrical Demonstrations. Not that he had not a respect to the places of

the Sacred Leaves, but because he knew very well that his said Doctrine

being  demonstrated,  it  could  not  contradict  the  Scriptures,  rightly,  and

according to their true meaning understood. And therefore in the end of his

Epistle Dedicatory, speaking to The Pope, he saith thus;

  Si fortasscerunt Mataeologi qui cum omnum Mathematicum ignari sint,

tamen de [...]is judicium assumunt, propter aliquem locum Scripturae, malè

ad  suum  propositum,  detortum,  ausi  fuerint  hoc  meum  institutum  repre

[...]endere  ac  insectari,  illos  nihil  moror,  adeò  ut  etiam  illorum  judicium,

tanquam  temerarium  contemnam.  Non  enim  obscurum  est,  Lactantium,

celelebrem  alioqui  Scriptorem,  sed  Mathematicum  parvum,  admodum

pueriliter  de  forma  Terrae  loqui,  cùm  deridet  eos,  qui  Terram,  Glob  [...]

formam habere prodiderunt. Itaque non debet mirum videri studiosis, si qui

tales, nos etiam ridebunt. Mathemata Mathematicis scribuntur; quibus & hi

nostri  labores,  (si  me  non  fallit  opinio)  videbuntur  etiam  Reipublicae

Ecclesiasticae conducere aliquid, cujus Principatum Tua Sanctitas nunc ten

[...].

  If there should chance to be any Mataeologists, who though ignorant in all

the  Mathematicks,  yet  pretending  a  skill  in  those  Learnings,  should  dare,

upon the authority of some place of Scripture wrested to their purpose, to

condemn and censure this my Hypothesis, I value them not, but shall slight

their  inconsiderate  Judgement.  For  it  is  not  unknown,  that  Lactantius

(otherwise  a  Famous  Author,  though  mean  Mathematician)  writeth  very

childishly touching the Form of the Earth, when he scoffs at those who affirm

the Earth to be in Form of a Globe. So that it ought not to seem strange to the

Ingenious, if any such should likewise now deride us. The Mathematicks are

written for Mathematitians, to whom (if I deceive not my self) these Labours

of mine shall seem to add something, as also to the Common-weale of the

Church, whose Government is now in the hands of Your Holiness.  And of this kinde do these appear to be who indeavour to perswade that

Copernicus may be condemned before his Book is read; and to make the

World believe that it is not onely lawfull but commendable so to do, produce

certain Authorities of the Scripture, of Divines, and of Councils; which as

they are by me had in reverence, and held of Supream Authority, insomuch

that I should esteem it high temerity for any one to contradict them whilst

they are used according to the In stitutes of Holy Church, so I believe that it

is no errour to speak, so long as one hath reason to suspect that a person hath

a  desire,  for  some  concern  of  his  own,  to  produce  and  alledge  them,  to

purposes different from those that are in the most Sacred intention of The

Holy Church. Therefore I not onely protest (and my sincerity shall manifest

it  self) that I intend to submit my self freely to renounce those errors, into

which, through ignorance▪ I may run in this Discourse of matters pertaining

to Religion; but I farther declare, that I desire not in these matters to engage

dispute with any one, although it should be in points that are disputable: for

my end tendeth onely to this, That if in these considerations, besides my own

profession, amongst the errours that may be in them, there be any thing apt to

give others an hint of some Notion beneficial to the Holy Church, touching

the determining about the Copernican Systeme, it may be taken and improved

as shall seem best to my Superiours: If not, let my Book be torn and burnt;

for that I do neither intend, nor pretend to gain to my self any fruit from my

writings, that is not Pious and Catholick. And moreover, although that many

of the things that I observe have been spoken in my own hearing, yet I shall

freely admit and grant to those that spake them, that they never said them, if

so they please, but confess that I might have been mistaken: And therefore

what I say, let it be supposed to be spoken not by them, but by those which

were of this opinion.

  The motive therefore that they produce to condemn the Opinion of the

Mobility of the Earth, and Stability of the Sun, is, that reading in the Sacred

Leaves, in many places, that the Sun moveth, that the Earth standeth still; and

the  Scripture  not  being  capable  of  lying,  or  erring,  it  followeth  upon

necessary consequence, that the Position of those is Erronious and Heretical,

who maintain that the Sun of it self is immoveable, and the Earth moveable.

  Touching this Reason I think it fit in the first place, to consider, That it is

both piously spoken, and prudently affirmed, That the Sacred Scripture can

never lye, when ever its true meaning is understood: Which I believe none

will deny to be many times very abstruce, and very different from that whichthe bare sound of the words signifieth. Whence it cometh to pass, that if ever

any one should constantly confine himself to the naked Grammatical Sence,

he  might,  erring  himself,  make  not  only  Contradictions  and  Propositions

remote from Truth to appear in the Scriptures, but also gross Heresies and

Blasphemies: For that we should be forced to assign to God feet, and hands,

and  eyes,  yea  more  corporal  and  humane  affections,  as  of  Anger,  of

Repentance, of Hatred, nay, and sometimes the Forgetting of things past, and

Ignorance of those to come: Which Propositions, like as (so the Holy Ghost

affirmeth) they were in that manner pronounced by the Sacred Scriptures, that

they might be accommodated to the Capacity of the Vulgar, who are very

rude and unlearned; so likewise, for the sakes of those that deserve to be

distinguished    from  the  Vulgar,  it  is  necessary  that  grave  and  skilful

Expositors produce the true senses of them, and shew the particular Reasons

why they are dictated under such and such words. And this is a Doctrine so

true and common amongst Divines, that it would be superfluous to produce

any attestation thereof.

  Hence me thinks I may with much more reason conclude, that the same

holy  Writ,  when  ever  it  hath  had  occasion  to  pronounce  any  natural

Conclusion,  and  especially,  any  of  those  which  are  more  abstruce,  and

difficult to be understood, hath not failed to observe this Rule, that so it might

not cause confusion in the mindes of those very people, and render them the

more  contumacious  against  the  Doctrines  that  were  more  sublimely

mysterious: For (like as we have said, and as it plainly appeareth) out of the

sole respect of condescending to Popular Capacity, the Scripture hath not

scrupled to shadow over most principal and fundamental Truths, attributing,

even to God himself, qualities extreamly remote from, and contrary unto his

Essence. Who would positively affirm that the Scripture, laying aside that

respect, in speaking but occasionally of the Earth, of the Water, of the Sun, or

of any other Creature, hath chosen to confine it self, with all rigour, within

the bare and narrow literal sense of the words? And especially, in mentioning

of those Creatures, things not at all concerning the primary Institution of the

same Sacred Volume, to wit, the Service of God, and the salvation of Souls,

and in things infinitely beyond the apprehension of the Vulgar?

  This therefore being granted, methinks that in the Discussion of Natural

Problemes, we ought not to begin at the authority of places of Scripture; but

at Sensible Experiments and Necessary Demonstrations: For, from the Divine

Word, the Sacred Scripture and Nature did both alike proceed; the first, as theHoly Ghosts Inspiration; the second, as the most observant Executrix of Gods

Commands: And moreover it being convenient in the Scriptures (by way of

condescension  to  the  understanding  of  all  men)  to  speak  many  things

different, in appearance; and so far as concernes the naked signification of the

words, from absolute truth: But on the contrary, Nature being inexorable and

immutable, and never passing the bounds of the Laws assigned her, as one

that nothing careth whether her abstruse reasons and methods of operating be,

or be not exposed to the Capacity of Men; I conceive that that, concerning

Natural Effects, which either Sensible Experience sets before our eyes, or

Necessary Demonstrations do prove unto us, ought not, upon any account, to

be called into question, much  less condemned upon the testimony of Texts of

Scripture, which may, under their words, couch Senses seemingly contrary

thereto; In regard that every Expression of Scripture is not tied to so strict

conditions, as every Effect of Nature: Nor doth God less admirably discover

himself unto us in Nature’s Actions, than in the Scriptures Sacred Dictions.

Which  peradventure  Tertullian  intended  to  express  in  those  words:Not

definimus,  Deum,  primò  N  [...]  tura  cognoscendum;  Deinde,  Doctrina

recognescendum: Natura ex operibus; Doctrina ex p [...]aedicationibus. We

conclude, God is known; first, by Nature, and then again more particularly

known  by  Doctrine:  by  Nature,  in  his  Works;  by  Doctrine,  in  his  Word

preached.

  But I will not hence affirm, but that we ought to have an extraordinary

esteem for the Places of Sacred Scripture, nay, being come to a certainty in

any Natural Conclusions,Tertul. adver. Marcion. lib. 1. ca. we ought to make

use  of  them,  as  most  apposite  helps  to  the  true  Exposition  of  the  same

Scriptures, and to the investigation of those Senses which are necessarily

conteined  in  them,  as  most  true,  and  concordant  with  the  Truths

demonstrated.

  This maketh me to suppose, that the Authority of the Sacred Volumes was

intended  principally  to  perswade  men  to  the  belief  of  those  Articles  and

Propositions, which, by reason they surpass all humane discourse, could not

by any other Science, or by any other means be made credible, than by the

Mouth of the Holy Spirit it self. Besides that, even in those Propositions,

which are not de Fide, the Authority of the same Sacred Leaves ought to be

preferred to the Authority of all Humane Sciences that are not written in a

Demonstrative Method, but either with bare Narrations, or else with probable

Reasons; and this I hold to be so far convenient and necessary, by how far thesaid Divine Wisdome surpasseth all humane Judgment and Conjecture. But

that  that  self  same  God  who  hath  indued  us  with  Senses,  Discourse,  and

Understanding  hath  intended,  laying  aside  the  use  of  these,  to  give  the

knowledg of those things by other means, which we may attain by these, so

as  that  even  in  those  Natural  Conclusions,  which  either  by  Sensible

Experiments or Necessary Demonstrations are set before our eyes, or our

Understanding, we ought to deny Sense and Reason, I do not conceive that I

am bound to believe it; and especially in those Sciences, of which but a small

part, and that divided into Conclusions is to be found in the Scripture: Such

as, for instance, is that of Astronomy, of which there is so small a part in

Holy Writ, that it doth not so much as name any of the Planets, except the

Sun and the Moon, and once or twice onely Venus under the name of Lucifer.

For if the Holy Writers had had any intention to perswade People to believe

the Dispositions and Motions of the Coelestial Bodies; and that consequently

we are still to derive that knowledge  from the Sacred Books they would not,

in my opinion, have spoken so little thereof, that it is as much as nothing, in

comparison of the infinite admirable Conclusions, which in that Science are

comprized and demonstrated. Nay, that the Authours of the Holy Volumes

did not only not pretend to teach us the Constitutions and Motions of the

Heavens  and  Stars,  their  Figures,  Magnitudes,  and  Distances,  but  that

intentionally (albeit that all these things were very well known unto them)

they  forbore  to  speak  of  them,  is  the  opinion  of  the  Most  Holy  &  Most

Learned Fathers: and in S. Augustine we read the following words. Quaeri

etiam  solet,  quae  forma  &  figura  Caeli  credenda  sit  secundum  Scripturas

nostras:  Multi  enim  multum  disputant  de  iis  ribus,  quas  majori  prudentia

nostri  Autores  omiserunt,  ad  beatam  vitam  non  profuturas  discentibus,  &

occupaentes  (quod  prius  est)  multum  prolixa  [...],  &  rebus  salubribus

impendenda temporum spatiae. Quid enim ad [...]e pertinet, utrum Caelum,

sicut Sphaera, undique concludat Terram, in media Mundi [...]ole libratam;

an eam ex una parte desuper, velut discus, operiat? Sed quia [...] de Fide

agitur  Scripturarum,  propter  illam  causam,  quam  non  semel

commemoravimus, Ne scilicet quisquam eloquia divina non intelligens, cum

de his rebus tale aliquid vel invenerit in Libris Nostris, vel ex illis audiverit,

quod perceptis assertionibus adversari videatur, nullo modo eis, cetera utilia

monentibus,  vel  narrantibus,  vel  prae  [...]ntiantibus,  credat:  Breviter

discendum  est,  de  figura  Caeli,  hoc  scisse  Autores  nostros,  quod  veritas

habet:  Sed  Spiritum  Dei,  qui  per  ipsos  loquebatur,  noluisse  ista  docerehomines, nulli ad salutem profutura. D. August. Lib. 2. De Gen. ad literam,

Ca. Idem etiam legitur apud Petrum Lombardum Magistrum Sententiarum. It

is  likewise  commonly  asked,  of  what  Form  and  Figure  we  may  believe

Heaven to be, according to the Scriptures: For many contend much about

those matters, which the greater prudence of our Authors hath forborn to

speak of, as nothing furthering their Learners in relation to a blessed life; and,

(which is the chiefest thing) taking up much of that time which should be

spent in holy exercises. For what is it to me whether Heaven, as a Sphere,

doth on all sides environ the Earth, a Mass ballanced in the middle of the

World; or whether like a Dish it doth onely cover or overcast the same? But

because  belief  of  Scripture  is  urged  for  that  cause,  which  we  have  oft

mentioned, that is, That none through ignorance of Divine Phrases, when

they shall find any thing of this nature in, or hear any thing cited out of our

Bibles which may seem to oppose manifest Conclusions, should be induced

to suspect their truth, when they admonish, relate, & deliver more profitable

matters Briefly be it spoken, touching the Figure of Heaven, that our Authors

knew the truth: But the H. Spirit would not, that men should learn what is

profitable to none for salvation.

  And the same intentional silence of these sacred Penmen in determining

what is to be believed of these accidents of the Celestial Bodies, is again

hinted to us by the same Father in the ensuing 10. Chapter upon the Question,

Whether we are to believe that Heaven moveth, or standeth still, in these

words: De Moit [...] etiam Caeli, nonnulli fra [...]tres quaestionem movent,

utrum  stet,  an  moveatur;  quia  [...]  si  [...]  vetur,  inquiunt,  quomodo

Firmamentum  est?  Si  autem  stat,  quomodo  Sydera  quae  in  ipso  fixa

creduntur, ab Oriente in Occidentem circu¯ eunt,, Septentrionalibus breviores

gyros  juxta  cardinem  peragentibus;  ut  Caelum,  si  est  alius  nobis  occulius

cardo, ex alio vertice, sicut Sphaera; si autem nullus alius cardo est, vel uti

discus  rotari  videatur?  Quibus  respondeo,  Multum  subtilibus  &  laboriosis

rationibus ista perquiri, ut vere percipiaetur, utrum ita, an non ita sit, quibus

ineundis atque tractandis nec mihi jam tempus est, nec illis esse debet, quos

ad salutem suam, è Sanctae Ecclesiae necessaria utilitate cupimus informari:

There are some of the Brethren that start a question concerning the motion of

Heaven, Whether it be fixed, or moved: For if it be moved (say they) how is

it a Firmament? If it stand still, how do these Stars which are held to be fixed

go round from East to West, the more Northern performing shorter Circuits

near the Pole; so that Heaven, if there be another Pole, to us unknown, mayseem to revolve upon some other Axis; but if there be not another Pole, it

may be thought to move as a Discus? To whom I reply, that  these points

require many subtil and profound Reasons, for the making out whether they

be  really  so,  or  no;  the  undertakeing  and  discussing  of  which  is  neither

consistent with my leasure, nor their duty, vvhom I desire to instruct in the

necessary  matters  more  directly  conducing  to  their  salvation,  and  to  the

benefit of The Holy Church.

  From which (that we may come nearer to our particular case) it necessarily

followeth,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  not  having  intended  to  teach  us,  whether

Heaven  moveth  or  standeth  still;  nor  whether  its  Figure  be  in  Form  of  a

Sphere, or of a Discus, or distended in Planum: Nor whether the Earth be

contained  in  the  Centre  of  it,  or  on  one  side;  he  hath  much  less  had  an

intention to assure us of other Conclusions of the same kinde, and in such a

manner, connected to these already named, that without the dedermination of

them,  one  can  neither  affirm  one  or  the  other  part;  which  are,  The

determining of the Motion and Rest of the said Earth, and of the Sun. And if

the  same  Holy  Spirit  hath  purposely  pretermitted  to  teach  us  those

Propositions, as nothing concerning his intention, that is, our salvation; how

can it be affirmed, that the holding of one part rather than the other, should be

so necessary, as that it is de Fide, and the other erronious? Can an Opinion be

Heretical, and yet nothing concerning the salvation of souls? Or can it be said

that  the  Holy  Ghost  purposed  not  to  teach  us  a  thing  that  concerned  our

salvation? I might here insert the Opinion of an EcclesiasticalCard. Baronius.

Person,Spiritui sancto mentem fuisse, nos docere, quomodo ad Caelum eatur:

non  autem,  quomodo  Caelum  gradiatur.  raised  to  the  degree  of

Eminentissimo, to wit, That the intention of the Holy Ghost, is to teach us

how we shall go to Heaven, and not how Heaven goeth.

  But  let  us  return  to  consider  how  much  necessary  Demonstrations,

Cardinal.  Bar.  and  sensible  Experiments  ought  to  be  esteemed  in  Natural

Conclusions;  and  of  what  Authority  Holy  and  Learned  Divines  have

accounted them, from whom amongst an hundred other attestations, we have

these that follow: Illud etiam diligenter cavendum, & omnino fugiendum est,

ne in tractanda Mosis Doctrina, quicquam affirmate & asseveranter sentiamus

&  dicamus,  quod  repugnet  manifestis  experimentis  &  rationibus

Philosophiae, vel aliarum Disciplinarum. Namque cum Verum omne semper

cum  Vero  congruat,  non  potest  Veritas  Sacrarum  Litterarum,  Veris

Rationibus & Experimentis Humanarum Doctrinarum esse contraria. Peter. inGen. circa Principium. We must also carefully heed and altogether avoid in

handling the Doctrine of Moses, to avouch or speak any thing affirmatively

and confidently which contradicteth the manifest Experiments and Reasons

of Philosophy, or other Sciences. For since all Truth is agreeable to Truth, the

Truth of Holy Writ cannot be contrary to the solid Reasons and Experiments

of Humane Learning.

  And  in  St.  Augustine  we  read:  Si  manifestae  certaeque  Rationi,  velut

sanctarum Litterarum objicitur autoriritas, non intelligit, qui hoc facit; & non

Scriptura  sensum  (ad  quem  penetrare  non  potuit)  sed  suum  potius  objicit

veritati: nec [...]d quod in ea, sed quod in seipso velut pro ea invenit, opponit.

If  any  one  shall  object  the  Authority  of  Sacred  Writ,  against  clear  and

manifest  Reason,  he  that  doth  so,  knows  not  what  he  undertakes:  For  he

objects against the Truth, not the sense of the Scripture (which is beyond his

comprehension) but rather his own; not what is in it, but what, finding it in

himself, he fancyed to be in it.

  This granted, and it being true, (as hath been said) that two Truths cannot

be contrary to each other, it is the office of a Judicious Expositor to study to

finde the true Senses of Sacred Texts, which undoubtedly shall accord with

those  Natural  Conclusions,  of  which  manifest  Sense  and  Necessary

Demonstrations  had  before  made  us  sure  and  certain.Epist.  7.  ad

Marcellinum. Yea, in regard that the Scriptures (as hath been said) for the

Reasons alledged, admit in many places Expositions far from the Sense of the

words; and moreover, we not being able to affirm, that all Interpreters speak

by Divine Inspiration; For (if it were so) then there would be no difference

between them about the Senses of the same places; I should think that it

would be an act of great prudence to make it unlawful for any one to usurp

Texts  of  Scripture,  and  as  it  were  to  force  them  to  maintain  this  or  that

Naturall  Conclusion  for  truth,  of  which  Sence,  &  Demonstrative,  and

necessary Reasons may one time or other assure us the contrary. For who will

prescribe bounds to the Wits of men? Who will assert that all that is sensible

and knowable in the World is already discovered and known? Will not they

that in other points disagree with us, confess this (and it is a great truth) that

Eaquae scimus, sint minima pars corum quae ignoramus? That those Truths

which we know, are very few, in comparison of those which we know not?

Nay more,Ecclesiast. ca. if we have it from the Mouth of the Holy Ghost, that

Deus tradidit Mundum disputationi eorum, ut non inveniat homo opus, quod

operatus est Deus ab initio ad finem: One ought not, as I conceive, to stop theway to free Philosophating, touching the things of the World, and of Nature,

as if that they were already certainly found, and all manifest: nor ought it to

be counted rashness, if one do not sit down satisfied with the opinions now

become  as  it  were  commune;  nor  ought  any  persons  to  be  displeased,  if

others do not hold, in natural Disputes to that opinion which best pleaseth

them; and especially touching Problems that have, for thousands of years,

been controverted amongst the greatest Philosophers, as is the Stability of the

Sun, and Mobility of the Earth, an opinion held by Pythagoras, and by his

whole  Sect;  by  Heraclides  Ponticus,  who  was  of  the  same  opininion;  by

Phylolaus, the Master of Plato; and by Plato himself, as Aristotle relateth, and

of which Plutarch writeth in the life of Numa, that the said Plato, when he

was grown old, said, It is a most absurd thing to think otherwise: The same

was  believed  by  Aristarchus  Samius,  as  we  have  it  in  Archimedes;  and

probably  by  Archimedes  himself;    by  Nicetas  the  Philosopher,  upon  the

testimony of Scicero, and by many others. And this opinion hath, finally,

been amplified, and with many Observations and Demonstrations confirmed

by Nicholaus Copernicus. And Seneca, a most eminent Philosopher, in his

Book De Cometis, advertizeth us that we ought, with great diligence, seek for

an  assured  knowledge,  whether  it  be  Heaven,  or  the  Earth,  in  which  the

Diurnal Conversion resides.

  And for this cause, it would probably be prudent and profitable counsel, if

besides the Articles which concern our Salvation, and the establishment of

our Faith (against the stability of which there is no fear that any valid and

solid Doctrine can ever rise up) men would not aggregate and heap up more,

without necessity: And if it be so, it would certainly be a preposterous thing

to introduce such Articles at the request of persons who, besides that we

know not that they speak by inspiration of Divine Grace, we plainly see that

there might be wished in them the understanding which would be necessary

first to enable them to comprehend, and then to discuss the Demonstrations

wherewith the subtiler Sciences proceed in confirming such like Conclusions.

Nay, more I should say, (were it lawful to speak my judgment freely on this

Argument) that it would haply more suit with the Decorum and Majesty of

those  Sacred  Volumes,  if  care  were  taken  that  every  shallow  and  vulgar

Writer might not authorize his Books (which are not seldome grounded upon

foolish fancies) by inserting into them Places of Holy Scripture, interpreted,

or rather distorted to Senses as remote from the right meaning of the said

Scripture, as they are neer to derirision, who not without ostentation flourishout their Writings therewith. Examples of such like abuses there might many

be produced, but for this time I will confine my self to two, not much besides

these matters of Astronomy: One of which, is that of those Pamphlets which

were published against the Medicean Planets, of which I had the fortune to

make the discovery; against the existence of which there were brought many

places of Sacred Scripture: Now, that all the World seeth them to be Planets, I

would gladly hear with what new interpretations those very Antagonists do

expound the Scripture, and excuse their own simplicity. The other example is

of  him  who  but  very  lately  hath  Printed  against  Astronomers  and

Philosophers, that the Moon doth not receive its light from the Sun, but is of

its own nature resplendent: which imagination he in the close confirmeth, or,

to  say  better,  perswadeth  himself  that  he  confirmeth  by  sundry  Texts  of

Scripture, which he thinks cannot be reconciled unlesse his opinion should be

true and necessary. Neverthelesse,  the Moon of it self is Tenebrose, and yet

it is no lesse lucid than the Splendor of the Sun.

  Hence it is manifest, that these kinde of Authors, in regard they did not

dive into the true Sence of the Scriptures, would (in case their authority were

of any great moment) have imposed a necessity upon others to believe such

Conclusions for true as were repugnant to manifest Reason, and to Sense.

Which abuse Deus avertat, that it do not gain Countenance and Authority; for

if it should, it would in a short time be necessary to proscribe and inhibit all

the Contemplative Sciences. For being that by nature the number of such as

are very unapt to understand perfectly both the Sacred Scriptures, and the

other Sciences is much greater than that of the skilfull and intelligent; those

of the first sort superficially running over the Scriptures, would arrogate to

themselves an Authority of decreeing upon all the Questions in Nature, by

vertue of some Word by them misunderstood, and produced by the Sacred

Pen-men to another purpose: Nor would the small number of the Intelligent

be able to repress the furious Torrent of those men, who would finde so many

the more followers, in that the gaining the reputation of Wise men without

pains or Study, is far more grateful to humane Nature, than the consuming

our  selves  with  restless  contemplations  about  the  most  painfull  Arts.

Therefore we ought to return infinite thanks to Almighty God, who of his

Goodness freeth us from this fear, in that he depriveth such kinde of persons

of all Authority and, reposeth the Consulting, Resolving, and Decreeing upon

so  important  Determinations  in  the  extraordinary  Wisdom  and  Candor  of

most  Sacred  Fathers;  and  in  the  Supream  Authority  of  those,  who  beingguided by his Holy Spirit, cannot but determin Holily: So ordering things,

that of the levity of those other men, there is no account made. This kinde of

men are those, as I believe, against whom, not without Reason, Grave, and

Holy  Writers  do  so  much  inveigh;  and  of  whom  in  particular  S.  Hierom

writeth:Hanc (Scilicet Sacram cripturam) garrula anus, banc delirus sen [...]x,

hanc  Sophista  verbosus,  hanc  universi  praesumunt,  lacerant,  docent,

antequant  dis  [...]ant.  Alij,  adducto  supercilio,  grandia  verba  trutinantes,

[...]nter mulierculas, de Sacris Lit [...]eris Philosophantur. Alij discunt, proh

pudor! à faeminis, quod viros docens, & ne parum hoc sit, quadam facilitate

verborum, [...] audaciâ, edisserunt aliis, quod ipsi non intelligunt. Taceo de

mei  similibus,  qui  si  forte  ad  Scripturas  Sanctas,  post  siculares  litteras

venerint, & sermone composito, aurem populi mulserint; quicquid dixerint,

hoc legem Des putant: nec scire dignantur, quid Prophetae, quid Apostoli

senserint,  sed  ad  sensum  suum,  incongrua  apta  [...]  [...]  stimonia:  Quasi

grande sit, & non vit [...]ocissimum docendi genus, depravare sententias, &

ad voluntatem suam Scripturamtrahere repugnantem. Jeron. Epist. ad Paul.

103. This (Scilicet the Sacred Scripture) the talking old woman, the doting

old man, the talkative Sophister, all venture upon, lacerate, teach, and that

before they have learnt it. Others induced by Pride, diving into hard words,

Philosophate  amongst  Women,  touching  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Others  (Oh

shameful!) Learn of Women what they teach to Men; and, as if this were

nothing, in a certain facility of words, I may say of confidence, expound to

others what they understand not themselves. I forbear to speak of those of my

own Profession, who, if after Humane Learning they chance to attain to the

Holy Scriptures, and tickle the ears of the people with affected and Studied

expressions, they affirm that all they say, is to be entertained as the Law of

God;  and not stooping to learn what the Prophets and Apostles held, they

force incongruous testimonies to their own Sense: As if it were the genuine,

and  not  corrupt  way  of  teaching  to  deprave  Sentences,  and  Wrest  the

Scripture according to their own singular and contradictory humour.

  I will not rank among these same secular Writers any Theologists, whom I

repute to be men of profound Learning, and sober Manners, and therefore

hold them in great esteem and veneration: Yet I cannot deny but that I have a

certain  scruple  in  my  mind,  and  consequently  am  desirous  to  have  it

removed, whilst I hear that they pretend to a power of constraining others by

Authority of the Scriptures to follow that opinion in Natural Disputations,

which they think most agreeth with the Texts of that: Holding withall, thatthey are not bound to answer the Reasons and Experiments on the contrary:

In Explication and Confirmation of which their judgement they say, That

Theologie  being  the  Queen  of  all  the  Sciences,  she  ought  not  upon  any

account  to  stoop  to  accomodate  her  self  to  the  Positions  of  the  rest,  less

worthy, and inferior to her: But that they ought to refer themselves to her (as

to  their  Supream  Emperess)  and  change  and  alter  their  Conclusions,

according to Theological Statutes and Decrees. And they further add, That if

in the inferior Science there should be any Conclusion certain by vertue of

Demonstrations or experiments, to which there is found in Scripture another

Conclusion  repugnant;  the  very  Professors  of  that  Science  ought  of

themselves to resolve their Demonstrations, and discover the falacies of their

own  Experiments,  without  repairing  to  Theologers  and  Textuaries,  it  not

suiting  (as  hath  been  said)  with  the  dignity  of  Theologie  to  stoop  to  the

investigation of the falacies of the inferior Sciences: But it sufficeth her, to

determine the truth of the Conclusion with her absolute Authority, and by her

infallibility. And then the Natural Conclusions in which they say that we

ought to bide by the meer Authority of the Scripture, without glossing, or

expounding it to Senses different from the Words, they affirm to be Those of

which  the  Scripture  speaketh  alwaies  in  the  same  manner;  and  the  Holy

Fathers all receive, and expound to the same Sense.

  Now as to these Determinations, I have had occasion to consider some

particulars (which I will purpose) for that I was made cautious thereof, by

those  who  understand  more  than  I  in  these  businesses,  and  to  whose

judgements I alwaies submit my self. And first I could say, that there might

possibly  a  certain  kinde  of  equivocation  interpose,  in  that  they  do  not

distinguish the preheminences whereby Sacred Theologie meriteth the Title

of Queen.  For it might be called so, either because that that which is taught

by all the other Sciences, is found to be comprized and demonstrated in it, but

with more excellent means, and with more sublime Learning; in like manner,

as for example; The Rules of measuring of Land, & of Accountantship are

much more excellently contained in the Arithmatick and Geometry of Euclid,

than in the Practises of Surveyours and Accomptants: Or because the Subject

about  which  Theologie  is  conversant,  excelleth  in  Dignity  all  the  other

Subjects,  that  are  the  Matters  of  other  Sciences:  As  also  because  its

Documents are divulged by nobler waies. That the Title and Authority of

Queen belongeth to Theologie in the first Sense, I think that no Theologers

will affirm, that have but any in-sight into the other Sciences; of which thereare none (as I believe) that will say that Geometry, Astronomy Musick, and

Medicine  are  much  more  excellently  and  exactly  contained  in  the  Sacred

Volumes, than in the Books of Archimedes, in Ptolomy, in Boetius, and in

Galen. Therefore it is probable that the Regal Preheminence is given her upon

the second account, namely, By reason of the Subject, and the admirable

communicating  of  the  Divine  Revelations  in  those  Conclusions  which  by

other means could not be conceived by men, and which chiefly concern the

acquist of eternal Beatitude. Now if Theologie being conversant about the

loftiest Divine Contemplation, and residing for Dignity in the Regal Throne

of the Sciences, (whereby she becometh of highest Authority) descendeth not

to the more mean and humble Speculations of the inferior Sciences: Nay; (as

hath  been  declared  above)  hath  no  regard  to  them,  as  not  concerning

Beatitude;  the  Professors  thereof  ought  not  to  arrogate  to  themselves  the

Authority to determin of Controversies in those Professions which have been

neither practised nor studied by them. For this would be as if an Absolute

Prince,  knowing  that  he  might  freely  command,  and  cause  himself  to  be

obeyed,  should  (being  neither  Phisitian  nor  Architect)  undertake  to

administer Medicines, and erect Buildings after his own fashion, to the great

endangering af the lives of the poor Patients, and to the manifest destruction

of the Edifices.

  Again,  to  command  the  very  Professors  of  Astronomy,  that  they  of

themselves  see  to  the  confuting  of  their  own  Observations  and

Demonstrations, as those that can be no other but Falacies and Sophismes, is

to  enjoyn  a  thing  beyond  all  possibility  of  doing:  For  it  is  not  onely  to

command them that they do not see that which they see, and that they do not

understand that which they understand; but that in seeking, they finde the

contrary of that which they happen to meet with. Therefore before that this is

to be done, it would be necessary that they were  shewed the way how to

make the Powers of the Soul to command one another, and the inferior the

Superior; so that the imagination and will might, and should believe contrary

to what the Intellect understands: I still mean in Propositions purely Natural,

and which are not de Fide, and not in the Supernatural, which are de Fide.

  I would entreat these Wise and Prudent Fathers, that they would withal

diligence consider the difference that is between Opinable and Demonstrative

Doctrines: To the end, that well weighing in their minds with what force

Necessary Illations oblige, they might the better ascertain themselves, that it

is not in the Power of the Professors of Demonstrative Sciences to changetheir Opinions at pleasure, and apply themselves one while to one side, and

another  while  to  another;  and  that  there  is  a  great  difference  between

commanding  a  Methametitian  or  a  Philosopher,  and  the  disposing  of  a

Lawyer or a Merchant; and that the demonstrated Conclusions touching the

things  of  Nature  and  of  the  Heavens  cannot  be  changed  with  the  same

facility, as the Opinions are touching what is lawful or not in a Contract,

Bargain, or Bill of Exchange. This difference was well understood by the

Learned and Holy Fathers, as their having been at great pains to confute

many Arguments, or to say better, many Philosophical Fallacies, doth prove

unto us; and as may expresly be read in some of them, and particularly we

have in S. Augustine the following words:Hoc indubitanter tenendum est, ut

quicquid  Sapientes  hujus  Mundi,  de  Natura  rerum  veraciter  demonstrare

potuerint, ostendamus, nostris libris non esse contrarium: quicquid autem illi,

in suis voluminibus, contrarium Sacris Litteris docent, sine ulla dubitatione

credamus,  id  falsissimum  esse,  &  quoquo  modo  possumus,  etiam

ostendamus; atque ita teneamus Fidem Domini nostri, in quasunt absconditi

omnes  thesauri  Sapientiae,  ut  neque  falsae  Philosophiae  loquacitate

seducamur, neque simulata Religionis superstitione terreamur. This is to be

held for an undoubted Truth, That we may be confident, that whatever the

Sages of this World have demonstrated touching Natural Points, is no waies

contrary to our Bibles: And in case they teach any thing in their Books that is

contrary to the Holy Scriptures, we may without any scruple conclude it to be

most false; And according to our ability let us make the same appear: And let

us so keep the Faith of our Lord, in whom are hidden all the Treasures of

Wisdom; that we be neither seduced with the Loquacity of false Philosophy,

nor scared by the superstition of a counterfeit Religion.

  From which words, I conceive that I may collect this Doctrine, namely,

That  in  the  Books  of  the  Wise  of  this  World,  there  are  contained  some

Natural truths that are solidly demonstrated, and others again that are barely

taught; and that as to the first sort, it is the Office of wise Divines to shew

that they are not contrary to the Sacred Scriptures; As to the rest, taught, but

not necessarily demonstrated, if they shall contain any thing contrary to the

Sacred Leaves, it ought to be held undoubtedly false, and such it ought by all

possible waies to be demonstrated.

  If therefore Natural Conclusions veritably demonstrated,Gen. as Litteram.

lib I. Cap.25. are  not to be postposed to the Places of Scripture, but that it

ought  to  be  shewn  how  those  Places  do  not  interfer  with  the  saidConclusions; then its necessary before a Physical Proposition be condemned,

to shew that it is not necessarily demonstrated; and this is to be done not by

them who hold it to be true, but by those who judge it to be false. And this

seemeth very reasonable, and agreeable to Nature; that is to say, that they

may much more easily find the fallacies in a Discourse, who believe it to be

false, than those who account it true and concludent. Nay, in this particular it

will come to passe, that the followers of this opinion, the more that they shall

turn  over  Books,  examine  the  Arguments,  repeat  the  Observations,  and

compare the Experiments, the more shall they be confirmed in this belief.

And  your  Highness  knoweth  what  happened  to  the  late  Mathematick

Professor in the University of Pisa, Who betook himself in his old age to look

into the Doctrine of Copernicus, with hope that he might be able solidly to

confute it (for that he held it so far to be false, as that he had never studied it)

but  it  was  his  fortune,  that  as  soon  as  he  had  understood  the  grounds,

proceedings,  and  demonstrations  of  Copernicus,  he  found  himself  to  be

perswaded, and of an opposer became his most confident Defender. I might

also nominate otherP. Clavius the Jesuite. Mathematicians, who being moved

by my last Discoveries, have confessed it necessary to change the formerly

received Constitution of the World, it not being able by any means to subsist

any longer.

  If for the banishing this Opinion and Hypothesis out of the World, it were

enough  to  stop  the  mouth  of  one  alone,  as  it  may  be  they  perswade

themselves  who  measuring  others  judgements  by  their  own,  think  it

impossible  that  this  Doctrine  should  be  able  to  subsist  and  finde  any

followers, this would be very easie to be done, but the business standeth

otherwise:  For  to  execute  such  a  determination,  it  would  be  necessary  to

prohibite not onely the Book of Copernicus, and the Writings of the other

Authors that follow the same opinion, but to interdict the whole Science of

Astronomy; and which is more, to forbid men looking towards Heaven, that

so they might not see Mars and Venus at one time neer to the Earth, and at

another farther off, with such a difference that the latter is found to be fourty

times,  and  the  former  sixty  times  bigger  in  surface  at  one  time  than  at

another; and to the end, that the same Venus might not be discovered to be

one  while  round,  and  another  while  forked,  with  most  subtil  hornes:  and

many  other  sensible  Observations  which  can  never  by  any  means  be

reconciled to the Ptolomaick Systeme, but are unanswerable Arguments for

the Copernican.  But  the  prohibiting  of  Copernicus  his  Book,  now  that  by  many    new

Observations, and by the application of many of the Learned to the reading of

him, his Hypothesis and Doctrine doth every day appear to be more true,

having  admitted  and  tolerated  it  for  so  many  years,  whilst  he  was  lesse

followed, studied, and confirmed, would seem, in my judgment, an affront to

Truth, and a seeking the more to obscure and suppresse her, the more she

sheweth her self clear and perspicuous.

  The abolishing and censuring, not of the whole Book, but onely so much

of it as concerns this particular opinion of the Earths Mobility, would, if I

mistake not, be a greater detriment to souls, it being an occasion of great

scandal, to see a Position proved, and to see it afterwards made an Heresie to

believe it.

  The prohibiting of the whole Science, what other would it be but an open

contempt of an hundred Texts of the Holy Scriptures, which teach us, That

the Glory, and the Greatnesse of Almighty God is admirably discerned in all

his Works, and divinely read in the Open Book of Heaven? Nor let any one

think that the Lecture of the lofty conceits that are written in those Leaves

finish in only beholding the Splendour of the Sun, and of the Stars, and their

rising and setting, (which is the term to which the eyes of bruits and of the

vulgar  reach)  but  there  are  couched  in  them  mysteries  so  profound,  and

conceipts so sublime, that the vigils, labours, and studies of an hundred and

an hundred acute Wits, have not yet been able thorowly to dive into them

after  the  continual  disquisition  of  some  thousands  of  years.  But  let  the

Unlearned believe, that like as that which their eyes discern in beholding the

aspect  of  a  humane  body,  is  very  little  in  comparison  of  the  stupendious

Artifices, which an exquisite and curious Anatomist or Philosopher finds in

the same when he is searching for the use of so many Muscles, Tendons,

Nerves, and Bones; and examining the Offices of the Heart, and of the other

principal  Members,  seeking  the  seat  of  the  vital  Faculties,  noting  and

observing  the  admirable  structures  of  the  Instruments  of  the  Senses,  and,

without  ever  making  an  end  of  satisfying  his  curiosity  and  wonder,

contemplating the Receptacles of the Imagination, of the Memory, and of the

Understanding;  So  that  which  represents  it  self  to  the  meer  sight,  is  as

nothing in comparison and proportion to the strange Wonders, that by help of

long  and  accurate  Observations  the  Wit  of  Learned  Men  discovereth  in

Heaven. And this is the substance of what I had to consider touching this

particular.  In the next place, as to those that adde, That those Natural Propositions of

which the Scripture still speaks in one constant tenour, and which the Fathers

all unanimously receive in the same sense, ought to be accepted according to

the naked and  literal sense of the Words, without glosses and interpretations;

and received and held for most certain and true; and that consequently the

Mobility of the Sun, and Stability of the Earth, as being such, are de Fide to

be held for true, and the contrary opinion to be deemed Heretical. I shall

propose  to  consideration,  in  the  first  place,  That  of  Natural  Propositions,

some there are, of which all humane Science and Discourse can furnish us

only with some plausible opinion, and probable conjecture rather than with

any certain and demonstrative knowledge; as for example, whether the Stars

be animated: Others there are, of which we have, or may confidently believe

that  we  may  have,  by  Experiments,  long  Observations,  and  Necessary

Demonstrations an undubitable assurance; as for instance, whether the Earth

and Heavens move, or not; whether the Heavens are Spherical, or otherwise.

As to the first sort, I doubt not in the least, that if humane Ratiocinations

cannot reach them, and that consequently there is no Science to be had of

them, but only an Opinion or Belief, we ought fully and absolutely to comply

with the meer Verbal Sense of the Scripture: But as to the other Positions, I

should think (as hath been said above) That we are first to ascertain our

selves of the fact it self, which will assist us in finding out the true senses of

the Scriptures; which shall most certainly be found to accord with the fact

demonstrated, for two truths can never contradict each other. And this I take

to be a Doctrine orthodox and undoubted, for that I finde it written in Saint

Augustine, who speaking to our point of the Figure of Heaven, and what it is

to be believed to be, in regard that which Astronomers affirm concerning it

seemeth to be, contrary to the Scripture, (they holding it to be rotund, and the

Scripture calling it as it were aPelle, a Skin in the Original, but in our Bibles a

Curtain. Curtain, determineth that we are not at all to regard that the Scripture

contradicts Astronomers; but to believe its Authority, if that which they say

shall be false, and founded only on the conjectures of humane infirmity: but

if that which which they affirm be proved by indubitable Reasons, this Holy

Father  doth  not  say,  that  the  Astronomers  are  to  be  enjoyned,  that  they

themselves resolving and renouncing their Demonstrations do declare their

Conclusion to be false, but saith, that it ought to be demonstrated, That what

is said in Scripture of a Curtain is not contrary to their true Demonstrations.

These are his words: Sed ait aliquis, quomodo non est contrarium iis, quifiguram  Sphaerae  Coelo  tribunt,  quod  scriptum  est  in  Libris  Nostris,  Qui

extendit Coelum, sicut pellem? Sit sanè contraritem, si falsum est, quod illi

dicunt: hoc enim verum est, qu [...]d Divina dicit authoritas, potius quam

illud,  qu  [...]d  humana  infirmitas  conjicit.  Sea  si  forte  illud  talibus  illi

documentis probare potuerint, ut dubitari inde non debeat; demonstrandum

est, hoc quod apud nos est de Pelle dictum, veris illis rationibus non esse

contrarium.  But  some  object;  How  doth  it  appear,  that  the  saying  in  our

Bibles, Who stretcheth out the Heaven as a Curtain, maketh not against those

who maintain the Heavens to be in figure of a Sphere? Let it be so, if that be

false  which  they  affirme:  For  that  is  truth  which  is  spoke  by  Divine

Authority, rather than  that which proceeds from Humane Infirmity. But if

peradventure they should be able to prove their Position by such Experiments

as puts it out of question, it is to be proved, that vvhat is said in Scripture

concerning a Curtain, doth in no vvise contradict their manifest Reasons.

  He  proceedeth  afterwards  to  admonish  us  that  we  ought  to  be  no  less

careful and observant in reconciling a Text of Scripture with a demonstrated

Natural Proposition, than w [...]th another Text of Scripture which should

sound to a contrary Sense. Nay methinks that the circumspection of this Saint

is worthy to be admired and imitated, who even in obscure Conclusions, and

of  which  we  may  assure  our  selves  that  we  can  have  no  knowledge  or

Science by humane demonstration, is very reserved in determining what is to

be believed, as we see by that which he writeth in the end of his second

Book, de Genesi ad Litteram, speaking, whether the Stars are to be believed

animate:Quod  licet  in  praesenti  facile  non  possit  comprehendi;  arbitror

tamen,  in  processu  tractandarum  Scripturarum,  opportuniora  loca  posse

occurrere, ubi nobis de hac re, secundum Sancta auctoritatis Litteras, etsi non

ost endere certum aliquid, tamen credere licebit. Nunc autem, servatâ semper

modoratione piae gravitatis, nihil credere dere obscura temere debemus; ne

fortè, quod postea veritas patefecerit, quamvis Libris Sanctis, sive Testamenti

veteris, sive, novi nullo modo esse possit aeeversum, tamen propter amorem

nostri  erroris,  oderimus.  Which  particular,  although  (at  present)  it  cannot

easily be comprehended, yet I suppose in our farther Progress of handling the

Scriptures, we may meet with some more pertinent places, upon which it will

be  permitted  us  (if  not  to  determin  any  thing  for  certain,  yet)  to  suggest

somewhat  concerning  this  matter,  according  to  the  dictates  of  Sacred

Authority. But novv, the moderation of pious gravity being alwaies observed,

vve ought to receive nothing rashly in a doubtful point, least perhaps vvereject that out of respect to our Errour, vvhich hereafter Truth may discover,

to be in no vvise repugnant to the Sacred Volumes of the Old and Nevv

Testament.

  By this and other places (if I deceive not my self) the intent of the Holy

Fathers appeareth to be, That in Natural questions, and which are not de Fide,

it is first to be considered, whether they be indubitably demonstrated, or by

sensible  Experiments  known;  or  whether  such  a  knowledge  and

demonstration is to be had; which having obtained, and it being the gift of

God, it ought to be applyed to find out the true Sences of the Sacred Pages in

those  places,  which  in  appearance  might  seem  to  speak  to  a  contrary

meaning:  Which  will  unquestionably  be  pierced  into  by  Prudent  Divines,

together with the occasions that moved the Holy Ghost,Id. D Aug. in Gen. ad

Litteram, lib. 1. in sine. (for our exercise, or for some other reason to me

unknown) to veil it self sometimes under words of different significations.

  As to the other point, Of our regarding the Primary Scope of those Sacred

Volumes, I cannot think that their having spoken alwaies in the same tenour,

doth any thing at all disturb this Rule. For if it hath been the Scope of the

Scripture by way of condescention to the capacity of the Vulgar at any time,

to  express    a  Proposition  in  words,  that  bear  a  sense  different  from  the

Essence of the said Proposition; why might it not have observed the same,

and for the same respect, as often as it had occasion to speak of the same

thing? Nay I conceive, that to have done otherwise, would but have encreased

the confusion, and diminished the credit that these Sacred Records ought to

have amongst the Common People.

  Again, that touching the Rest and Motion of the Sun and Earth, it was

necessary, for accommodation▪ to Popular Capacity, to assert that which the

Litteral sense of the Scripture importeth, experience plainly proveth: For that

even to our dayes people far less rude, do continue in the same Opinion upon

Reasons, that if they were well weighed and examined, would be found to be

extream  trivial,  and  upon  Experiments,  either  wholly  false,  or  altogether

besides the purpose. Nor is it worth while to go about to remove them from it,

they being incapable of the contrary Reasons that depend upon too exquisite

Observations, and too subtil Demonstrations, grounded upon Abstractions,

which, for the comprehending of them, require too strong an Imagination.

Whereupon, although that the Stability of Heaveu, and Motion of the Earth

should be more than certain and demonstrated to the Wise; yet nevertheless it

would be necessary, for the conservation of credit amongst the Vulgar, toaffirm the contrary: For that of a thousand ordinary men, that come to be

questioned concerning these particulars, its probab [...]e that there will not be

found so much as one that will not answer that he thinketh, and so certainly

he doth, that the Sun moveth, and the Earth standeth still. But yet none ought

to take this common Popular Assent to be any Argument of the truth of that

which is affirmed: For if we should examine these very men touching the

grounds and motives by which they are induced to believe in that manner;

and  on  the  other  side  should  hear  what  Experiments  and  Demonstrations

perswade those few others to believe the contrary, we should finde these

latter  to  be  moved  by  most  solid  Reasons,  and  the  former  by  simple

appearances,  and  vain  and  ridiculous  occurrences.  That  therefore  it  was

necessary to assign Motion to the Sun, and Rest to the earth, lest the shallow

capacity of the Vulgar should be confounded, amused, and rendred obstinate

and contumacious, in giving credit to the principal Articles, and which are

absolutely de fide, it is sufficiently obvious. And if it was necessary so to do,

it is not at all to be wondred at, that it was with extraordinary Wisdom so

done, in the Divine Scriptures.

  But I will alledge further, That not onely a respect to the Incapacity of the

Vulgar, but the current Opinion of those times  made the Sacred Writers, in

the points that were not necessary to salvation, to accommodate themselves

more to the received use, than to the true Essence of things: Of which S.

Hierom  treating,  writeth:Quasi  non  mu  [...]tain  Scripturis  Sanctis  dicantur

juxta  opinionem  illius  temporis  quo  gesta  referunt,  &  non  juxta  quod  rei

veritas contenebat. D. Hiero. in c. 28. Jerem. As if many things were not

spoken in the Holy Scriptures according to the judgement of those times in

which they were acted, and not according to that which truth contained. And

elsewhere,  the  same  Saint:Consuetudinis  Scripturarum  est,  ut  opinionem

multarum  rerum  sic  narret  Historicus,  quomodo  eo  tempore  ab  omnibus

credebatur. In ca. Matth. It is the custome for the Pen-men of Scripture, to

deliver their Judgments in many things, according to the common received

opinion that their times had of them. AndD. Thomas, in ca. Job. v. 7. S.

Thomas Aquinas in Job upon those words, Qui extendit Aquilonem super

vacuum, & appendit Terram super nihilum: Noteth that the Scripture calleth

that space Vacuum and Nihilum, which imbraceth and invironeth the Earth,

and which we know, not to be empty, bat filled with Air, Neverthelesse, saith

he, The Scripture to comply with the apprehension of the Vulgar, who think

that in that same space there is nothing, calleth it Vacuum and Nihilum. Herethe words of S. Thomas, Quod de superiori Haemisphaerio Coeli nihil nobis

apparet, nisi spatium aëre plenum, quod vulgares homines reputant Vacuum;

loquitur enim secundum existimationem vulgarium hominum, prout est mos

in  Sacra  Scriptura.  Now  from  this  Place  I  think  one  may  very  Logically

argue, That the Sacred Scripture for the same respect had much more reason

to phrase the Sun moveable, and the Earth immoveable. For if we should try

the capacity of the Common People, we should find them much more unapt

to be perswaded of the stability of the Sun, and Motion of the Earth, than that

the space that environeth it is full of Air. Therefore if the sacred Authors, in

this point, which had not so much difficulty to be beat into the capacity of the

Vulgar, have notwithstanding forborn to attempt perswading them unto it, it

must  needs  seem  very  reasonable  that  in  other  Propositions  much  more

abstruse they have observed the same stile. Nay Copernicus himself, knowing

what power an antiquated custome and way of conceiving things become

familiar to us from our infancy hath in our Fancy, that he might not increase

confusion and difficulty in our apprehensions, after he had first demonstrated,

That  the  Motions  which  appear  to  us  to  belong  to  the  Sun,  or  to  the

Firmament, are really in the Earth; in proceeding afterwards to reduce them

into Tables, and to apply them to use, he calleth them the Motions of the Sun,

and of the Heaven that is above the Planets; expresly terming them the Rising

and  Setting  of  the  Sun  and  Stars;  and  mutations  in  the  obliquity  of  the

Zodiack, and variations in the points of the Equinoxes, the Middle Motion,

Anomalia, Prosthaphaeresis of the Sun; and such other things; which do in

reality belong to the Earth: But because  being joyned to it, and consequently

having a share in every of its motions, we cannot immediately discern them

in her, but are forced to refer them to the Celestial Bodies in which they

appear; therefore we call them as if they were made there, where they seem to

us to be made. Whence it is to be noted how nenessary it is to accommodate

our discourse to our old and accustomed manner of understanding.

  That, in the next place, the common consent of Fathers, in receiving a

Natural Proposition of Scripture, all in the same sense ought to Authorize it

so far, as to make it become a matter of Faith to believe it to beNamely,

according to the Litteral Sense. so, I should think that it ought at most to be

understood of those Conclusions onely, which have been by the said Fathers

discussed, and sifted with all possible diligence, and debated on the one side,

and on the other, and all things in the end concurring to disprove the one, and

prove the other. But the Mobility of the Earth, and Stability of the Sun, arenot of this kinde; For, that the said Opinion was in those times totally buried,

and never brought amongst the Questions of the Schools, and not considered,

much less followed by any one: So that it is to be believed that it never so

much as entered into the thought of the Fathers to dispute it, the Places of

Scripture, their own Opinion, and the assent of men having all concurred in

the same judgement, without the contradiction of any one, so far as we can

finde.

  Besides, it is not enough to say that the Fathers all admit the stability of

the Earth, &c. Therefore to believe it is a matter of Faith: But its necessary to

prove that they have condemned the contrary Opinion: For I may affirm and

bide by this, That their not having occasion to make satisfaction upon the

same, and to discuss it, hath made them to omit and admit it, onely as current,

but not as resolved and proved. And I think I have very good Reason for what

I say; For either the Fathers did make reflection upon this Conclusion as

controverted, or not: If not, then they could determin nothing concerning it,

no not in their private thoughts; and their incogitance doth not oblige us to

receive those Precepts which they have not, so much as in their intentions

enjoyned. But if they did reflect and consider thereon, they would long since

have condemned it, if they had judged it erroneous; which we do not find that

they have done. Nay, after that some Divines have began to consider it, we

find that they have not deem’d it erroneous; as we read in the Commentaries

of Didacus a Stunica upon Job, in Ca, v. 6. on the words, Qui commovet

Terram de loco suo, &c. Where he at large discourseth upon the Copernican

Hypothesis, and concludeth, That the Mobility of the Earth, is not contrary to

Scripture.

  Withal, I may justly question the truth of that determination, namely, That

the Church enjoyneth us to hold such like Natural  Conclusions as matters of

Faith, onely because they bear the stamp of an unanimous Interpretation of all

the Fathers: And I do suppose that it may possibly be, that those who hold in

this manner, might possibly have gone about in favour of their own Opinion,

to have amplified the Decretal of the Councils; which I cannot finde in this

case to prohibit any other, save onely, Perverting to Senses contrary to that of

Holy Church, or of the concurrent consent of Fathers, those places, and those

onely that do pertain either to Faith or Manners, or concern our edification in

the Doctrine of Christianity: And thus speaks the Council of Trent. Concil.

Trid. Sess. 4. Sess. 4. But the Mobility or Stability of the Earth, or of the Sun,

are not matters of Faith, nor contrary to Manners, nor is there any one, thatfor  the  stablishing  of  this  Opinion,  will  pervert  places  of  Scripture  in

opposition to the Holy Church, or to the Fathers: Nay, Those who have writ

of this Doctrine, did never make use of Texts of Scripture; that they might

leave it still in the breasts of Grave and Prudent Divines to interpret the said

Places, according to their true meaning.

  And how far the Decrees of Councills do comply with the Holy Fathers in

these particulars, may be sufficiently manifest, in that they are so far from

enjoyning to receive such like Natural Conclusions for matters of Faith, or

from censuring the contrary Opinions as erronious; that rather respecting the

Primitive  and  primary  intention  of  the  Holy  Church,  they  do  adjudge  it

unprofitable to be busied in examining the truth thereof. Let your Highness

be pleased to hear once again what S. Augustine answers to to those Brethren

who put the Question, Whether it be true that Heaven moveth, or standeth

still?His  resp  [...]ndeo,  mul  [...]um  subuliter,  &  laboriosis  rationibus,  ista

perquiri, ut vere percipiatur, utrum ita, an non ita sit: quibus ineundis atque

tractandis, nec mihi jam, tem [...]us est, nec illis esse debet, quos ad salutem

suam, Sanctae Ecclesiae necessariam utilitatem cupimus informari. To these I

answer,  That  Points  of  this  nature  require  a  curious  and  profound

examination, that it may truly appear whether they be true or false; a work

inconsistent with my leasure to undertake or go thorow with, nor is it any

way  necessary  for  those,  whom  we  desire  to  inform  of  things  that  more

nearly concern their own salvation and The Churches Benefit.

  But yet although in Natural Propositions we were to take the resolution of

condemning  or  admitting  them  from  Texts  of  Scripture  unanimously

expounded in the same Sense by all the Fathers, yet do I not see how this

Rule can hold in our Case; for that upon the same Places we read several

Expositions  in  the  Fathers;  Non  solem,  sed  Primum  Mobile  immotum

constitisse: Dionis. Areop. Dionysius Areopagita saying, That the Primum

Mobile, and not the Sun stand still. Saint Augustine is of the same Opinion;

Omnia corpora Caelestia, immota substitisse: All the Celestial Bodies were

immoveable.  And  with  them  concurreth  Abulensis.  But  which  is  more,

amongst  the  Jewish  Authors  (whom  Josephus  applauds)  some  have

held,Solem revera non substitisse immotum, sed probrevi tempore, intra quod

Israelitae, hostes suos fuderunt, id ita visumesse. That  The Sun did not really

stand still, but seemed so to do, during the short time in which Israel gave the

overthrow  to  their  Enemies.  So  for  the  Miracle  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah,

Paulus Burgensis is of opinion that it was not wrought on the Sun, but on theDiall. But that, in short, it is necessary to Glosse and Interpret the words of

the Text in Joshua, when ever the Worlds Systeme is in dispute,Isa. Ca. I

shall shew anon. Now finally, granting to these Gentlemen more than they

demand, to wit, That we are wholly to acquiesce in the judgment of Judicious

Divines, and that in regard that such a particular Disquisition is not found to

have been made by the Ancient Fathers, it may be undertaken by the Sages of

our Age, who having first heard the Experiments, Observations, Reasons, and

Demonstrations of Philosophers and Astronomers, on the one side, and on the

other (seeing that the Controversie is about Natural Problems, and Necessary

Dilemma’s, and which cannot possibly be otherwise than in one of the two

manners in controversie) they may with competent certainty determine what

Divine  Inspirations  shall  dictate  to  them.  But  that  without  minutely

examining and discussing all the Reasons on both sides; and without ever

comming to any certainty of the truth of the Case, such a Resolution should

be taken, Is not to be hoped from those who do not stick to hazzard the

Majesty and Dignity of the Sacred Scripture, in defending the reputation of

their vain Fancies; Nor to be feared from those who make it their whole

businesse, to examine with all intensness, what the Grounds of this Doctrine

are; and that only in an Holy Zeal for Truth, the Sacred Scriptures, and for the

Majesty, Dignity, and Authority, in which every Christian should indeavour

to have them maintained. Which Dignity, who seeth not that it is with greater

Zeal desired and procured by those who, absolutely submitting themselves to

the Holy Church, desire, not that this, or that opinion may be prohibited, but

onely that such things may be proposed to consideration, as may the more

ascertain her in the safest choice, than by those who being blinded by their

particular Interest, or stimulated by malitious suggestions, preach that she

should, without more ado, thunder out Curses, for that she had power so to

do: Not considering that all that may be done is not alwayes convenient to be

done. The Holy Fathers of old were not of this opinion, but rather knowing of

how  great  prejudice,  and  how  much  against  the  primary  intent  of  the

Catholick Church, it would be to go about from Texts of Scripture to decide

Natural  Conclusions,  touching  which,  either  Experiments  or  necessary

Demonstrations, might in time to come evince the contrary, of that which the

naked sense of the Words soundeth, they have  not only proceeded with great

circumspection, but have left the following Precepts for the instruction of

others.In  rebus  obscuris,  at  que  à  nostris  oculis  remotissimis,  siqua  inde

scripta etiam divina legerimus, quae possint salva fide, qua [...]imbuimur,aliis atque aliis parere sententiis, in nullam earum nos praecipiti affirmatione

ita projiciamus, ut si forte diligentiùs discussa veritas ea¯ recte labefactaverit,

corr [...]amus: non pro sententia Divinarum Scripturarum, sed pro nostra ita

dimicantes, ut eam velimus Scriturarum esse, quae nostra est, cum potius cam

quae Scripturarum est, nostram esse velle debeamus. Divus Augustin. in Gen.

ad Litteram, lib. 2. c. 18. & seq. In points obscure and remote from our Sight,

if we come to read any thing out of Sacred Writ, that, with a Salvo to the

Faith that we have imbued, may correspond with several constructions, let us

not so farre throw our selves upon any of them with a precipitous obstinacy,

as that if, perhaps the Truth being more diligently search’t into, it should

justly fall to the ground, we might fall together with it: and so shew that we

contend not for the sense of Divine Scriptures, but our own, in that we would

have that which is our own to be the sense of Scriptures, vvhen as vve should

rather desire the Scriptures meaning to be ours.

  He  goeth  on,  and  a  little  after  teacheth  us,  that  no  Proposition  can  be

against the Faith, unlesse first it be demonstrated false; saying,Tam diu non

est extra fidem, donec Veritate certissima refellatur. Quod si factum fuerit,

non hoc habebat Divina Scriptura, sed hoc senserat humana Ignorantia. Ibid.

Tis not all the while contrary to Faith, until it be disproved by most certain

Truth,  which  if  it  should  so  be,  the  Holy  Scripture  affirm’d  it  not,  but

Humane Ignorance supposed it. Whereby we see that the senses which we

impose on Texts of Scripture, would be false, when ever they should disagree

with Truths demonstrated. And therefore we ought, by help of demonstrated

Truth, to seek the undoubted sense of Scripture: and not according to the

sound of the words, that may seem true to our weaknesse, to go about, as it

were,  to  force  Nature,  and  to  deny  Experiments  and  Necessary

Demonstrations.

  Let  Your  Highnesse  be  pleased  to  observe  farther,  with  how  great

circumspection  this  Holy  Man  proceedeth,  before  he  affirmeth  any

Interpretation of Scripture to be sure, and in such wise certain, as that it need

not fear the encounter of any difficulty that may procure it disturbance, for

not  contenting  himself  that  some  sense  of  Scripture  agreeth  with  some

Demonstration,  he  subjoynes.  Si  autem  hoc  verum  esse  vera  ratio

demonstraverit,  adhuc  incertum  erit,  utrum  hoc  in  illis  verbis  Sanctorum

Librorum, Scriptor sentiri voluerit, an aliquid aliud non minus verum. Quod s

[...]caetra  contextio  sermonis  non  hoc  eum  voluisse  probaverit,  non  ideo

falsum erit aliud, quod ipse intelligi voluit, sed & verum, & quod utiliuscognoscatur. But if right Reason shall demonstrate this to be true, yet is it

questionable whether in these words of Sacred Scripture the Pen-man would

have this to be understood, or somewhat else, no lesse true. And in case the

Context of his Words shall prove that he intended not this, yet will not that

which he would have to be understood be therefore false, but most true, aad

that which is more profitable to be knovvn.

  But  that  which  increaseth  our  wonder  concerning  the  circumspection, 

wherewith this Pious Author proceedeth, is, that not trusting to his observing,

that both Demonstrative Reasons, and the sense that the words of Scripture

and the rest of the Context both precedent and subsequent, do conspire to

prove the same thing, he addeth the following words.

  Si  autem  contextio  Scripturae,  hoc  voluiss  intelligi  Scriptorem,  non

repugnaverit, adhuc restabit quaerere, utrum & aliud non potuerit. But if the

Context do not hold forth any thing that may disprove this to be the Authors

Sense, it yet remains to enquire, Whether the other may not be intended also.

And not yet resolving to accept of one Sense, or reject another, but thinking

that he could never use sufficient caution, he proceedeth: Quod si & aliud

potuisse  invenerimus,  incertum  erit;  quidnam  eorum  ille  voluerit:  aut

utrumque voluisse non inconvenienter creditur, si utriusque sententiae certa

circumstantia sufragatur. But if so be we finde that the other may be also

meant, it vvill be doubted which of them he would have to stand; or which in

probability he may be thought to aim at, if the true circumstances on both

sides be weighed. And lastly, intending to render a Reason of this his Rule,

by  shewing  us  to  what  perils  those  men  expose  the  Scriptures,  and  the

Church;  who,  more  respecting  the  support  of  their  own  errours,  than  the

Scriptures Dignity, would stretch its Authority beyond the Bounds which it

prescribeth to it self, he subjoyns the ensuing words, which of themselves

alone  might  suffice  to  repress  and  moderate  the  excessive  liberty,  which

some think that they may assume to themselves: Plerumque enim accidit, ut

aliquid  de  Terra,  de  Celo,  de  ceteris  hujus  mundi  elementis,  de  motu,

conversione,  vel  etiam  magnitudine  &  intervallis  Syderum,  de  certis

defectibus Solis, & Lunae, de eircuitibus annorum & temporum; de Naturis

animalium,  fruticum,  lapidum,  atque  hujusmodi  ceteris,  etiam  non

Christianus  ita  noverit,  ut  cirtissima  ratione  vel  experientiâ  teneat.  Turpe

autem est nimis & perniciosum, ac maxime cavendum, ut Christianum de his

rebus  quasi  secundum  Christianas  litteras  loquentem,  ita  delirare  quilibet

infidelis audiat, ut, quem admodum dicitur, toto Caelo errare conspiciens,risu¯tenere  vix  possit:  &  non  tam  molestum  est,  quod  errans  homo

derideretur,  sed  quod  auctores  nostri,  ab  tis  qui  foris  sunt,  talia  sensisse

creduntur, & cum magno exitio corim, de quorum salute satagimus, tanquam

indocti reprehenduntur atque respuuntur. Cum enim quemquam de numero

Christianorum eai [...]re, quam ipsi optime norunt, deprehenderint, & vanam

sententiam  suam  de  nostris  libris  asserent;  quo  pacto  illis  Libris  credituri

sunt,  de  Resurrectione  Mortuorum,  &  de  spe  vitae  eternae,  Regnoque

Celorum; quando de his rebus quas jam experiri, vel indubitatis rationibus

percipere potuerunt, fallaciter putaverint esse conscriptos. For it many times

falls out, that a Christian may not so fully understand a Point concerning the

Earth, Heaven, and the rest of this Worlds Elements; the Motion, Conversion,

Magnitude, and Distances of the Stars, the certain defects of the Sun and

Moon, the Revolutions of Years and Times, the Nature of Animals, Fruits,

Stones, and other things of like nature, as to defend the same by right Reason,

or  make  it  out  by  Experiments.  But  its  too  great  an  absurdity,  yea  most

pernicious, and chiefly to be avoided, to let an Infidel finde a Christian so

stupid,  that  he  should  argue  these  matters;  as  if  they  were  according  to

Christian  Doctrine;  and  make  him  (as  the  Proverb  saith)  scarce  able  to

contain his laughter, seeing him so far from the Mark. Nor is the matter so

much that one in an errour should be laught at, but that our Authors should be

thought by them that are without, to be of the same Opinion, and to the great

prejudice of those, whose salvation we wait for, sensured and rejected as

unlearned.  For  when  they  shal  confute  any  one  of  the  Christians  in  that

matter,  vvhich  they  themselvs  thorovvly  understand,  and  shall  thereupon

express  their  light  esteem  of  our  Books;  hovv  shall  these  Volumes  be

believed touching the Resurrection of the Dead, the Hope of eternal Life, and

the Kingdom of Heaven; vvhen, as to these Points vvhich admit of present

Demonstration,  or  undoubted  Reasons,  they  conceive  them  to  be  falsly

vvritten.

  And how much the truly Wise and Prudent Fathers are displeased with

these men, who in defence of Propositions which they do not understand, do

apply, and in a certain sense pawn Texts of Scripture, and afterwards go on to

encrease their first Errour, by producing other places less understood than the

former. The same Saint declareth in the expressions following: Quid enim

molestiae,  tristiaeque  ingerant  prudentibus  fratribus,  tenerar  [...]j

praesumpiores,  satis  dici  non  potest,  cum,  si  quando  de  falsa  &  prava

opinione sua reprehendi & convinci caeperint, ab iis qui nostrorum librorumauctoritate, & apertissima falsitate dixerunt, eosdnm libros Sanctos, unde id

probent,  proferre  conantur;  vel  etiam  memoriter,  quae  ad  testimonium  v

[...]lere arbitrantur, multa inde verba pronunciant, non intelligentes, neque

quae loquuntur, neque de quibus affirmant. What trouble and sorrow weak

undertakers bring upon their knowing Brethren, is not to be expressed; since

vvhen  they  begin  to  be  told  and  convinced  of  their  false  and  unsound

Opinion, by those vvho have no respect for the Authority of our Scriptures, in

defence of vvhat through a fond Temerity, and most manifest falsity, they

have urged; they fall to citing the said Sacred Books for proof of it, or else

repeat many vvords by heart out of them, vvhich they conceive to make for

their purpose; not knovving either what they say, or vvhereof they affirm.

  In the number of these we may, as I conceive, account those, who, being

either  unwilling  or  unable  to  understand  the  Demonstrations  and

Experiments, wherewith the Author and followers of this Opinion do confirm

it, run upon all occasions to the Scriptures, not considering that the more they

cite them, and the more they persist in affirming that they are very clear, and

do admit no other senses, save those which they force upon them, the greater

injury they do to the Dignity of them (if we allowed that their judgments

were of any great Authority) in case that the Truth coming to be manifestly

known to the contrary, should occasion any confusion, at least to those who

are separated from the Holy Church; of whom yet she is very solicitous, and

like  a  tender  Mother,  desirous  to  recover  them  again  into  her  Lap  Your

Highness therefore may see how praeposterously those Persons proceed, who

in Natural Disputations do range Texts of Scripture in the Front for their

Arguments;  and  such  Texts  too  many  times,  as  are  but  superficially

understood by them.

  But if these men do verily think, & absolutely believe that they have the

true sence of Such a particular place of Scripture, it must needs follow of

consequence, that they do likewise hold for, certain, that they have found the

absolute truth of that Natural Conclusion, which they intend to dispute: And

that withal, they do know that they have a great advantage of their Adversary,

whose  Lot  it  is  to  defend  the  part  that  is  false;  in  regard  that  he  who

maintaineth  the  Truth,  may  have  many  sensible  experiments,  and  many

necessary Demonstrations on his side; whereas his Antagonist can make use

of no other than deceitful appearances, Paralogisms and Sophisms. Now if

they keeping within natural bounds, & producing no other Weapons but those

of Philosophy, pretend however, to have so much advantage of their Enemy;why do they afterwards  in coming to engage, presently betake themselves to

a  Weapon  inevitable  &  dreadful  to  terrifie  their  Opponent  with  the  sole

beholding of it? But if I may speak the truth, I believe that they are the first

that are affrighted, and that perceiving themselves unable to bear up against

the assaults of theit Adversary, go about to find out ways how to keep them

far enough off, forbidding unto them the use of the Reason which the Divine

Bounty  had  vouchsafed  them,  &  abusing  the  most  equitable  Authority  of

sacred Scripture, which rightly understood and applyed, can never, according

to the common Maxime of Divines, oppose the Manifest Experiments, or

Necessary Demonstrations. But these mens running to the Scriptures for a

Cloak  to  their  inability  to  comprehend,  not  to  say  resolve  the  Reasons

alledged against them, ought (if I be not mistaken) to stand them in no stead:

the Opinion which they oppose having never as yet been condemned by Holy

Church. So that if they would proceed with Candor, they should either by

silence confess themselves unable to handle such like points, or first consider

that it is not in the power of them or others,If this passage seem harsh, the

Reader must remember that I do but Translate. but onely in that of the Pope,

and of Sacred Councils to censure a Position to be Erroneous: But that it is

left  to  their  freedome  to  dispute  concerning  its  falsity.  And  thereupon,

knowing that it is impossible that a Proposition should at the same time be

True and Heretical; they ought, I say, to imploy themselves in that work

which is most proper to them, namely, in demonstrating the falsity thereof:

whereby they may see how needlesse the prohibiting of it is, its falshood

being  once  discovered,  for  that  none  would  follow  it:  or  the  Prohibition

would be safe, and without all danger of Scandal. Therefore first let these

men apply themselves to examine the Arguments of Copernicus and others;

and leave the condemning of them for Erroneous and Heretical to whom it

belongeth: But yet let them not hope ever to finde such rash and precipitous

Determinations in the Wary and Holy Fathers, or in the absolute Wisdome of

him that cannot erre, as those into which they suffer themselves to be hurried

by some particular Affection or Interest of their own. In these and such other

Positions, which are not directly de Fide, certainly no man doubts but His

Holiness hath alwayes an absolute power of Admitting or Condemning them,

but it is not in the power of any Creature to make them to be true or false,

otherwise than of their own nature, and de facto they are.

  Therefore it is in my judgment more discretion to assure us first of the

necessary and immutable Truth of the Fact, (over which none hath power)than without that certainty by condemning one part to deprive ones self of

that authority of freedome  to elect, making those Determinations to become

necessary, which at present are indifferent and arbitrary, and rest in the will

of Supreme Authority. And in a word, if it be not possible that a Conclusion

should be declared Heretical, whilst we are not certain, but that it may be

true, their pains are in vain who pretend to condemn the Mobility of the Earth

and  Stability  of  the  Sun,  unlesse  they  have  first  demonstrated  it  to  be

impossible and false.

  It remaineth now, that we consider whether it be true, that the Place in

Joshuah may be taken without altering the pure signification of the words:

and how it can be that the Sun, obeying the command of Joshuah, which was,

That  it  should  stand  still,  the  day  might  thereupon  be  much  lengthened.

Which  businesse,  if  the  Celestial  Motions  be  taken  according  to  the

Ptolomaick Systeme, can never any wayes happen, for that the Sun moving

thorow the Ecliptick, according to the order of the Signes, which is from East

to West (which is that which maketh Day and Night) it is a thing manifest,

that  the  Sun  ceasing  its  true  and  proper  Motion,  the  day  would  become

shorter and not longer; and that on the contrary, the way to lengthen it would

be to hasten and velocitate the Suns motion; insomuch that to cause the Sun

to stay above the Horizon for some time, in one and the same place, without

declining towards the West, it would be necessary to accelerate its motion in

such a manner as that it might seem equal to that of the Primum Mobile,

which would be an accelerating it about three hundred and sixty times more

than ordinary. If therefore Joshuah had had an intention that his words should

be taken in their pure and proper signification, he would have bid the Sun to

have accelerated its Motion so, that the Rapture of the Primum Mobile might

not carry it to the West: but because his words were heard by people which

haply knew no other Celestial Motion, save this grand and common one,

from East to West, stooping to their Capacity, and having no intention to

teach them the Constitution of the Spheres, but only that they should perceive

the greatness of the Miracle wrought, in the lengthening of the Day, he spoke

according  to  their  apprehension.  Possibly  this  Consideration  moved

Dionysius Areopagita to say that in this Miracle the Primum Mobile stood

still, and this stopping, all the Celestial Spheres did of consequence stay: of

which opinion is S. Augustine himself, and Abulensis at large confirmeth it.

Yea, that Joshua’s intention was, that the whole Systeme of the Celestial

Spheres should stand still, is collected from the command he gave at the sametime to the Moon, although that it had nothing to do in the lengthening of the

day; and under the injunction laid upon the  Moon, we are to understand the

Orbes of all the other Planets, passed over in silence here, as also in all other

places of the Sacred Scriptures; the intention of which, was not to teach us

the Astronomical Sciences. I suppose therefore, (if I be not deceived) that it is

very plain, that if we allow the Ptolemaick Systeme, we must of necessity

interpret  the  words  to  some  sense  different  from  their  strict  signification.

Which Interpretation (being admonished by the most usefull precepts of S.

Augustine) I will not affirm to be of necessity this above-mentioned, since

that some other man may haply think of some other more proper, and more

agreeable Sense.

  But  now,  if  this  same  passage  may  be  understood  in  the  Copernican

Systeme,  to  agree  better  with  what  we  read  in  Joshuah,  with  the  help  of

another Observation by me newly shewen in the Body of the Sun; I will

propound it to consideration, speaking alwaies with those safe Reserves; That

I am not so affectionate to my own inventions, as to prefer them before those

of other men, and to believe that better and more agreeable to the intention of

the Sacred Volumes cannot be produced.

  Supposing therefore in the first place, that in the Miracle of Joshuah, the

whole  Systeme  of  the  Celestial  Revolutions  stood  still,  according  to  the

judgement of the afore-named Authors: And this is the rather to be admitted,

to the end, that by the staying of one alone, all the Constitutions might not be

confounded, and a great disorder needlesly introduced in the whole course of

Nature: I come in the second place to consider how the Solar Body, although

stable in one constant place, doth nevertheless revolve in it self, making an

entire Conversion in the space of a Month, or thereabouts; as I conceive I

have solidly demonstrated in my Letters Delle Machie Solari: Which motion

we sensibly see to be in the upper part of its Globe, inclined towards the

South; and thence towards the lower part, to encline towards the North, just

in the same manner as all the other Orbs of the Planets do. Thirdly, If we

respect  the  Nobility  of  the  Sun,  and  his  being  the  Fountain  of  Light,  by

which, (as I necessarily demonstrate) not onely the Moon and Earth, but all

the  other  Planets  (all  in  the  same  manner  dark  of  themselves)  become

illuminated; I conceive that it will be no unlogicall Illation to say, That it, as

the Grand Minister of Nature, and in a certain sense the Soul and Heart of the

World, infuseth into the other Bodies which environ it; not onely Light, but

Motion also; by revolving [...] On its own Axis. in it self: So that in the samemanner  that  the  motion  of  the  Heart  of  an  Animal  ceasing,  all  the  other

motions of its Members would cease; so, the Conversion of the Sun ceasing,

[...] Conversions of all the Planets would stand still. And though  I could

produce the testimonies of many grave Writers to prove the admirable power

and influence of the Sun, I will content my self with one sole place of Holy

Dionisius Areopagita in his Book de Divinis Nominibus; who thus writes of

the  Sun:Lux  ejus  colligit,  convertitque  ad  se  omnia,  quae  videntur,  quae

moventur, quae illustrantur, quae calescunt, & uno nomine ea, quae ab ejus

splendore  continentur.  Itaque  Sol  [...]  dicitur,  quod  omnia  congreget,

colligatque dispersa. His Light gathereth and converts all things to himself,

which are seen, moved, illustrated, wax hot, and (in a word) those things

which are preserved by his splendor: Wherefore the Sun is called [...], for that

he collecteth and gathereth together all things dispersed. And a little after of

the  Sun  again  he  adds;Si  enim  Sol  hic  quem  videmus,  eorum  quae  sub

sensum  cadunt,  essentias  &  qualitates,  quaeque  multa  sint  ac  dissimiles,

tamen  ipse  qui  unus  est,  aequaliterque  lumen  fundit,  renovat,  alit,  tuetur,

perficit, dividit, conjungit, fovet, faecunda reddit, auget, mutat, firmat edit,

movet, vitalia (que) facit omnia: & unaqua (que) res hujus universitatis, pro

captu suo, unius atque ejusdem Solis est particeps, causasque multorum, quae

participent, in se aequabiliter anticipatas habet, certe majori raticne, &c. If

this Sun which we see, as touching the Essences and Qualities of those things

which fall vvithin our Sense, being very many and different; yet if he vvho is

one, and equally bestovves his Light, doth renew, nourish, defend, perfect,

divide,  conjoyn,  cherish,  make  fruitfull,  encrease,  change,  fix,  produce,

move, and fashion all living creatures: And every thing in this Vniverse at

this Pleasure, is partaker of one and the same Sun; and the causes of many

things which participate of him, are equally auticipated in him: Certainly by

greater  reason;  &c.  The  Sun  therefore  being  the  Fountain  of  Light  and,

Principle of Motion, God intending, that at the Command of Joshua, all the

Worlds Systeme, should continue many hours in the same state, it sufficeth to

make the Sun stand still, upon whose stay (all the other Conversions ceasing)

the Earth, the Moon, the Sun did abide in the same Constitution as before, as

likewise all the other Planets: Nor in all that time did the Day decline towards

Night,  but  it  was  miraculously  prolonged:  And  in  this  manner,  upon  the

standing still of the Sun, without altering, or in the least disturbing the other

Aspects and mutual Positions of the Stars, the Day might be lengthned on

Earth; which exactly agreeth with the Litteral sense of the Sacred Text.  But that of which, if I be not mistaken, we are to make no small account,

is, That by help of this Copernican Hypothesis, we have the Litteral, apert,

and Natural Sense of another particular that we read of in the same Miracle;

which is, That the Sun stood still in Medio Caeli: Upon which passage grave

Divines raise many questions, in regard it seemeth very probable, That when

Joshuah desired the lengthning of the Day, the Sun was near setting, and not

in the Meridian; for if it had been in the Meridian, it being then about the

Summer Solstice, and consequently the dayes being at the longest, it doth not

seem likely that it was necessary to pray for the lengthning of the day, to

prosecute Victory in a Battail, the space of seven hours and more, which

remained  to  Night,  being  sufficient  for  that  purpose.  Upon  which  Grave

Divines have been induced to think that the Sun was near setting: And so the

words themselves seem to  sound, saying, Ne movearis Sol, ne movearis. For

if it had been in the Meridian, either it had been needless to have asked a

Mircale,  or  it  would  have  been  sufficient  to  have  onely  praid  for  some

retardment. Of this opinion is Cajetan, to which subscribeth Magaglianes,

confirming it by saying, that Joshua had that very day done so many other

things before his commanding the Sun, as were not possibly to be dispatch’t

in half a day. Whereupon they are forced to read the Words in Medio Coeli

(to confess the truth) with a little harshness, saying that they import no more

than this: That the Sun stood still, being in our Hemisphere, Solem stetisse,

dum  adhuc  in  Hemisphaerio  nostro,  supra  scilicet  Horizontem  existeret.

Cajetan in loco. that is, above the Horizon. But (if I do not erre) we shall

avoid that and all other harsh expositions, if according to the Copernican

Systeme we place the Sun in the midst, that is, in the Centre of the Coelestial

Orbes, and of the Planetary Conversions, as it is most requisite to do. For

supposing any hour of the day (either Noon, or any other, as you shall please

neerer  to  the  Evening)  the  Day  was  lengthened,  and  all  the  Coelestial

Revolutions stayed by the Suns standing still, In the midst, that is, in the

Centre of Heaven, where it resides: A Sense so much the more accomodate to

the  Letter  (besides  what  hath  been  said  already)  in  that,  if  the  Text  had

desired to have affirmed the Suns Rest to have been caused at Noon-day, the

proper expression of it had been to say, It stood still at Noon-day, or in the

Meridian Circle, and not in the midst of Heaven: In regard that the true and

only Middle of a Spherical Body (as is Heaven) is the Centre.

  Again,  as  to  other  places  of  Scripture,  which  seem  contrary  to  this

position,  I  do  not  doubt  but  that  if  it  were  acknowledged  for  True  andDemonstrated those very Divines who so long as they repute it false, hold

those places incapable of Expositions that agree with it would finde such

Interpretations for them, as should very well suit therewith; and especially if

to the knowledge of Divine Learning they would but adde some knowledge

of the Astronomical Sciences: And as at present, whilst they deem it false

they think they meet in Scripture only with such places as make against it, if

they shall but once have entertained another conceipt thereof, they would

meet peradventure as many others that accord with it, and haply would judge,

that the Holy Church doth very appositly teach, That God placed the Sun in

the Centre of Heaven, and that thereupon by revolving it in it self, after the

manner of a Wheel, He contributed the ordinary Courses to the Moon and

other Erratick Stars, whilst that she Sings,

 

  Coeli Deus sanctissime,

  Qui lucidum Centrum Poli,

  Candore pingis igneo,

  Augens decoro lumine,

  Quarto die, qui flammeam

  Solis rotam constituens

  Lunae ministras ordinem,

  Vagosque cursus Syderum.

 

  They  might  say,  that  the  Name  of  Firmament  very  well  agreeth,  ad

literam, to the Starry Sphere, and to all that which is above the Planetary

Conversions;  which  according  to  this  Hypothesis  is  altogether  firme  and

immoveable. Ad litteram (the Earth moving circularly) they might understand

its Poles, where it’s said, Nec dum Terram fecerat, & flumina, & Cardines

Orbis Terrae, Which Cardines orOr Poles. Hinges seem to be ascribed to the

Earth in vain, if it be not to turn upon them.


                                        FINIS.


           DISCOURSE ON FLOATING BODIES




                          Translated by Thomas Salusbury


At  a  dinner  held  by  Cosimo  II  de’  Medici,  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,

Galileo discussed with, inter alia, Lodovico delle Columbe (an Aristotelian

physicist, with views diametrically opposed to those of Galileo) the subjects

of floating bodies and buoyancy. It was a classical encounter of scientific

analysis opposed against philosophical principles, and Galileo won the day. 

As a result of this debate, Galileo published an account, encouraged by and

dedicated  to  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany.    This  interesting  volume  was

published in 1612.  Although often abbreviated to Discourse on Floating

Bodies, its Italian title (and its publication in Italian rather than Latin made

clear its general audience) was Discorso intorno alle cose, che Stanno in sù

l’acqua,  ò  che  in  quella  si  muovono,  which  more  literally  translates  as

Discourse on Bodies that Stay atop Water, or Move in It. The first edition

sold out almost immediately, and a second edition appeared in the same year

(see Figure 1).  Within the text, Galileo’s views on sunspots and some of the

planets (especially Venus, Jupiter and Saturn) were also mentioned.  Thus

Galileo again challenged the accepted Aristotelian view, pioneering the now

accepted scientific methodology that practical experimental observations and

mathematical analysis were paramount when weighed against unsubstantiated

arguments:  that  empirical  data,  logically  analysed,  count  more  than

philosophical speculation.

  Although  this  is  an  important  work  in  Galileo’s  development  and  his

relationship with the authorities, it is not an easy read – which is not helped

by a rather clumsy translation.  A sense of this can be gained from the final

sentence: “And this is the only true proper and absolute Cause of Natation

and Submersion, so that nothing else hath part therein: and the Board of the

Adversaries swimmeth, when it is conjoined with as much Air, as, together

with it, doth form a Body less grave than so much water as would fill the

place that the said Compound occupies in the water; but when they shall

demit  the  simple  Ebony  into  the  water,  according  to  the  Tenor  of  our

Question, it shall always go to the bottom, though it were as thin as a Paper.”Figure 1:  Title page of the second edition of ‘Discorso intorno alle cose, che Stanno in sù l’acqua, ò
              che in quella si muovono’, published (like the first edition) in 1612.                                  A DISCOVRSE


                Presented to the Most Serene DON COSIMO II.


                          GREAT DUKE of TUSCANY:


                                    CONCERNING


      The Natation of BODIES Upon, or Submersion In, the WATER.


Considering (Most Serene Prince) that the publishing this present Treatise, of

so different an Argument from that which many expect, and which according
                                          A
to the intentions I proposed in my  Astronomicall Adviso, I should before

this time have put forth, might peradventure make some thinke, either that I

had  wholly  relinquished  my  farther  imployment  about  the  new  Celestiall

Observations, or that, at least, I handled them very remissely; I have judged

fit to render an account, aswell of my deferring that, as of my writing, and

publishing this treatise.

A
 His Nuncio Siderio.


  As to the first, the last discoveries of Saturn to be tricorporeall, and of the

mutations of Figure in Venus, like to those that are seen in the Moon, together

with the Consequents depending thereupon, have not so much occasioned the

demur, as the investigation of the times of the Conversions of each of the

Four Medicean Planets about Jupiter, which I lighted upon in April the year

past, 1611, at my being in Rome; where, in the end, I assertained my selfe,

that the first and neerest to Jupiter, moved about 8 gr. & 29 m. of its Sphere

in an houre, makeing its whole revolution in one naturall day, and 18 hours,

and almost an halfe. The second moves in its Orbe 14 gr. 13 min. or very

neer, in an hour, and its compleat conversion is consummate in 3 dayes, 13

hours, and one third, or thereabouts. The third passeth in an hour, 2 gr. 6 min.

little more or less of its Circle, and measures it all in 7 dayes, 4 hours, or very

neer. The fourth, and more remote than the rest, goes in one houre, 0 gr 54

min. and almost an halfe of its Sphere, and finisheth it all in 16 dayes, and

very neer 18 hours. But because the excessive velocity of their returns or

restitutions, requires a most scrupulous precisenesse to calculate their places,in times past and future, especially if the time be for many Moneths or Years;

I  am  therefore  forced,  with  other  Observations,  and  more  exact  than  the

former, and in times more remote from one another, to correct the Tables of

such  Motions,  and  limit  them  even  to  the  shortest  moment:  for  such

exactnesse my first Observations suffice not; not only in regard of the short

intervals of Time, but because I had not as then found out a way to measure

the distances between the said Planets by any Instrument: I Observed such

Intervals with simple relation to the Diameter of the Body of Jupiter; taken,

as we have said, by the eye, the which, though they admit not errors of above

a Minute, yet they suffice not for the determination of the exact greatness of

the Spheres of those Stars. But now that I have hit upon a way of taking such

measures without failing, scarce in a very few Seconds, I will continue the

observation to the very occultation of JUPITER, which shall serve to bring us

to the perfect knowledge of the Motions, and Magnitudes of the Orbes of the

said Planets, together also with some other consequences thence arising. I
                                                                            1
adde  to  these  things  the  observation  of  some  obscure  Spots,  which  are

discovered in the Solar Body, which changing, position in that, propounds to

our consideration a great argument either that the Sun revolves in it selfe, or

that perhaps other Starrs, in like manner as Venus and Mercury, revolve about

it, invisible in other times, by reason of their small digressions, lesse than that

of Mercury, and only visible when they interpose between the Sun and our

eye, or else hint the truth of both this and that; the certainty of which things

ought not to be contemned, nor omitted.

1
 The Authors Observations of the Solar Spots


  Continuall  observation  hath  at  last  assured  me  that  these  Spots  are

matters contiguous to the Body of the Sun, there continually produced in

great number, and afterwards dissolved, some in a shorter, some in a longer

time, and to be by the Conversion or Revolution of the Sun in it selfe, which

in a Lunar Moneth, or thereabouts, finisheth its Period, caried about in a

Circle, an accident great of it selfe, and greater for its Consequences.
                                                      B
  As to the other particular in the next place  Many causes have moved me

to write the present Tract, the subject whereof, is the Dispute which I held

some dayes since, with some learned men of this City, about which, as your

Highnesse knows, have followed many Discourses: The principall of which

Causes hath been the Intimation of your Highnesse, having commended tome Writing, as a singular means to make true known from false, reall from

apparent Reasons, farr better than by Disputing vocally, where the one or the

other, or very often both the Disputants, through too greate heate, or exalting

of  the  voyce,  either  are  not  understood,  or  else  being  transported  by

ostentation of not yeilding to one another, farr from the first Proposition, with

the novelty, of the various Proposals, confound both themselves and their

Auditors.

B
 The occasion inducing the Author to write this Treatise.


  Moreover, it seemed to me convenient to informe your Highnesse of all

the sequell, concerning the Controversie of which I treat, as it hath been

advertised often already by others: and because the Doctrine which I follow,

in the discussion of the point in hand, is different from that of Aristotle; and

interferes with his Principles, I have considered that against the Authority of

that most famous Man, which amongst many makes all suspected that comes

not from the Schooles of the Peripateticks, its farr better to give ones Reasons

by the Pen than by word of mouth, and therfore I resolved to write the present

discourse:  in  which  yet  I  hope  to  demonstrate  that  it  was  not  out  of

capritiousnesse,  or  for  that  I  had  not  read  or  understood Aristotle,  that  I

sometimes swerve from his opinion, but because severall Reasons perswade

me to it, and the same Aristotle hath tought me to fix my judgment on that

which  is  grounded  upon  Reason,  and  not  on  the  bare  Authority  of  the
      2
Master; and it is most certaine according to the sentence of Alcinoos, that

philosophating should be free. Nor is the resolution of our Question in my
                                                            3
judgment  without  some  benefit  to  the  Universall,  forasmuch  as  treating

whether the figure of Solids operates, or not, in their going, or not going to

the bottome in Water, in occurrences of building Bridges or other Fabricks on

the Water, which happen commonly in affairs of grand import, it may be of

great availe to know the truth.

2
 Aristotle prefers Reason to the Authority ofan Author.

3
 The benefit of this Argument.


  I  say  therfore,  that  being  the  last  Summer  in  company  with  certain

Learned men, it was said in the argumentation; That Condensation was the
                  4
propriety of Cold, and there was alledged for instance, the example of Ice:now I at that time said, that, in my judgment, the Ice should be rather Water
                          5
rarified than condensed, and my reason was, because Condensation begets

diminution of Mass, and augmentation of gravity, and Rarifaction causeth

greater  Lightness,  and  augmentarion  of  Masse:  and  Water  in  freezing,

encreaseth in Masse, and the Ice made thereby is lighter than the Water on

which it swimmeth.

4
 Condensation the Propriety of Cold, according to the Peripateticks.

5
 Ice rather water rarified, than condensed, and why:


  What I say, is manifest, because, the medium subtracting from the whole

Gravity of Sollids the weight of such another Masse of the said Medium; as
                              C
Archimedes proves in his  First Booke De Insidentibus Humido; when ever

the Masse of the said Solid encreaseth by Distraction, the more shall the

Medium detract from its entire Gravity; and lesse, when by Compression it

shall be condensed and reduced to a lesse Masse.

C
 In lib: 1. of Natation of Bodies Prop. 7.


                  Figure operates not in the Natation of Sollids.


It was answered me, tha{t} that proceeded not from the greater Levity, but

from  the  Figure,  large  and  flat,  which  not  being  able  to  penetrate  the

Resistance of the Water, is the cause that it submergeth not. I replied, that any

piece of Ice, of whatsoever Figure, swims upon the Water, a manifest signe,

that its being never so flat and broad, hath not any part in its floating: and

added, that it was a manifest proofe hereof to see a piece of Ice of very broad

Figure  being  thrust  to  the  botome  of  the  Water,  suddenly  return  to  flote

atoppe, which had it been more grave, and had its swimming proceeded from

its Forme, unable to penetrate the Resistance of the Medium, that would be

altogether impossible; I concluded therefore, that the Figure was in sort a

Cause  of  the  Natation  or  Submersion  of  Bodies,  but  the  greater  or  lesse

Gravity in respect of the Water: and therefore all Bodyes heavier than it of

what Figure soever they be, indifferently go to the bottome, and the lighter,

though of any figure, float indifferently on the top: and I suppose that those

which  hold  otherwise,  were  induced  to  that  beliefe,  by  seeing  how  that

diversity of Formes or Figures, greatly altereth the Velosity, and Tardity ofMotion; so that Bodies of Figure broad and thin, descend far more leasurely

into the Water, than those of a more compacted Figure, though both made of

the  same  Matter:  by  which  some  might  be  induced  to  believe  that  the

Dilatation of the Figure might reduce it to such amplenesse that it should not

only retard but wholly impede and take away the Motion, which I hold to be

false. Upon this Conclusion, in many dayes discourse, was spoken much, and

many  things,  and  divers  Experiments  produced,  of  which  your  Highnesse

heard, and saw some, and in this discourse shall have all that which hath been

produced against my Assertion, and what hath been suggested to my thoughts

on  this  matter,  and  for  confirmation  of  my  Conclusion:  which  if  it  shall

suffice to remove that (as I esteem hitherto false) Opinion, I shall thinke I

have not unprofitably spent my paynes and time. and although that come not

to  passe,  yet  ought  I  to  promise  another  benefit  to  my  selfe,  namely,  of

attaining the knowledge of the truth, by hearing my Fallacyes confuted, and

true demonstrations produced by those of the contrary opinion.

  And  to  proceed  with  the  greatest  plainness  and  perspicuity  that  I  can

possible, it is, I conceive, necessary, first of all to declare what is the true,

intrinsecall, and totall Cause, of the ascending of some Sollid Bodyes in the

Water, and therein floating; or on the contrary, of their sinking and so much

the rather in asmuch as I cannot satisfie myselfe in that which Aristotle hath

left written on this Subject.


      The cause of the Natation & submersion of Solids in the Water.


I say then the Cause why some Sollid Bodyes descend to the Bottom of

Water, is the excesse of their Gravity, above the Gravity of the Water; and on

the contrary, the excess of the Waters Gravity above the Gravity of those, is

the Cause that others do not descend, rather that they rise from the Bottom,

and ascend to the Surface. This was subtilly demonstrated by Archimedes in

his Book Of the NATATION of BODIES: Conferred afterwards by a very

grave Author, but, if I erre not invisibly, as below for defence of him, I shall

endeavour to prove.

  I,  with  a  different  Method,  and  by  other  meanes,  will  endeavour  to

demonstrate  the  same,  reducing  the  Causes  of  such  Effects  to  more

intrinsecall  and  immediate  Principles,  in  which  also  are  discovered  the

Causes of some admirable and almost incredible Accidents, as that would be,

that a very little quantity of Water, should be able, with its small weight, toraise and sustain a Solid Body, an hundred or a thousand times heavier than

it.

  And  because  demonstrative  Order  so  requires,  I  shall  define  certain

Termes, and afterwards explain some Propositions, of which, as of things true

and obvious, I may make use of to my present purpose.


                                    DEFINITION I.


I then call equally Grave in specie, those Matters of which equall Masses

weigh equally.

  As if for example, two Balls, one of Wax, and the other of some Wood of

equall Masse, were also equall in Weight, we say, that such Wood, and the

Wax are in specie equally grave.


                                    DEFINITION II.


But equally grave in Absolute Gravity, we call two Sollids, weighing equally,

though of Mass they be unequall.

  As for example, a Mass of Lead, and another of Wood, that weigh each

ten pounds, I call equall in Absolute Gravity, though the Mass of the Wood

be much greater then that of the Lead.

  And, consequently, less Grave in specie.


                                    DEFINITION III.


I call a Matter more Grave in specie than another, of which a Mass, equall to

a Mass of the other, shall weigh more.

  And so I say, that Lead is more grave in specie than Tinn, because if you

take of them two equall Masses, that of the Lead weigheth more.


                                    DEFINITION IV.


But I call that Body more grave absolutely than this, if that weigh more than

this, without any respect had to the Masses.

  And thus a great piece of Wood is said to weigh more than a little lump of

Lead, though the Lead be in specie more heavy than the Wood.  And the same is to be understood of the less grave in specie, and the less

grave absolutely.

  These Termes defined, I take from the Mechanicks two Principles: the first

is, that


                                      AXIOME. I.


Weights absolutely equall, moved with equall Velocity, are of equall Force

and Moment in their operations.


                                    DEFINITION V.


Moment, amongst Mechanicians, signifieth that Vertue, that Force, or that

Efficacy, with which the Mover moves, and the Moveable resists.

  Which Vertue dependes not only on the simple Gravity, but on the Velocity

of the Motion, and on the diverse Inclinations of the Spaces along which the

Motion is made: For a descending Weight makes a greater Impetus in a

Space much declining, than in one less declining; and in summe, what ever is

the occasion of such Vertue, it ever retaines the name of Moment; nor in my

Judgement, is this sence new in our Idiome, for, if I mistake not, I think we

often say; This is a weighty businesse, but the other is of small moment: and

we consider lighter matters and let pass those of Moment; a Metaphor, I

suppose, taken from the Mechanicks.

  As for example, two weights equall in absolute Gravity, being put into a

Ballance of equall Arms, they stand in Equilibrium, neither one going down,

nor the other up: because the equality of the Distances of both, from the

Centre  on  which  the  Ballance  is  supported,  and  about  which  it  moves,

causeth that those weights, the said Ballance moving, shall in the same Time

move equall Spaces, that is, shall move with equall Velocity, so that there is

no reason for which this Weight should descend more than that, or that more

than  this;  and  therefore  they  make  an Equilibrium,  and  their  Moments

continue of semblable and equall Vertue.

  The second Principle is; That


                                      AXIOME II.The Moment and Force of the Gravity, is encreased by the Velocity of the

Motion.

  So that Weights absolutely equall, but conjoyned with Velocity unequall,

are of Force, Moment and Vertue unequall: and the more potent, the more

swift, according to the proportion of the Velocity of the one, to the Velocity

of the other. Of this we have a very pertinent example in the Balance or

Stiliard  of  unequall  Arms,  at  which  Weights  absolutely  equall  being

suspended, they do not weigh down, and gravitate equally, but that which is

at  a  greater  distance  from  the  Centre,  about  which  the  Beam  moves,

descends, raising the other, and the Motion of this which ascends is slow, and

the other swift: and such is the Force and Vertue, which from the Velocity of

the  Mover,  is  conferred  on  the  Moveable,  which  receives  it,  that  it  can

exquisitely  compensate,  as  much  more  Weight  added  to  the  other  slower

Moveable: so that if of the Arms of the Balance, one were ten times as long

as the other, whereupon in the Beames moving about the Centre, the end of

that would go ten times as far as the end of this, a Weight suspended at the

greater  distance,  may  sustain  and  poyse  another  ten  times  more  grave

absolutely than it: and that because the Stiliard moving, the lesser Weight

shall move ten times faster than the bigger. It ought alwayes therefore to be

understood, that Motions are according to the same Inclinations, namely, that

if one of the Moveables move perpendicularly to the Horizon, then the other

makes its Motion by the like Perpendicular; and if the Motion of one were to

be made Horizontally; that then the other is made along the same Horizontall

plain: and in summe, alwayes both in like Inclinations.

  This  proportion  between  the  Gravity  and  Velocity  is  found  in  all

Mechanicall Instruments: and is considered by Aristotle, as a Principle in his

Mechanicall  Questions;  whereupon  we  also  may  take  it  for  a  true

Assumption, That


                                      AXIOME III.


Weights  absolutely  unequall,  do  alternately  counterpoyse  and  become  of

equall Moments, as oft as their Gravities, with contrary proportion, answer

to the Velocity of their Motions.

  That is to say, that by how much the one is less grave than the other, by so

much is it in a constitution of moving more swiftly than that.  Having prefatically explicated these things, we may begin to enquire, what

Bodyes those are which totally submerge in Water, and go to the Bottom, and

which  those  that  by  constraint  float  on  the  top,  so  that  being  thrust  by

violence under Water, they return to swim, with one part of their Mass visible

above  the  Surface  of  the  Water:  and  this  we  will  do  by  considering  the

respective  operation  of  the  said  Solids,  and  of  Water:  Which  operation
                                                            6
followes the Submersion and sinking; and this it is, That in the Submersion

that the Solid maketh, being depressed downwards by its proper Gravity, it

comes  to  drive  away  the  water  from  the  place  where  it  successively

subenters, and the water repulsed riseth and ascends above its first levell, to

which Ascent on the other side it, as being a grave Body of its own nature,

resists: And because the descending Solid more and more immerging, greater

and greater quantity of Water ascends, till the whole Sollid be submerged; its

necessary  to  compare  the  Moments  of  the  Resistance  of  the  water  to

Ascension, with the Moments of the pressive Gravity of the Solid: And if the

Moments of the Resistance of the water, shall equalize the Moments of the
                                      7
Solid, before its totall Immersion; in this case doubtless there shall be made

an Equilibrium, nor shall the Body sink any farther. But if the Moment of the

Solid,  shall  alwayes  exceed  the  Moments  wherewith  the  repulsed  water
                                    8
successively makes Resistance, that Solid shall not only wholly submerge

under water, but shall descend to the Bottom. But if, lastly, in the instant of

totall Submersion, the equality shall be made between the Moments of the
                                              9
prement Solid, and the resisting Water; then shall rest, ensue, and the said

Solid shall be able to rest indifferently, in whatsoever part of the water. By

this time is manifest the necessity of comparing the Gravity of the water, and
            10
of the Solid; and this comparison might at first sight seem sufficient to

conclude and determine which are the Solids that float a-top, and which those

that sink to the Bottom in the water, asserting that those shall float which are

lesse grave in specie than the water, and those submerge, which are in specie

more grave. For it seems in appearance, that the Sollid in sinking continually,

raiseth  so  much  Water  in  Mass,  as  answers  to  the  parts  of  its  own  Bulk

submerged: whereupon it is impossible, that a Solid less grave in specie, than

water, should wholly sink, as being unable to raise a weight greater than its

own,  and  such  would  a  Mass  of  water  equall  to  its  own  Mass  be.  And

likewise it seems necessary, that the graver Solids do go to the Bottom, as

being of a Force more than sufficient for the raising a Masse of water, equall

to its own, though inferiour in weight. Nevertheless the business succeedsotherwise:  and  though  the  Conclusions  are  true,  yet  are  the  Causes  thus

assigned deficient, nor is it true, that the Solid in submerging, raiseth and

repulseth Masses of Water, equall to the parts of it self submerged; but the
                                                                                    11
Water repulsed, is alwayes less than the parts of the Solid submerged: and

so much the more by how much the Vessell in which the Water is contained

is narrower: in such manner that it hinders not, but that a Solid may submerge

all under Water, without raising so much Water in Mass, as would equall the

tenth or twentieth part of its own Bulk: like as on the contrary, a very small
                                                                12
quantity of Water, may raise a very great Solid Mass, though such Solid

should weigh absolutely a hundred times as much, or more, than the said

Water, if so be that the Matter of that same Solid be in specie less grave than

the Water. And thus a great Beam, as suppose of a 1000 weight, may be

raised and born afloat by Water, which weighs not 50: and this happens when

the Moment of the Water is compensated by the Velocity of its Motion.

6
 How the submersion of Solids in the Water, is effected.

7
 What Solids shall float on the Water.

8
 What Solids shall sinke to the botome.

9
 What Solids shall rest in all places of the Water.

10
 The Gravitie of the Water and Solid must be compared in all Problems, of Natation of Bodies.

11
 The water repelled is ever less than the parts of the Sollid submerged.

12
 A small quantity of water, may float a very great Solid Mass.


  But  because  such  things,  propounded  thus  in  abstract,  are  somewhat

difficult  to  be  comprehended,  it  would  be  good  to  demonstrate  them  by

particular examples; and for facility of demonstration, we will suppose the

Vessels  in  which  we  are  to  put  the  Water,  and  place  the  Solids,  to  be

inviron’d and included with sides erected perpendicular to the Plane of the

Horizon, and the Solid that is to be put into such vessell to be either a streight

Cylinder, or else an upright Prisme.


The which proposed and declared, I proceed to demonstrate the truth of what

                hath been hinted, forming the ensuing Theoreme.                                    THEOREME I.


          The Proportion of the water raised to the Solid submerged.


The Mass of the Water which ascends in the submerging of a Solid, Prisme

or Cylinder, or that abaseth in taking it out, is less than the Mass of the said

Solid, so depressed or advanced: and hath to it the same proportion, that the

Surface of the Water circumfusing the Solid, hath to the same circumfused

Surface, together with the Base of the Solid.

  Let the Vessell be A B C D, and in it the Water raised up to the Levell E F

G, before the Solid Prisme H I K be therein immerged; but after that it is

depressed under Water, let the Water be raised as high as the Levell L M, the

Solid H I K shall then be all under Water, and the Mass of the elevated Water

shall be L G, which is less than the Masse of the Solid depressed, namely of

H I K, being equall to the only part E I K, which is contained under the first

Levell E F G.

  Which is manifest, because if the Solid H I K be taken out, the Water I G

shall  return  into  the  place  occupied  by  the  Mass  E  I  K,  where  it  was

continuate before the submersion of the Prisme. And the Mass L G being

equall to the Mass E K: adde thereto the Mass E N, and it shall be the whole

Mass E M, composed of the parts of the Prisme E N, and of the Water N F,

equall to the whole Solid H I K: And, therefore, the Mass L G shall have the

same proportion to E M, as to the Mass H I K: But the Mass L G hath the

same proportion to the Mass E M, as the Surface L M hath to the Surface M

H:  Therefore  it  is  manifest,  that  the  Mass  of  Water  repulsed  L  G,  is  in

proportion to the Mass of the Solid submerged H I K; as the Surface L M,

namely, that of the Water ambient about the Sollid, to the whole Surface H M,

compounded of the said ambient water, and the Base of the Prisme H N. But

if we suppose the first Levell of the Water the according to the Surface H M,

and the Prisme allready submerged H I K; and after to be taken out and

raised to E A O, and the Water to be faln from the first Levell H L M as low

as E F G; It is manifest, that the Prisme E A O being the same with H I K, its

superiour part H O, shall be equall to the inferiour E I K: and remove the

common part E N, and, consequently, the Mass of the Water L G is equall to

the Mass H O; and, therefore, less than the Solid, which is without the Water,

namely, the whole Prisme E A O, to which likewise, the said Mass of Waterabated  L  G,  hath  the  same  proportion,  that  the  Surface  of  the  Waters

circumfused L M hath to the same circumfused Surface, together with the

Base of the Prisme A O: which hath the same demonstration with the former

case above.













  And from hence is inferred, that the Mass of the Water, that riseth in the

immersion of the Solid, or that ebbeth in elevating it, is not equall to all the

Mass of the Solid, which is submerged or elevated, but to that part only,

which in the immersion is under the first Levell of the Water, and in the

elevation remaines above the first Levell: Which is that which was to be

demonstrated. We will now pursue the things that remain.

  And first we will demonstrate that,


                                    THEOREME II.


            The proportion of the water abated, to the Solid raised.


When in one of the above said Vessels, of what ever breadth, whether wide or

narrow, there is placed such a Prisme or Cylinder, inviron’d with Water, if

we elevate that Solid perpendicularly, the Water circumfused shall abate, and

the Abatement of the Water, shall have the same proportion to the Elevation

of the Prisme, as one of the Bases of the Prisme, hath to the Surface of the

Water Circumfused.  Imagine in the Vessell, as is aforesaid, the Prisme A C D B to be placed,

and in the rest of the Space the Water to be diffused as far as the Levell E A:

and raising the Solid, let it be transferred to G M, and let the Water be abased

from E A to N O: I say, that the descent of the Water, measured by the Line

A O, hath the same proportion to the rise of the Prisme, measured by the Line

G A, as the Base of the Solid G H hath to the Surface of the Water N O. The

which is manifest: because the Mass of the Solid G A B H, raised above the

first Levell E A B, is equall to the Mass of Water that is abased E N O A.

Therefore, E N O A and G A B H are two equall Prismes; for of equall

Prismes,  the  Bases  answer  contrarily  to  their  heights:  Therefore,  as  the

Altitude A O is to the Altitude A G, so is the Superficies or Base G H to the

Surface of the Water N O. If therefore, for example, a Pillar were erected in a

waste Pond full of Water, or else in a Well, capable of little more then the

Mass of the said Pillar, in elevating the said Pillar, and taking it out of the

Water, according as it riseth, the Water that invirons it will gradually abate,

and the abasement of the Water at the instant of lifting out the Pillar, shall

have the same proportion, that the thickness of the Pillar hath to the excess of

the breadth of the said Pond or Well, above the thickness of the said Pillar: so

that if the breadth of the Well were an eighth part larger than the thickness of

the Pillar, and the breadth of the Pond twenty five times as great as the said

thickness,  in  the  Pillars  ascending  one  foot,  the  water  in  the  Well  shall

descend seven foot, and that in the Pond only 1/25 of a foot.

Why a Solid less grave in specie than water, stayeth not under water, in very

                                    small depths:


This Demonstrated, it will not be difficult to show the true cause, how it

comes to pass, that,                                    THEOREME III.


A Prisme or regular Cylinder, of a substance specifically less grave than

Water, if it should be totally submerged in Water, stayes not underneath, but

riseth, though the Water circumfused be very little, and in absolute Gravity,

never so much inferiour to the Gravity of the said Prisme.

  Let then the Prisme A E F B, be put into the Vessell C D F B, the same

being less grave in specie than the Water: and let the Water infused rise to the

height of the Prisme: I say, that the Prisme left at liberty, it shall rise, being

born  up  by  the  Water  circumfused  C  D  E  A.  For  the  Water  C  E  being

specifically more grave than the Solid A F, the absolute weight of the water C

E, shall have greater proportion to the absolute weight of the Prisme A F,

than the Mass C E hath to the Mass A F (in regard the Mass hath the same

proportion to the Mass, that the weight absolute hath to the weight absolute,

in case the Masses are of the same Gravity in specie.) But the Mass C E is to

the Mass A F, as the Surface of the water A C, is to the Superficies, or Base

of the Prisme A B; which is the same proportion as the ascent of the Prisme

when it riseth, hath to the descent of the Water circumfused C E.









  Therefore, the absolute Gravity of the water C E, hath greater proportion

to the absolute Gravity of the Prisme A F; than the Ascent of the Prisme A F,

hath  to  the  descent  of  the  said  water  C  E.  The  Moment,  therefore,

compounded of the absolute Gravity of the water C E, and of the Velocity of

its descent, whilst it forceably repulseth and raiseth the Solid A F, is greater

than the Moment compounded of the absolute Gravity of the Prisme A F, and

of the Tardity of its ascent, with which Moment it contrasts and resists the

repulse and violence done it by the Moment of the water: Therefore, the

Prisme shall be raised.


            The Proportion according to which the Submersion &