would think just the opposite to be true. For since the terminal points of the

two motions are the same and since the straight line included between these

two points is the shortest distance between them, it would seem reasonable

that motion along this line should be executed in the shortest time; but this is

not the case, for the shortest time — and therefore the most rapid motion —

is that employed along the arc of which this straight line is the chord.

  As to the times of vibration of bodies suspended by threads of different

lengths, they bear to each other the same proportion as the square roots of the

lengths of the thread; or one might say the lengths are to each other as the

squares of the times; so that if one wishes to make the vibration-time of one

pendulum twice that of another, he must make its suspension four times as

long. In like manner, if one pendulum has a suspension nine times as long as

another, this second pendulum will execute three vibrations during each one

of the first; from which it follows that the lengths of the suspending cords

bear  to  each  other  the  [inverse]  ratio  of  the  squares  of  the  number  of

vibrations performed in the same time.


Sagr. Then, if I understand you correctly, I can easily measure the length of a

string whose upper end is attached at any height whatever even if this end

were invisible and I could see only the lower extremity. For if I attach to the

lower end of this string a rather heavy weight and give it a to-and-fro motion,

and if I ask a friend to count a number of its vibrations, while I, during the

same time-interval, count the number of vibrations of a pendulum which is

exactly one cubit in length, then knowing the number of vibrations which

each pendulum makes in the given interval of time one can determine the

length  of  the  string.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  my  friend  counts  20

vibrations of the long cord during the same time in which I count 240 of my

string which is one cubit in length; taking the squares of the two numbers, 20

and 240, namely 400 and 57600, then, I say, the long string contains 57600

units of such length that my pendulum will contain 400 of them; and since

the length of my string is one cubit, I shall divide 57600 by 400 and thus

obtain 144. Accordingly I shall call the length of the string 144 cubits.


Salv. Nor will you miss it by as much as a hand’s breadth, especially if you

observe a large number of vibrations.Sagr. You give me frequent occasion to admire the wealth and profusion of

nature when, from such common and even trivial phenomena, you derive

facts which are not only striking and new but which are often far removed

from what we would have imagined. Thousands of times I have observed

vibrations especially in churches where lamps, suspended by long cords, had

been inadvertently set into motion; but the most which I could infer from

these observations was that the view of those who think that such vibrations

are maintained by the medium is highly improbable: for, in that case, the air

must needs have considerable judgment and little else to do but kill time by

pushing  to  and  fro  a  pendent  weight  with  perfect  regularity.  But  I  never

dreamed of learning that one and the same body, when suspended from a

string a hundred cubits long and pulled aside through an arc of 90° or even 1°

or ½°, would employ the same time in passing through the least as through

the largest of these arcs; and, indeed, it still strikes me as somewhat unlikely.

Now I am waiting to hear how these same simple phenomena can furnish

solutions for those acoustical problems — solutions which will be at least

partly satisfactory.


Salv. First of all one must observe that each pendulum has its own time of

vibration so definite and determinate that it is not possible to make it move

with any other period [altro periodo] than that which nature has given it. For

let any one take in his hand the cord to which the weight is attached and try,

as much as he pleases, to increase or diminish the frequency [frequenza] of

its  vibrations;  it  will  be  time  wasted.  On  the  other  hand,  one  can  confer

motion upon even a heavy pendulum which is at rest by simply blowing

against it; by repeating these blasts with a frequency which is the same as that

of the pendulum one can impart considerable motion. Suppose that by the

first puff we have displaced the pendulum from the vertical by, say, half an

inch; then if, after the pendulum has returned and is about to begin the second

vibration, we add a second puff, we shall impart additional motion; and so on

with other blasts provided they are applied at the right instant, and not when

the pendulum is coming toward us since in this case the blast would impede

rather than aid the motion. Continuing thus with many impulses [impulsi] we

impart  to  the  pendulum  such  momentum  [impeto]  that  a  greater  impulse

[forza] than that of a single blast will be needed to stop it.Sagr. Even as a boy, I observed that one man alone by giving these impulses

at the right instant was able to ring a bell so large that when four, or even six,

men seized the rope and tried to stop it they were lifted from the ground, all

of  them  together  being  unable  to  counterbalance  the  momentum  which  a

single man, by properly-timed pulls, had given it.Salv. Your illustration makes my meaning clear and is quite as well fitted, as

what I have just said, to explain the wonderful phenomenon of the strings of

the cittern [cetera] or of the spinet [cimbalo], namely, the fact that a vibrating

string will set another string in motion and cause it to sound not only when

the latter is in unison but even when it differs from the former by an octave or

a fifth. A string which has been struck begins to vibrate and continues the

motion as long as one hears the sound [risonanza]; these vibrations cause the

immediately surrounding air to vibrate and quiver; then these ripples in the

air  expand  far  into  space  and  strike  not  only  all  the  strings  of  the  same

instrument but even those of neighboring instruments. Since that string which

is tuned to unison with the one plucked is capable of vibrating with the same

frequency, it acquires, at the first impulse, a slight oscillation; after receiving

two, three, twenty, or more impulses, delivered at proper intervals, it finally

accumulates  a  vibratory  motion  equal  to  that  of  the  plucked  string,  as  is

clearly shown by equality of amplitude in their vibrations. This undulation

expands through the air and sets into vibration not only strings, but also any

other body which happens to have the same period as that of the plucked

string. Accordingly if we attach to the side of an instrument small pieces of

bristle  or  other  flexible  bodies,  we  shall  observe  that,  when  a  spinet  is

sounded, only those pieces respond that have the same period as the string

which has been struck; the remaining pieces do not vibrate in response to this

string, nor do the former pieces respond to any other tone.

  If one bows the base string on a viola rather smartly and brings near it a

goblet of fine, thin glass having the same tone [tuono] as that of the string,

this  goblet  will  vibrate  and  audibly  resound.  That  the  undulations  of  the

medium are widely dispersed about the sounding body is evinced by the fact

that a glass of water may be made to emit a tone merely by the friction of the

finger-tip upon the rim of the glass; for in this water is produced a series of

regular waves. The same phenomenon is observed to better advantage by

fixing the base of the goblet upon the bottom of a rather large vessel of water

filled nearly to the edge of the goblet; for if, as before, we sound the glass by

friction of the finger, we shall see ripples spreading with the utmost regularity

and with high speed to large distances about the glass. I have often remarked,

in thus sounding a rather large glass nearly full of water, that at first the

waves are spaced with great uniformity, and when, as sometimes happens,

the tone of the glass jumps an octave higher I have noted that at this momenteach of the aforesaid waves divides into two; a phenomenon which shows

clearly that the ratio involved in the octave [forma dell’ ottava] is two.


Sagr. More than once have I observed this same thing, much to my delight

and also to my profit. For a long time I have been perplexed about these

different harmonies since the explanations hitherto given by those learned in

music  impress  me  as  not  sufficiently  conclusive.  They  tell  us  that  the

diapason, i. e. the octave, involves the ratio of two, that the diapente which

we call the fifth involves a ratio of 3:2, etc.; because if the open string of a

monochord be sounded and afterwards a bridge be placed in the middle and

the half length be sounded one hears the octave; and if the bridge be placed at

1/3  the  length  of  the  string,  then  on  plucking  first  the  open  string  and

afterwards 2/3 of its length the fifth is given; for this reason they say that the

octave depends upon the ratio of two to one [contenuta tra’l due e l’uno] and

the fifth upon the ratio of three to two. This explanation does not impress me

as sufficient to establish 2 and 3/2 as the natural ratios of the octave and the

fifth; and my reason for thinking so is as follows. There are three different

ways in which the tone of a string may be sharpened, namely, by shortening

it, by stretching it and by making it thinner. If the tension and size of the

string remain constant one obtains the octave by shortening it to one-half, i.e.,

by sounding first the open string and then one-half of it; but if length and size

remain constant and one attempts to produce the octave by stretching he will

find  that  it  does  not  suffice  to  double  the  stretching  weight;  it  must  be

quadrupled; so that, if the fundamental note is produced by a weight of one

pound, four will be required to bring out the octave.

  And finally if the length and tension remain constant, while one changes
      15
the size of the string he will find that in order to produce the octave the size

must be reduced to ¼ that which gave the fundamental. And what I have said

concerning the octave, namely, that its ratio as derived from the tension and

size of the string is the square of that derived from the length, applies equally

well to all other musical intervals [intervalli musici]. Thus if one wishes to

produce a fifth by changing the length he finds that the ratio of the lengths

must be sesquialteral, in other words he sounds first the open string, then

two-thirds of it; but if he wishes to produce this same result by stretching or

thinning the string then it becomes necessary to square the ratio 3/2 that is by

taking 9/4 [dupla sesquiquarta]; accordingly, if the fundamental requires a

weight of 4 pounds, the higher note will be produced not by 6, but by 9pounds;  the  same  is  true  in  regard  to  size,  the  string  which  gives  the

fundamental is larger than that which yields the fifth in the ratio of 9 to 4.

15
 For the exact meaning of “size” see p. 103 below. [Trans.]


  In view of these facts, I see no reason why those wise philosophers should

adopt 2 rather than 4 as the ratio of the octave, or why in the case of the fifth

they should employ the sesquialteral ratio, 3/2, rather than that of 9/4. Since it

is impossible to count the vibrations of a sounding string on account of its

high  frequency,  I  should  still  have  been  in  doubt  as  to  whether  a  string,

emitting the upper octave, made twice as many vibrations in the same time as

one giving the fundamental, had it not been for the following fact, namely,

that  at  the  instant  when  the  tone  jumps  to  the  octave,  the  waves  which

constantly accompany the vibrating glass divide up into smaller ones which

are precisely half as long as the former.


Salv. This is a beautiful experiment enabling us to distinguish individually

the waves which are produced by the vibrations of a sonorous body, which

spread through the air, bringing to the tympanum of the ear a stimulus which

the mind translates into sound. But since these waves in the water last only so

long as the friction of the finger continues and are, even then, not constant

but are always forming and disappearing, would it not be a fine thing if one

had the ability to produce waves which would persist for a long while, even

months and years, so as to easily measure and count them?


Sagr. Such an invention would, I assure you, command my admiration.

Salv. The device is one which I hit upon by accident; my part consists merely

in the observation of it and in the appreciation of its value as a confirmation

of something to which I had given profound consideration; and yet the device

is, in itself, rather common. As I was scraping a brass plate with a sharp iron

chisel in order to remove some spots from it and was running the chisel rather

rapidly over it, I once or twice, during many strokes, heard the plate emit a

rather  strong  and  clear  whistling  sound;  on  looking  at  the  plate  more

carefully, I noticed a long row of fine streaks parallel and equidistant from

one another. Scraping with the chisel over and over again, I noticed that it

was only when the plate emitted this hissing noise that any marks were left

upon it; when the scraping was not accompanied by this sibilant note there

was not the least trace of such marks. Repeating the trick several times andmaking  the  stroke,  now  with  greater  now  with  less  speed,  the  whistling

followed with a pitch which was correspondingly higher and lower. I noted

also that the marks made when the tones were higher were closer together;

but when the tones were deeper, they were farther apart. I also observed that

when, during a single stroke, the speed increased toward the end the sound

became sharper and the streaks grew closer together, but always in such a

way  as  to  remain  sharply  defined  and  equidistant.  Besides  whenever  the

stroke was accompanied by hissing I felt the chisel tremble in my grasp and a

sort of shiver run through my hand. In short we see and hear in the case of the

chisel  precisely  that  which  is  seen  and  heard  in  the  case  of  a  whisper

followed  by  a  loud  voice;  for,  when  the  breath  is  emitted  without  the

production of a tone, one does not feel either in the throat or mouth any

motion to speak of in comparison with that which is felt in the larynx and

upper part of the throat when the voice is used, especially when the tones

employed are low and strong.

  At times I have also observed among the strings of the spinet two which

were in unison with two of the tones produced by the aforesaid scraping; and

among those which differed most in pitch I found two which were separated

by an interval of a perfect fifth. Upon measuring the distance between the

markings produced by the two scrapings it was found that the space which

contained 45 of one contained 30 of the other, which is precisely the ratio

assigned to the fifth.

  But now before proceeding any farther I want to call your attention to the

fact that, of the three methods for sharpening a tone, the one which you refer

to as the fineness of the string should be attributed to its weight. So long as

the material of the string is unchanged, the size and weight vary in the same

ratio. Thus in the case of gut-strings, we obtain the octave by making one

string 4 times as large as the other; so also in the case of brass one wire must

have 4 times the size of the other; but if now we wish to obtain the octave of

a gut-string, by use of brass wire, we must make it, not four times as large,

but four times as heavy as the gut-string: as regards size therefore the metal

string is not four times as big but four times as heavy. The wire may therefore

be even thinner than the gut notwithstanding the fact that the latter gives the

higher note. Hence if two spinets are strung, one with gold wire the other

with  brass,  and  if  the  corresponding  strings  each  have  the  same  length,

diameter, and tension it follows that the instrument strung with gold will have

a pitch about one-fifth lower than the other because gold has a density almosttwice that of brass. And here it is to be noted that it is the weight rather than

the  size  of  a  moving  body  which  offers  resistance  to  change  of  motion

[velocità del moto] contrary to what one might at first glance think. For it

seems reasonable to believe that a body which is large and light should suffer

greater retardation of motion in thrusting aside the medium than would one

which is thin and heavy; yet here exactly the opposite is true.

  Returning now to the original subject of discussion, I assert that the ratio

of a musical interval is not immediately determined either by the length, size,

or tension of the strings but rather by the ratio of their frequencies, that is, by

the number of pulses of air waves which strike the tympanum of the ear,

causing it also to vibrate with the same frequency. This fact established, we

may possibly explain why certain pairs of notes, differing in pitch produce a

pleasing sensation, others a less pleasant effect, and still others a disagreeable

sensation. Such an explanation would be tantamount to an explanation of the

more  or  less  perfect  consonances  and  of  dissonances.  The  unpleasant

sensation produced by the latter arises, I think, from the discordant vibrations

of two different tones which strike the ear out of time [sproporzionatamente].

Especially  harsh  is  the  dissonance  between  notes  whose  frequencies  are

incommensurable; such a case occurs when one has two strings in unison and

sounds one of them open, together with a part of the other which bears the

same ratio to its whole length as the side of a square bears to the diagonal;

this yields a dissonance similar to the augmented fourth or diminished fifth

[tritono o semidiapente].

  Agreeable  consonances  are  pairs  of  tones  which  strike  the  ear  with  a

certain regularity; this regularity consists in the fact that the pulses delivered

by the two tones, in the same interval of time, shall be commensurable in

number, so as not to keep the ear drum in perpetual torment, bending in two

different directions in order to yield to the ever-discordant impulses.

  The first and most pleasing consonance is, therefore, the octave since, for

every  pulse  given  to  the  tympanum  by  the  lower  string,  the  sharp  string

delivers two; accordingly at every other vibration of the upper string both

pulses  are  delivered  simultaneously  so  that  one-half  the  entire  number  of

pulses  are  delivered  in  unison.  But  when  two  strings  are  in  unison  their

vibrations always coincide and the effect is that of a single string; hence we

do not refer to it as consonance. The fifth is also a pleasing interval since for

every two vibrations of the lower string the upper one gives three, so that

considering the entire number of pulses from the upper string one-third ofthem will strike in unison, i. e., between each pair of concordant vibrations

there intervene two single vibrations; and when the interval is a fourth, three

single vibrations intervene. In case the interval is a second where the ratio is

9/8 it is only every ninth vibration of the upper string which reaches the ear

simultaneously  with  one  of  the  lower;  all  the  others  are  discordant  and

produce  a  harsh  effect  upon  the  recipient  ear  which  interprets  them  as

dissonances.


Simp. Won’t  you  be  good  enough  to  explain  this  argument  a  little  more

clearly?


Salv. Let AB denote the length of a wave [lo spazio e la dilatazione d’una

vibrazione] emitted by the lower string and CD that of a higher string which

is emitting the octave of AB; divide AB in the middle at E. If the two strings

begin their motions at A and C, it is clear that when the sharp vibration has

reached the end D, the other vibration will have travelled only as far as E,

which, not being a terminal point, will emit no pulse; but there is a blow

delivered at D. Accordingly when the one wave comes back from D to C, the

other passes on from E to B; hence the two pulses from B and C strike the

drum  of  the  ear  simultaneously.  Seeing  that  these  vibrations  are  repeated

again and again in the same manner, we conclude that each alternate pulse

from CD falls in unison with one from AB. But each of the pulsations at the

terminal points, A and B, is constantly accompanied by one which leaves

always from C or always from D. This is clear because if we suppose the

waves to reach A and C at the same instant, then, while one wave travels

from A to B, the other will proceed from C to D and back to C, so that waves

strike at C and B simultaneously; during the passage of the wave from B back

to A the disturbance at C goes to D and again returns to C, so that once more

the pulses at A and C are simultaneous.  Next let the vibrations AB and CD be separated by an interval of a fifth,

that is, by a ratio of 3/2; choose the points E and O such that they will divide

the wave length of the lower string into three equal parts and imagine the

vibrations to start at the same instant from each of the terminals A and C. It is

evident that when the pulse has been delivered at the terminal D, the wave in

AB has travelled only as far as O; the drum of the ear receives, therefore,

only the pulse from D. Then during the return of the one vibration from D to

C, the other will pass from O to B and then back to O, producing an isolated

pulse at B — a pulse which is out of time but one which must be taken into

consideration.

  Now  since  we  have  assumed  that  the  first  pulsations  started  from  the

terminals A and C at the same instant, it follows that the second pulsation,

isolated at D, occurred after an interval of time equal to that required for

passage from C to D or, what is the same thing, from A to O; but the nextpulsation, the one at B, is separated from the preceding by only half this

interval, namely, the time required for passage from O to B. Next while the

one vibration travels from O to A, the other travels from C to D, the result of

which is that two pulsations occur simultaneously at A and D. Cycles of this

kind follow one after another, i. e., one solitary pulse of the lower string

interposed  between  two  solitary  pulses  of  the  upper  string.  Let  us  now

imagine time to be divided into very small equal intervals; then if we assume

that, during the first two of these intervals, the disturbances which occurred

simultaneously  at  A  and  C  have  travelled  as  far  as  O  and  D  and  have

produced a pulse at D; and if we assume that during the third and fourth

intervals one disturbance returns from D to C, producing a pulse at C, while

the other, passing on from O to B and back to O, produces a pulse at B; and if

finally, during the fifth and sixth intervals, the disturbances travel from O and

C to A and D, producing a pulse at each of the latter two, then the sequence

in which the pulses strike the ear will be such that, if we begin to count time

from any instant where two pulses are simultaneous, the ear drum will, after

the lapse of two of the said intervals, receive a solitary pulse; at the end of the

third interval, another solitary pulse; so also at the end of the fourth interval;

and two intervals later, i. e., at the end of the sixth interval, will be heard two

pulses in unison. Here ends the cycle — the anomaly, so to speak — which

repeats itself over and over again.


Sagr. I  can  no  longer  remain  silent;  for  I  must  express  to  you  the  great

pleasure I have in hearing such a complete explanation of phenomena with

regard to which I have so long been in darkness. Now I understand why

unison does not differ from a single tone; I understand why the octave is the

principal harmony, but so like unison as often to be mistaken for it and also

why  it  occurs  with  the  other  harmonies.  It  resembles  unison  because  the

pulsations of strings in unison always occur simultaneously, and those of the

lower string of the octave are always accompanied by those of the upper

string; and among the latter is interposed a solitary pulse at equal intervals

and in such a manner as to produce no disturbance; the result is that such a

harmony  is  rather  too  much  softened  and  lacks  fire.  But  the  fifth  is

characterized by its displaced beats and by the interposition of two solitary

beats of the upper string and one solitary beat of the lower string between

each pair of simultaneous pulses; these three solitary pulses are separated by

intervals  of  time  equal  to  half  the  interval  which  separates  each  pair  ofsimultaneous beats from the solitary beats of the upper string. Thus the effect

of the fifth is to produce a tickling of the ear drum such that its softness is

modified with sprightliness, giving at the same moment the impression of a

gentle kiss and of a bite.


Salv. Seeing that you have derived so much pleasure from these novelties, I

must show you a method by which the eye may enjoy the same game as the

ear. Suspend three balls of lead, or other heavy material, by means of strings

of  different  length  such  that  while  the  longest  makes  two  vibrations  the

shortest will make four and the medium three; this will take place when the

longest string measures 16, either in hand breadths or in any other unit, the

medium 9 and the shortest 4, all measured in the same unit.

  Now pull all these pendulums aside from the perpendicular and release

them  at  the  same  instant;  you  will  see  a  curious  interplay  of  the  threads

passing each other in various manners but such that at the completion of

every  fourth  vibration  of  the  longest  pendulum,  all  three  will  arrive

simultaneously at the same terminus, whence they start over again to repeat

the same cycle. This combination of vibrations, when produced on strings is

precisely that which yields the interval of the octave and the intermediate

fifth. If we employ the same disposition of apparatus but change the lengths

of the threads, always however in such a way that their vibrations correspond

to those of agreeable musical intervals, we shall see a different crossing of

these threads but always such that, after a definite interval of time and after a

definite  number  of  vibrations,  all  the  threads,  whether  three  or  four,  will

reach the same terminus at the same instant, and then begin a repetition of the

cycle.

  If however the vibrations of two or more strings are incommensurable so

that they never complete a definite number of vibrations at the same instant,

or if commensurable they return only after a long interval of time and after a

large  number  of  vibrations,  then  the  eye  is  confused  by  the  disorderly

succession of crossed threads. In like manner the ear is pained by an irregular

sequence of air waves which strike the tympanum without any fixed order.

  But, gentlemen, whither have we drifted during these many hours lured on

by various problems and unexpected digressions? The day is already ended

and we have scarcely touched the subject proposed for discussion. Indeed we

have  deviated  so  far  that  I  remember  only  with  difficulty  our  earlyintroduction  and  the  little  progress  made  in  the  way  of  hypotheses  and

principles for use in later demonstrations.


Sagr. Let  us  then  adjourn  for  to-day  in  order  that  our  minds  may  find

refreshment in sleep and that we may return tomorrow, if so please you, and

resume the discussion of the main question.


Salv. I shall not fail to be here to-morrow at the same hour, hoping not only

to render you service but also to enjoy your company.

  End of the first day.                                    Second Day


SAGR. While Simplicio and I were awaiting your arrival we were trying to

recall that last consideration which you advanced as a principle and basis for

the results you intended to obtain; this consideration dealt with the resistance

which all solids offer to fracture and depended upon a certain cement which

held the parts glued together so that they would yield and separate only under

considerable pull [potente attrazzione]. Later we tried to find the explanation

of this coherence, seeking it mainly in the vacuum; this was the occasion of

our many digressions which occupied the entire day and led us far afield from

the original question which, as I have already stated, was the consideration of

the resistance [resistenza] that solids offer to fracture.


Salv. I  remember  it  all  very  well.  Resuming  the  thread  of  our  discourse,

whatever  the  nature  of  this  resistance  which  solids  offer  to  large  tractive

forces [violenta attrazzione] there can at least be no doubt of its existence;

and though this resistance is very great in the case of a direct pull, it is found,

as  a  rule,  to  be  less  in  the  case  of  bending  forces  [nel  violentargli  per

traverso].  Thus,  for  example,  a  rod  of  steel  or  of  glass  will  sustain  a

longitudinal pull of a thousand pounds while a weight of fifty pounds would

be quite sufficient to break it if the rod were fastened at right angles into a

vertical wall. It is this second type of resistance which we must consider,

seeking to discover in what proportion it is found in prisms and cylinders of

the same material, whether alike or unlike in shape, length, and thickness. In

this discussion I shall take for granted the well-known mechanical principle

which has been shown to govern the behavior of a bar, which we call a lever,

namely, that the force bears to the resistance the inverse ratio of the distances

which separate the fulcrum from the force and resistance respectively.


Simp. This was demonstrated first of all by Aristotle, in his Mechanics.


Salv. Yes,  I  am  willing  to  concede  him  priority  in  point  of  time;  but  as

regards rigor of demonstration the first place must be given to Archimedes,
                                                                              16
since upon a single proposition proved in his book on Equilibrium depends

not only the law of the lever but also those of most other mechanical devices.16
 Works of Archimedes. Trans. by T. L. Heath, pp. 189-220. [Trans.]


Sagr. Since now this principle is fundamental to all the demonstrations which

you propose to set forth would it not be advisable to give us a complete and

thorough proof of this proposition unless possibly it would take too much

time?


Salv. Yes, that would be quite proper, but it is better I think to approach our

subject in a manner somewhat different from that employed by Archimedes,

namely, by first assuming merely that equal weights placed in a balance of

equal  arms  will  produce  equilibrium  —  a  principle  also  assumed  by

Archimedes — and then proving that it is no less true that unequal weights

produce equilibrium when the arms of the steelyard have lengths inversely

proportional to the weights suspended from them; in other words, it amounts

to the same thing whether one places equal weights at equal distances or

unequal weights at distances which bear to each other the inverse ratio of the

weights.

  In order to make this matter clear imagine a prism or solid cylinder, AB,

suspended at each end to the rod [linea] HI, and supported by two threads HA

and IB; it is evident that if I attach a thread, C, at the middle point of the

balance  beam  HI,  the  entire  prism  AB  will,  according  to  the  principle

assumed, hang in equilibrium since one-half its weight lies on one side, and

the other half on the other side, of the point of suspension C. Now suppose

the prism to be divided into unequal parts by a plane through the line D, and

let the part DA be the larger and DB the smaller: this division having been

made, imagine a thread ED, attached at the point E and supporting the parts

AD and DB, in order that these parts may remain in the same position relative

to  line  HI:  and  since  the  relative  position  of  the  prism  and  the  beam  HI

remains unchanged, there can be no doubt but that the prism will maintain its

former state of equilibrium. But circumstances would remain the same if that

part of the prism which is now held up, at the ends, by the threads AH and

DE were supported at the middle by a single thread GL; and likewise the

other part DB would not change position if held by a thread FM placed at its

middle  point.  Suppose  now  the  threads  HA,  ED,  and  IB  to  be  removed,

leaving  only  the  two  GL  and  FM,  then  the  same  equilibrium  will  be

maintained so long as the suspension is at C. Now let us consider that we

have here two heavy bodies AD and DB hung at the ends G and F, of abalance beam GF in equilibrium about the point C, so that the line CG is the

distance from C to the point of suspension of the heavy body AD, while CF is

the distance at which the other heavy body, DB, is supported. It remains now

only to show that these distances bear to each other the inverse ratio of the

weights themselves, that is, the distance GC is to the distance CF as the prism

DB is to the prism DA — a proposition which we shall prove as follows:

Since the line GE is the half of EH, and since EF is the half of EI, the whole

length GF will be half of the entire line HI, and therefore equal to CI: if now

we  subtract  the  common  part  CF  the  remainder  GC  will  be  equal  to  the

remainder FI, that is, to FE, and if to each of these we add CE we shall have

GE equal to CF: hence GE:EF=FC:CG. But GE and EF bear the same ratio to

each other as do their doubles HE and EI, that is, the same ratio as the prism

AD to DB. Therefore, by equating ratios we have, convertendo, the distance

GC is to the distance CF as the weight BD is to the weight DA, which is what

I desired to prove.











  This principle established, I desire, before passing to any other subject, to

call your attention to the fact that these forces, resistances, moments, figures,

etc., may be considered either in the abstract, dissociated from matter, or in

the concrete, associated with matter. Hence the properties which belong to

figures that are merely geometrical and non-material must be modified when

we fill these figures with matter and therefore give them weight. Take, for

example, the lever BA which, resting upon the support E, is used to lift a

heavy stone D. The principle just demonstrated makes it clear that a force

applied at the extremity B will just suffice to equilibrate the resistance offered

by  the  heavy  body  D  provided  this  force  [momento]  bears  to  the  force

[momento] at D the same ratio as the distance AC bears to the distance CB;

and this is true so long as we consider only the moments of the single force at

B and of the resistance at D, treating the lever as an immaterial body devoid

of weight. But if we take into account the weight of the lever itself — aninstrument which may be made either of wood or of iron — it is manifest

that, when this weight has been added to the force at B, the ratio will be

changed and must therefore be expressed in different terms. Hence before

going further let us agree to distinguish between these two points of view;

when we consider an instrument in the abstract, i. e., apart from the weight of

its own material, we shall speak of “taking it in an absolute sense” [prendere

assolutamente]; but if we fill one of these simple and absolute figures with

matter and thus give it weight, we shall refer to such a material figure as a

“moment” or “compound force” [momento o forza composta].











Sagr. I must break my resolution about not leading you off into a digression;

for I cannot concentrate my attention upon what is to follow until a certain

doubt is removed from my mind, namely, you seem to compare the force at B

with the total weight of the stone D, a part of which — possibly the greater

part — rests upon the horizontal plane: so that . . .


Salv. I understand perfectly: you need go no further. However please observe

that I have not mentioned the total weight of the stone; I spoke only of its

force [momento] at the point A, the extremity of the lever BA, which force is

always less than the total weight of the stone, and varies with its shape and

elevation.


Sagr. Good:  but  there  occurs  to  me  another  question  about  which  I  am

curious. For a complete understanding of this matter, I should like you to

show me, if possible, how one can determine what part of the total weight is

supported by the underlying plane and what part by the end A of the lever.


Salv. The  explanation  will  not  delay  us  long  and  I  shall  therefore  have

pleasure  in  granting  your  request.  In  the  accompanying  figure,  let  us

understand that the weight having its center of gravity at A rests with the endB upon the horizontal plane and with the other end upon the lever CG. Let N

be the fulcrum of a lever to which the force [potenza] is applied at G. Let fall

the perpendiculars, AO and CF, from the center A and the end C. Then I say,

the magnitude [momento] of the entire weight bears to the magnitude of the

force [momento della potenza] at G a ratio compounded of the ratio between

the two distances GN and NC and the ratio between FB and BO. Lay off a

distance X such that its ratio to NC is the same as that of BO to FB; then,

since the total weight A is counterbalanced by the two forces at B and at C, it

follows that the force at B is to that at C as the distance FO is to the distance

OB. Hence, componendo, the sum of the forces at B and C, that is, the total

weight A [momento di tutto ‘l peso A], is to the force at C as the line FB is to

the line BO, that is, as NC is to X: but the force [momento della potenza]

applied at C is to the force applied at G as the distance GN is to the distance
                                                                        17
NC; hence it follows, ex æquali in proportione perturbata, that the entire

weight A is to the force applied at G as the distance GN is to X. But the ratio

of GN to X is compounded of the ratio of GN to NC and of NC to X, that is,

of FB to BO; hence the weight A bears to the equilibrating force at G a ratio

compounded of that of GN to NC and of FB to BO: which was to be proved.

17
 For definition of perturbata see Todhunter’s Euclid. Book V, Def. 20. [Trans.]










  Let us now return to our original subject; then, if what has hitherto been

said is clear, it will be easily understood that,


                                      Proposition I


A prism or solid cylinder of glass, steel, wood or other breakable material

which  is  capable  of  sustaining  a  very  heavy  weight  when  applied

longitudinally  is,  as  previously  remarked,  easily  broken  by  the  transverse

application of a weight which may be much smaller in proportion as the

length of the cylinder exceeds its thickness.  Let us imagine a solid prism ABCD fastened into a wall at the end AB,

and supporting a weight E at the other end; understand also that the wall is

vertical and that the prism or cylinder is fastened at right angles to the wall. It

is clear that, if the cylinder breaks, fracture will occur at the point B where

the edge of the mortise acts as a fulcrum for the lever BC, to which the force

is applied; the thickness of the solid BA is the other arm of the lever along

which is located the resistance. This resistance opposes the separation of the

part  BD,  lying  outside  the  wall,  from  that  portion  lying  inside.  From  the

preceding, it follows that the magnitude [momento] of the force applied at C

bears to the magnitude [momento] of the resistance, found in the thickness of

the prism, i. e., in the attachment of the base BA to its contiguous parts, the

same ratio which the length CB bears to half the length BA; if now we define

absolute resistance to fracture as that offered to a longitudinal pull (in which

case the stretching force acts in the same direction as that through which the

body is moved), then it follows that the absolute resistance of the prism BD is

to the breaking load placed at the end of the lever BC in the same ratio as the

length BC is to the half of AB in the case of a prism, or the semidiameter in
                                                          18
the case of a cylinder. This is our first proposition. Observe that in what has

here  been  said  the  weight  of  the  solid  BD  itself  has  been  left  out  of

consideration, or rather, the prism has been assumed to be devoid of weight.

But if the weight of the prism is to be taken account of in conjunction with

the weight E, we must add to the weight E one half that of the prism BD: so

that if, for example, the latter weighs two pounds and the weight E is ten

pounds we must treat the weight E as if it were eleven pounds.

18
 The one fundamental error which is implicitly introduced into this proposition and which is carried
through the entire discussion of the Second Day consists in a failure to see that, in such a beam, there
must be equilibrium between the forces of tension and compression over any cross-section. The correct
point  of  view  seems  first  to  have  been  found  by  E.  Mariotte  in  1680  and  by  A.  Parent  in  1713.
Fortunately this error does not vitiate the conclusions of the subsequent propositions which deal only
with proportions — not actual strength — of beams. Following K. Pearson (Todhunter’s History of
Elasticity) one might say that Galileo’s mistake lay in supposing the fibres of the strained beam to be
inextensible. Or, confessing the anachronism, one might say that the error consisted in taking the lowest
fibre of the beam as the neutral axis. [Trans.]


Simp. Why not twelve?


Salv. The weight E, my dear Simplicio, hanging at the extreme end C acts

upon the lever BC with its full moment of ten pounds: so also would the solidBD if suspended at the same point exert its full moment of two pounds; but,

as you know, this solid is uniformly distributed throughout its entire length,

BC, so that the parts which lie near the end B are less effective than those

more remote.





























  Accordingly if we strike a balance between the two, the weight of the

entire prism may be considered as concentrated at its center of gravity which

lies midway of the lever BC. But a weight hung at the extremity C exerts a

moment twice as great as it would if suspended from the middle: therefore if

we consider the moments of both as located at the end C we must add to the

weight E one-half that of the prism.


Simp. I understand perfectly; and moreover, if I mistake not, the force of the

two  weights  BD  and  E,  thus  disposed,  would  exert  the  same  moment  aswould the entire weight BD together with twice the weight E suspended at

the middle of the lever BC.


Salv. Precisely  so,  and  a  fact  worth  remembering.  Now  we  can  readily

understand


                                      Proposition II


How and in what proportion a rod, or rather a prism, whose width is greater

than its thickness offers more resistance to fracture when the force is applied

in the direction of its breadth than in the direction of its thickness.



















  For the sake of clearness, take a ruler ad whose width is ac and whose

thickness, cb, is much less than its width. The question now is why will the

ruler, if stood on edge, as in the first figure, withstand a great weight T,

while, when laid flat, as in the second figure, it will not support the weight X

which is less than T. The answer is evident when we remember that in the

one case the fulcrum is at the line bc, and in the other case at ca, while the

distance at which the force is applied is the same in both cases, namely, the

length bd: but in the first case the distance of the resistance from the fulcrum

— half the line ca — is greater than in the other case where it is only half of

bc. Therefore the weight T is greater than X in the same ratio as half the

width ca is greater than half the thickness bc, since the former acts as a leverarm for ca, and the latter for cb, against the same resistance, namely, the

strength of all the fibres in the cross-section ab. We conclude, therefore, that

any  given  ruler,  or  prism,  whose  width  exceeds  its  thickness,  will  offer

greater resistance to fracture when standing on edge than when lying flat, and

this in the ratio of the width to the thickness.


                                    Proposition III


Considering  now  the  case  of  a  prism  or  cylinder  growing  longer  in  a

horizontal direction, we must find out in what ratio the moment of its own

weight increases in comparison with its resistance to fracture. This moment I

find increases in proportion to the square of the length. In order to prove this

let AD be a prism or cylinder lying horizontal with its end A firmly fixed in a

wall. Let the length of the prism be increased by the addition of the portion

BE. It is clear that merely changing the length of the lever from AB to AC

will, if we disregard its weight, increase the moment of the force [at the end]

tending to produce fracture at A in the ratio of CA to BA. But, besides this,

the  weight  of  the  solid  portion  BE,  added  to  the  weight  of  the  solid  AB

increases the moment of the total weight in the ratio of the weight of the

prism AE to that of the prism AB, which is the same as the ratio of the length

AC to AB.

  It follows, therefore, that, when the length and weight are simultaneously

increased in any given proportion, the moment, which is the product of these

two, is increased in a ratio which is the square of the preceding proportion.

The conclusion is then that the bending moments due to the weight of prisms

and cylinders which have the same thickness but different lengths, bear to

each other a ratio which is the square of the ratio of their lengths, or, what is

the same thing, the ratio of the squares of their lengths.

  We  shall  next  show  in  what  ratio  the  resistance  to  fracture  [bending

strength], in prisms and cylinders, increases with increase of thickness while

the length remains unchanged. Here I say that                                    Proposition IV


In  prisms  and  cylinders  of  equal  length,  but  of  unequal  thicknesses,  the

resistance to fracture increases in the same ratio as the cube of the diameter of

the thickness, i. e., of the base.  From the preceding we are able to conclude that


                                        Corollary


The resistance [strength] of a prism or cylinder of constant length varies in

the sesquialteral ratio of its volume.

  This is evident because the volume of a prism or cylinder of constant

altitude varies directly as the area of its base, i. e., as the square of a side or

diameter  of  this  base;  but,  as  just  demonstrated,  the  resistance  [strength]

varies as the cube of this same side or diameter. Hence the resistance varies

in the sesquialteral ratio of the volume — consequently also of the weight —

of the solid itself.


Simp. Before proceeding further I should like to have one of my difficulties

removed. Up to this point you have not taken into consideration a certain

other kind of resistance which, it appears to me, diminishes as the solid grows

longer, and this is quite as true in the case of bending as in pulling; it is

precisely thus that in the case of a rope we observe that a very long one is less

able to support a large weight than a short one. Whence, I believe, a short rod

of wood or iron will support a greater weight than if it were long, provided

the force be always applied longitudinally and not transversely, and providedalso that we take into account the weight of the rope itself which increases

with its length.


Salv. I fear, Simplicio, if I correctly catch your meaning, that in this particular

you are making the same mistake as many others; that is if you mean to say

that a long rope, one of perhaps 40 cubits, cannot hold up so great a weight as

a shorter length, say one or two cubits, of the same rope.

Simp. That is what I meant, and as far as I see the proposition is highly

probable.


Salv. On the contrary, I consider it not merely improbable but false; and I

think I can easily convince you of your error. Let AB represent the rope,

fastened at the upper end A: at the lower end attach a weight C whose force is

just sufficient to break the rope. Now, Simplicio, point out the exact place

where you think the break ought to occur.

  Let us say D.


Salv. And why at D?


Simp. Because at this point the rope is not strong enough to support, say, 100

pounds, made up of the portion of the rope DB and the stone C.


Salv. Accordingly whenever the rope is stretched [violentata] with the weight

of 100 pounds at D it will break there.


Simp. I think so.


Salv. But tell me, if instead of attaching the weight at the end of the rope, B,

one fastens it at a point nearer D, say, at E: or if, instead of fixing the upper

end of the rope at A, one fastens it at some point F, just above D, will not the

rope, at the point D, be subject to the same pull of 100 pounds?


Simp. It would, provided you include with the stone C the portion of rope EB.


Salv. Let us therefore suppose that the rope is stretched at the point D with a

weight of 100 pounds, then according to your own admission it will break;

but FE is only a small portion of AB; how can you therefore maintain that thelong rope is weaker than the short one? Give up then this erroneous view

which you share with many very intelligent people, and let us proceed.

  Now having demonstrated that, in the case of [uniformly loaded] prisms

and cylinders of constant thickness, the moment of force tending to produce

fracture [momento sopra le proprie resistenze] varies as the square of the

length; and having likewise shown that, when the length is constant and the

thickness varies, the resistance to fracture varies as the cube of the side, or

diameter, of the base, let us pass to the investigation of the case of solids

which simultaneously vary in both length and thickness. Here I observe that,






























                                      Proposition V


Prisms  and  cylinders  which  differ  in  both  length  and  thickness  offer

resistances to fracture [i. e., can support at their ends loads] which are directlyproportional  to  the  cubes  of  the  diameters  of  their  bases  and  inversely

proportional to their lengths.





























  This proposition having been demonstrated, let us next consider the case

of prisms and cylinders which are similar. Concerning these we shall show

that,


                                    Propositionhi VI


In the case of similar cylinders and prisms, the moments [stretching forces]

which result from multiplying together their weight and length [i. e., from the

moments produced by their own weight and length], which latter acts as a

lever-arm, bear to each other a ratio which is the sesquialteral of the ratio

between the resistances of their bases.  In order to prove this let us indicate the two similar cylinders by AB and

CD: then the magnitude of the force [momento] in the cylinder AB, opposing

the resistance of its base B, bears to the magnitude [momento] of the force at

CD, opposing the resistance of its base D, a ratio which is the sesquialteral of

the ratio between the resistance of the base B and the resistance of the base D.

And since the solids AB and CD, are effective in opposing the resistances of

their bases B and D, in proportion to their weights and to the mechanical

advantages [forze] of their lever arms respectively, and since the advantage

[forza] of the lever arm AB is equal to the advantage [forza] of the lever arm

CD (this is true because in virtue of the similarity of the cylinders the length

AB is to the radius of the base B as the length CD is to the radius of the base

D), it follows that the total force [momento] of the cylinder AB is to the total

force [momento] of the cylinder CD as the weight alone of the cylinder AB is

to the weight alone of the cylinder CD, that is, as the volume of the cylinder

AB [l’istesso cilindro AB] is to the volume CD [all’istesso CD]: but these are

as the cubes of the diameters of their bases B and D; and the resistances of

the bases, being to each other as their areas, are to each other consequently as

the squares of their diameters. Therefore the forces [momenti] of the cylinders
                                                                                    19
are to each other in the sesquialteral ratio of the resistance of their bases.

19
 The preceding paragraph beginning with Prop. VI is of more than usual interest as illustrating the
confusion of terminology current in the time of Galileo. The translation given is literal except in the
case of those words for which the Italian is supplied. The facts which Galileo has in mind are so evident
that  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  one  can  here  interpret  “moment”  to  mean  the  force  “opposing  the
resistance of its base,” unless “the force of the lever arm AB” be taken to mean “the mechanical
advantage of the lever made up of AB and the radius of the base B”; and similarly for “the force of the
lever arm CD.” [Trans.]Simp. This proposition strikes me as both new and surprising: at first glance it

is very different from anything which I myself should have guessed: for since

these figures are similar in all other respects, I should have certainly thought

that the forces [momenti] and the resistances of these cylinders would have

borne to each other the same ratio.


Sagr. This is the proof of the proposition to which I referred, at the very

beginning of our discussion, as one imperfectly understood by me.


Salv. For a while, Simplicio, I used to think, as you do, that the resistances of

similar solids were similar; but a certain casual observation showed me that

similar solids do not exhibit a strength which is proportional to their size, the

larger ones being less fitted to undergo rough usage just as tall men are more

apt than small children to be injured by a fall. And, as we remarked at the

outset, a large beam or column falling from a given height will go to pieces

when  under  the  same  circumstances  a  small  scantling  or  small  marble

cylinder  will  not  break.  It  was  this  observation  which  led  me  to  the

investigation of the fact which I am about to demonstrate to you: it is a very

remarkable thing that, among the infinite variety of solids which are similar

one  to  another,  there  are  no  two  of  which  the  forces  [momenti],  and  the

resistances of these solids are related in the same ratio.

Simp. You remind me now of a passage in Aristotle’s Questionsin Mechanics

in which he tries to explain why it is that a wooden beam becomes weaker

and can be more easily bent as it grows longer, notwithstanding the fact that

the shorter beam is thinner and the longer one thicker: and, if I remember

correctly, he explains it in terms of the simple lever.


Salv. Very  true:  but,  since  this  solution  seemed  to  leave  room  for  doubt,
                      20
Bishop di Guevara, whose truly learned commentaries have greatly enriched

and illuminated this work, indulges in additional clever speculations with the

hope of thus overcoming all difficulties; nevertheless even he is confused as

regards this particular point, namely, whether, when the length and thickness

of these solid figures increase in the same ratio, their strength and resistance

to fracture, as well as to bending, remain constant. After much thought upon

this subject, I have reached the following result. First I shall show that,

20
 Bishop of Teano; b. 1561; d. 1641. [Trans.]                                    Proposition VII


Among heavy prisms and cylinders of similar figure, there is one and only

one which under the stress of its own weight lies just on the limit between

breaking and not breaking: so that every larger one is unable to carry the load

of its own weight and breaks; while every smaller one is able to withstand

some additional force tending to break it.

  Let AB be a heavy prism, the longest possible that will just sustain its own

weight, so that if it be lengthened the least bit it will break. Then, I say, this

prism  is  unique  among  all  similar  prisms  —  infinite  in  number  —  in

occupying  that  boundary  line  between  breaking  and  not  breaking;  so  that

every larger one will break under its own weight, and every smaller one will

not break, but will be able to withstand some force in addition to its own

weight.

  Let the prism CE be similar to, but larger than, AB: then, I say, it will not

remain intact but will break under its own weight. Lay off the portion CD,

equal in length to AB. And, since, the resistance [bending strength] of CD is

to  that  of  AB  as  the  cube  of  the  thickness  of  CD  is  to  the  cube  of  the

thickness of AB, that is, as the prism CE is to the similar prism AB, it follows

that the weight of CE is the utmost load which a prism of the length CD can

sustain; but the length of CE is greater; therefore the prism CE will break.

Now take another prism FG which is smaller than AB. Let FH equal AB,

then  it  can  be  shown  in  a  similar  manner  that  the  resistance  [bending

strength] of FG is to that of AB as the prism FG is to the prism AB provided

the distance AB that is FH, is equal to the distance FG; but AB is greater than

FG, and therefore the moment of the prism FG applied at G is not sufficient

to break the prism FG.Sagr. The demonstration is short and clear; while the proposition which, at

first glance, appeared improbable is now seen to be both true and inevitable.

In  order  therefore  to  bring  this  prism  into  that  limiting  condition  which

separates breaking from not breaking, it would be necessary to change the

ratio between thickness and length either by increasing the thickness or by

diminishing the length. An investigation of this limiting state will, I believe,

demand equal ingenuity.


Salv. Nay, even more; for the question is more difficult; this I know because I

spent no small amount of time in its discovery which I now wish to share

with you.


                                    Proposition VIII


Given  a  cylinder  or  prism  of  the  greatest  length  consistent  with  its  not

breaking under its own weight; and having given a greater length, to find the

diameter of another cylinder or prism of this greater length which shall be the

only and largest one capable of withstanding its own weight.

  Let BC be the largest cylinder capable of sustaining its own weight; and

let DE be a length greater than AC: the problem is to find the diameter of the

cylinder which, having the length DE, shall be the largest one just able to

withstand its own weight. Let I be a third proportional to the lengths DE andAC;  let  the  diameter  FD  be  to  the  diameter  BA  as  DE  is  to  I;  draw  the

cylinder FE; then, among all cylinders having the same proportions, this is

the largest and only one just capable of sustaining its own weight.

  Let  M  be  a  third  proportional  to  DE  and  I:  also  let  O  be  a  fourth

proportional  to  DE,  I,  and  M;  lay  off  FG  equal  to  AC.  Now  since  the

diameter FD is to the diameter AB as the length DE is to I, and since O is a

fourth proportional to DE, I and M, it follows that :=DE:O. But the resistance

[bending strength] of the cylinder DG is to the resistance of the cylinder BC

as the cube of FD is to the cube of BA: hence the resistance of the cylinder

DG is to that of cylinder BC as the length DE is to O. And since the moment

of the cylinder BC is held in equilibrium by [è equale alla] its resistance, we

shall accomplish our end (which is to prove that the moment of the cylinder

FE is equal to the resistance located at FD), if we show that the moment of

the cylinder FE is to the moment of the cylinder BC as the resistance DF is to

the resistance BA, that is, as the cube of FD is to the cube of BA, or as the

length DE is to O. The moment of the cylinder FE is to the moment of the

cylinder DG as the square of DE is to the square of AC, that is, as the length

DE  is  to  I;  but  the  moment  of  the  cylinder  DG  is  to  the  moment  of  the

cylinder BC, as the square of DF is to the square of BA, that is, as the square

of DE is to the square of I, or as the square of I is to the square of M, or, as I

is  to  O.  Therefore  by  equating  ratios,  it  results  that  the  moment  of  the

cylinder FE is to the moment of the cylinder BC as the length DE is to O, that

is, as the cube of DF is to the cube of BA, or as the resistance of the base DF

is to the resistance of the base BA; which was to be proven.Sagr. This demonstration, Salviati, is rather long and difficult to keep in mind

from a single hearing. Will you not, therefore, be good enough to repeat it?


Salv. As you like; but I would suggest instead a more direct and a shorter

proof: this will, however, necessitate a different figure.

  The favor will be that much greater: nevertheless I hope you will oblige

me by putting into written form the argument just given so that I may study it

at my leisure.


Salv. I shall gladly do so. Let A denote a cylinder of diameter DC and the

largest capable of sustaining its own weight: the problem is to determine a

larger  cylinder  which  shall  be  at  once  the  maximum  and  the  unique  one

capable of sustaining its own weight.

  Let E be such a cylinder, similar to A, having the assigned length, and

having a diameter KL. Let MN be a third proportional to the two lengths DC

and KL: let MN also be the diameter of another cylinder, X, having the same

length as E: then, I say, X is the cylinder sought. Now since the resistance of

the base DC is to the resistance of the base KL as the square of DC is to the

square of KL, that is, as the square of KL is to the square of MN, or, as the

cylinder E is to the cylinder X, that is, as the moment E is to the moment X;and  since  also  the  resistance  [bending  strength]  of  the  base  KL  is  to  the

resistance of the base MN as the cube of KL is to the cube of MN, that is, as

the cube of DC is to the cube of KL, or, as the cylinder A is to the cylinder E,

that is, as the moment of A is to the moment of E; hence it follows, ex æquali
                              21
in proportione perturbata, that the moment of A is to the moment of X as

the resistance of the base DC is to the resistance of the base MN; therefore

moment and resistance are related to each other in prism X precisely as they

are in prism A.

21
 For definition of perturbata see Todhunter’s Euclid, Book V, Def. 20. [Trans.]





























  Let us now generalize the problem; then it will read as follows:

  Given a cylinder AC in which moment and resistance [bending strength]

are  related  in  any  manner  whatsoever;  let  DE  be  the  length  of  another

cylinder; then determine what its thickness must be in order that the relationbetween its moment and resistance shall be identical with that of the cylinder

AC.

  Using Fig. 25 in the same manner as above, we may say that, since the

moment of the cylinder FE is to the moment of the portion DG as the square

of ED is to the square of FG, that is, as the length DE is to I; and since the

moment of the cylinder FG is to the moment of the cylinder AC as the square

of FD is to the square of AB, or, as the square of ED is to the square of I, or,

as the square of I is to the square of M, that is, as the length I is to O; it

follows, ex æquali, that the moment of the cylinder FE is to the moment of

the cylinder AC as the length DE is to O, that is, as the cube of DE is to the

cube of I, or, as the cube of FD is to the cube of AB, that is, as the resistance

of the base FD is to the resistance of the base AB; which was to be proven.

  From  what  has  already  been  demonstrated,  you  can  plainly  see  the

impossibility of increasing the size of structures to vast dimensions either in

art  or  in  nature;  likewise  the  impossibility  of  building  ships,  palaces,  or

temples of enormous size in such a way that their oars, yards, beams, iron-

bolts, and, in short, all their other parts will hold together; nor can nature

produce trees of extraordinary size because the branches would break down

under their own weight; so also it would be impossible to build up the bony

structures of men, horses, or other animals so as to hold together and perform

their normal functions if these animals were to be increased enormously in

height; for this increase in height can be accomplished only by employing a

material which is harder and stronger than usual, or by enlarging the size of

the bones, thus changing their shape until the form and appearance of the

animals suggest a monstrosity. This is perhaps what our wise Poet had in

mind, when he says, in describing a huge giant:

  “Impossible it is to reckon his height
                                        22
  “So beyond measure is his size.”

                                            22


Non si può compartir quanto sia lungo,

  Sì smisuratamente è tutto grosso.

  Ariosto’s Orlando Furioso, XVII, 30 [Trans.]

  To illustrate briefly, I have sketched a bone whose natural length has been

increased three times and whose thickness has been multiplied until, for a

correspondingly large animal, it would perform the same function which thesmall bone performs for its small animal. From the figures here shown you

can see how out of proportion the enlarged bone appears. Clearly then if one

wishes to maintain in a great giant the same proportion of limb as that found

in an ordinary man he must either find a harder and stronger material for

making the bones, or he must admit a diminution of strength in comparison

with men of medium stature; for if his height be increased inordinately he

will fall and be crushed under his own weight. Whereas, if the size of a body

be  diminished,  the  strength  of  that  body  is  not  diminished  in  the  same

proportion; indeed the smaller the body the greater its relative strength. Thus

a small dog could probably carry on his back two or three dogs of his own

size; but I believe that a horse could not carry even one of his own size.























Simp. This may be so; but I am led to doubt it on account of the enormous

size reached by certain fish, such as the whale which, I understand, is ten

times as large as an elephant; yet they all support themselves.


Salv. Your question, Simplicio, suggests another principle, one which had

hitherto escaped my attention and which enables giants and other animals of

vast size to support themselves and to move about as well as smaller animals

do. This result may be secured either by increasing the strength of the bonesand  other  parts  intended  to  carry  not  only  their  weight  but  also  the

superincumbent  load;  or,  keeping  the  proportions  of  the  bony  structure

constant, the skeleton will hold together in the same manner or even more

easily, provided one diminishes, in the proper proportion, the weight of the

bony material, of the flesh, and of anything else which the skeleton has to

carry. It is this second principle which is employed by nature in the structure

of fish, making their bones and muscles not merely light but entirely devoid

of weight.


Simp. The trend of your argument, Salviati, is evident. Since fish live in water

which  on  account  of  its  density  [corpulenza]  or,  as  others  would  say,

heaviness [gravità] diminishes the weight [peso] of bodies immersed in it,

you mean to say that, for this reason, the bodies of fish will be devoid of

weight and will be supported without injury to their bones. But this is not all;

for although the remainder of the body of the fish may be without weight,

there can be no question but that their bones have weight. Take the case of a

whale’s rib, having the dimensions of a beam; who can deny its great weight

or  its  tendency  to  go  to  the  bottom  when  placed  in  water?  One  would,

therefore, hardly expect these great masses to sustain themselves.


Salv. A very shrewd objection! And now, in reply, tell me whether you have

ever seen fish stand motionless at will under water, neither descending to the

bottom nor rising to the top, without the exertion of force by swimming?


Simp. This is a well-known phenomenon.


Salv. The fact then that fish are able to remain motionless under water is a

conclusive reason for thinking that the material of their bodies has the same

specific gravity as that of water; accordingly, if in their make-up there are

certain parts which are heavier than water there must be others which are

lighter, for otherwise they would not produce equilibrium.

  Hence, if the bones are heavier, it is necessary that the muscles or other

constituents of the body should be lighter in order that their buoyancy may

counterbalance  the  weight  of  the  bones.  In  aquatic  animals  therefore

circumstances  are  just  reversed  from  what  they  are  with  land  animals

inasmuch as, in the latter, the bones sustain not only their own weight but

also that of the flesh, while in the former it is the flesh which supports notonly its own weight but also that of the bones. We must therefore cease to

wonder why these enormously large animals inhabit the water rather than the

land, that is to say, the air.


Simp. I am convinced and I only wish to add that what we call land animals

ought really to be called air animals, seeing that they live in the air, are

surrounded by air, and breathe air.


Sagr. I  have  enjoyed  Simplicio’s  discussion  including  both  the  question

raised and its answer. Moreover I can easily understand that one of these

giant fish, if pulled ashore, would not perhaps sustain itself for any great

length of time, but would be crushed under its own mass as soon as the

connections between the bones gave way.


Salv. I am inclined to your opinion; and, indeed, I almost think that the same

thing would happen in the case of a very big ship which floats on the sea

without going to pieces under its load of merchandise and armament, but

which on dry land and in air would probably fall apart. But let us proceed and

show how:

  Given a prism or cylinder, also its own weight and the maximum load

which it can carry, it is then possible to find a maximum length beyond which

the cylinder cannot be prolonged without breaking under its own weight.

  Let AC indicate both the prism and its own weight; also let D represent the

maximum load which the prism can carry at the end C without fracture; it is

required to find the maximum to which the length of the said prism can be

increased without breaking. Draw AH of such a length that the weight of the

prism AC is to the sum of AC and twice the weight D as the length CA is to

AH; and let AG be a mean proportional between CA and AH; then, I say, AG

is the length sought. Since the moment of the weight [momento gravante] D

attached at the point C is equal to the moment of a weight twice as large as D

placed at the middle point AC, through which the weight of the prism AC

acts, it follows that the moment of the resistance of the prism AC located at A

is  equivalent  to  twice  the  weight  D  plus  the  weight  of  AC,  both  acting

through the middle point of AC. And since we have agreed that the moment

of the weights thus located, namely, twice D plus AC, bears to the moment of

AC the same ratio which the length HA bears to CA and since AG is a mean

proportional between these two lengths, it follows that the moment of twiceD plus AC is to the moment of AC as the square of GA is to the square of

CA. But the moment arising from the weight [momento premente] of the

prism GA is to the moment of AC as the square of GA is to the square of CA;

thence AG is the maximum length sought, that is, the length up to which the

prism AC may be prolonged and still support itself, but beyond which it will

break.

















  Hitherto we have considered the moments and resistances of prisms and

solid cylinders fixed at one end with a weight applied at the other end; three

cases were discussed, namely, that in which the applied force was the only

one acting, that in which the weight of the prism itself is also taken into

consideration, and that in which the weight of the prism alone is taken into

consideration. Let us now consider these same prisms and cylinders when

supported at both ends or at a single point placed somewhere between the

ends. In the first place, I remark that a cylinder carrying only its own weight

and  having  the  maximum  length,  beyond  which  it  will  break,  will,  when

supported either in the middle or at both ends, have twice the length of one

which is mortised into a wall and supported only at one end. This is very

evident because, if we denote the cylinder by ABC and if we assume that

one-half of it, AB, is the greatest possible length capable of supporting its

own weight with one end fixed at B, then, for the same reason, if the cylinder

is carried on the point G, the first half will be counterbalanced by the other

half BC. So also in the case of the cylinder DEF, if its length be such that it

will support only one-half this length when the end D is held fixed, or the

other half when the end F is fixed, then it is evident that when supports, suchas H and I, are placed under the ends D and F respectively the moment of any

additional force or weight placed at E will produce fracture at this point.














  A more intricate and difficult problem is the following: neglect the weight

of a solid such as the preceding and find whether the same force or weight

which produces fracture when applied at the middle of a cylinder, supported

at both ends, will also break the cylinder when applied at some other point

nearer one end than the other.

  Thus, for example, if one wished to break a stick by holding it with one

hand at each end and applying his knee at the middle, would the same force

be required to break it in the same manner if the knee were applied, not at the

middle, but at some point nearer to one end?


Sagr. This problem, I believe, has been touched upon by Aristotle in his

Questions in Mechanics.

  His inquiry however is not quite the same; for he seeks merely to discover

why it is that a stick may be more easily broken by taking hold, one hand at

each end of the stick, that is, far removed from the knee, than if the hands

were  closer  together.  He  gives  a  general  explanation,  referring  it  to  the

lengthened lever arms which are secured by placing the hands at the ends of

the stick. Our inquiry calls for something more: what we want to know is

whether, when the hands are retained at the ends of the stick, the same force

is required to break it wherever the knee be placed.


Sagr. At first glance this would appear to be so, because the two lever arms

exert, in a certain way, the same moment, seeing that as one grows shorter the

other grows correspondingly longer.Salv. Now you see how readily one falls into error and what caution and

circumspection are required to avoid it. What you have just said appears at

first glance highly probable, but on closer examination it proves to be quite

far from true; as will be seen from the fact that whether the knee — the

fulcrum of the two levers — be placed in the middle or not makes such a

difference  that,  if  fracture  is  to  be  produced  at  any  other  point  than  the

middle, the breaking force at the middle, even when multiplied four, ten, a

hundred, or a thousand times would not suffice. To begin with we shall offer

some general considerations and then pass to the determination of the ratio in

which the breaking force must change in order to produce fracture at one

point rather than another.

  Let AB denote a wooden cylinder which is to be broken in the middle,

over the supporting point C, and let DE represent an identical cylinder which

is to be broken just over the supporting point F which is not in the middle.

First of all it is clear that, since the distances AC and CB are equal, the forces

applied at the extremities B and A must also be equal. Secondly since the

distance DF is less than the distance AC the moment of any force acting at D

is less than the moment of the same force at A, that is, applied at the distance

CA;  and  the  moments  are  less  in  the  ratio  of  the  length  DF  to  AC;

consequently it is necessary to increase the force [momento] at D in order to

overcome, or even to balance, the resistance at F; but in comparison with the

length AC the distance DF can be diminished indefinitely: in order therefore

to  counterbalance  the  resistance  at  F  it  will  be  necessary  to  increase

indefinitely the force [forza] applied at D. On the other hand, in proportion as

we increase the distance FE over that of CB, we must diminish the force at E

in order to counterbalance the resistance at F; but the distance FE, measured

in terms of CB, cannot be increased indefinitely by sliding the fulcrum F

toward the end D; indeed, it cannot even be made double the length CB.

Therefore the force required at E to balance the resistance at F will always be

more  than  half  that  required  at  B.  It  is  clear  then  that,  as  the  fulcrum  F

approaches the end D, we must of necessity indefinitely increase the sum of

the forces applied at E and D in order to balance, or overcome, the resistance

at F.Sagr. What shall we say, Simplicio? Must we not confess that geometry is

the most powerful of all instruments for sharpening the wit and training the

mind to think correctly? Was not Plato perfectly right when he wished that

his pupils should be first of all well grounded in mathematics? As for myself,

I  quite  understood  the  property  of  the  lever  and  how,  by  increasing  or

diminishing its length, one can increase or diminish the moment of force and

of  resistance;  and  yet,  in  the  solution  of  the  present  problem  I  was  not

slightly, but greatly, deceived.

Simp. Indeed I begin to understand that while logic is an excellent guide in

discourse, it does not, as regards stimulation to discovery, compare with the

power of sharp distinction which belongs to geometry.


Sagr. Logic, it appears to me, teaches us how to test the conclusiveness of

any argument or demonstration already discovered and completed; but I do

not  believe  that  it  teaches  us  to  discover  correct  arguments  and

demonstrations. But it would be better if Salviati were to show us in just what

proportion the forces must be increased in order to produce fracture as thefulcrum is moved from one point to another along one and the same wooden

rod.

  The ratio which you desire is determined as follows:

  If  upon  a  cylinder  one  marks  two  points  at  which  fracture  is  to  be

produced, then the resistances at these two points will bear to each other the

inverse ratio of the rectangles formed by the distances from the respective

points to the ends of the cylinder.

  Let A and B denote the least forces which will bring about fracture of the

cylinder at C; likewise E and F the smallest forces which will break it at D.

Then, I say, that the sum of the forces A and B is to the sum of the forces E

and F as the area of the rectangle AD.DB is to the area of the rectangle

AC.CB. Because the sum of the forces A and B bears to the sum of the forces

E and F a ratio which is the product of the three following ratios, namely,

(A+B)/B, B/F, and F/(F+E); but the length BA is to the length CA as the sum

of the forces A and B is to the force B; and, as the length DB is to the length

CB, so is the force B to the force F; also as the length AD is to AB, so is the

force F to the sum of the forces F and E.













  Hence it follows that the sum of the forces A and B bears to the sum of the

forces E and F a ratio which is the product of the three following ratios,

namely, BA/CA, BD/BC, and AD/AB. But DA/CA is the product of DA/BA

and BA/CA. Therefore the sum of the forces A and B bears to the sum of the

forces E and F a ratio which is the product of DA:CA and DB:CB. But the

rectangle AD.DB bears to the rectangle AC.CB a ratio which is the product

of DA/CA and DB/CB. Accordingly the sum of the forces A and B is to the

sum of the forces E and F as the rectangle AD.DB is to the rectangle AC.CB,

that is, the resistance to fracture at C is to the resistance to fracture at D as the

rectangle AD.DB is to the rectangle AC.CB.  q. e. d.

  Let  that  one  of  the  given  weights  which  is  larger  than  the  maximum

weight supported at the middle of the cylinder AB bear to this maximum

weight the same ratio which the length E bears to the length F. The problem

is to find that point in the cylinder at which this larger weight becomes the

maximum that can be supported. Let G be a mean proportional between the

lengths E and F. Draw AD and S so that they bear to each other the same

ratio as E to G; accordingly S will be less than AD.

  Let AD be the diameter of a semicircle AHD, in which take AH equal to

S; join the points H and D and lay off DR equal to HD. Then, I say, R is the

point sought, namely, the point at which the given weight, greater than the

maximum  supported  at  the  middle  of  the  cylinder  D,  would  become  the

maximum load.

  On AB as diameter draw the semicircle ANB: erect the perpendicular RN

and join the points N and D. Now since the sum of the squares on NR and

RD is equal to the square of ND, that is, to the square of AD, or to the sum of

the squares of AH and HD; and, since the square of HD is equal to the square

of DR, it follows that the square of NR, that is, the rectangle AR.RB, is equal

to the square of AH, also therefore to the square of S; but the square of S is to

the square of AD as the length F is to the length E, that is, as the maximum

weight supported at D is to the larger of the two given weights. Hence the

latter will be the maximum load which can be carried at the point R; which is

the solution sought.


Sagr. Now I understand thoroughly; and I am thinking that, since the prism

AB grows constantly stronger and more resistant to the pressure of its load at

points which are more and more removed from the middle, we could in the

case of large heavy beams cut away a considerable portion near the ends

which would notably lessen the weight, and which, in the beam work of large

rooms, would prove to be of great utility and convenience.Salv. I was just on the point of mentioning an interesting and remarkable fact

connected with this very question. My meaning will be clearer if I draw a

figure.  Let  DB  represent  a  prism;  then,  as  we  have  already  shown,  its

resistance  to  fracture  [bending  strength]  at  the  end  AD,  owing  to  a  load

placed at the end B, will be less than the resistance at CI in the ratio of the

length CB to AB. Now imagine this same prism to be cut through diagonally

along the line FB so that the opposite faces will be triangular; the side facing

us will be FAB. Such a solid will have properties different from those of the

prism; for, if the load remain at B, the resistance against fracture [bending

strength] at C will be less than that at A in the ratio of the length CB to the

length  AB.  This  is  easily  proved:  for  if  CNO  represents  a  cross-section

parallel to AFD, then the length FA bears to the length CN, in the triangle

FAB, the same ratio which the length AB bears to the length CB. Therefore,

if we imagine A and C to be the points at which the fulcrum is placed, the

lever arms in the two cases BA, AF and BC, CN will be proportional [simili].

Hence the moment of any force applied at B and acting through the arm BA,against a resistance placed at a distance AF will be equal to that of the same

force at B acting through the arm BC against the same resistance located at a

distance CN. But now, if the force still be applied at B, the resistance to be

overcome when the fulcrum is at C, acting through the arm CN, is less than

the resistance with the fulcrum at A in the same proportion as the rectangular

cross-section CO is less than the rectangular cross-section AD, that is, as the

length CN is less than AF, or CB than BA.


















  Consequently the resistance to fracture at C, offered by the portion OBC,

is less than the resistance to fracture at A, offered by the entire block DAB, in

the same proportion as the length CB is smaller than the length AB.

  By this diagonal saw-cut we have now removed from the beam, or prism

DB, a portion, i. e., a half, and have left the wedge, or triangular prism, FBA.

We  thus  have  two  solids  possessing  opposite  properties;  one  body  grows

stronger as it is shortened while the other grows weaker. This being so it

would seem not merely reasonable, but inevitable, that there exists a line of

section such that, when the superfluous material has been removed, there will

remain a solid of such figure that it will offer the same resistance [strength] at

all points.

Simp. Evidently one must, in passing from greater to less, encounter equality.


Sagr. But now the question is what path the saw should follow in making the

cut.Simp. It seems to me that this ought not to be a difficult task: for if by sawing

the  prism  along  the  diagonal  line  and  removing  half  of  the  material,  the

remainder acquires a property just the opposite to that of the entire prism, so

that at every point where the latter gains strength the former becomes weaker,

then it seems to me that by taking a middle path, i. e., by removing half the

former half, or one-quarter of the whole, the strength of the remaining figure

will be constant at all those points where, in the two previous figures, the

gain in one was equal to the loss in the other.


Salv. You have missed the mark, Simplicio. For, as I shall presently show

you, the amount which you can remove from the prism without weakening it

is not a quarter but a third. It now remains, as suggested by Sagredo, to

discover the path along which the saw must travel: this, as I shall prove, must

be a parabola. But it is first necessary to demonstrate the following lemma:

  If the fulcrums are so placed under two levers or balances that the arms

through which the forces act are to each other in the same ratio as the squares

of the arms through which the resistances act, and if these resistances are to

each other in the same ratio as the arms through which they act, then the

forces will be equal.

  Let AB and CD represent two levers whose lengths are divided by their

fulcrums in such a way as to make the distance EB bear to the distance FD a

ratio which is equal to the square of the ratio between the distances EA and

FC. Let the resistances located at A and C be to each other as EA is to FC.

Then, I say, the forces which must be applied at B and D in order to hold in

equilibrium  the  resistances  at  A  and  C  are  equal.  Let  EG  be  a  mean

proportional  between  EB  and  FD.  Then  we  shall  have

BE:EG=EG:FD=AE:CF. But this last ratio is precisely that which we have

assumed  to  exist  between  the  resistances  at  A  and  C.  And  since

EG:FD=AE:CF, it follows, permutando, that EG:AE=FD:CF. Seeing that the

distances DC and GA are divided in the same ratio by the points F and E, it

follows that the same force which, when applied at D, will equilibrate the

resistance at C, would if applied at G equilibrate at A a resistance equal to

that found at C.  But one datum of the problem is that the resistance at A is to the resistance

at C as the distance AE is to the distance CF, or as BE is to EG. Therefore the

force applied at G, or rather at D, will, when applied at B, just balance the

resistance located at A.

  q. e. d.

  This being clear draw the parabola FNB in the face FB of the prism DB.

Let the prism be sawed along this parabola whose vertex is at B. The portion

of  the  solid  which  remains  will  be  included  between  the  base  AD,  the

rectangular plane AG, the straight line BG and the surface DGBF, whose

curvature is identical with that of the parabola FNB. This solid will have, I

say, the same strength at every point. Let the solid be cut by a plane CO

parallel to the plane AD. Imagine the points A and C to be the fulcrums of

two levers of which one will have the arms BA and AF; the other BC and

CN. Then since in the parabola FBA, we have BA:BC=:, it is clear that the

arm BA of one lever is to the arm BC of the other lever as the square of the

arm AF is to the square of the other arm CN. Since the resistance to be

balanced by the lever BA is to the resistance to be balanced by the lever BC

in the same ratio as the rectangle DA is to the rectangle OC, that is as the

length AF is to the length CN, which two lengths are the other arms of the

levers, it follows, by the lemma just demonstrated, that the same force which,

when applied at BG will equilibrate the resistance at DA, will also balance

the resistance at CO. The same is true for any other section. Therefore this

parabolic solid is equally strong throughout.  It can now be shown that, if the prism be sawed along the line of the

parabola FNB, one-third part of it will be removed; because the rectangle FB

and the surface FNBA bounded by the parabola are the bases of two solids

included between two parallel planes, i. e., between the rectangles FB and

DG; consequently the volumes of these two solids bear to each other the

same ratio as their bases. But the area of the rectangle is one and a half times

as large as the area FNBA under the parabola; hence by cutting the prism

along the parabola we remove one-third of the volume. It is thus seen how

one can diminish the weight of a beam by as much as thirty-three per cent

without diminishing its strength; a fact of no small utility in the construction

of  large  vessels,  and  especially  in  supporting  the  decks,  since  in  such

structures lightness is of prime importance.


Sagr. The advantages derived from this fact are so numerous that it would be

both wearisome and impossible to mention them all; but leaving this matter

to one side, I should like to learn just how it happens that diminution of

weight is possible in the ratio above stated. I can readily understand that,

when a section is made along the diagonal, one-half the weight is removed;

but, as for the parabolic section removing one-third of the prism, this I can

only accept on the word of Salviati who is always reliable; however I prefer

first-hand knowledge to the word of another.


Salv. You would like then a demonstration of the fact that the excess of the

volume of a prism over the volume of what we have called the parabolic solid

is one-third of the entire prism. This I have already given you on a previous

occasion; however I shall now try to recall the demonstration in which I
                                                                                          24
remember having used a certain lemma from Archimedes’ book On Spirals,namely, Given any number of lines, differing in length one from another by a

common difference which is equal to the shortest of these lines; and given

also  an  equal  number  of  lines  each  of  which  has  the  same  length  as  the

longest of the first-mentioned series; then the sum of the squares of the lines

of this second group will be less than three times the sum of the squares of

the lines in the first group. But the sum of the squares of the second group

will be greater than three times the sum of the squares of all excepting the

longest of the first group.

24
 The reader will notice that two different problems are here involved. That which is suggested in the
last remark of Sagredo is the following:


  To  find  a  beam  whose  maximum  stress  has  the  same  value  when  a

constant load moves from one end of the beam to the other. The second

problem — the one which Salviati proceeds to solve — is the following: To

find a beam in all cross-sections of which the maximum stress is the same for

a constant load in a fixed position. [Trans.]

  For demonstration of the theorem here cited, see “Works of Archimedes”

translated  by  T.  L.  Heath  (Camb.  Univ.  Press  1897)  p.  107  and  p.  162.

[Trans.]Sagr. More slowly, please; for I do not see how the excess of this figure

described about the “mixed triangle” is much smaller than the rectangle BO.


Salv. Does not the rectangle BO have an area which is equal to the sum of the

areas of all the little rectangles through which the parabola passes? I mean the

rectangles BI, IH, HF, FE, EG, and GA of which only a part lies outside the

“mixed triangle.” Have we not taken the rectangle BO smaller than the area

X? Therefore if, as our opponent might say, the triangle plus X is equal to a

third part of this rectangle CP, the circumscribed figure, which adds to the

triangle an area less than X, will still remain smaller than a third part of the

rectangle, CP. But this cannot be, because this circumscribed figure is larger

than a third of the area. Hence it is not true that our “mixed triangle” is less

than a third of the rectangle.

  You have cleared up my difficulty; but it still remains to be shown that the

circumscribed figure is larger than a third part of the rectangle CP, a task

which will not, I believe, prove so easy.Salv. There is nothing very difficult about it. Since in the parabola :=DA:AZ=

rectangle KE: rectangle AG, seeing that the altitudes of these two rectangles,

AK and KL, are equal, it follows that :=:=rectangle KE: rectangle KZ. In

precisely the same manner it may be shown that the other rectangles LF, MH,

NI, OB, stand to one another in the same ratio as the squares of the lines MA,

NA, OA, PA.

  Let us now consider the circumscribed figure, composed of areas which

bear to each other the same ratio as the squares of a series of lines whose

common difference in length is equal to the shortest one in the series; note

also that the rectangle CP is made up of an equal number of areas each equal

to the largest and each equal to the rectangle OB. Consequently, according to

the lemma of Archimedes, the circumscribed figure is larger than a third part

of the rectangle CP; but it was also smaller, which is impossible. Hence the

“mixed triangle” is not less than a third part of the rectangle CP.

  Likewise, I say, it cannot be greater. For, let us suppose that it is greater

than a third part of the rectangle CP and let the area X represent the excess of

the triangle over the third part of the rectangle CP; subdivide the rectangle

into equal rectangles and continue the process until one of these subdivisions

is smaller than the area X. Let BO represent such a rectangle smaller than X.

Using the above figure, we have in the “mixed triangle” an inscribed figure,

made up of the rectangles VO, TN, SM, RL, and QK, which will not be less

than a third part of the large rectangle CP.

  For the “mixed triangle” exceeds the inscribed figure by a quantity less

than that by which it exceeds the third part of the rectangle CP; to see that

this is true we have only to remember that the excess of the triangle over the

third part of the rectangle CP is equal to the area X, which is less than the

rectangle BO, which in turn is much less than the excess of the triangle over

the inscribed figure. For the rectangle BO is made up of the small rectangles

AG, GE, EF, FH, HI, and IB; and the excess of the triangle over the inscribed

figure  is  less  than  half  the  sum  of  these  little  rectangles.  Thus  since  the

triangle exceeds the third part of the rectangle CP by an amount X, which is

more than that by which it exceeds the inscribed figure, the latter will also

exceed the third part of the rectangle, CP. But, by the lemma which we have

assumed, it is smaller. For the rectangle CP, being the sum of the largest

rectangles, bears to the component rectangles of the inscribed figure the same

ratio which the sum of all the squares of the lines equal to the longest bears tothe squares of the lines which have a common difference, after the square of

the longest has been subtracted.

  Therefore, as in the case of squares, the sum total of the largest rectangles,

i.  e.,  the  rectangle  CP,  is  greater  than  three  times  the  sum  total  of  those

having a common difference minus the largest; but these last make up the

inscribed figure. Hence the “mixed triangle” is neither greater nor less than

the third part of rectangle CP; it is therefore equal to it.

Sagr. A fine, clever demonstration; and all the more so because it gives us the
                                                                                          25
quadrature  of  the  parabola,  proving  it  to  be  four-thirds  of  the  inscribed

triangle, a fact which Archimedes demonstrates by means of two different,

but admirable, series of many propositions. This same theorem has also been
                                              26
recently  established  by  Luca  Valerio,  the  Archimedes  of  our  age;  his

demonstration is to be found in his book dealing with the centers of gravity of

solids.

25
 Distinguish carefully between this triangle and the “mixed triangle” above mentioned. [Trans.]

26
 An eminent Italian mathematician, contemporary with Galileo. [Trans.]


Salv. A book which, indeed, is not to be placed second to any produced by

the most eminent geometers either of the present or of the past; a book which,

as soon as it fell into the hands of our Academician, led him to abandon his

own researches along these lines; for he saw how happily everything had

been treated and demonstrated by Valerio.

  When I was informed of this event by the Academician himself, I begged

of him to show the demonstrations which he had discovered before seeing

Valerio’s book; but in this I did not succeed.


Salv. I have a copy of them and will show them to you; for you will enjoy the

diversity of method employed by these two authors in reaching and proving

the same conclusions; you will also find that some of these conclusions are

explained in different ways, although both are in fact equally correct.


Sagr. I shall be much pleased to see them and will consider it a great favor if

you will bring them to our regular meeting. But in the meantime, considering

the strength of a solid formed from a prism by means of a parabolic section,

would it not, in view of the fact that this result promises to be both interesting

and useful in many mechanical operations, be a fine thing if you were to givesome quick and easy rule by which a mechanician might draw a parabola

upon a plane surface?


Salv. There are many ways of tracing these curves; I will mention merely the

two which are the quickest of all. One of these is really remarkable; because

by it I can trace thirty or forty parabolic curves with no less neatness and

precision,  and  in  a  shorter  time  than  another  man  can,  by  the  aid  of  a

compass, neatly draw four or six circles of different sizes upon paper. I take a

perfectly round brass ball about the size of a walnut and project it along the

surface of a metallic mirror held in a nearly upright position, so that the ball

in its motion will press slightly upon the mirror and trace out a fine sharp
                                27
parabolic line; this parabola will grow longer and narrower as the angle of

elevation  increases.  The  above  experiment  furnishes  clear  and  tangible

evidence that the path of a projectile is a parabola; a fact first observed by our

friend and demonstrated by him in his book on motion which we shall take

up at our next meeting. In the execution of this method, it is advisable to

slightly heat and moisten the ball by rolling in the hand in order that its trace

upon the mirror may be more distinct.

27
 It is now well known that this curve is not a parabola but a catenary the equation of which was first
given, 49 years after Galileo’s death, by James Bernoulli. [Trans.]

                                                                                    28
  By use of the geometrical lines drawn upon our friend’s compass, one

may easily lay off those points which will locate this same curve upon the

same face of the prism.

28
 The geometrical and military compass of Galileo, described in Nat. Ed. Vol. 2. [Trans.]


  Hitherto we have demonstrated numerous conclusions pertaining to the

resistance which solids offer to fracture. As a starting point for this science,

we assumed that the resistance offered by the solid to a straight-away pull

was known; from this base one might proceed to the discovery of many other

results and their demonstrations; of these results the number to be found in

nature is infinite. But, in order to bring our daily conference to an end, I wish

to discuss the strength of hollow solids, which are employed in art — and still

oftener  in  nature  —  in  a  thousand  operations  for  the  purpose  of  greatly

increasing strength without adding to weight; examples of these are seen in

the bones of birds and in many kinds of reeds which are light and highlyresistant both to bending and breaking. For if a stem of straw which carries a

head of wheat heavier than the entire stalk were made up of the same amount

of  material  in  solid  form  it  would  offer  less  resistance  to  bending  and

breaking. This is an experience which has been verified and confirmed in

practice where it is found that a hollow lance or a tube of wood or metal is

much stronger than would be a solid one of the same length and weight, one

which would necessarily be thinner; men have discovered, therefore, that in

order to make lances strong as well as light they must make them hollow. We

shall now show that:

  In the case of two cylinders, one hollow the other solid but having equal

volumes and equal lengths, their resistances [bending strengths] are to each

other in the ratio of their diameters.

  Let AE denote a hollow cylinder and IN a solid one of the same weight

and length; then, I say, that the resistance against fracture exhibited by the

tube AE bears to that of the solid cylinder IN the same ratio as the diameter

AB to the diameter IL. This is very evident; for since the tube and the solid

cylinder IN have the same volume and length, the area of the circular base IL

will be equal to that of the annulus AB which is the base of the tube AE. (By

annulus is here meant the area which lies between two concentric circles of

different radii.) Hence their resistances to a straight-away pull are equal; but

in  producing  fracture  by  a  transverse  pull  we  employ,  in  the  case  of  the

cylinder IN, the length LN as one lever arm, the point L as a fulcrum, and the

diameter LI, or its half, as the opposing lever arm: while in the case of the

tube, the length BE which plays the part of the first lever arm is equal to LN,

the opposing lever arm beyond the fulcrum, B, is the diameter AB, or its half.

Manifestly then the resistance [bending strength] of the tube exceeds that of

the solid cylinder in the proportion in which the diameter AB exceeds the

diameter IL which is the desired result. Thus the strength of a hollow tube

exceeds that of a solid cylinder in the ratio of their diameters whenever the

two are made of the same material and have the same weight and length.  It  may  be  well  next  to  investigate  the  general  case  of  tubes  and  solid

cylinders  of  constant  length,  but  with  the  weight  and  the  hollow  portion

variable. First we shall show that:

  Given a hollow tube, a solid cylinder may be determined which will be

equal [eguale] to it.

  The  method  is  very  simple.  Let  AB  denote  the  external  and  CD  the

internal diameter of the tube. In the larger circle lay off the line AE equal in

length to the diameter CD; join the points E and B. Now since the angle at E

inscribed in a semicircle, AEB, is a right-angle, the area of the circle whose

diameter is AB is equal to the sum of the areas of the two circles whose

respective diameters are AE and EB. But AE is the diameter of the hollow

portion of the tube. Therefore the area of the circle whose diameter is EB is

the same as the area of the annulus ACBD. Hence a solid cylinder of circular

base having a diameter EB will have the same volume as the walls of the tube

of equal length.  By use of this theorem, it is easy:

  To find the ratio between the resistance [bending strength] of any tube and

that of any cylinder of equal length.

  Let ABE denote a tube and RSM a cylinder of equal length: it is required

to find the ratio between their resistances. Using the preceding proposition,

determine a cylinder ILN which shall have the same volume and length as the

tube. Draw a line V of such a length that it will be related to IL and RS

(diameters  of  the  bases  of  the  cylinders  IN  and  RM),  as  follows:

V:RS=RS:IL. Then, I say, the resistance of the tube AE is to that of the

cylinder RM as the length of the line AB is to the length V. For, since the

tube AE is equal both in volume and length, to the cylinder IN, the resistance

of the tube will bear to the resistance of the cylinder the same ratio as the line

AB to IL; but the resistance of the cylinder IN is to that of the cylinder RM as

the cube of IL is to the cube of RS, that is, as the length IL is to length V:therefore, ex æquali, the resistance [bending strength] of the tube AE bears to

the resistance of the cylinder RM the same ratio as the length AB to V.

  q. e. d.






























29
 “Natural motion” of the author has here been translated into “free motion” — since this is the term
used to-day to distinguish the “natural” from the “violent” motions of the Renaissance. [Trans.]

30
 A theorem demonstrated on p. 175 below. [Trans.]


  End of the second day.                                      Third Day


                      Change of Position. [De Motu Locali]


This discussion is divided into three parts; the first part deals with motion

which  is  steady  or  uniform;  the  second  treats  of  motion  as  we  find  it

accelerated in nature; the third deals with the so-called violent motions and

with projectiles.


                                    Uniform Motion


In dealing with steady or uniform motion, we need a single definition which I

give as follows:


                                      Definition


By steady or uniform motion, I mean one in which the distances traversed by

the moving particle during any equal intervals of time, are themselves equal.


                                        Caution


We must add to the old definition (which defined steady motion simply as

one in which equal distances are traversed in equal times) the word “any,”

meaning  by  this,  all  equal  intervals  of  time;  for  it  may  happen  that  the

moving body will traverse equal distances during some equal intervals of

time and yet the distances traversed during some small portion of these time-

intervals may not be equal, even though the time-intervals be equal.

  From the above definition, four axioms follow, namely:


                                        Axiom I


In the case of one and the same uniform motion, the distance traversed during

a longer interval of time is greater than the distance traversed during a shorter

interval of time.


                                        Axiom IIIn the case of one and the same uniform motion, the time required to traverse

a greater distance is longer than the time required for a less distance.


                                        Axiom III


In one and the same interval of time, the distance traversed at a greater speed

is larger than the distance traversed at a less speed.


                                        Axiom IV


The speed required to traverse a longer distance is greater than that required

to traverse a shorter distance during the same time-interval.


                              Theorem I, Proposition I


If a moving particle, carried uniformly at a constant speed, traverses two

distances the time-intervals required are to each other in the ratio of these

distances.

  Let a particle move uniformly with constant speed through two distances

AB, BC, and let the time required to traverse AB be represented by DE; the

time required to traverse BC, by EF; then I say that the distance AB is to the

distance BC as the time DE is to the time EF.





  Let the distances and times be extended on both sides towards G, H and I,

K; let AG be divided into any number whatever of spaces each equal to AB,

and in like manner lay off in DI exactly the same number of time-intervals

each equal to DE. Again lay off in CH any number whatever of distances

each equal to BC; and in FK exactly the same number of time-intervals each

equal to EF; then will the distance BG and the time EI be equal and arbitrary

multiples of the distance BA and the time ED; and likewise the distance HB

and the time KE are equal and arbitrary multiples of the distance CB and the

time FE.

  And since DE is the time required to traverse AB, the whole time EI will

be required for the whole distance BG, and when the motion is uniform there

will be in EI as many time-intervals each equal to DE as there are distances inBG each equal to BA; and likewise it follows that KE represents the time

required to traverse HB.

  Since, however, the motion is uniform, it follows that if the distance GB is

equal to the distance BH, then must also the time IE be equal to the time EK;

and if GB is greater than BH, then also IE will be greater than EK; and if less,
    31
less. There are then four quantities, the first AB, the second BC, the third

DE,  and  the  fourth  EF;  the  time  IE  and  the  distance  GB  are  arbitrary

multiples of the first and the third, namely of the distance AB and the time

DE.

31
 The method here employed by Galileo is that of Euclid as set forth in the famous 5th Definition of
the Fifth Book of his Elements, for which see art. Geometry Ency. Brit. 11th Ed. p. 683. [Trans.]


  But it has been proved that both of these latter quantities are either equal

to,  greater  than,  or  less  than  the  time  EK  and  the  space  BH,  which  are

arbitrary multiples of the second and the fourth. Therefore the first is to the

second, namely the distance AB is to the distance BC, as the third is to the

fourth, namely the time DE is to the time EF.

  q. e. d.


                              Theorem II, Proposition II,


If a moving particle traverses two distances in equal intervals of time, these

distances will bear to each other the same ratio as the speeds. And conversely

if the distances are as the speeds then the times are equal.

  Referring to Fig. 40, let AB and BC represent the two distances traversed

in equal time-intervals, the distance AB for instance with the velocity DE,

and the distance BC with the velocity EF. Then, I say, the distance AB is to

the  distance  BC  as  the  velocity  DE  is  to  the  velocity  EF.  For  if  equal

multiples of both distances and speeds be taken, as above, namely, GB and IE

of AB and DE respectively, and in like manner HB and KE of BC and EF,

then one may infer, in the same manner as above, that the multiples GB and

IE are either less than, equal to, or greater than equal multiples of BH and

EK. Hence the theorem is established.


                            Theorem III, Proposition IIIIn the case of unequal speeds, the time-intervals required to traverse a given

space are to each other inversely as the speeds.

  Let the larger of the two unequal speeds be indicated by A; the smaller, by

B; and let the motion corresponding to both traverse the given space CD.

Then I say the time required to traverse the distance CD at speed A is to the

time required to traverse the same distance at speed B, as the speed B is to the

speed A. For let CD be to CE as A is to B; then, from the preceding, it

follows that the time required to complete the distance CD at speed A is the

same as the time necessary to complete CE at speed B; but the time needed to

traverse the distance CE at speed B is to the time required to traverse the

distance CD at the same speed as CE is to CD; therefore the time in which

CD is covered at speed A is to the time in which CD is covered at speed B as

CE is to CD, that is, as speed B is to speed A.

  q. e. d.


















                            Theorem IV, Proposition IV


If two particles are carried with uniform motion, but each with a different

speed, the distances covered by them during unequal intervals of time bear to

each other the compound ratio of the speeds and time intervals.

  Let the two particles which are carried with uniform motion be E and F

and let the ratio of the speed of the body E be to that of the body F as A is to

B; but let the ratio of the time consumed by the motion of E be to the time

consumed by the motion of F as C is to D. Then, I say, that the distancecovered by E, with speed A in time C, bears to the space traversed by F with

speed B in time D a ratio which is the product of the ratio of the speed A to

the speed B by the ratio of the time C to the time D. For if G is the distance

traversed by E at speed A during the time-interval C, and if G is to I as the

speed A is to the speed B; and if also the time-interval C is to the time-

interval D as I is to L, then it follows that I is the distance traversed by F in

the same time that G is traversed by E since G is to I in the same ratio as the

speed A to the speed B. And since I is to L in the same ratio as the time-

intervals C and D, if I is the distance traversed by F during the interval C,

then L will be the distance traversed by F during the interval D at the speed

B.












  But the ratio of G to L is the product of the ratios G to I and I to L, that is,

of the ratios of the speed A to the speed B and of the time-interval C to the

time-interval D.

  q. e. d.


                              Theorem V, Proposition V


If two particles are moved at a uniform rate, but with unequal speeds, through

unequal distances, then the ratio of the time-intervals occupied will be the

product of the ratio of the distances by the inverse ratio of the speeds.

  Let the two moving particles be denoted by A and B, and let the speed of

A be to the speed of B in the ratio of V to T; in like manner let the distances

traversed be in the ratio of S to R; then I say that the ratio of the time-interval

during which the motion of A occurs to the time-interval occupied by the

motion of B is the product of the ratio of the speed T to the speed V by the

ratio of the distance S to the distance R.  Let C be the time-interval occupied by the motion of A, and let the time-

interval C bear to a time-interval E the same ratio as the speed T to the speed

V.

  And since C is the time-interval during which A, with speed V, traverses

the distance S and since T, the speed of B, is to the speed V, as the time-

interval C is to the time-interval E, then E will be the time required by the

particle B to traverse the distance S. If now we let the time-interval E be to

the time-interval G as the distance S is to the distance R, then it follows that

G is the time required by B to traverse the space R. Since the ratio of C to G

is the product of the ratios C to E and E to G (while also the ratio of C to E is

the inverse ratio of the speeds of A and B respectively, i. e., the ratio of T to

V); and since the ratio of E to G is the same as that of the distances S and R

respectively, the proposition is proved.

                            Theorem VI, Proposition VI


If two particles are carried at a uniform rate, the ratio of their speeds will be

the product of the ratio of the distances traversed by the inverse ratio of the

time-intervals occupied.

  Let A and B be the two particles which move at a uniform rate; and let the

respective distances traversed by them have the ratio of V to T, but let the

time-intervals be as S to R. Then I say the speed of A will bear to the speed

of B a ratio which is the product of the ratio of the distance V to the distance

T and the time-interval R to the time-interval S.  Let C be the speed at which A traverses the distance V during the time-

interval S; and let the speed C bear the same ratio to another speed E as V

bears to T; then E will be the speed at which B traverses the distance T during

the time-interval S. If now the speed E is to another speed G as the time-

interval R is to the time-interval S, then G will be the speed at which the

particle B traverses the distance T during the time-interval R. Thus we have

the speed C at which the particle A covers the distance V during the time S

and also the speed G at which the particle B traverses the distance T during

the time R. The ratio of C to G is the product of the ratio C to E and E to G;

the ratio of C to E is by definition the same as the ratio of the distance V to

distance T; and the ratio of E to G is the same as the ratio of R to S. Hence

follows the proposition.


Salv. The  preceding  is  what  our  Author  has  written  concerning  uniform

motion. We pass now to a new and more discriminating consideration of

naturally accelerated motion, such as that generally experienced by heavy

falling bodies; following is the title and introduction.


                            Naturally Accelerated Motion


The  properties  belonging  to  uniform  motion  have  been  discussed  in  the

preceding section; but accelerated motion remains to be considered.

  And first of all it seems desirable to find and explain a definition best

fitting natural phenomena. For anyone may invent an arbitrary type of motion

and discuss its properties; thus, for instance, some have imagined helices and

conchoids as described by certain motions which are not met with in nature,

and have very commendably established the properties which these curves

possess in virtue of their definitions; but we have decided to consider the

phenomena of bodies falling with an acceleration such as actually occurs in

nature and to make this definition of accelerated motion exhibit the essentialfeatures  of  observed  accelerated  motions.  And  this,  at  last,  after  repeated

efforts we trust we have succeeded in doing. In this belief we are confirmed

mainly by the consideration that experimental results are seen to agree with

and  exactly  correspond  with  those  properties  which  have  been,  one  after

another,  demonstrated  by  us.  Finally,  in  the  investigation  of  naturally

accelerated motion we were led, by hand as it were, in following the habit

and custom of nature herself, in all her various other processes, to employ

only those means which are most common, simple and easy.

  For I think no one believes that swimming or flying can be accomplished

in a manner simpler or easier than that instinctively employed by fishes and

birds.

  When, therefore, I observe a stone initially at rest falling from an elevated

position and continually acquiring new increments of speed, why should I not

believe  that  such  increases  take  place  in  a  manner  which  is  exceedingly

simple  and  rather  obvious  to  everybody?  If  now  we  examine  the  matter

carefully  we  find  no  addition  or  increment  more  simple  than  that  which

repeats itself always in the same manner. This we readily understand when

we consider the intimate relationship between time and motion; for just as

uniformity of motion is defined by and conceived through equal times and

equal  spaces  (thus  we  call  a  motion  uniform  when  equal  distances  are

traversed during equal time-intervals), so also we may, in a similar manner,

through  equal  time-intervals,  conceive  additions  of  speed  as  taking  place

without complication; thus we may picture to our mind a motion as uniformly

and  continuously  accelerated  when,  during  any  equal  intervals  of  time

whatever,  equal  increments  of  speed  are  given  to  it.  Thus  if  any  equal

intervals of time whatever have elapsed, counting from the time at which the

moving body left its position of rest and began to descend, the amount of

speed acquired during the first two time-intervals will be double that acquired

during the first time-interval alone; so the amount added during three of these

time-intervals will be treble; and that in four, quadruple that of the first time-

interval. To put the matter more clearly, if a body were to continue its motion

with the same speed which it had acquired during the first time-interval and

were to retain this same uniform speed, then its motion would be twice as

slow as that which it would have if its velocity had been acquired during two

time-intervals.

  And thus, it seems, we shall not be far wrong if we put the increment of

speed as proportional to the increment of time; hence the definition of motionwhich we are about to discuss may be stated as follows: A motion is said to

be uniformly accelerated, when starting from rest, it acquires, during equal

time-intervals, equal increments of speed.


Sagr. Although I can offer no rational objection to this or indeed to any other

definition,  devised  by  any  author  whomsoever,  since  all  definitions  are

arbitrary, I may nevertheless without offense be allowed to doubt whether

such a definition as the above, established in an abstract manner, corresponds

to and describes that kind of accelerated motion which we meet in nature in

the case of freely falling bodies. And since the Author apparently maintains

that the motion described in his definition is that of freely falling bodies, I

would like to clear my mind of certain difficulties in order that I may later

apply myself more earnestly to the propositions and their demonstrations.


Salv. It is well that you and Simplicio raise these difficulties. They are, I

imagine, the same which occurred to me when I first saw this treatise, and

which were removed either by discussion with the Author himself, or by

turning the matter over in my own mind.

Sagr. When I think of a heavy body falling from rest, that is, starting with

zero speed and gaining speed in proportion to the time from the beginning of

the motion; such a motion as would, for instance, in eight beats of the pulse

acquire eight degrees of speed; having at the end of the fourth beat acquired

four degrees; at the end of the second, two; at the end of the first, one: and

since time is divisible without limit, it follows from all these considerations

that if the earlier speed of a body is less than its present speed in a constant

ratio, then there is no degree of speed however small (or, one may say, no

degree of slowness however great) with which we may not find this body

travelling after starting from infinite slowness, i. e., from rest. So that if that

speed  which  it  had  at  the  end  of  the  fourth  beat  was  such  that,  if  kept

uniform, the body would traverse two miles in an hour, and if keeping the

speed which it had at the end of the second beat, it would traverse one mile

an hour, we must infer that, as the instant of starting is more and more nearly

approached, the body moves so slowly that, if it kept on moving at this rate, it

would not traverse a mile in an hour, or in a day, or in a year or in a thousand

years;  indeed,  it  would  not  traverse  a  span  in  an  even  greater  time;  a

phenomenon which baffles the imagination, while our senses show us that a

heavy falling body suddenly acquires great speed.Salv. This is one of the difficulties which I also at the beginning, experienced,

but which I shortly afterwards removed; and the removal was effected by the

very experiment which creates the difficulty for you. You say the experiment

appears  to  show  that  immediately  after  a  heavy  body  starts  from  rest  it

acquires a very considerable speed: and I say that the same experiment makes

clear the fact that the initial motions of a falling body, no matter how heavy,

are very slow and gentle. Place a heavy body upon a yielding material, and

leave it there without any pressure except that owing to its own weight; it is

clear that if one lifts this body a cubit or two and allows it to fall upon the

same material, it will, with this impulse, exert a new and greater pressure than

that caused by its mere weight; and this effect is brought about by the [weight

of the] falling body together with the velocity acquired during the fall, an

effect which will be greater and greater according to the height of the fall,

that is according as the velocity of the falling body becomes greater. From

the  quality  and  intensity  of  the  blow  we  are  thus  enabled  to  accurately

estimate the speed of a falling body. But tell me, gentlemen, is it not true that

if a block be allowed to fall upon a stake from a height of four cubits and

drives it into the earth, say, four finger-breadths, that coming from a height of

two cubits it will drive the stake a much less distance, and from the height of

one  cubit  a  still  less  distance;  and  finally  if  the  block  be  lifted  only  one

finger-breadth how much more will it accomplish than if merely laid on top

of the stake without percussion? Certainly very little. If it be lifted only the

thickness of a leaf, the effect will be altogether imperceptible. And since the

effect of the blow depends upon the velocity of this striking body, can any

one doubt the motion is very slow and the speed more than small whenever

the effect [of the blow] is imperceptible? See now the power of truth; the

same experiment which at first glance seemed to show one thing, when more

carefully examined, assures us of the contrary.

  But without depending upon the above experiment, which is doubtless

very conclusive, it seems to me that it ought not to be difficult to establish

such a fact by reasoning alone. Imagine a heavy stone held in the air at rest;

the support is removed and the stone set free; then since it is heavier than the

air it begins to fall, and not with uniform motion but slowly at the beginning

and  with  a  continuously  accelerated  motion.  Now  since  velocity  can  be

increased and diminished without limit, what reason is there to believe that

such  a  moving  body  starting  with  infinite  slowness,  that  is,  from  rest,

immediately acquires a speed of ten degrees rather than one of four, or oftwo, or of one, or of a half, or of a hundredth; or, indeed, of any of the infinite

number of small values [of speed]? Pray listen. I hardly think you will refuse

to grant that the gain of speed of the stone falling from rest follows the same

sequence  as  the  diminution  and  loss  of  this  same  speed  when,  by  some

impelling force, the stone is thrown to its former elevation: but even if you do

not grant this, I do not see how you can doubt that the ascending stone,

diminishing in speed, must before coming to rest pass through every possible

degree of slowness.


Simp. But  if  the  number  of  degrees  of  greater  and  greater  slowness  is

limitless, they will never be all exhausted, therefore such an ascending heavy

body will never reach rest, but will continue to move without limit always at

a slower rate; but this is not the observed fact.


Salv. This would happen, Simplicio, if the moving body were to maintain its

speed for any length of time at each degree of velocity; but it merely passes

each  point  without  delaying  more  than  an  instant:  and  since  each  time-

interval however small may be divided into an infinite number of instants,

these  will  always  be  sufficient  [in  number]  to  correspond  to  the  infinite

degrees of diminished velocity.

  That such a heavy rising body does not remain for any length of time at

any given degree of velocity is evident from the following: because if, some

time-interval having been assigned, the body moves with the same speed in

the last as in the first instant of that time-interval, it could from this second

degree of elevation be in like manner raised through an equal height, just as it

was  transferred  from  the  first  elevation  to  the  second,  and  by  the  same

reasoning would pass from the second to the third and would finally continue

in uniform motion forever.


Sagr. From these considerations it appears to me that we may obtain a proper

solution of the problem discussed by philosophers, namely, what causes the

acceleration in the natural motion of heavy bodies? Since, as it seems to me,

the  force  [virtù]  impressed  by  the  agent  projecting  the  body  upwards

diminishes continuously, this force, so long as it was greater than the contrary

force  of  gravitation,  impelled  the  body  upwards;  when  the  two  are  in

equilibrium the body ceases to rise and passes through the state of rest in

which the impressed impetus [impeto] is not destroyed, but only its excessover the weight of the body has been consumed — the excess which caused

the  body  to  rise.  Then  as  the  diminution  of  the  outside  impetus  [impeto]

continues, and gravitation gains the upper hand, the fall begins, but slowly at

first on account of the opposing impetus [virtù impressa], a large portion of

which  still  remains  in  the  body;  but  as  this  continues  to  diminish  it  also

continues to be more and more overcome by gravity, hence the continuous

acceleration of motion.


Simp. The idea is clever, yet more subtle than sound; for even if the argument

were conclusive, it would explain only the case in which a natural motion is

preceded by a violent motion, in which there still remains active a portion of

the  external  force  [virtù  esterna];  but  where  there  is  no  such  remaining

portion and the body starts from an antecedent state of rest, the cogency of

the whole argument fails.

Sagr. I believe that you are mistaken and that this distinction between cases

which you make is superfluous or rather nonexistent. But, tell me, cannot a

projectile receive from the projector either a large or a small force [virtù]

such as will throw it to a height of a hundred cubits, and even twenty or four

or one?

  Undoubtedly, yes.


Sagr. So  therefore  this  impressed  force  [virtù  impressa]  may  exceed  the

resistance of gravity so slightly as to raise it only a finger-breadth; and finally

the force [virtù] of the projector may be just large enough to exactly balance

the  resistance  of  gravity  so  that  the  body  is  not  lifted  at  all  but  merely

sustained. When one holds a stone in his hand does he do anything but give it

a force impelling [virtù impellente] it upwards equal to the power [facoltà] of

gravity drawing it downwards? And do you not continuously impress this

force [virtù]  upon  the  stone  as  long  as  you  hold  it  in  the  hand?  Does  it

perhaps diminish with the time during which one holds the stone?

  And what does it matter whether this support which prevents the stone

from falling is furnished by one’s hand or by a table or by a rope from which

it hangs? Certainly nothing at all. You must conclude, therefore, Simplicio,

that it makes no difference whatever whether the fall of the stone is preceded

by a period of rest which is long, short, or instantaneous provided only the

fall does not take place so long as the stone is acted upon by a force [virtù]

opposed to its weight and sufficient to hold it at rest.Salv. The present does not seem to be the proper time to investigate the cause

of the acceleration of natural motion concerning which various opinions have

been expressed by various philosophers, some explaining it by attraction to

the center, others to repulsion between the very small parts of the body, while

still others attribute it to a certain stress in the surrounding medium which

closes in behind the falling body and drives it from one of its positions to

another. Now, all these fantasies, and others too, ought to be examined; but it

is not really worth while. At present it is the purpose of our Author merely to

investigate and to demonstrate some of the properties of accelerated motion

(whatever  the  cause  of  this  acceleration  may  be)  —  meaning  thereby  a

motion, such that the momentum of its velocity [i momenti della sua velocità]

goes on increasing after departure from rest, in simple proportionality to the

time,  which  is  the  same  as  saying  that  in  equal  time-intervals  the  body

receives  equal  increments  of  velocity;  and  if  we  find  the  properties  [of

accelerated motion] which will be demonstrated later are realized in freely

falling and accelerated bodies, we may conclude that the assumed definition

includes such a motion of falling bodies and that their speed [accelerazione]

goes on increasing as the time and the duration of the motion.

  So far as I see at present, the definition might have been put a little more

clearly perhaps without changing the fundamental idea, namely, uniformly

accelerated motion is such that its speed increases in proportion to the space

traversed; so that, for example, the speed acquired by a body in falling four

cubits  would  be  double  that  acquired  in  falling  two  cubits  and  this  latter

speed would be double that acquired in the first cubit. Because there is no

doubt but that a heavy body falling from the height of six cubits has, and

strikes with, a momentum [impeto] double that it had at the end of three

cubits, triple that which it had at the end of one.


Salv. It is very comforting to me to have had such a companion in error; and

moreover let me tell you that your proposition seems so highly probable that

our Author himself admitted, when I advanced this opinion to him, that he

had for some time shared the same fallacy. But what most surprised me was

to  see  two  propositions  so  inherently  probable  that  they  commanded  the

assent of everyone to whom they were presented, proven in a few simple

words to be not only false, but impossible.Simp. I am one of those who accept the proposition, and believe that a falling

body acquires force [vires] in its descent, its velocity increasing in proportion

to  the  space,  and  that  the  momentum  [momento]  of  the  falling  body  is

doubled when it falls from a doubled height; these propositions, it appears to

me, ought to be conceded without hesitation or controversy.


Salv. And  yet  they  are  as  false  and  impossible  as  that  motion  should  be

completed instantaneously; and here is a very clear demonstration of it. If the

velocities are in proportion to the spaces traversed, or to be traversed, then

these spaces are traversed in equal intervals of time; if, therefore, the velocity

with which the falling body traverses a space of eight feet were double that

with which it covered the first four feet (just as the one distance is double the

other) then the time-intervals required for these passages would be equal. But

for one and the same body to fall eight feet and four feet in the same time is

possible  only  in  the  case  of  instantaneous  [discontinuous]  motion;  but

observation shows us that the motion of a falling body occupies time, and

less of it in covering a distance of four feet than of eight feet; therefore it is

not true that its velocity increases in proportion to the space.

  The falsity of the other proposition may be shown with equal clearness.

For if we consider a single striking body the difference of momentum in its

blows can depend only upon difference of velocity; for if the striking body

falling from a double height were to deliver a blow of double momentum, it

would be necessary for this body to strike with a doubled velocity; but with

this  doubled  speed  it  would  traverse  a  doubled  space  in  the  same  time-

interval; observation however shows that the time required for fall from the

greater height is longer.


Sagr. You present these recondite matters with too much evidence and ease;

this great facility makes them less appreciated than they would be had they

been presented in a more abstruse manner. For, in my opinion, people esteem

more lightly that knowledge which they acquire with so little labor than that

acquired through long and obscure discussion.


Salv. If those who demonstrate with brevity and clearness the fallacy of many

popular beliefs were treated with contempt instead of gratitude the injury

would be quite bearable; but on the other hand it is very unpleasant and

annoying to see men, who claim to be peers of anyone in a certain field ofstudy, take for granted certain conclusions which later are quickly and easily

shown by another to be false. I do not describe such a feeling as one of envy,

which usually degenerates into hatred and anger against those who discover

such fallacies; I would call it a strong desire to maintain old errors, rather

than accept newly discovered truths. This desire at times induces them to

unite against these truths, although at heart believing in them, merely for the

purpose  of  lowering  the  esteem  in  which  certain  others  are  held  by  the

unthinking crowd. Indeed, I have heard from our Academician many such

fallacies held as true but easily refutable; some of these I have in mind.

Sagr. You must not withhold them from us, but, at the proper time, tell us

about them even though an extra session be necessary. But now, continuing

the  thread  of  our  talk,  it  would  seem  that  up  to  the  present  we  have

established the definition of uniformly accelerated motion which is expressed

as follows:

  A motion is said to be equally or uniformly accelerated when, starting

from rest, its momentum (celeritatis momenta) receives equal increments in

equal times.


Salv. This  definition  established,  the  Author  makes  a  single  assumption,

namely,

  The speeds acquired by one and the same body moving down planes of

different inclinations are equal when the heights of these planes are equal.

  By the height of an inclined plane we mean the perpendicular let fall from

the upper end of the plane upon the horizontal line drawn through the lower

end of the same plane. Thus, to illustrate, let the line AB be horizontal, and

let  the  planes  CA  and  CD  be  inclined  to  it;  then  the  Author  calls  the

perpendicular CB the “height” of the planes CA and CD; he supposes that the

speeds acquired by one and the same body, descending along the planes CA

and CD to the terminal points A and D are equal since the heights of these

planes are the same, CB; and also it must be understood that this speed is that

which would be acquired by the same body falling from C to B.


Sagr. Your  assumption  appears  to  me  so  reasonable  that  it  ought  to  be

conceded without question, provided of course there are no chance or outside

resistances, and that the planes are hard and smooth, and that the figure of the

moving body is perfectly round, so that neither plane nor moving body is

rough. All resistance and opposition having been removed, my reason tellsme at once that a heavy and perfectly round ball descending along the lines

CA, CD, CB would reach the terminal points A, D, B, with equal momenta

[impeti eguali].





















Salv. Your words are very plausible; but I hope by experiment to increase the

probability to an extent which shall be little short of a rigid demonstration.  This  experiment  leaves  no  room  for  doubt  as  to  the  truth  of  our

supposition; for since the two arcs CB and DB are equal and similarly placed,

the momentum [momento] acquired by the fall through the arc CB is the same

as that gained by fall through the arc DB; but the momentum [momento]

acquired at B, owing to fall through CB, is able to lift the same body [mobile]

through the arc BD; therefore, the momentum acquired in the fall BD is equal

to that which lifts the same body through the same arc from B to D; so, in

general, every momentum acquired by fall through an arc is equal to that

which can lift the same body through the same arc. But all these momenta

[momenti] which cause a rise through the arcs BD, BG, and BI are equal,

since they are produced by the same momentum, gained by fall through CB,

as experiment shows. Therefore all the momenta gained by fall through the

arcs DB, GB, IB are equal.


Sagr. The argument seems to me so conclusive and the experiment so well

adapted  to  establish  the  hypothesis  that  we  may,  indeed,  consider  it  as

demonstrated.


Salv. I do not wish, Sagredo, that we trouble ourselves too much about this

matter, since we are going to apply this principle mainly in motions which

occur  on  plane  surfaces,  and  not  upon  curved,  along  which  accelerationvaries in a manner greatly different from that which we have assumed for

planes.

  So that, although the above experiment shows us that the descent of the

moving body through the arc CB confers upon it momentum [momento] just

sufficient to carry it to the same height through any of the arcs BD, BG, BI,

we are not able, by similar means, to show that the event would be identical

in  the  case  of  a  perfectly  round  ball  descending  along  planes  whose

inclinations are respectively the same as the chords of these arcs. It seems

likely, on the other hand, that, since these planes form angles at the point B,

they will present an obstacle to the ball which has descended along the chord

CB, and starts to rise along the chord BD, BG, BI.

  In striking these planes some of its momentum [impeto] will be lost and it

will not be able to rise to the height of the line CD; but this obstacle, which

interferes with the experiment, once removed, it is clear that the momentum

[impeto] (which gains in strength with descent) will be able to carry the body

to the same height. Let us then, for the present, take this as a postulate, the

absolute truth of which will be established when we find that the inferences

from it correspond to and agree perfectly with experiment. The author having

assumed this single principle passes next to the propositions which he clearly

demonstrates; the first of these is as follows:


                              Theorem I, Proposition I


The time in which any space is traversed by a body starting from rest and

uniformly accelerated is equal to the time in which that same space would be

traversed by the same body moving at a uniform speed whose value is the

mean of the highest speed and the speed just before acceleration began.

  Let  us  represent  by  the  line  AB  the  time  in  which  the  space  CD  is

traversed by a body which starts from rest at C and is uniformly accelerated;

let the final and highest value of the speed gained during the interval AB be

represented by the line EB drawn at right angles to AB; draw the line AE,

then all lines drawn from equidistant points on AB and parallel to BE will

represent the increasing values of the speed, beginning with the instant A. Let

the point F bisect the line EB; draw FG parallel to BA, and GA parallel to

FB, thus forming a parallel-ogram AGFB which will be equal in area to the

triangle AEB, since the side GF bisects the side AE at the point I; for if the

parallel lines in the triangle AEB are extended to GI, then the sum of all theparallels contained in the quadrilateral is equal to the sum of those contained

in the triangle AEB; for those in the triangle IEF are equal to those contained

in the triangle GIA, while those included in the trapezium AIFB are common.

Since  each  and  every  instant  of  time  in  the  time-interval  AB  has  its

corresponding point on the line AB, from which points parallels drawn in and

limited by the triangle AEB represent the increasing values of the growing

velocity,  and  since  parallels  contained  within  the  rectangle  represent  the

values of a speed which is not increasing, but constant, it appears, in like

manner, that the momenta [momenta] assumed by the moving body may also

be  represented,  in  the  case  of  the  accelerated  motion,  by  the  increasing

parallels of the triangle AEB, and, in the case of the uniform motion, by the

parallels of the rectangle GB. For, what the momenta may lack in the first

part  of  the  accelerated  motion  (the  deficiency  of  the  momenta  being

represented by the parallels of the triangle AGI) is made up by the momenta

represented by the parallels of the triangle IEF.  Hence it is clear that equal spaces will be traversed in equal times by two

bodies, one of which, starting from rest, moves with a uniform acceleration,

while the momentum of the other, moving with uniform speed, is one-half its

maximum momentum under accelerated motion.

  q. e. d.


                              Theorem II, Proposition II


The spaces described by a body falling from rest with a uniformly accelerated

motion are to each other as the squares of the time-intervals employed in

traversing these distances.

  Let the time beginning with any instant A be represented by the straight

line  AB  in  which  are  taken  any  two  time-intervals  AD  and  AE.  Let  HI

represent the distance through which the body, starting from rest at H, fallswith uniform acceleration. If HL represents the space traversed during the

time-interval AD, and HM that covered during the interval AE, then the space

MH stands to the space LH in a ratio which is the square of the ratio of the

time AE to the time AD; or we may say simply that the distances HM and HL

are related as the squares of AE and AD.





























  Draw the line AC making any angle whatever with the line AB; and from

the points D and E, draw the parallel lines DO and EP; of these two lines, DO

represents the greatest velocity attained during the interval AD, while EP

represents the maximum velocity acquired during the interval AE. But it has

just been proved that so far as distances traversed are concerned it is precisely

the  same  whether  a  body  falls  from  rest  with  a  uniform  acceleration  or

whether it falls during an equal time-interval with a constant speed which is

one-half  the  maximum  speed  attained  during  the  accelerated  motion.  It

follows therefore that the distances HM and HL are the same as would betraversed, during the time-intervals AE and AD, by uniform velocities equal

to one-half those represented by DO and EP respectively. If, therefore, one

can show that the distances HM and HL are in the same ratio as the squares

of the time-intervals AE and AD, our proposition will be proven.

  q. e. d.

  Evidently then the ratio of the distances is the square of the ratio of the

final velocities, that is, of the lines EP and DO, since these are to each other

as AE to AD.


                                      Corollary I


Hence  it  is  clear  that  if  we  take  any  equal  intervals  of  time  whatever,

counting from the beginning of the motion, such as AD, DE, EF, FG, in

which the spaces HL, LM, MN, NI are traversed, these spaces will bear to

one another the same ratio as the series of odd numbers, 1, 3, 5, 7; for this is

the ratio of the differences of the squares of the lines [which represent time],

differences which exceed one another by equal amounts, this excess being

equal to the smallest line [viz. the one representing a single time-interval]: or

we may say [that this is the ratio] of the differences of the squares of the

natural numbers beginning with unity.

  While, therefore, during equal intervals of time the velocities increase as

the natural numbers, the increments in the distances traversed during these

equal time-intervals are to one another as the odd numbers beginning with

unity.


Sagr. Please suspend the discussion for a moment since there just occurs to

me an idea which I want to illustrate by means of a diagram in order that it

may be clearer both to you and to me.

  Let the line AI represent the lapse of time measured from the initial instant

A; through A draw the straight line AF making any angle whatever; join the

terminal points I and F; divide the time AI in half at C; draw CB parallel to

IF. Let us consider CB as the maximum value of the velocity which increases

from zero at the beginning, in simple proportionality to the intercepts on the

triangle ABC of lines drawn parallel to BC; or what is the same thing, let us

suppose  the  velocity  to  increase  in  proportion  to  the  time;  then  I  admit

without question, in view of the preceding argument, that the space described

by a body falling in the aforesaid manner will be equal to the space traversedby the same body during the same length of time travelling with a uniform

speed equal to EC, the half of BC. Further let us imagine that the body has

fallen with accelerated motion so that, at the instant C, it has the velocity BC.

It is clear that if the body continued to descend with the same speed BC,

without acceleration, it would in the next time-interval CI traverse double the

distance covered during the interval AC, with the uniform speed EC which is

half of BC; but since the falling body acquires equal increments of speed

during equal increments of time, it follows that the velocity BC, during the

next  time-interval  CI  will  be  increased  by  an  amount  represented  by  the

parallels of the triangle BFG which is equal to the triangle ABC. If, then, one

adds to the velocity GI half of the velocity FG, the highest speed acquired by

the accelerated motion and determined by the parallels of the triangle BFG,

he will have the uniform velocity with which the same space would have

been described in the time CI; and since this speed IN is three times as great

as EC it follows that the space described during the interval CI is three times

as great as that described during the interval AC. Let us imagine the motion

extended over another equal time-interval IO, and the triangle extended to

APO; it is then evident that if the motion continues during the interval IO, at

the constant rate IF acquired by acceleration during the time AI, the space

traversed during the interval IO will be four times that traversed during the

first interval AC, because the speed IF is four times the speed EC. But if we

enlarge  our  triangle  so  as  to  include  FPQ  which  is  equal  to  ABC,  still

assuming the acceleration to be constant, we shall add to the uniform speed

an increment RQ, equal to EC; then the value of the equivalent uniform speed

during  the  time-interval  IO  will  be  five  times  that  during  the  first  time-

interval AC; therefore the space traversed will be quintuple that during the

first interval AC. It is thus evident by simple computation that a moving body

starting from rest and acquiring velocity at a rate proportional to the time,

will, during equal intervals of time, traverse distances which are related to
                                                                        32
each other as the odd numbers beginning with unity, 1, 3, 5; or considering

the total space traversed, that covered in double time will be quadruple that

covered during unit time; in triple time, the space is nine times as great as in

unit time. And in general the spaces traversed are in the duplicate ratio of the

times, i. e., in the ratio of the squares of the times.

32
 As illustrating the greater elegance and brevity of modern analytical methods, one may obtain the
result of Prop. II directly from the fundamental equations = ½ g (t22 - t21) = g/2 (t2 + t1) (t2 - t1)


where g is the acceleration of gravity and s, the space traversed between the

instants t1 and t2. If now t2 - t1 = 1, say one second, then s = g/2 (t2 + t1)

where t2+t1, must always be an odd number, seeing that it is the sum of two

consecutive terms in the series of natural numbers. [Trans.]































Simp. In truth, I find more pleasure in this simple and clear argument of

Sagredo  than  in  the  Author’s  demonstration  which  to  me  appears  rather

obscure; so that I am convinced that matters are as described, once having

accepted the definition of uniformly accelerated motion. But as to whether

this  acceleration  is  that  which  one  meets  in  nature  in  the  case  of  falling

bodies, I am still doubtful; and it seems to me, not only for my own sake butalso for all those who think as I do, that this would be the proper moment to

introduce  one  of  those  experiments  —  and  there  are  many  of  them,  I

understand — which illustrate in several ways the conclusions reached.

Salv. The request which you, as a man of science, make, is a very reasonable

one; for this is the custom — and properly so — in those sciences where

mathematical demonstrations are applied to natural phenomena, as is seen in

the case of perspective, astronomy, mechanics, music, and others where the

principles,  once  established  by  well-chosen  experiments,  become  the

foundations of the entire superstructure. I hope therefore it will not appear to

be a waste of time if we discuss at considerable length this first and most

fundamental question upon which hinge numerous consequences of which we

have in this book only a small number, placed there by the Author, who has

done so much to open a pathway hitherto closed to minds of speculative turn.

So far as experiments go they have not been neglected by the Author; and

often, in his company, I have attempted in the following manner to assure

myself  that  the  acceleration  actually  experienced  by  falling  bodies  is  that

above described.

  A piece of wooden moulding or scantling, about 12 cubits long, half a

cubit wide, and three finger-breadths thick, was taken; on its edge was cut a

channel a little more than one finger in breadth; having made this groove very

straight, smooth, and polished, and having lined it with parchment, also as

smooth and polished as possible, we rolled along it a hard, smooth, and very

round bronze ball. Having placed this board in a sloping position, by lifting

one end some one or two cubits above the other, we rolled the ball, as I was

just saying, along the channel, noting, in a manner presently to be described,

the time required to make the descent. We repeated this experiment more

than  once  in  order  to  measure  the  time  with  an  accuracy  such  that  the

deviation  between  two  observations  never  exceeded  one-tenth  of  a  pulse-

beat. Having performed this operation and having assured ourselves of its

reliability, we now rolled the ball only one-quarter the length of the channel;

and having measured the time of its descent, we found it precisely one-half’of

the former. Next we tried other distances, comparing the time for the whole

length with that for the half, or with that for two-thirds, or three-fourths, or

indeed for any fraction; in such experiments, repeated a full hundred times,

we always found that the spaces traversed were to each other as the squares

of the times, and this was true for all inclinations of the plane, i. e., of the

channel, along which we rolled the ball. We also observed that the times ofdescent, for various inclinations of the plane, bore to one another precisely

that  ratio  which,  as  we  shall  see  later,  the  Author  had  predicted  and

demonstrated for them.

  For the measurement of time, we employed a large vessel of water placed

in an elevated position; to the bottom of this vessel was soldered a pipe of

small diameter giving a thin jet of water, which we collected in a small glass

during the time of each descent, whether for the whole length of the channel

or for a part of its length; the water thus collected was weighed, after each

descent,  on  a  very  accurate  balance;  the  differences  and  ratios  of  these

weights gave us the differences and ratios of the times, and this with such

accuracy that although the operation was repeated many, many times, there

was no appreciable discrepancy in the results.


Simp. I would like to have been present at these experiments; but feeling

confidence in the care with which you performed them, and in the fidelity

with which you relate them, I am satisfied and accept them as true and valid


Salv. Then we can proceed without discussion.

  Secondly, it follows that, starting from any initial point, if we take any two

distances,  traversed  in  any  time-intervals  whatsoever,  these  time-intervals

bear  to  one  another  the  same  ratio  as  one  of  the  distances  to  the  mean

proportional of the two distances.

  For if we take two distances ST and SY measured from the initial point S,

the mean proportional of which is SX, the time of fall through ST is to the

time of fall through SY as ST is to SX; or one may say the time of fall

through SY is to the time of fall through ST as SY is to SX. Now since it has

been shown that the spaces traversed are in the same ratio as the squares of

the times; and since, moreover, the ratio of the space SY to the space ST is

the square of the ratio SY to SX, it follows that the ratio of the times of fall

through SY and ST is the ratio of the respective distances SY and SX.  Fig. 50


                                        Scholium


The above corollary has been proven for the case of vertical fall; but it holds

also for planes inclined at any angle; for it is to be assumed that along these

planes the velocity increases in the same ratio, that is, in proportion to the
                                                                33
time, or, if you prefer, as the series of natural numbers.

33
 The dialogue which intervenes between this Scholium and the following theorem was elaborated by
Viviani, at the suggestion of Galileo. See National Edition, viii, 23. [Trans.]


Salv. Here, Sagredo, I should like, if it be not too tedious to Simplicio, to

interrupt  for  a  moment  the  present  discussion  in  order  to  make  some

additions  on  the  basis  of  what  has  already  been  proved  and  of  whatmechanical principles we have already learned from our Academician. This

addition  I  make  for  the  better  establishment  on  logical  and  experimental

grounds, of the principle which we have above considered; and what is more

important,  for  the  purpose  of  deriving  it  geometrically,  after  first

demonstrating a single lemma which is fundamental in the science of motion

[impeti].


Sagr. If the advance which you propose to make is such as will confirm and

fully establish these sciences of motion, I will gladly devote to it any length

of time. Indeed, I shall not only be glad to have you proceed, but I beg of you

at once to satisfy the curiosity which you have awakened in me concerning

your proposition; and I think that Simplicio is of the same mind.


Simp. Quite right.


Salv. Since  then  I  have  your  permission,  let  us  first  of  all  consider  this

notable fact, that the momenta or speeds [i momenti o le velocità] of one and

the same moving body vary with the inclination of the plane.

  The speed reaches a maximum along a vertical direction, and for other

directions diminishes as the plane diverges from the vertical. Therefore the

impetus, ability, energy, [l’impeto, il talento, l’energia] or, one might say, the

momentum [il momento] of descent of the moving body is diminished by the

plane upon which it is supported and along which it rolls.

  For the sake of greater clearness erect the line AB perpendicular to the

horizontal AC; next draw AD, AE, AF, etc., at different inclinations to the

horizontal. Then I say that all the momentum of the falling body is along the

vertical and is a maximum when it falls in that direction; the momentum is

less along DA and still less along EA, and even less yet along the more

inclined plane FA. Finally on the horizontal plane the momentum vanishes

altogether; the body finds itself in a condition of indifference as to motion or

rest;  has  no  inherent  tendency  to  move  in  any  direction,  and  offers  no

resistance  to  being  set  in  motion.  For  just  as  a  heavy  body  or  system  of

bodies cannot of itself move upwards, or recede from the common center

[comun centro] toward which all heavy things tend, so it is impossible for

any  body  of  its  own  accord  to  assume  any  motion  other  than  one  which

carries it nearer to the aforesaid common center. Hence, along the horizontal,by which we understand a surface, every point of which is equidistant from

this same common center, the body will have no momentum whatever.





























  It is clear that the impelling force [impeto] acting on a body in descent is

equal to the resistance or least force [resistenza o forza minima] sufficient to

hold  it  at  rest.  In  order  to  measure  this  force  and  resistance  [forza  e

resistenza] I propose to use the weight of another body. Let us place upon the

plane FA a body G connected to the weight H by means of a cord passing

over  the  point  F;  then  the  body  H  will  ascend  or  descend,  along  the

perpendicular,  the  same  distance  which  the  body  G  ascends  or  descends

along the inclined plane FA; but this distance will not be equal to the rise or

fall of G along the vertical in which direction alone G, as other bodies, exerts

its force [resistenza]. This is clear. For if we consider the motion of the body

G, from A to F, in the triangle AFC to be made up of a horizontal component

AC and a vertical component CF, and remember that this body experiencesno resistance to motion along the horizontal (because by such a motion the

body  neither  gains  nor  loses  distance  from  the  common  center  of  heavy

things) it follows that resistance is met only in consequence of the body rising

through the vertical distance CF. Since then the body G in moving from A to

F offers resistance only in so far as it rises through the vertical distance CF,

while the other body H must fall vertically through the entire distance FA,

and since this ratio is maintained whether the motion be large or small, the

two bodies being inextensibly connected, we are able to assert positively that,

in case of equilibrium (bodies at rest) the momenta, the velocities, or their

tendency to motion [propensioni al moto], i. e., the spaces which would be

traversed by them in equal times, must be in the inverse ratio to their weights.
                                                                                      34
This is what has been demonstrated in every case of mechanical motion. So

that, in order to hold the weight G at rest, one must give H a weight smaller

in  the  same  ratio  as  the  distance  CF  is  smaller  than  FA.  If  we  do  this,

FA:FC=weight G:weight H; then equilibrium will occur, that is, the weights

H and G will have the same impelling forces [momenti eguali], and the two

bodies will come to rest.

34
 A near approach to the principle of virtual work enunciated by John Bernoulli in 1717. [Trans.]


  And since we are agreed that the impetus, energy, momentum or tendency

to motion of a moving body is as great as the force or least resistance [forza o

resistenza minima] sufficient to stop it, and since we have found that the

weight H is capable of preventing motion in the weight G, it follows that the

less weight H whose entire force [momento totale] is along the perpendicular,

FC, will be an exact measure of the component of force [momento parziale]

which the larger weight G exerts along the plane FA. But the measure of the

total force [total momento] on the body G is its own weight, since to prevent

its fall it is only necessary to balance it with an equal weight, provided this

second weight be free to move vertically; therefore the component of the

force [momento parziale] on G along the inclined plane FA will bear to the

maximum and total force on this same body G along the perpendicular FC the

same ratio as the weight H to the weight G. This ratio is, by construction, the

same which the height, FC, of the inclined plane bears to the length FA. We

have here the lemma which I proposed to demonstrate and which, as you will

see,  has  been  assumed  by  our  Author  in  the  second  part  of  the  sixth

proposition of the present treatise.Sagr. From what you have shown thus far, it appears to me that one might

infer, arguing ex aequali con la proportione perturbata, that the tendencies

[momenti]  of  one  and  the  same  body  to  move  along  planes  differently

inclined, but having the same vertical height, as FA and FI, are to each other

inversely as the lengths of the planes.

  Perfectly right. This point established, I pass to the demonstration of the

following theorem:

  If  a  body  falls  freely  along  smooth  planes  inclined  at  any  angle

whatsoever, but of the same height, the speeds with which it reaches the

bottom are the same.

  First we must recall the fact that on a plane of any inclination whatever a

body starting from rest gains speed or momentum [la quantita dell’impeto] in

direct proportion to the time, in agreement with the definition of naturally

accelerated  motion  given  by  the  Author.  Hence,  as  he  has  shown  in  the

preceding proposition, the distances traversed are proportional to the squares

of the times and therefore to the squares of the speeds. The speed relations

are here the same as in the motion first studied [i. e., vertical motion], since in

each case the gain of speed is proportional to the time.

  Let AB be an inclined plane whose height above the level BC is AC. As

we have seen above the force impelling [l’impeto] a body to fall along the

vertical AC is to the force which drives the same body along the inclined

plane AB as AB is to AC. On the incline AB, lay off AD a third proportional

to AB and AC; then the force producing motion along AC is to that along AB

(i. e., along AD) as the length AC is to the length AD. And therefore the body

will traverse the space AD, along the incline AB, in the same time which it

would occupy in falling the vertical distance AC, (since the forces [momenti]

are in the same ratio as these distances); also the speed at C is to the speed at

D as the distance AC is to the distance AD. But, according to the definition of

accelerated motion, the speed at B is to the speed of the same body at D as

the  time  required  to  traverse  AB  is  to  the  time  required  for  AD;  and,

according to the last corollary of the second proposition, the time of passing

through the distance AB bears to the time of passing through AD the same

ratio as the distance AC (a mean proportional between AB and AD) to AD.

Accordingly the two speeds at B and C each bear to the speed at D the same

ratio, namely, that of the distances AC and AD; hence they are equal. This is

the theorem which I set out to prove.  From  the  above  we  are  better  able  to  demonstrate  the  following  third

proposition  of  the  Author  in  which  he  employs  the  following  principle,

namely, the time required to traverse an inclined plane is to that required to

fall through the vertical height of the plane in the same ratio as the length of

the plane to its height.

  In like manner it can be shown that the time required to fall through AC is

to the time required for any other incline AE as the length AC is to the length

AE; therefore, ex aequali, the time of fall along the incline AB is to that
                                                                35
along AE as the distance AB is to the distance AE, etc.

35
 Putting this argument in a modern and evident notation, one has AC = ½ gtc2 and AD = ½ gtd2 If
now = AB. AD, it follows at once that td = tc [Trans.]


q. d. e.


  One might by application of this same theorem, as Sagredo will readily

see, immediately demonstrate the sixth proposition of the Author; but let ushere end this digression which Sagredo has perhaps found rather tedious,

though I consider it quite important for the theory of motion.

Sagr. On the contrary it has given me great satisfaction, and indeed I find it

necessary for a complete grasp of this principle.


Salv. I will now resume the reading of the text.

  If one and the same body, starting from rest, falls along an inclined plane

and also along a vertical, each having the same height, the times of descent

will be to each other as the lengths of the inclined plane and the vertical.

  Let AC be the inclined plane and AB the perpendicular, each having the

same vertical height above the horizontal, namely, BA; then I say, the time of

descent of one and the same body along the plane AC bears a ratio to the time

of fall along the perpendicular AB, which is the same as the ratio of the

length AC to the length AB. Let DG, EI and LF be any lines parallel to the

horizontal CB; then it follows from what has preceded that a body starting

from A will acquire the same speed at the point G as at D, since in each case

the vertical fall is the same; in like manner the speeds at I and E will be the

same;  so  also  those  at  L  and  F.  And  in  general  the  speeds  at  the  two

extremities of any parallel drawn from any point on AB to the corresponding

point on AC will be equal.  Thus the two distances AC and AB are traversed at the same speed. But it

has already been proved that if two distances are traversed by a body moving

with equal speeds, then the ratio of the times of descent will be the ratio of

the distances themselves; therefore, the time of descent along AC is to that

along AB as the length of the plane AC is to the vertical distance AB.

  q. e. d.

  It seems to me that the above could have been proved clearly and briefly

on the basis of a proposition already demonstrated, namely, that the distance

traversed in the case of accelerated motion along AC or AB is the same as

that covered by a uniform speed whose value is one-half the maximum speed,

CB; the two distances AC and AB having been traversed at the same uniform

speed it is evident, from Proposition I, that the times of descent will be to

each other as the distances.                                        Corollary


Hence we may infer that the times of descent along planes having different

inclinations, but the same vertical height stand to one another in the same

ratio as the lengths of the planes. For consider any plane AM extending from

A to the horizontal CB; then it may be demonstrated in the same manner that

the time of descent along AM is to the time along AB as the distance AM is

to AB; but since the time along AB is to that along AC as the length AB is to

the length AC, it follows, ex æquali, that as AM is to AC so is the time along

AM to the time along AC.


                            Theorem IV, Proposition IV


The  times  of  descent  along  planes  of  the  same  length  but  of  different

inclinations are to each other in the inverse ratio of the square roots of their

heights

  From a single point B draw the planes BA and BC, having the same length

but different inclinations; let AE and CD be horizontal lines drawn to meet

the perpendicular BD; and let BE represent the height of the plane AB, and

BD the height of BC; also let BI be a mean proportional to BD and BE; then

the ratio of BD to BI is equal to the square root of the ratio of BD to BE.

Now, I say, the ratio of the times of descent along BA and BC is the ratio of

BD to BI; so that the time of descent along BA is related to the height of the

other plane BC, namely BD as the time along BC is related to the height BI.

Now it must be proved that the time of descent along BA is to that along BC

as the length BD is to the length BI.  Draw IS parallel to DC; and since it has been shown that the time of fall

along BA is to that along the vertical BE as BA is to BE; and also that the

time along BE is to that along BD as BE is to BI; and likewise that the time

along BD is to that along BC as BD is to BC, or as BI to BS; it follows, ex

æquali, that the time along BA is to that along BC as BA to BS, or BC to BS.

However, BC is to BS as BD is to BI; hence follows our proposition.


                              Theorem V, Proposition V


The times of descent along planes of different length, slope and height bear to

one another a ratio which is equal to the product of the ratio of the lengths by

the square root of the inverse ratio of their heights.                            Theorem VI, Proposition VI


If from the highest or lowest point in a vertical circle there be drawn any

inclined planes meeting the circumference the times of descent along these

chords are each equal to the other.

  By use of the principles of mechanics [ex mechanicis] one may obtain the

same result, namely, that a falling body will require equal times to traverse

the distances CA and DA, indicated in the following figure. Lay off BA equal

to  DA,  and  let  fall  the  perpendiculars  BE  and  DF;  it  follows  from  the

principles of mechanics that the component of the momentum [momentum

ponderis] acting along the inclined plane ABC is to the total momentum [i.

e., the momentum of the body falling freely] as BE is to BA; in like manner

the  momentum  along  the  plane  AD  is  to  its  total  momentum  [i.  e.,  themomentum of the body falling freely] as DF is to DA, or to BA. Therefore

the momentum of this same weight along the plane DA is to that along the

plane ABC as the length DF is to the length BE; for this reason, this same

weight will in equal times according to the second proposition of the first

book, traverse spaces along the planes CA and DA which are to each other as

the lengths BE and DF. But it can be shown that CA is to DA as BE is to DF.

Hence the falling body will traverse the two paths CA and DA in equal times.





























  Moreover the fact that CA is to DA as BE is to DF may be demonstrated

as follows: Join C and D; through D, draw the line DGL parallel to AF and

cutting the line AC in I; through B draw the line BH, also parallel to AF.

Then the angle ADI will be equal to the angle DCA, since they subtend equal

arcs  LA  and  DA,  and  since  the  angle  DAC  is  common,  the  sides  of  the

triangles, CAD and DAI, about the common angle will be proportional toeach other; accordingly as CA is to DA so is DA to IA, that is as BA is to IA,

or as HA is to GA, that is as BE is to DF.

  e. d.

  The same proposition may be more easily demonstrated as follows: On the

horizontal line AB draw a circle whose diameter DC is vertical. From the

upper end of this diameter draw any inclined plane, DF, extending to meet

the circumference; then, I say, a body will occupy the same time in falling

along the plane DF as along the diameter DC. For draw FG parallel to AB

and perpendicular to DC; join FC; and since the time of fall along DC is to

that along DG as the mean proportional between CD and GD is to GD itself;

and since also DF is a mean proportional between DC and DG, the angle

DFC  inscribed  in  a  semicircle  being  a  right-angle,  and  FG  being

perpendicular to DC, it follows that the time of fall along DC is to that along

DG as the length FD is to GD. But it has already been demonstrated that the

time of descent along DF is to that along DG as the length DF is to DG;

hence the times of descent along DF and DC each bear to the time of fall

along DG the same ratio; consequently they are equal.  In like manner it may be shown that if one draws the chord CE from the

lower end of the diameter, also the line EH parallel to the horizon, and joins

the points E and D, the time of descent along EC,will be the same as that

along the diameter, DC.


                                      Corollary I


From this it follows that the times of descent along all chords drawn through

either C or D are equal one to another.


                                      Corollary II


It also follows that, if from any one point there be drawn a vertical line and

an inclined one along which the time of descent is the same, the inclined line

will be a chord of a semicircle of which the vertical line is the diameter.                                      Corollary III


Moreover the times of descent along inclined planes will be equal when the

vertical  heights  of  equal  lengths  of  these  planes  are  to  each  other  as  the

lengths of the planes themselves; thus it is clear that the times of descent

along CA and DA, in the figure just before the last, are equal, provided the

vertical height of AB (AB being equal to AD), namely, BE, is to the vertical

height DF as CA is to DA.

Sagr. Please allow me to interrupt the lecture for a moment in order that I

may clear up an idea which just occurs to me; one which, if it involve no

fallacy,  suggests  at  least  a  freakish  and  interesting  circumstance,  such  as

often occurs in nature and in the realm of necessary consequences.

  If,  from  any  point  fixed  in  a  horizontal  plane,  straight  lines  be  drawn

extending indefinitely in all directions, and if we imagine a point to move

along each of these lines with constant speed, all starting from the fixed point

at the same instant and moving with equal speeds, then it is clear that all of

these moving points will lie upon the circumference of a circle which grows

larger and larger, always having the aforesaid fixed point as its center; this

circle spreads out in precisely the same manner as the little waves do in the

case of a pebble allowed to drop into quiet water, where the impact of the

stone starts the motion in all directions, while the point of impact remains the

center of these ever-expanding circular waves. But imagine a vertical plane

from the highest point of which are drawn lines inclined at every angle and

extending indefinitely; imagine also that heavy particles descend along these

lines  each  with  a  naturally  accelerated  motion  and  each  with  a  speed

appropriate to the inclination of its line. If these moving particles are always

visible, what will be the locus of their positions at any instant? Now the

answer to this question surprises me, for I am led by the preceding theorems

to believe that these particles will always lie upon the circumference of a

single circle, ever increasing in size as the particles recede farther and farther

from the point at which their motion began. To be more definite, let A be the

fixed point from which are drawn the lines AF and AH inclined at any angle

whatsoever. On the perpendicular AB take any two points C and D about

which,  as  centers,  circles  are  described  passing  through  the  point  A,  and

cutting the inclined lines at the points F, H, B, E, G, I. From the preceding

theorems it is clear that, if particles start, at the same instant, from A and

descend along these lines, when one is at E another will be at G and anotherat I; at a later instant they will be found simultaneously at F, H and B; these,

and indeed an infinite number of other particles travelling along an infinite

number of different slopes will at successive instants always lie upon a single

ever-expanding circle. The two kinds of motion occurring in nature give rise

therefore to two infinite series of circles, at once resembling and differing

from each other; the one takes its rise in the center of an infinite number of

concentric  circles;  the  other  has  its  origin  in  the  contact,  at  their  highest

points, of an infinite number of eccentric circles; the former are produced by

motions which are equal and uniform; the latter by motions which are neither

uniform nor equal among themselves, but which vary from one to another

according to the slope.





























  Further, if from the two points chosen as origins of motion, we draw lines

not only along horizontal and vertical planes but in all directions then just as

in the former cases, beginning at a single point ever-expanding circles areproduced, so in the latter case an infinite number of spheres are produced

about a single point, or rather a single sphere which expands in size without

limit; and this in two ways, one with the origin at the center, the other on the

surface of the spheres.


Salv. The idea is really beautiful and worthy of the clever mind of Sagredo.


Simp. As for me, I understand in a general way how the two kinds of natural

motions give rise to the circles and spheres; and yet as to the production of

circles by accelerated motion and its proof, I am not entirely clear; but the

fact that one can take the origin of motion either at the inmost center or at the

very  top  of  the  sphere  leads  one  to  think  that  there  may  be  some  great

mystery hidden in these true and wonderful results, a mystery related to the

creation of the universe (which is said to be spherical in shape), and related

also to the seat of the first cause [prima causa].


Salv. I have no hesitation in agreeing with you. But profound considerations

of this kind belong to a higher science than ours [a più alte dottrine che le

nostre]. We must be satisfied to belong to that class of less worthy workmen

who  procure  from  the  quarry  the  marble  out  of  which,  later,  the  gifted

sculptor  produces  those  masterpieces  which  lay  hidden  in  this  rough  and

shapeless exterior. Now, if you please, let us proceed.


                            Theorem VII, Proposition VII


If the heights of two inclined planes are to each other in the same ratio as the

squares of their lengths, bodies starting from rest will traverse these planes in

equal times.

  Take two planes of different lengths and different inclinations, AE and

AB, whose heights are AF and AD: let AF be to AD as the square of AE is to

the  square  of  AB;  then,  I  say,  that  a  body,  starting  from  rest  at  A,  will

traverse the planes AE and AB in equal times. From the vertical line, draw

the horizontal parallel lines EF and DB, the latter cutting AE at G. Since

FA:DA=:, and since FA:DA=EA:GA, it follows that EA:GA=:. Hence BA is

a mean proportional between EA and GA. Now since the time of descent

along AB bears to the time along AG the same ratio which AB bears to AG

and since also the time of descent along AG is to the time along AE as AG isto a mean proportional between AG and AE, that is, to AB, it follows, ex

æquali, that the time along AB is to the time along AE as AB is to itself.

Therefore the times are equal.

  q. e. d.






























                          Theorem VIII, Proposition VIII


The times of descent along all inclined planes which intersect one and the

same vertical circle, either at its highest or lowest point, are equal to the time

of fall along the vertical diameter; for those planes which fall short of this

diameter the times are shorter; for planes which cut this diameter, the times

are longer.


                            Theorem IX, Proposition IXIf from any point on a horizontal line two planes, inclined at any angle, are

drawn, and if they are cut by a line which makes with them angles alternately

equal to the angles between these planes and the horizontal, then the times

required to traverse those portions of the plane cut off by the aforesaid line

are equal.

  Through the point C on the horizontal line X, draw two planes CD and CE

inclined at any angle whatever: at any point in the line CD lay off the angle

CDF equal to the angle XCE; let the line DF cut CE at F so that the angles

CDF and CFD are alternately equal to XCE and LCD; then, I say, the times

of descent over CD and CF are equal. Now since the angle CDF is equal to

the angle XCE by construction, it is evident that the angle CFD must be equal

to the angle DCL. For if the common angle DCF be subtracted from the three

angles of the triangle CDF, together equal to two right angles, (to which are

also equal all the angles which can be described about the point C on the

lower side of the line LX) there remain in the triangle two angles, CDF and

CFD, equal to the two angles XCE and LCD; but, by hypothesis, the angles

CDF and XCE are equal; hence the remaining angle CFD is equal to the

remainder DCL. Take CE equal to CD; from the points D and E draw DA

and EB perpendicular to the horizontal line XL; and from the point C draw

CG perpendicular to DF. Now since the angle CDG is equal to the angle ECB

and since DGC and CBE are right angles, it follows that the triangles CDG

and CBE are equiangular; consequently DC:CG=CE:EB. But DC is equal to

CE, and therefore CG is equal to EB. Since also the angles at C and at A, in

the triangle DAC, are equal to the angles at F and G in the triangle CGF, we

have CD:DA=FC:CG and, permutando, DC:CF=DA:CG=DA:BE. Thus the

ratio of the heights of the equal planes CD and CE is the same as the ratio of

the lengths DC and CF. Therefore, by Corollary I of Prop. VI, the times of

descent along these planes will be equal.

  q. e. d.  An  alternative  proof  is  the  following:  Draw  FS  perpendicular  to  the

horizontal line AS. Then, since the triangle CSF is similar to the triangle

DGC, we have SF:FC=GC:CD; and since the triangle CFG is similar to the

triangle DCA, we have FC:CG=CD:DA. Hence, ex æquali, SF:CG=CG:DA.

Therefore CG is a mean proportional between SF and DA, while DA:SF=:.

Again  since  the  triangle  ACD  is  similar  to  the  triangle  CGF,  we  have

DA:DC=GC:CF and, permutando, DA:CG = DC:CF: also :=:. But it has been

shown that :=DA:SF. Therefore :=DA:FS. Hence from the above Prop. VII,

since the heights DA and FS of the planes CD and CF are to each other as the

squares of the lengths of the planes, it follows that the times of descent along

these planes will be equal.                              Theorem X, Proposition X


The  times  of  descent  along  inclined  planes  of  the  same  height,  but  of

different slope, are to each other as the lengths of these planes; and this is

true whether the motion starts from rest or whether it is preceded by a fall

from a constant height.

  q. e. d.                            Theorem XI, Proposition XI


If a plane be divided into any two parts and if motion along it starts from rest,

then the time of descent along the first part is to the time of descent along the

remainder  as  the  length  of  this  first  part  is  to  the  excess  of  a  mean

proportional between this first part and the entire length over this first part.

  Let the fall take place, from rest at A, through the entire distance AB

which is divided at any point C; also let AF be a mean proportional between

the entire length BA and the first part AC; then CF will denote the excess of

the mean proportional FA over the first part AC. Now, I say, the time of

descent along AC will be to the time of subsequent fall through CB as the

length AC is to CF. This is evident, because the time along AC is to the time

along  the  entire  distance  AB  as  AC  is  to  the  mean  proportional  AF.Therefore, dividendo,  the  time  along  AC  will  be  to  the  time  along  the

remainder CB as AC is to CF. If we agree to represent the time along AC by

the length AC then the time along CB will be represented by CF.

  q. e. d.                            Theorem XII, Proposition XII


If a vertical plane and any inclined plane are limited by two horizontals, and

if we take mean proportionals between the lengths of these planes and those

portions of them which lie between their point of intersection and the upper

horizontal, then the time of fall along the perpendicular bears to the time

required to traverse the upper part of the perpendicular plus the time required

to traverse the lower part of the intersecting plane the same ratio which the

entire length of the vertical bears to a length which is the sum of the mean

proportional on the vertical plus the excess of the entire length of the inclined

plane over its mean proportional.

  Let AF and CD be two horizontal planes limiting the vertical plane AC

and the inclined plane DF; let the two last-mentioned planes intersect at B.

Let AR be a mean proportional between the entire vertical AC and its upper

part AB; and let FS be a mean proportional between FD and its upper partFB. Then, I say, the time of fall along the entire vertical path AC bears to the

time of fall along its upper portion AB plus the time of fall along the lower

part of the inclined plane, namely, BD, the same ratio which the length AC

bears to the mean proportional on the vertical, namely, AR, plus the length

SD which is the excess of the entire plane DF over its mean proportional FS.

  Join the points R and S giving a horizontal line RS. Now since the time of

fall through the entire distance AC is to the time along the portion AB as CA

is to the mean proportional AR it follows that, if we agree to represent the

time of fall through AC by the distance AC, the time of fall through the

distance AB will be represented by AR; and the time of descent through the

remainder, BC, will be represented by RC. But, if the time along AC is taken

to be equal to the length AC, then the time along FD will be equal to the

distance FD; and we may likewise infer that the time of descent along BD,

when preceded by a fall along FB or AB, is numerically equal to the distance

DS. Therefore the time required to fall along the path AC is equal to AR plus

RC; while the time of descent along the broken line ABD will be equal to AR

plus SD.

  q. e. d.  The same thing is true if, in place of a vertical plane, one takes any other

plane, as for instance NO; the method of proof is also the same.


                            Problem I, Proposition XIII


Given a perpendicular line of limited length, it is required to find a plane

having a vertical height equal to the given perpendicular and so inclined that

a body, having fallen from rest along the perpendicular, will make its descent

along the inclined plane in the same time which it occupied in falling through

the given perpendicular.

  Let AB denote the given perpendicular: prolong this line to C making BC

equal to AB, and draw the horizontal lines CE and AG. It is required to draw

a plane from B to the horizontal line CE such that after a body starting from

rest at A has fallen through the distance AB, it will complete its path along

this plane in an equal time. Lay off CD equal to BC, and draw the line BD.Construct the line BE equal to the sum of BD and DC; then, I say, BE is the

required plane. Prolong EB till it intersects the horizontal AG at G. Let GF be

a  mean  proportional  between  GE  and  GB;  then  EF:FB=EG:GF,  and

:=:=EG:GB. But EG is twice GB; hence the square of EF is twice the square

of FB; so also is the square of DB twice the square of BC. Consequently

EF:FB=DB:BC, and componendo et permutando, EB:DB + BC=BF:BC. But

EB=DB  +  BC;  hence  BF=BC=BA.  If  we  agree  that  the  length  AB  shall

represent the time of fall along the line AB, then GB will represent the time

of descent along GB, and GF the time along the entire distance GE; therefore

BF will represent the time of descent along the difference of these paths,

namely, BE, after fall from G or from A.

  q. e. d.




























                            Problem II, Proposition XIVGiven an inclined plane and a perpendicular passing through it, to find a

length on the upper part of the perpendicular through which a body will fall

from rest in the same time which is required to traverse the inclined plane

after fall through the vertical distance just determined.






























                            Problem III, Proposition XV


Given a vertical line and a plane inclined to it, it is required to find a length

on the vertical line below its point of intersection which will be traversed in

the  same  time  as  the  inclined  plane,  each  of  these  motions  having  been

preceded by a fall through the given vertical line.

  Let AB represent the vertical line and BC the inclined plane; it is required

to find a length on the perpendicular below its point of intersection, which

after a fall from A will be traversed in the same time which is needed for BCafter  an  identical  fall  from  A.  Draw  the  horizontal  AD,  intersecting  the

prolongation of CB at D; let DE be a mean proportional between CD and DB;

lay off BF equal to BE; also let AG be a third proportional to BA and AF.

Then, I say, BG is the distance which a body, after falling through AB, will

traverse in the same time which is needed for the plane BC after the same

preliminary  fall.  For  if  we  assume  that  the  time  of  fall  along  AB  is

represented by AB, then the time for DB will be represented by DB. And

since DE is a mean proportional between BD and DC, this same DE will

represent the time of descent along the entire distance DC while BE will

represent the time required for the difference of these paths, namely, BC,

provided in each case the fall is from rest at D or at A. In like manner we may

infer that BF represents the time of descent through the distance BG after the

same preliminary fall; but BF is equal to BE. Hence the problem is solved.                          Theorem XIII, Proposition XVI


If a limited inclined plane and a limited vertical line are drawn from the same

point, and if the time required for a body, starting from rest, to traverse each

of these is the same, then a body falling from any higher altitude will traverse

the inclined plane in less time than is required for the vertical line.

  In like manner EF represents the time of descent along EC, starting from

rest at D or falling from rest at A. But it has been shown that EF is less than

EG; hence follows the theorem.


                                        Corollary


From this and the preceding proposition, it is clear that the vertical distance

covered by a freely falling body, after a preliminary fall, and during the time-

interval required to traverse an inclined plane, is greater than the length of the

inclined  plane,  but  less  than  the  distance  traversed  on  the  inclined  plane

during an equal time, without any preliminary fall. For since we have just

shown that bodies falling from an elevated point A will traverse the plane EC

in Fig. 71 in a shorter time than the vertical EB, it is evident that the distance

along EB which will be traversed during a time equal to that of descent along

EC will be less than the whole of EB. But now in order to show that this

vertical  distance  is  greater  than  the  length  of  the  inclined  plane  EC,  we

reproduce Fig. 70 of the preceding theorem in which the vertical length BG is

traversed in the same time as BC after a preliminary fall through AB. That

BG is greater than BC is shown as follows: since BE and FB are equal while

BA is less than BD, it follows that FB will bear to BA a greater ratio than EB

bears to BD; and, componendo, FA will bear to BA a greater ratio than ED to

DB; but FA:AB=GF:FB (since AF is a mean proportional between BA and

AG) and in like manner ED:BD=CE:EB. Hence GB bears to BF a greater

ratio than CB bears to BE; therefore GB is greater than BC.                            Problem IV, Proposition XVII


Given a vertical line and an inclined plane, it is required to lay off a distance

along the given plane which will be traversed by a body, after fall along the

perpendicular, in the same time-interval which is needed for this body to fall

from rest through the given perpendicular.

  Let AB be the vertical line and BE the inclined plane. The problem is to

determine on BE a distance such that a body, after falling through AB, will

traverse it in a time equal to that required to traverse the perpendicular AB

itself, starting from rest.

  Draw the horizontal AD and extend the plane until it meets this line in D.

Lay off FB equal to BA; and choose the point E such that BD:FD=DF:DE.

Then, I say, the time of descent along BE, after fall through AB, is equal tothe time of fall, from rest at A, through AB. For, if we assume that the length

AB represents the time of fall through AB, then the time of fall through DB

will be represented by the time DB; and since BD:FD=DF:DE, it follows that

DF will represent the time of descent along the entire plane DE while BF

represents the time through the portion BE starting from rest at D; but the

time of descent along BE after the preliminary descent along DB is the same

as that after a preliminary fall through AB. Hence the time of descent along

BE after AB will be BF which of course is equal to the time of fall through

AB from rest at A.

  q. e. f.






























                            Problem V, Proposition XVIII


Given the distance through which a body will fall vertically from rest during

a given time-interval, and given also a smaller time-interval, it is required tolocate another [equal] vertical distance which the body will traverse during

this given smaller time-interval.






























                            Problem VI, Proposition XIX


Given the distance through which a body falls in a vertical line from rest and

given also the time of fall, it is required to find the time in which the same

body  will,  later,  traverse  an  equal  distance  chosen  anywhere  in  the  same

vertical line.

  On the vertical line AB, lay off AC equal to the distance fallen from rest at

A, also locate at random an equal distance DB. Let the time of fall through

AC be represented by the length AC. It is required to find the time necessary

to traverse DB after fall from rest at A. About the entire length AB describe

the semicircle AEB; from C draw CE perpendicular to AB; join the points A

and E; the line AE will be longer than EC; lay off EF equal to EC. Then, Isay, the difference FA will represent the time required for fall through DB.

For since AE is a mean proportional between BA and AC and since AC

represents the time of fall through AC, it follows that AE will represent the

time through the entire distance AB. And since CE is a mean proportional

between DA and AC (seeing that DA=BC) it follows that CE, that is, EF, will

represent the time of fall through AD. Hence the difference AF will represent

the time of fall through the difference DB.

  q. e. d.






























                                        Corollary


Hence  it  is  inferred  that  if  the  time  of  fall  from  rest  through  any  given

distance is represented by that distance itself, then the time of fall, after the

given distance has been increased by a certain amount, will be represented by

the excess of the mean proportional between the increased distance and theoriginal distance over the mean proportional between the original distance

and the increment. Thus, for instance, if we agree that AB represents the time

of fall, from rest at A, through the distance AB, and that AS is the increment,

the time required to traverse AB, after fall through SA, will be the excess of

the  mean  proportional  between  SB  and  BA  over  the  mean  proportional

between BA and AS.


                            Problem VII, Proposition XX


Given any distance whatever and a portion of it laid off from the point at

which motion begins, it is required to find another portion which lies at the

other end of the distance and which is traversed in the same time as the first

given portion.





























  Let the given distance be CB and let CD be that part of it which is laid off

from the beginning of motion. It is required to find another part, at the end B,which is traversed in the same time as the assigned portion CD. Let BA be a

mean proportional between BC and CD; also let CE be a third proportional to

BC and CA. Then, I say, EB will be the distance which, after fall from C, will

be traversed in the same time as CD itself. For if we agree that CB shall

represent the time through the entire distance CB, then BA (which, of course,

is a mean proportional between BC and CD) will represent the time along

CD; and since CA is a mean proportional between BC and CE, it follows that

CA will be the time through CE; but the total length CB represents the time

through the total distance CB. Therefore the difference BA will be the time

along the difference of distances, EB, after falling from C; but this same BA

was the time of fall through CD. Consequently the distances CD and EB are

traversed, from rest at A, in equal times.

  q. e. f.                          Theorem XIV, Proposition XXI


If, on the path of a body falling vertically from rest, one lays off a portion

which  is  traversed  in  any  time  you  please  and  whose  upper  terminus

coincides with the point where the motion begins, and if this fall is followed

by  a  motion  deflected  along  any  inclined  plane,  then  the  space  traversed

along the inclined plane, during a time-interval equal to that occupied in the

previous vertical fall, will be greater than twice, and less than three times, the

length of the vertical fall.

  Let AB be a vertical line drawn downwards from the horizontal line AE,

and let it represent the path of a body falling from rest at A; choose any

portion  AC  of  this  path.  Through  C  draw  any  inclined  plane,  CG,  along

which the motion is continued after fall through AC. Then, I say, that the

distance traversed along this plane CG, during the time-interval equal to that

of the fall through AC, is more than twice, but less than three times, this same

distance AC. Let us lay off CF equal to AC, and extend the plane GC until it

meets the horizontal in E; choose G such that CE:EF=EF:EG. If now we

assume that the time of fall along AC is represented by the length AC, then

CE  will  represent  the  time  of  descent  along  CE,  while  CF,  or  CA,  will

represent the time of descent along CG. It now remains to be shown that the

distance CG is more than twice, and less than three times, the distance CA

itself.  Since  CE:EF=EF:EG,  it  follows  that  CE:EF=CF:FG;  but  EC<EF;

therefore CF will be less than FG and GC will be more than twice FC, or AC.

Again since FE<2EC (for EC is greater than CA, or CF), we have GF less

than twice FC, and also GC less than three times CF, or CA.

  q. e. d.  This proposition may be stated in a more general form; since what has

been proven for the case of a vertical and inclined plane holds equally well in

the case of motion along a plane of any inclination followed by motion along

any plane of less steepness, as can be seen from the adjoining figure. The

method of proof is the same.


                          Problem VIII, Proposition XXII


Given two unequal time-intervals, also the distance through which a body

will fall along a vertical line, from rest, during the shorter of these intervals, it

is required to pass through the highest point of this vertical line a plane so

inclined that the time of descent along it will be equal to the longer of the

given intervals.

  Let A represent the longer and B the shorter of the two unequal time-

intervals, also let CD represent the length of the vertical fall, from rest, duringthe time B. It is required to pass through the point C a plane of such a slope

that it will be traversed in the time A.











  Draw from the point C to the horizontal a line CX of such a length that

B:A=CD:CX. It is clear that CX is the plane along which a body will descend

in the given time A. For it has been shown that the time of descent along an

inclined plane bears to the time of fall through its vertical height the same

ratio which the length of the plane bears to its vertical height. Therefore the

time along CX is to the time along CD as the length CX is to the length CD,

that is, as the time-interval A is to the time-interval B: but B is the time

required to traverse the vertical distance, CD, starting from rest; therefore A

is the time required for descent along the plane CX.


                          Problem IX, Proposition XXIII


Given the time employed by a body in falling through a certain distance

along a vertical line, it is required to pass through the lower terminus of this

vertical fall, a plane so inclined that this body will, after its vertical fall,

traverse on this plane, during a time-interval equal to that of the vertical fall,

a distance equal to any assigned distance, provided this assigned distance is

more than twice and less than three times, the vertical fall.

  Let AS be any vertical line, and let AC denote both the length of the

vertical fall, from rest at A, and also the time required for this fall. Let IR be a

distance more than twice and less than three times, AC. It is required to pass

a plane through the point C so inclined that a body, after fall through AC,

will, during the time AC, traverse a distance equal to IR. Lay off RN and NM

each  equal  to  AC.  Through  the  point  C,  draw  a  plane  CE  meeting  the

horizontal, AE, at such a point that IM:MN=AC:CE. Extend the plane to O,

and lay off CF, FG and GO equal to RN, NM, and MI respectively. Then, I

say, the time along the inclined plane CO, after fall through AC, is equal tothe time of fall, from rest at A, through AC. For since OG:GF=FC:CE, it

follows, componendo, that OF:FG=OF:FC=FE:EC, and since an antecedent is

to  its  consequent  as  the  sum  of  the  antecedents  is  to  the  sum  of  the

consequents,  we  have  OE:EF=EF:EC.  Thus  EF  is  a  mean  proportional

between OE and EC. Having agreed to represent the time of fall through AC

by the length AC it follows that EC will represent the time along EC, and EF

the time along the entire distance EO, while the difference CF will represent

the  time  along  the  difference  CO;  but  CF=CA;  therefore  the  problem  is

solved. For the time CA is the time of fall, from rest at A, through CA while

CF (which is equal to CA) is the time required to traverse CO after descent

along EC or after fall through AC.

  q. e. f.
























  It is to be remarked also that the same solution holds if the antecedent

motion takes place, not along a vertical, but along an inclined plane. This

case  is  illustrated  in  the  following  figure  where  the  antecedent  motion  is

along  the  inclined  plane  AS  underneath  the  horizontal  AE.  The  proof  is

identical with the preceding.


                                        ScholiumOn  careful  attention,  it  will  be  clear  that,  the  nearer  the  given  line  IR

approaches to three times the length AC, the nearer the inclined plane, CO,

along which the second motion takes place, approaches the perpendicular

along which the space traversed, during the time AC, will be three times the

distance AC. For if IR be taken nearly equal to three times AC, then IM will

be  almost  equal  to  MN;  and  since,  by  construction,  IM:MN=AC:CE,  it

follows that CE is but little greater than CA: consequently the point E will lie

near the point A, and the lines CO and CS, forming a very acute angle, will

almost coincide. But, on the other hand, if the given line, IR, be only the least

bit  longer  than  twice  AC,  the  line  IM  will  be  very  short;  from  which  it

follows that AC will be very small in comparison with CE which is now so

long that it almost coincides with the horizontal line drawn through C. Hence

we  can  infer  that,  if,  after  descent  along  the  inclined  plane  AC  of  the

adjoining figure, the motion is continued along a horizontal line, such as CT,

the  distance  traversed  by  a  body,  during  a  time  equal  to  the  time  of  fall

through  AC,  will  be  exactly  twice  the  distance  AC.  The  argument  here

employed is the same as the preceding. For it is clear, since OE:EF=EF:EC,

that FC measures the time of descent along CO. But, if the horizontal line TC

which is twice as long as CA, be divided into two equal parts at V then this

line must be extended indefinitely in the direction of X before it will intersect

the line AE produced; and accordingly the ratio of the infinite length TX to

the infinite length VX is the same as the ratio of the infinite distance VX to

the infinite distance CX.  The same result may be obtained by another method of approach, namely,

by returning to the same line of argument which was employed in the proof

of the first proposition. Let us consider the triangle ABC, which, by lines

drawn parallel to its base, represents for us a velocity increasing in proportion

to the time; if these lines are infinite in number, just as the points in the line

AC are infinite or as the number of instants in any interval of time is infinite,

they will form the area of the triangle. Let us now suppose that the maximum

velocity  attained  —  that  represented  by  the  line  BC  —  to  be  continued,

without acceleration and at constant value through another interval of time

equal to the first. From these velocities will be built up, in a similar manner,

the area of the parallelogram ADBC, which is twice that of the triangle ABC;

accordingly  the  distance  traversed  with  these  velocities  during  any  given

interval of time will be twice that traversed with the velocities represented by

the triangle during an equal interval of time. But along a horizontal plane the

motion  is  uniform  since  here  it  experiences  neither  acceleration  nor

retardation; therefore we conclude that the distance CD traversed during a

time-interval equal to AC is twice the distance AC; for the latter is covered

by a motion, starting from rest and increasing in speed in proportion to the

parallel  lines  in  the  triangle,  while  the  former  is  traversed  by  a  motionrepresented  by  the  parallel  lines  of  the  parallelogram  which,  being  also

infinite in number, yield an area twice that of the triangle.





























  Furthermore we may remark that any velocity once imparted to a moving

body will be rigidly maintained as long as the external causes of acceleration

or retardation are removed, a condition which is found only on horizontal

planes; for in the case of planes which slope downwards there is already

present  a  cause  of  acceleration,  while  on  planes  sloping  upward  there  is

retardation;  from  this  it  follows  that  motion  along  a  horizontal  plane  is

perpetual;  for,  if  the  velocity  be  uniform,  it  cannot  be  diminished  or

slackened, much less destroyed. Further, although any velocity which a body

may have acquired through natural fall is permanently maintained so far as its

own nature [suapte natura] is concerned, yet it must be remembered that if,

after descent along a plane inclined downwards, the body is deflected to a

plane inclined upward, there is already existing in this latter plane a cause ofretardation;  for  in  any  such  plane  this  same  body  is  subject  to  a  natural

acceleration downwards. Accordingly we have here the superposition of two

different states, namely, the velocity acquired during the preceding fall which

if acting alone would carry the body at a uniform rate to infinity, and the

velocity which results from a natural acceleration downwards common to all

bodies.  It  seems  altogether  reasonable,  therefore,  if  we  wish  to  trace  the

future history of a body which has descended along some inclined plane and

has been deflected along some plane inclined upwards, for us to assume that

the  maximum  speed  acquired  during  descent  is  permanently  maintained

during  the  ascent.  In  the  ascent,  however,  there  supervenes  a  natural

inclination  downwards,  namely,  a  motion  which,  starting  from  rest,  is

accelerated at the usual rate. If perhaps this discussion is a little obscure, the

following figure will help to make it clearer.

  Let  us  suppose  that  the  descent  has  been  made  along  the  downward

sloping plane AB, from which the body is deflected so as to continue its

motion along the upward sloping plane BC; and first let these planes be of

equal length and placed so as to make equal angles with the horizontal line

GH.  Now  it  is  well  known  that  a  body,  starting  from  rest  at  A,  and

descending along AB, acquires a speed which is proportional to the time,

which is a maximum at B, and which is maintained by the body so long as all

causes of fresh acceleration or retardation are removed; the acceleration to

which I refer is that to which the body would be subject if its motion were

continued along the plane AB extended, while the retardation is that which

the body would encounter if its motion were deflected along the plane BC

inclined  upwards;  but,  upon  the  horizontal  plane  GH,  the  body  would

maintain a uniform velocity equal to that which it had acquired at B after fall

from A; moreover this velocity is such that, during an interval of time equal

to  the  time  of  descent  through  AB,  the  body  will  traverse  a  horizontal

distance equal to twice AB. Now let us imagine this same body to move with

the same uniform speed along the plane BC so that here also during a time-

interval equal to that of descent along AB, it will traverse along BC extended

a distance twice AB; but let us suppose that, at the very instant the body

begins its ascent it is subjected, by its very nature, to the same influences

which surrounded it during its descent from A along AB, namely, it descends

from rest under the same acceleration as that which was effective in AB, and

it traverses, during an equal interval of time, the same distance along this

second plane as it did along AB; it is clear that, by thus superposing upon thebody a uniform motion of ascent and an accelerated motion of descent, it will

be carried along the plane BC as far as the point C where these two velocities

become equal.













  If now we assume any two points D and E, equally distant from the vertex

B, we may then infer that the descent along BD takes place in the same time

as the ascent along BE. Draw DF parallel to BC; we know that, after descent

along AD, the body will ascend along DF; or, if, on reaching D, the body is

carried along the horizontal DE, it will reach E with the same momentum

[impetus] with which it left D; hence from E the body will ascend as far as C,

proving that the velocity at E is the same as that at D.

  From this we may logically infer that a body which descends along any

inclined plane and continues its motion along a plane inclined upwards will,

on account of the momentum acquired, ascend to an equal height above the

horizontal; so that if the descent is along AB the body will be carried up the

plane BC as far as the horizontal line ACD: and this is true whether the

inclinations of the planes are the same or different, as in the case of the planes

AB and BD. But by a previous postulate [p. 184] the speeds acquired by fall

along variously inclined planes having the same vertical height are the same.

If therefore the planes EB and BD have the same slope, the descent along EB

will be able to drive the body along BD as far as D; and since this propulsion

comes from the speed acquired on reaching the point B, it follows that this

speed at B is the same whether the body has made its descent along AB or

EB. Evidently then the body will be carried up BD whether the descent has

been made along AB or along EB. The time of ascent along BD is however

greater than that along BC, just as the descent along EB occupies more time

than that along AB; moreover it has been demonstrated that the ratio between

the lengths of these times is the same as that between the lengths of theplanes.  We  must  next  discover  what  ratio  exists  between  the  distances

traversed  in  equal  times  along  planes  of  different  slope,  but  of  the  same

elevation, that is, along planes which are included between the same parallel

horizontal lines. This is done as follows:













                          Theorem XV, Proposition XXIV


Given  two  parallel  horizontal  planes  and  a  vertical  line  connecting  them;

given  also  an  inclined  plane  passing  through  the  lower  extremity  of  this

vertical line; then, if a body fall freely along the vertical line and have its

motion reflected along the inclined plane, the distance which it will traverse

along this plane, during a time equal to that of the vertical fall, is greater than

once but less than twice the vertical line.

  Let  BC  and  HG  be  the  two  horizontal  planes,  connected  by  the

perpendicular AE; also let EB represent the inclined plane along which the

motion takes place after the body has fallen along AE and has been reflected

from E towards B. Then, I say, that, during a time equal to that of fall along

AE,  the  body  will  ascend  the  inclined  plane  through  a  distance  which  is

greater than AE but less than twice AE. Lay off ED equal to AE and choose F

so that EB:BD=BD:BF. First we shall show that F is the point to which the

moving body will be carried after reflection from E towards B during a time

equal to that of fall along AE; and next we shall show that the distance EF is

greater than EA but less than twice that quantity.  Let us agree to represent the time of fall along AE by the length AE, then

the time of descent along BE, or what is the same thing, ascent along EB will

be represented by the distance EB.

  Now, since DB is a mean proportional between EB and BF, and since BE

is the time of descent for the entire distance BE, it follows that BD will be the

time of descent through BF, while the remainder DE will be the time of

descent along the remainder FE. But the time of descent along the fall from

rest at B is the same as the time of ascent from E to F after reflection from E

with the speed acquired during fall either through AE or BE. Therefore DE

represents the time occupied by the body in passing from E to F, after fall

from A to E and after reflection along EB. But by construction ED is equal to

AE. This concludes the first part of our demonstration.

  Now since the whole of EB is to the whole of BD as the portion DB is to

the  portion  BF,  we  have  the  whole  of  EB  is  to  the  whole  of  BD  as  the

remainder ED is to the remainder DF; but EB>BD and hence ED>DF, and

EF is less than twice DE or AE.

  q. e. d.

  The same is true when the initial motion occurs, not along a perpendicular,

but upon an inclined plane: the proof is also the same provided the upward

sloping plane is less steep, i. e., longer, than the downward sloping plane.


                          Theorem XVI, Proposition XXV


If descent along any inclined plane is followed by motion along a horizontal

plane, the time of descent along the inclined plane bears to the time required

to traverse any assigned length of the horizontal plane the same ratio which

twice the length of the inclined plane bears to the given horizontal length.

  Let CB be any horizontal line and AB an inclined plane; after descent

along AB let the motion continue through the assigned horizontal distanceBD. Then, I say, the time of descent along AB bears to the time spent in

traversing BD the same ratio which twice AB bears to BD. For, lay off BC

equal to twice AB then it follows, from a previous proposition, that the time

of descent along AB is equal to the time required to traverse BC; but the time

along BC is to the time along DB as the length CB is to the length BD. Hence

the time of descent along AB is to the time along BD as twice the distance

AB is to the distance BD.

  q. e. d.














                            Problem X, Proposition XXVI


Given a vertical height joining two horizontal parallel lines; given also a

distance  greater  than  once  and  less  than  twice  this  vertical  height,  it  is

required to pass through the foot of the given perpendicular an inclined plane

such that, after fall through the given vertical height, a body whose motion is

deflected along the plane will traverse the assigned distance in a time equal to

the time of vertical fall.

  Let AB be the vertical distance separating two parallel horizontal lines AO

and  BC;  also  let  FE  be  greater  than  once  and  less  than  twice  BA.  The

problem is to pass a plane through B, extending to the upper horizontal line,

and such that a body, after having fallen from A to B, will, if its motion be

deflected along the inclined plane, traverse a distance equal to EF in a time

equal to that of fall along AB. Lay off ED equal to AB; then the remainder

DF will be less than AB since the entire length EF is less than twice this

quantity;  also  lay  off  DI  equal  to  DF,  and  choose  the  point  X  such  that

EI:ID=DF:FX; from B, draw the plane BO equal in length to EX. Then, I say,

that the plane BO is the one along which, after fall through AB, a body will

traverse the assigned distance FE in a time equal to the time of fall throughAB.  Lay  off  BR  and  RS  equal  to  ED  and  DF  respectively;  then  since

EI:ID=DF:FX, we have, componendo,

    ED:DI=DX:XF=ED:DF=EX:XD=BO:OR=RO:OS. If we represent the time

of fall along AB by the length AB, then OB will represent the time of descent

along OB, and RO will stand for the time along OS, while the remainder BR

will represent the time required for a body starting from rest at O to traverse

the remaining distance SB. But the time of descent along SB starting from

rest at O is equal to the time of ascent from B to S after fall through AB.

Hence BO is that plane, passing through B, along which a body, after fall

through AB, will traverse the distance BS, equal to the assigned distance EF,

in the time-interval BR or BA.

  q. e. f.










                        Theorem XVII, Proposition XXVII


If a body descends along two inclined planes of different lengths but of the

same vertical height, the distance which it will traverse, in the lower part of

the  longer  plane,  during  a  time-interval  equal  to  that  of  descent  over  the

shorter plane, is equal to the length of the shorter plane plus a portion of it to

which the shorter plane bears the same ratio which the longer plane bears to

the excess of the longer over the shorter plane.

  Let  AC  be  the  longer  plane,  AB,  the  shorter,  and  AD  the  common

elevation; on the lower part of AC lay off CE equal to AB. Choose F such

that CA:AE=CA:CA-AB=CE:EF. Then, I say, that FC is that distance which

will,  after  fall  from  A,  be  traversed  during  a  time-interval  equal  to  that

required for descent along AB. For since CA:AE=CE:EF, it follows that the

remainder  EA:  the  remainder  AF  =  CA:AE.  Therefore  AE  is  a  mean

proportional between AC and AF. Accordingly if the length AB is employed

to measure the time of fall along AB, then the distance AC will measure the

time of descent through AC; but the time of descent through AF is measuredby the length AE, and that through FC by EC. Now EC=AB; and hence

follows the proposition.





















                          Problem XI, Proposition XXVIII


Let  AG  be  any  horizontal  line  touching  a  circle;  let  AB  be  the  diameter

passing through the point of contact; and let AE and EB represent any two

chords. The problem is to determine what ratio the time of fall through AB

bears to the time of descent over both AE and EB. Extend BE till it meets the

tangent at G, and draw AF so as to bisect the angle BAE. Then, I say, the

time through AB is to the sum of the times along AE and EB as the length

AE is to the sum of the lengths AE and EF. For since the angle FAB is equal

to the angle FAE, while the angle EAG is equal to the angle ABF it follows

that the entire angle GAF is equal to the sum of the angles FAB and ABF.

But the angle GFA is also equal to the sum of these two angles. Hence the

length GF is equal to the length GA; and since the rectangle BG.GE is equal

to  the  square  of  GA,  it  will  also  be  equal  to  the  square  of  GF,  or

BG:GF=GF:GE. If now we agree to represent the time of descent along AE

by the length AE, then the length GE will represent the time of descent along

GE, while GF will stand for the time of descent through the entire distance

GB; so also EF will denote the time through EB after fall from G or from Aalong AE. Consequently the time along AE, or AB, is to the time along AE

and EB as the length AE is to AE+EF.

  q. e. d.





























  A shorter method is to lay off GF equal to GA, thus making GF a mean

proportional between BG and GE. The rest of the proof is as above.


                        Theorem XVIII, Proposition XXIX


Given  a  limited  horizontal  line,  at  one  end  of  which  is  erected  a  limited

vertical line whose length is equal to one-half the given horizontal line; then a

body, falling through this given height and having its motion deflected into a

horizontal direction, will traverse the given horizontal distance and vertical

line  in  less  time  than  it  will  any  other  vertical  distance  plus  the  given

horizontal distance.  Lay off EB greater than AB, as in the first figure, and less than AB, as in

the second. It must be shown that the time required to traverse the distance

EB plus BC is greater than that required for AB plus BC. Let us agree that the

length  AB  shall  represent  the  time  along  AB,  then  the  time  occupied  in

traversing the horizontal portion BC will also be AB, seeing that BC=2AB;

consequently  the  time  required  for  both  AB  and  BC  will  be  twice  AB.

Choose the point O such that EB:BO=BO:BA, then BO will represent the

time of fall through EB. Again lay off the horizontal distance BD equal to

twice BE; whence it is clear that BO represents the time along BD after fall

through EB. Select a point N such that DB:BC=EB:BA=OB:BN. Now since

the  horizontal  motion  is  uniform  and  since  OB  is  the  time  occupied  in

traversing BD, after fall from E, it follows that NB will be the time along BC

after fall through the same height EB. Hence it is clear that OB plus BN

represents the time of traversing EB plus BC; and, since twice BA is the time

along AB plus BC, it remains to be shown that OB+BN>2BA.

  But  since  EB:BO=BO:BA,  it  follows  that  EB:BA=:.  Moreover  since

EB:BA=OB:BN it follows that OB:BN=:. But OB:BN=(OB:BA) (BA:BN),and therefore AB:BN=OB:BA, that is, BA is a mean proportional between

BO and BN. Consequently OB+BN>2BA.

  q. e. d.


                          Theorem XIX, Proposition XXX


A perpendicular is let fall from any point in a horizontal line; it is required to

pass through any other point in this same horizontal line a plane which shall

cut  the  perpendicular  and  along  which  a  body  will  descend  to  the

perpendicular in the shortest possible time. Such a plane will cut from the

perpendicular a portion equal to the distance of the assumed point in the

horizontal from the upper end of the perpendicular.

  Let AC be any horizontal line and B any point in it from which is dropped

the vertical line BD. Choose any point C in the horizontal line and lay off, on

the vertical, the distance BE equal to BC; join C and E. Then, I say, that of all

inclined planes that can be passed through C, cutting the perpendicular, CE is

that one along which the descent to the perpendicular is accomplished in the

shortest time. For, draw the plane CF cutting the vertical above E, and the

plane CG cutting the vertical below E; and draw IK, a parallel vertical line,

touching at C a circle described with BC as radius. Let EK be drawn parallel

to CF, and extended to meet the tangent, after cutting the circle at L. Now it

is clear that the time of fall along LE is equal to the time along CE; but the

time  along  KE  is  greater  than  along  LE;  therefore  the  time  along  KE  is

greater than along CE. But the time along KE is equal to the time along CF,

since they have the same length and the same slope; and, in like manner, it

follows that the planes CG and IE, having the same length and the same

slope, will be traversed in equal times. Also, since HE<IE, the time along HE

will be less than the time along IE. Therefore also the time along CE (equal to

the time along HE), will be shorter than the time along IE.

  q. e. d.                          Theorem XX, Proposition XXXI


If a straight line is inclined at any angle to the horizontal and if, from any

assigned point in the horizontal, a plane of quickest descent is to be drawn to

the inclined line, that plane will be the one which bisects the angle contained

between  two  lines  drawn  from  the  given  point,  one  perpendicular  to  the

horizontal line, the other perpendicular to the inclined line.

  Let CD be a line inclined at any angle to the horizontal AB; and from any

assigned point A in the horizontal draw AC perpendicular to AB, and AE

perpendicular to CD; draw FA so as to bisect the angle CAE. Then, I say, that

of all the planes which can be drawn through the point A, cutting the line CD

at any points whatsoever AF is the one of quickest descent [in quo tempore

omnium brevissimo fiat descensus]. Draw FG parallel to AE; the alternate

angles GFA and FAE will be equal; also the angle EAF is equal to the angleFAG.  Therefore  the  sides  GF  and  GA  of  the  triangle  FGA  are  equal.

Accordingly if we describe a circle about G as center, with GA as radius, this

circle will pass through the point F, and will touch the horizontal at the point

A and the inclined line at F; for GFC is a right angle, since GF and AE are

parallel. It is clear therefore that all lines drawn from A to the inclined line,

with the single exception of FA, will extend beyond the circumference of the

circle, thus requiring more time to traverse any of them than is needed for

FA.

  q. e. d.





























                                        Lemma


If two circles one lying within the other are in contact, and if any straight line

be drawn tangent to the inner circle, cutting the outer circle, and if three lines

be drawn from the point at which the circles are in contact to three points onthe tangential straight line, namely, the point of tangency on the inner circle

and the two points where the straight line extended cuts the outer circle, then

these three lines will contain equal angles at the point of contact.






























                        Theorem XXI, Proposition XXXII


If in a horizontal line any two points are chosen and if through one of these

points a line be drawn inclined towards the other, and if from this other point

a straight line is drawn to the inclined line in such a direction that it cuts off

from the inclined line a portion equal to the distance between the two chosen

points on the horizontal line, then the time of descent along the line so drawn

is less than along any other straight line drawn from the same point to the

same inclined line. Along other lines which make equal angles on opposite

sides of this line, the times of descent are the same.  Let A and B be any two points on a horizontal line: through B draw an

inclined straight line BC, and from B lay off a distance BD equal to BA; join

the points A and D. Then, I say, the time of descent along AD is less than

along any other line drawn from A to the inclined line BC. From the point A

draw AE perpendicular to BA; and from the point D draw DE perpendicular

to BD, intersecting AE at E. Since in the isosceles triangle ABD, we have the

angles BAD and BDA equal, their complements DAE and EDA are equal.

Hence if, with E as center and EA as radius, we describe a circle it will pass

through D and will touch the lines BA and BD at the points A and D. Now

since A is the end of the vertical line AE, the descent along AD will occupy

less time than along any other line drawn from the extremity A to the line BC

and extending beyond the circumference of the circle; which concludes the

first part of the proposition.  If however, we prolong the perpendicular line AE, and choose any point F

upon it, about which as center, we describe a circle of radius FA, this circle,

AGC, will cut the tangent line in the points G and C. Draw the lines AG and

AC which will according to the preceding lemma, deviate by equal angles

from the median line AD. The time of descent along either of these lines is

the same, since they start from the highest point A, and terminate on the

circumference of the circle AGC.


                          Problem XII, Proposition XXXIII


Given a limited vertical line and an inclined plane of equal height, having a

common upper terminal; it is required to find a point on the vertical line,

extended upwards, from which a body will fall and, when deflected along the

inclined plane, will traverse it in the same time-interval which is required for

fall, from rest, through the given vertical height.

  Let AB be the given limited vertical line and AC an inclined plane having

the same altitude. It is required to find on the vertical BA, extended above A,

a point from which a falling body will traverse the distance AC in the same

time which is spent in falling, from rest at A, through the given vertical line

AB. Draw the line DCE at right angles to AC, and lay off CD equal to AB;

also join the points A and D; then the angle ADC will be greater than the

angle CAD, since the side CA is greater than either AB or CD. Make the

angle DAE equal to the angle ADE, and draw EF perpendicular to AE; then

EF will cut the inclined plane, extended both ways, at F. Lay off AI and AG

each equal to CF; through G draw the horizontal line GH. Then, I say, H is

the point sought.

  For, if we agree to let the length AB represent the time of fall along the

vertical AB, then AC will likewise represent the time of descent from rest at

A, along AC; and since, in the right-angled triangle AEF, the line EC has

been drawn from the right angle at E perpendicular to the base AF, it follows

that AE will be a mean proportional between FA and AC, while CE will be a

mean proportional between AC and CF, that is between CA and AI. Now,

since AC represents the time of descent from A along AC, it follows that AE

will be the time along the entire distance AF, and EC the time along AI. But

since in the isosceles triangle AED the side EA is equal to the side ED it

follows that ED will represent the time of fall along AF, while EC is the time

of fall along AI. Therefore CD, that is AB, will represent the time of fall,from rest at A, along IF; which is the same as saying that AB is the time of

fall, from G or from H, along AC.

  e. f.






























                        Problem XIII, Proposition XXXIV


Given a limited inclined plane and a vertical line having their highest point in

common, it is required to find a point in the vertical line extended such that a

body will fall from it and then traverse the inclined plane in the same time

which is required to traverse the inclined plane alone starting from rest at the

top of said plane.

  Let  AC  and  AB  be  an  inclined  plane  and  a  vertical  line  respectively,

having a common highest point at A. It is required to find a point in the

vertical line, above A, such that a body, falling from it and afterwards having

its  motion  directed  along  AB,  will  traverse  both  the  assigned  part  of  thevertical line and the plane AB in the same time which is required for the

plane AB alone, starting from rest at A. Draw BC a horizontal line and lay off

AN equal to AC; choose the point L so that AB:BN=AL:LC, and lay off AI

equal to AL; choose the point E such that CE, laid off on the vertical AC

produced, will be a third proportional to AC and BI. Then, I say, CE is the

distance sought; so that, if the vertical line is extended above A and if a

portion AX is laid off equal to CE, then a body falling from X will traverse

both the distances, XA and AB, in the same time as that required, when

starting from A, to traverse AB alone.

  Draw XR parallel to BC and intersecting BA produced in R; next draw ED

parallel to BC and meeting BA produced in D; on AD as diameter describe a

semicircle; from B draw BF perpendicular to AD, and prolong it till it meets

the circumference of the circle; evidently FB is a mean proportional between

AB and BD, while FA is a mean proportional between DA and AB. Take BS

equal to BI and FH equal to FB. Now since AB:BD=AC:CE and since BF is

a mean proportional between AB and BD, while BI is a mean proportional

between  AC  and  CE,  it  follows  that  BA:AC=FB:BS,  and  since

BA:AC=BA:BN=FB:BS we shall have, convertendo,

BF:FS=AB:BN=AL:LC. Consequently the rectangle formed by FB and CL is

equal to the rectangle whose sides are AL and SF; moreover, this rectangle

AL.SF is the excess of the rectangle AL.FB, or AI.BF, over the rectangle

AI.BS,  or  AI.IB.  But  the  rectangle  FB.LC  is  the  excess  of  the  rectangle

AC.BF  over  the  rectangle  AL.BF;  and  moreover  the  rectangle  AC.BF  is

equal to the rectangle AB.BI since BA:AC=FB:BI; hence the excess of the

rectangle AB.BI over the rectangle AI.BF, or AI.FH, is equal to the excess of

the rectangle AI.FH over the rectangle AI.IB; therefore twice the rectangle

AI.FH  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  rectangles  AB.BI  and  AI.IB,  or
                                                                                2
2AI.FH=2AI.IB+. Add to each side, then 2AI.IB+ +==2AI.FH+AI. Again
                            22
add to each side, then AB+BF= = 2AI.FH + + = 2AI.FH + +. But =2AH.HF

+ + and hence 2AI.FH + + = 2AH.HF + +. Subtracting from each side we

have  2AI.FH+=2AH.HF+.  Since  now  FH  is  a  factor  common  to  both

rectangles, it follows that AH is equal to AI; for if AH were either greater or

smaller than AI, then the two rectangles AH.HF plus the square of HA would

be either larger or smaller than the two rectangles AI.FH plus the square of

IA, a result which is contrary to what we have just demonstrated.  If now we agree to represent the time of descent along AB by the length

AB, then the time through AC will likewise be measured by AC; and IB,

which is a mean proportional between AC and CE, will represent the time

through CE, or XA, from rest at X. Now, since AF is a mean proportional

between DA and AB, or between RB and AB, and since BF, which is equal

to FH, is a mean proportional between AB and BD, that is between AB and

AR, it follows, from a preceding proposition [Proposition XIX, corollary],

that the difference AH represents the time of descent along AB either from

rest at R or after fall from X, while the time of descent along AB, from rest at

A, is measured by the length AB. But as has just been shown, the time of fall

through XA is measured by IB, while the time of descent along AB, after fall,

through RA or through XA, is IA. Therefore the time of descent through XA

plus AB is measured by the length AB, which, of course, also measures the

time of descent, from rest at A, along AB alone.

  q. e. f.                          Problem XIV, Proposition XXXV


Given an inclined plane and a limited vertical line, it is required to find a

distance on the inclined plane which a body, starting from rest, will traverse

in the same time as that needed to traverse both the vertical and the inclined

plane.

  Let AB be the vertical line and BC the inclined plane. It is required to lay

off on BC a distance which a body, starting from rest, will traverse in a time

equal to that which is occupied by fall through the vertical AB and by descent

of  the  plane.  Draw  the  horizontal  line  AD,  which  intersects  at  E  the

prolongation of the inclined plane CB; lay off BF equal to BA, and about E

as  center,  with  EF  as  radius  describe  the  circle  FIG.  Prolong  FE  until  it

intersects  the  circumference  at  G.  Choose  a  point  H  such  that

GB:BF=BH:HF. Draw the line HI tangent to the circle at I. At B draw the

line  BK  perpendicular  to  FC,  cutting  the  line  EIL  at  L;  also  draw  LM

perpendicular to EL and cutting BC at M. Then, I say, BM is the distance

which a body, starting from rest at B, will traverse in the same time which is

required to descend from rest at A through both distances, AB and BM. Lay

off EN equal to EL; then since GB:BF=BH:HF, we shall have, permutando,

GB:BH=BF:HF,  and, dividendo,  GH:BH=BH:HF.  Consequently  the

rectangle GH.HF is equal to the square on BH; but this same rectangle is also

equal  to  the  square  on  HI;  therefore  BH  is  equal  to  HI.  Since,  in  the

quadrilateral ILBH, the sides HB and HI are equal and since the angles at B

and I are right angles, it follows that the sides BL and LI are also equal: but

EI=EF; therefore the total length LE, or NE, is equal to the sum of LB and

EF. If we subtract the common part EF, the remainder FN will be equal to

LB: but, by construction, FB=BA and, therefore, LB=AB+BN. If again we

agree to represent the time of fall through AB by the length AB, then the time

of descent along EB will be measured by EB; moreover since EN is a mean

proportional between ME and EB it will represent the time of descent along

the whole distance EM; therefore the difference of these distances, BM, will

be traversed, after fall from EB, or AB, in a time which is represented by BN.

But having already assumed the distance AB as a measure of the time of fall

through AB, the time of descent along AB and BM is measured by AB+BN.

Since EB measures the time of fall, from rest at E, along EB, the time from

rest  at  B  along  BM  will  be  the  mean  proportional  between  BE  and  BM,

namely, BL. The time therefore for the path AB+BM, starting from rest at Ais AB+BN; but the time for BM alone, starting from rest at B, is BL; and

since it has already been shown that BL = AB + BN, the proposition follows.

  Another and shorter proof is the following: Let BC be the inclined plane

and BA the vertical; at B draw a perpendicular to EC, extending it both ways;

lay off BH equal to the excess of BE over BA; make the angle HEL equal to

the angle BHE; prolong EL until it cuts BK in L; at L draw LM perpendicular

to EL and extend it till it meets BC in M; then, I say, BM is the portion of BC

sought.  For,  since  the  angle  MLE  is  a  right  angle,  BL  will  be  a  mean

proportional between MB and BE, while LE is a mean proportional between

ME and BE; lay off EN equal to LE; then NE=EL=LH, and HB=NE-BL. But

also HB=NE-(NB+BA); therefore BN+BA=BL. If now we assume the length

EB as a measure of the time of descent along EB, the time of descent, from

rest at B, along BM will be represented by BL; but, if the descent along BM

is from rest at E or at A, then the time of descent will be measured by BN;

and  AB  will  measure  the  time  along  AB.  Therefore  the  time  required  to

traverse AB and BM, namely, the sum of the distances AB and BN, is equal

to the time of descent, from rest at B, along BM alone.

  q. e. f.                                        Lemma


Let DC be drawn perpendicular to the diameter BA; from the extremity B

draw the line BED at random; draw the line FB. Then, I say, FB is a mean

proportional between DB and BE. Join the points E and F. Through B, draw

the tangent BG which will be parallel to CD. Now, since the angle DBG is

equal to the angle FDB, and since the alternate angle of GBD is equal to

EFB,  it  follows  that  the  triangles  FDB  and  FEB  are  similar  and  hence

BD:BF=FB:BE.                                        Lemma


Let AC be a line which is longer than DF, and let the ratio of AB to BC be

greater than that of DE to EF. Then, I say, AB is greater than DE. For, if AB

bears to BC a ratio greater than that of DE to EF, then DE will bear to some

length shorter than EF, the same ratio which AB bears to BC. Call this length

EG; then since AB:BC=DE:EG, it follows, componendo et convertendo, that

CA:AB=GD:DE. But since CA is greater than GD, it follows that BA is

greater than DE.                                        Lemma


Let ACIB be the quadrant of a circle; from B draw BE parallel to AC; about

any  point  in  the  line  BE  describe  a  circle  BOES,  touching  AB  at  B  and

intersecting the circumference of the quadrant at I. Join the points C and B;

draw the line CI, prolonging it to S. Then, I say, the line CI is always less

than CO. Draw the line AI touching the circle BOE. Then, if the line DI be

drawn, it will be equal to DB; but, since DB touches the quadrant, DI will

also be tangent to it and will be at right angles to AI; thus AI touches the

circle BOE at I. And since the angle AIC is greater than the angle ABC,

subtending as it does a larger arc, it follows that the angle SIN is also greater

than the angle ABC. Wherefore the arc IES is greater than the arc BO, and

the line CS, being nearer the center, is longer than CB. Consequently CO is

greater than CI, since SC:CB=OC:CI.