admitting  these  considerations,  the  right  motion  doth  go  whollyVadia  del

tutto a monte, rendered in the Latine omnino pessum eat. mounting, and that

Nature never makes use thereof, since that, even that that use, which was

from the beginning granted to it, which was of reducing the parts of integral

bodies  to  their  place,  when  they  were  separated  from  their  whole,  and

therefore constituted in a depraved disposition, is taken from it, and assigned

to the circular motion.


SALV.


This would necessarily follow, if it were concluded that the Terrestrial Globe

moveth circularly; a thing, which I pretend not to be done, but have onely

hitherto attempted, as I shall still, to examine the strength of those reasons,

which have been alledged by Philosophers to prove the immobility of the

Earth, of which this first taken from things falling perpendicularly, hath begat

the doubts, that have been mentioned; which I know not of what force they

may  have  seemed  to  Simplicius;  and  therefore  before  I  passe  to  the

examination  of  the  remaining  arguments,  it  would  be  convenient  that  he

produce what he hath to reply to the contrary.


SIMP.


As to this first, I confesse indeed that I have heard sundry pretty notions,

which I never thought upon before, and in regard they are new unto me, I

cannot have answers so ready for them, but this argument taken rom things

falling perpendicularly, I esteem it not one of the strongest proofs of the

mobility of the Earth; and I know not what may happen touching the shots of

great Guns, especially those aimed contrary to the diurnal motion.


SAGR.


The flying of the birds as much puzzleth me as the objection of the Gun-shot,

and all the other experiments above  alledged. For these birds which at their

pleasure flie forwards and backwards, and wind to and again in a thousand

fashions, and, which more importeth, lie whole hours upon the wing, these I

say  do  not  a  little  pose  me,  nor  do  I  see,  how  amongst  so  many

circumgyrations, they should not lose the motion of the Earth, and how theyshould be able to keep pace with so great a velocity as that which they so far

exceed with their flight.


SALV.


To  speak  the  truth,  your  scruple  is  not  without  reason,  and  its  possible

Copernicus  himself  could  not  find  an  answer  for  it,  that  was  to  himself

entirely satisfactory; and therefore haply past it over in silence; albeit he was,

indeed, very brief in examining the other allegations of his adversaries, I

believe  through  his  height  of  wit,  placed  on  greater  aud  sublimer

contemplations, like as Lions are not much moved at the barking of little

Dogs. We will therefore reserve the instance of birds to the last place, and for

the  present,  see  if  we  can  give  Simplicius  satisfaction  in  the  others,  by

shewing him in our wonted manner, that he himself hath their answers at

hand, though upon first thoughts he doth not discover them. And to begin

with the shots made at randome, with the self same piece, powder, and ball,

the  one  towards  the  East,  the  other  towards  the  West  (if  the  diurnal

conversion belonged to the Earth) ought to be much longer than that towards

the East.


SIMP.


I am moved so to think; because in the shot made towards the East, The

reason  why  a  Gun  should  seem  to  carry  farther  towards  the  West  than

towards the East. the ball whil’st it is out of the piece, is followed by the said

piece, the which being carried round by the Earth, runneth also with much

velocity towards the same part, whereupon the fall of the ball to the ground,

cometh to be but little distant from the piece. On the contrary in the shot

towards the West, before that the ball falleth to the ground, the piece is retired

very far towards the East, by which means the space between the ball and the

piece, that is Range, will appear longer than the other, by how much the

piece, that is the Earth, had run in the time that both the bals were in the air.


SALV.


I  could  wish,  that  we  did  know  some  way  to  make  an  experiment

corresponding to the motion of these projects, as that of the ship doth to themotion of things perpendicularly falling from on high; and I am thinking how

it may be done.


SAGR.


I believe, that it would be a very opposite proof, to take an open Chariot, The

experiment of a running chariot to find out the difference of Ranges. and to

accomodate therein aBalestrone da bolzoni. Stock-bow at half elevation, to

the end the flight may prove the greatest that my be, and whil’st the horses

shall run, to shoot first towards the part whither you drive, and then another

backwards towards the contrary part, causing some one to mark diligently

where the Chariot was in that moment f time when the shaft came to  the

ground, as well in the one shot as in the other: for thus you may see exactly

how much one shaft flew farther than the other.


SIMP.


In my thoughts this experiment is very proper: and I do not doubt but that the

flight, that is, the space between the shaft and the place where the chariot was

at the shafts fall, will be less by much when one shooteth towards the chariots

course, than when one shooteth the contrary way. For an example, let the

flight of it self be three hundred yards, and the course of the chariot in the

time whilst the shaft stayeth in the air, an hundred yards, therefore shooting

towards the course, of the three hundred yards of the flight, the chariot will

have gone one hundred; so then at the shafts coming to the ground, the space

between it and the chariot, shall be but two hundred yards onely; but on the

contrary, in the other shoot, the chariot running contrary to the shaft, when

the shaft shall have passed its three hundred yards, and the chariot its other

hundred the contrary way, the distance interposing shall be found to be four

hundred yards.


SALV.


Is there any way to shoot so that these flights may be equal?


SIMP.


I know no other way, unless by making the chariot to stand still.SALV.


This we know; but I mean when the chariot runneth in full carreer.


SIMP.


In that case you are to draw the Bow higher in shooting forwards, and to

slack it in shooting the contrary way.


SALV.


Then you see that there is one way more. But how much is the bow to be

drawn, and how much slackened?


SIMP.


In our case, where we have supposed that the bow carried three hundred

yards, it would be requisite to draw it so, as that it might carry four hundred,

and in the other to slacken it so, as that it might carry no more than two

hundred. For so each of the flights would be but three hundred in relation to

the chariot, the which, with its course of an hundred yards which it substracts

from the shoot of four hundred, and addeth to that of two hundred, would

reduce them both to three hundred.


SALV.


But what effect hath the greater or less intensness of the bow upon the shaft?


SIMP.


The stiffer bow carrieth it with greater velocity, and the weaker with less; and

the same shaft flieth so much farther at one time than another, with how

much greater velocity it goeth out of the tiller at one time, than another.


SALV.


So that to make the shaft shot either way, to flie at equal distance from the

running  chariot,  it  is  requisite,  that  if  in  the  first  shoot  of  the  precedent

example, it goeth out of the tiller with v. g. four degrees of velocity, that thenin the other shoot it depart  but with two onely: but if the same bow be used,

it always receiveth thence three degrees.


SIMP.


It doth so; and for this reason, shooting with the same bow in the chariots

course, the shoots cannot be equal.


SALV.


I  had  forgot  to  ask,  with  what  velocity  it  is  supposed  in  this  particular

experiment, that the chariot runneth.


SIMP.


The velocity of the chariot must be supposed to be one degree in comparison

to that of the bow, which is three,


SALV.


Very right, for so computation gives it. But tell me, when the chariot moveth,

doth not all things in the same move with the same velocity?


SIMP.


Yes doubtless.


SALV.


Then so doth the shaft also, and the bow, and the string, upon which the shaft

is nock’t.


SIMP.


They do so.


SALV.Why then, in discharging the shaft towards the course of the chariot, the bow

impresseth its three degrees of velocity on a shaft that had one degree of

velocity before, by means of the chariot which transported it so fast towards

that part; so that in its going off it hath four degrees of velocity. On the

contrary, in the other shoot, the same bow conferreth its same three degrees

of velocity on a shaft that moveth the contrary way, with one degree; so that

in  its  departing  from  the  bow-string,  it  hath  no  more  left  but  onely  two

degrees of velocity. But you your self have already said, that the way to make

the shoots equal, is to cause that the shaft be let flie the first time with four

degrees  of  velocity,  and  the  second  time  with  two.  Therefore  without

changing the bow, the very course of the chariot is that which adjusteth the

flights, The solution of the argument taken from great-Guns shot towards the

East & West. and the experiment doth so represent them to any one who is

not either wilfully or naturally incapable of reason. Now apply this discourse

to Gunnery, and you shall find, that whether the Earth move or stand still, the

shots made with the same force, will always curry equal ranges, to what part

soever aimed. The error of Aristotle, Ptolomey, Tycho, your self, and all the

rest,  is  grounded  upon  that  fixed  and  strong  persuasion,  that  the  Earth

standeth still, which you have not judgment nor power to depose, no not

when you have a desire to argue of that which would ensue, presupposing the

Earth to move. And thus, in the other argument, not considering that whil’st

the stone is upon the Tower, it doth, as to moving or not moving, the same

that the Terrestrial Globe doth, because you have concluded with your self,

that the Earth stands still, you always discourse touching the fall of the stone,

as if it were to depart from rest: whereas it behooveth to say, that if the Earth

standeth still, the stone departeth from rest, and descendeth perpendicularly;

but if the Earth do move, the stone  likewise moveth with like velocity, nor

doth  it  depart  from  rest,  but  from  a  motion  equal  to  that  of  the  Earth,

wherewith it intermixeth the supervenient motion of descent, and of those

two composeth a third which is transversal or side-ways.


SIMP.


But for Gods sake, if it move transversly, how is it that I behold it to move

directly and perpendicularly? This is no better than the denial of manifest

sense; and if we may not believe sense, at what other door shall we enter into

disquisitions of Philosophy?SALV.


In respect to the Earth, to the Tower, and to our selves, which all as one piece

move with the diurnal motion together with the stone, the diurnal motion is as

if it never had been, and becometh insensible, imperceptible, and without any

action at all; and the onely motion which we can perceive, is that of which we

partake not, that is the descent gliding along the side of the Tower: You are

not  the  first  that  hath  felt  great  repugnance  in  apprehending  this  non-

operating of motion upon things to which it is common.


SAGR.


Now I do remember a certain conceipt, A notable case of Sagredus, to shew

the  non-operating  of  common  motion.  that  came  one  day  into  my  fancy,

whilst  I  sailed  in  my  voyage  to  Aleppo,  whither  I  went  Consul  for  our

Countrey, and possibly it may be of some use, for explaining this nullity of

operation of common motion, and being as if it never were to all the partakers

thereof. And if it stand with the good liking of Simplicius, I will reason with

him upon that which then I thought of by my self alone.


SIMP.


The novelty of the things which I hear, makes me not so much a patient, as a

greedy and curious auditor: therefore go on.


SAGR.


If the neb of a writing pen, that I carried along with me in the ship, through

all my navigation from Venice toAlessandretta. Scanderon, had had a facultie

of leaving visible marks of its whole voyage, what signs, what marks, what

lines would it have left?


SIMP.


It would have left a line distended from Venice thither, not perfectly streight,

or to say better, distended in a perfect arch of a circle, but in some places

more, in some less curved, according as the vessel had gone more or less

fluctuating; but this its inflecting in some places a fathom or two to the righthand or to the left, upwards or downwards, in a length of many hundred

miles, would have brought but little alteration to the intire tract of the line, so

that it would have been hardly sensible; and without any considerable error,

might have been called the part of a perfect arch.


SAGR.


So that the true and most exact motion of the neb of my pen would have also

been an arch of a perfect circle, if the vessels motion, the fluctuation of the

billows ceasing, had been  calm and tranquill. And if I had continually held

that per in my hand, and had onely moved it sometimes an inch or two this

way or that way, what alteration should I have made in that its principal, and

very long tract or stroke?


SIMP.


Less than that which the declining in several places from absolute rectitude,

but the quantity of a flea’s eye makes in a right line of a thousand yards long.


SAGR.


If a Painter, then, at our launching from the Port, had began to design upon a

paper with that pen, and continued his work till he came to Scanderon, he

would have been able to have taken by its motion a perfect draught of all

those  figures  perfectly  interwoven  and  shadowed  on  several  sides  with

countreys, buildings, living creatures, and other things; albeit all the true,

real, and essential motion traced out by the neb of that pen, would have been

no other than a very long, but simple line: and as to the proper operation of

the Painter, he would have delineated the same to an hair, if the ship had

stood  still.  That  therefore  of  the  huge  long  motion  of  the  pen  there  doth

remain no other marks, than those tracks drawn upon the paper, the reason

thereof is because the grand motion from Venice to Scanderon, was common

to the paper, the pen, and all that which was in the ship: but the petty motions

forwards and backwards, to the right, to the left, communicated by the fingers

of the Painter unto the pen, and not to the paper, as being peculiar thereunto,

might leave marks of it self upon the paper, which did not move with that

motion. Thus it is likewise true, that the Earth moving, the motion of the

stone in descending downwards, was really a long tract of many hundredsand thousands of yards, and if it could have been able to have delineated in a

calm air, or other superficies, the track of its course, it would have left behind

an huge long transverse line. But that part of all this motion which is common

to the stone, the Tower, and our selves, is imperceptible to us, and as if it had

never been, and that part onely remaineth observable, of which neither the

Tower nor we are partakers, which is in fine, that wherewith the stone falling

measureth the Tower.


SALV.


A most witty conceipt to clear up this point, which was not a little difficult to

many capacities. Now if Simplicius will make no farther reply, we may pass

to the other experiments, the unfolding of which will receive no small facility

from the things already declared.


SIMP.


I  have  nothing  more  to  say:  and  I  was  well-nigh  transported  with  that

delineation, and with thinking how those strokes drawn so many ways, hither,

thither,  upwards,  downwards,  forwards,  backwards,  and  interwoven  with

thousands of turnings, are not essentially or really other, than small pieces of

one sole line  drawn all one way, and the same without any other alteration

save the declining the direct rectitude, sometimes a very insensible matter

towards one side or another, and the pens moving its neb one while softer,

another  while  slower,  but  with  very  small  inequality.  And  I  think  that  it

would in the same manner write a letter, and that those frollike penmen, who

to shew their command of hand, without taking their pen from the paper in

one sole stroke, with infinite turnings draw a pleasant knot, if they were in a

boat that did tide it along swiftly they would convert the whole motion of the

pen, which in reality is but one sole line, drawn all towards one and the same

part, and very little curved, or declining from perfect rectitude, into a knot or

flourish.  And  I  am  much  pleased  that  Sagredus  hath  helped  me  to  this

conceit: therefore let us go on, for the hope of meeting with more of them,

will make me the stricter in my attention.


SAGR.If  you  have  a  curiosity  to  hear  such  like  subtilties,  Subtilties  sufficiently

insipid, ironically, spoken and taken from a certain Encyclopaedia. which

occurr not thus to every one, you will find no want of them, especially in this

particular of Navigation; and do you not think that a witty conceit which I

met with likewise in the same voyage, when I observed that the mast of the

ship, without either breaking or bending, had made a greater voyage with its

round-top, that is with its top-gallant, than with its foot; for the round top

being  more  distant  from  the  centre  of  the  Earth  than  the  foot  is,  it  had

described the arch of a circle bigger than the circle by which the foot had

passed.


SIMP.


And thus when a man walketh he goeth farther with his head than with his

feet.


SAGR.


You have found out the matter your self by help of your own mother-vvit:

But let us not interrupt Salviatus.


SALV.


It pleaseth me to see Simplicius hovv he sootheth up himself in this conceit,

if happly it be his ovvn, and that he hath not borrovved it from a certain little

pamphlet of conclusions, vvhere there are a great many more such fancies no

less pleasant & vvitty. It follovveth that vve speak of the peice of Ordinance

mounted  perpendicular  to  the  Horizon,  An  instance  against  the  deurnal

motion  of  the  earth,  taken  from  the  shot  of  a  Peece  of  Ordinance

perpendicularly. that is, of a shot tovvards our vertical point, and to conclude,

of the return of the ball by the same line unto the same peice, though that in

the long time vvhich it is separated from the peice, the earth hath transported

it many miles tovvards the East; novv it seemeth, that the ball ought to fall a

like distance from the peice tovvards the West; the vvhich doth not happen:

therefore the peice vvithout having been moved did stay expecting the same.

The ansvver is the same vvith that of the stone falling from the Tovver; The

answer  to  the  objection,  shewing  the  equivoke.  and  all  the  fallacy,  and

equivocation consisteth in supposing still for true, that vvhich is in question;for the Opponent hath it still fixed in his conceit that the ball departs from its

rest, being discharged by the fire  from the piece; and the departing from the

state of rest, cannot be, unlesse the immobility of the Terrestrial Globe be

presupposed, which is the conclusion of that was in dispute; Therefore, I

reply, that those who make the Earth moveable, answer, that the piece, and

the ball that is in it, partake of the same motion with the Earth; nay that they

have this together with her from nature; and that therefore the ball departs in

no other manner from its quiescence, but conjoyned with its motion about the

centre,  the  which  by  its  projection  upwards,  is  neither  taken  away,  nor

hindered; and in this manner following, the universal motion of the Earth

towards the East, it alwayes keepeth perpendicular over the said piece, as

well in its rise as in its return. And the same you see to ensue, in making the

experiment  in  a  ship  with  a  bullet  shot  upwards  perpendicularly  with  a

Crosse-bow, which returneth to the same place whether the ship doth move,

or stand still.


SAGR.


This satisfieth very well to all; Another answer to the same objection. but

because that I have seen that Simplicius taketh pleasure with certain subtilties

to puzzle his companions, I will demand of him whether, supposing for this

time  that  the  Earth  standeth  still,  and  the  piece  erected  upon  it

perpendicularly, directed to our Zenith, he do at all question that to be the

true perpendicular shot, and that the ball in departing, and in its return is to go

by the same right line, still supposing all external and accidental impediments

to be removed?


SIMP.


I understand that the matter ought to succeed exactly in that manner.


SAGR.


But if the piece were placed, not prependicularly, but inclining towards some

place, what would the motion of the ball be? Would it go haply, as in the

other shot, by the perpendicular line, and return again by the same?


SIMP.It would not so do; but issuing out of the piece, it would pursue its motion by

a  right  line  which  prolongeth  the  erect  perpendicularity  of  the  concave

cylinder of the piece, unlesse so far as its own vveight vvould make it decline

from that erection towards the Earth.


SAGR.


So that the mounture of the cylinder is the regulator of the motion of the ball,

nor doth it, or would it move out of that line, if its own gravity did not make

it decline downwards. And therefore placing the cylinder perpendicularly,

Projects continue their motion by the right line that followeth the direction of

the motion, made together with the proficient, whil’st they were conjoin’d

therewith. and shooting the ball upwards, it returneth by the same right line

downvvards;  because  the  motion  of  the  ball  dependent  on  its  gravity  is

downward, by the same perpendicular. The journey therefore of the ball out

of the piece, continueth or prolongeth the rectitude or perpendicularity of that

small part of the said journey, vvhich it made vvithin the said piece; is it not

so?


SIMP.


So it is, in my opinion.


SAGR.


Now imagine the cylinder to be erected, and that the Earth doth revolve about

vvith a diurnal motion, carrying the piece along vvith it, tell me vvhat shall

be the motion of the ball vvithin the cylinder, having given fire?


SIMP.


It shall be a streight and perpendicular motion, the cylinder being erected

perpendicularly.


SAGR.


Consider vvell vvhat you say: for I believe that it vvill not be perpendicular.

It vvould indeed be perpendicular, if the Earth stood still, for so the ballvvould  have  no  other  motion  but  that  proceeding  from  the  fire.  The

revolution  of  the  Earth  supposed,  the  ball  in  the  piece  erected

perpendicularly, doth not move by a perpendicular, but an inclined line. But

in case the Earth turns round, the ball that is in the piece, hath likewise a

diurnal motion, so that there being added to the same the impulse of the fire,

it moveth from the breech of the piece to the muzzle with two motions, from

the composition whereof it cometh to passe that the motion made by the

centre  of  the  balls  gravity  is  an  inclining  line.  And  for  your  clearer

understanding the same, let the piece AC [in Fig. 2. ] be erected, and in it the

ball B; it is manifest, that the piece standing immoveable, and fire being

given to it, the ball will make its way out by the mouth A, and with its centre,

passing thorow the the piece, shall have described the perpendicular line BA,

and it shall pursue that rectitude when it is out of the piece, moving toward

the Zenith. But in case the Earth should move round, and consequently carry

the piece along with it, in the time that the ball driven out of the piece shall

move along the cylinder, the piece being carried by the Earth, shall passe into

the situation DE, and the ball B, in going off, would be at the cornish D, and

the motion of the bals centre, would have been according to the line BD, no

longer perpendicular, but inclining towards the East; and the ball (as hath

been concluded) being to continue its motion through the air, according to the

direction of the motion made in the piece, the said motion shall continue on

according  to  the  inclination  of  the  line  BD,  and  so  shall  no  longer  be

perpendicular, but inclined towards the East, to which part the piece doth also

move; whereupon the ball may follow the motion of the Earth, and of the

piece. Now Simplicius, you see it demonstrated, that the Range which you

took to be perpendicular, is not so.


SIMP.


I do not very well understand this business; do you, Salviatus?


SALV.


I apprehend it in part; but I have a certain kind of scruple, which I wish I

knew how to express. It seems to me, that according to what hath been said,

if the Piece be erected perpendicular, and the Earth do move, the ball would

not be to fall, as Aristotle and Tycho will have it, far from the Piece towards

the  West, nor as you would have it, upon the Piece, but rather far distanttowards  the  East.  For  according  to  your  explanation,  it  would  have  two

motions, the which would with one consent carry it thitherward, to wit, the

common motion of the Earth, which carrieth the Piece and the ball from CA

towards  ED;  and  the  fire  which  carrieth  it  by  the  inclined  line  BD,  both

motions towards the East, and therefore they are superiour to the motion of

the Earth.


SAGR.


Not so, Sir. The motion which carrieth the ball towards the East, cometh all

from the Earth, and the fire hath no part at all therein: the motion which

mounteth  the  ball  upwards,  is  wholly  of  fire,  wherewith  the  Earth  hath

nothing to do. And that it is so, if you give not fire, the ball will never go out

of the Piece, nor yet rise upwards a hairs breadth; as also if you make the

Earth immoveable, and give fire, the ball without any inclination shall go

perpendicularly  upwards.  The  ball  therefore  having  two  motions,  one

upwards, and the other in gyration, of both which the transverse line BD is

compounded,  the  impulse  upward  is  wholly  of  fire,  the  circular  cometh

wholly from the Earth, and is equal to the Earths motion: and being equal to

it, the ball maintaineth it self all the way directly over the mouth of the Piece,

and at last falleth back into the same: and because it always observeth the

erection of the Piece, it appeareth also continually over the head of him that is

near  the  Piece,  and  therefore  it  appeareth  to  mount  exactly  perpendicular

towards our Zenith, or vertical point.


SIMP.


I have yet one doubt more remaining, and it is, that in regard the motion of

the ball is very swift in the Piece, it seems not possible, that in that moment

of time the transposition of the Piece from CA to AD should confer such an

inclination upon the transverse line CD, that by means thereof, the ball when

it cometh afterwards into the air should be able to follow the course of the

Earth.


SAGR.


You err upon many accounts; and first, the inclination of the transverse line

CD, I believe it is much greater than you take it to be, for I verily think thatthe velocity of the Earths motion, not onely under the Equinoctial, but in our

paralel also, is greater than that of the ball whilst it moveth in the Piece; so

that the interval CE would be absolutely much bigger than the whole length

of the Piece, and the inclination of the transverse line consequently bigger

than half a right angle: but be the velocity of the Earth more, or be it less, in

comparison of the velocity of the fire, this imports nothing; for if the velocity

of the Earth be small, and consequently the inclination of the transverse line

be little also; there is then also need but of little inclination to make the  ball

suspend it self in its range directly over the Piece. And in a word, if you do

but attentively consider, you will comprehend, that the motion of the Earth in

transferring  the  Piece  along  with  it  from  CA  to  ED,  conferreth  upon  the

transverse line CD, so much of little or great inclination, as is required to

adjust the range to its perpendicularity. But you err, secondly, in that you

referr the faculty of carrying the ball along with the Earth to the impulse of

the fire, and you run into the same error, into which Salviatus, but even now

seemed to have fallen; for the faculty of following the motion of the Earth, is

the primary and perpetual motion, indelibly and inseparably imparted to the

said ball, as to a thing terrestrial, and that of its own nature doth and ever

shall possess the same.


SALV.


Let us yield, The manner how Fowlers shoot birds flying. Simplicius, for the

business  is  just  as  he  saith.  And  now  from  this  discourse  let  us  come  to

understand the reason of a Venatorian Problem, of those Fowlers who with

their guns shoot a bird flying; and because I did imagine, that in regard the

bird flieth a great pace, therefore they should aim their shot far from the bird,

anticipating its flight for a certain space, and more or less according to its

velocity and the distance of the bird, that so the bullet hasting directly to the

mark aimed at, it might come to arrive at the self same time in the same point

with  its  motion,  and  the  bird  with  its  flight,  and  by  that  means  one  to

encounter the other: and asking one of them, if their practise was not so to do;

He told me, no; but that the slight was very easie and certain, and that they

took aim just in the same manner as if they had shot at a bird that did sit still;

that is, they made the flying bird their mark, and by moving their fowling-

piece they followed her, keeping their aim still full upon her, till such time as

they let fly, and in this manner shot her as they did others sitting still. It isnecessary therefore that that motion, though slow, which the fowling-piece

maketh in turning and following after the flight of the bird do communicate it

self to the bullet also, and that it be joyned with that of the fire; so that the

ball hath from the fire the motion directly upwards, and from the concave

Cylinder of the barrel the declination according to the flight of the Bird, just

as was said before of the shot of a Canon; where the ball receiveth from the

fire a virtue of mounting upwards towards the Zenith, and from the motion of

the  Earth  its  winding  towards  the  East,  and  of  both  maketh  a  compound

motion  that  followeth  the  course  of  the  Earth,  and  that  to  the  beholder

seemeth onely to go directly upwards, and return again downwards by the

same line. The holding therefore of the gun continually directed towards the

mark, maketh the shoot hit right, and that you may keep your gun directed to

the mark, in case the mark stands still, you must also hold  your gun still; and

if the mark shall move, the gun must be kept upon the mark by moving. The

answer to the objection tak n from the shots of great Guns ma e towards the

North and South. And upon this dependeth the proper answer to the other

argument taken from the shot of a Canon, at the mark placed towards the

South or North: wherein is alledged, that if the Earth should move, the shots

would all range Westward of the mark, because that in the time whilst the

ball, being forc’d out of the Piece, goeth through the air to the mark, the said

mark being carried toward the East, would leave the ball to the Westward. I

answer therefore, demanding whether if the Canon be aimed true at the mark,

and permitted so to continue, it will constantly hit the said mark, whether the

Earth move or stand still? It must be replied, that the aim altereth not at all,

for if the mark doth stand still, the Piece also doth stand still, and if it, being

transported by the Earths motion, doth move, the Piece doth also move at the

same rate, and, the aim maintained, the shot proveth always true, as by what

hath been said above, is manifest.


SAGR.


Stay a little, I entreat you, Salviatus, till I have propounded a certain conceit

touching these shooters of birds flying, whose proceeding I believe to be the

same which you relate, and believe the effect of hitting the bird doth likewise

follow:  but  yet  I  cannot  think  that  act  altogether  conformable  to  this  of

shooting in great Guns, which ought to hit as well when the piece and mark

moveth,  as  when  they  both  stand  still;  and  these,  in  my  opinion,  are  theparticulars in which they disagree. In shooting with a great Gun both it and

the mark move with equal velocity, being both transported by the motion of

the  Terrestrial  Globe:  and  albeit  sometimes  the  piece  being  planted  more

towards the Pole, than the mark, and consequently its motion being somewhat

flower than the motion of the mark, as being made in a lesser circle, such a

difference is insensible, at that little distance of the piece from the mark: but

in the shot of the Fowler the motion of the Fowling-piece wherewith it goeth

following the bird, is very slow in comparison of the flight of the said bird;

whence me thinks it should follow, that that small motion which the turning

of the Birding-piece conferreth on the bullet that is within it, cannot, when it

is once gone forth of it, multiply it self in the air, untill it come to equal the

velocity of the birds flight, so as that the said bullet should always keep direct

upon it: nay, me thinketh the bird would anticipate it and leave it behind. Let

me add, that in this act, the air through which the bullet is to pass, partaketh

not of the motion of the bird: whereas in the case of the Canon, both it, the

mark, and the intermediate air, do equally partake of the common diurnal

motion. So that the true cause of the Marks-man his hitting the mark, as it

should seem, moreover and besides the  following the birds flight with the

piece, is his somewhat anticipating it, taking his aim before it; as also his

shooting (as I believe) not with one bullet, but with many small balls (called

shot)  the  which  scattering  in  the  air  possess  a  great  space;  and  also  the

extreme velocity wherewith these shot, being discharged from the Gun, go

towards the bird.


SALV.


See  how  far  the  winged  wit  of  Sagredus  anticipateth,  and  out-goeth  the

dulness of mine; which perhaps would have light upon these disparities, The

answer to the Argument taken from the shots at point blanck towards the East

& West. but not without long studie. Now turning to the matter in hand, there

do remain to be considered by us the shots at point blank, towards the East

and towards the West; the first of which, if the Earth did move, would always

happen to be too high above the mark, and the second too low; forasmuch as

the  parts  of  the  Earth  Eastward,  by  reason  of  the  diurnal  motion,  do

continually descend beneath the tangent paralel to the Horizon, whereupon

the  Eastern  stars  to  us  appear  to  ascend;  and  on  the  contrary,  the  parts

Westward do more and more ascend, whereupon the Western stars do in ourseeming descend: and therefore the ranges which are leveled according to the

said tangent at the Oriental mark, (which whilst the ball passeth along by the

tangent descendeth) should prove too high, and the Occidental too low by

means of the elevation of the mark, whilst the ball passeth along the tangent.

The  answer  is  like  to  the  rest:  for  as  the  Eastern  mark  goeth  continually

descending, by reason of the Earths motion, under a tangent that continueth

immoveable;  so  likewise  the  piece  for  the  same  reason  goeth  continually

inclining, and with its mounture pursuing the said mark: by which means the

shot proveth true.


But  here  I  think  it  a  convenient  opportunity  to  give  notice  of  certain

concessions,  The  followers  of  Copernicus  too  freely  admit  certain

propositions for true, which are very doubtfull. which are granted perhaps

over liberally by the followers of Copernicus unto their Adversaries: I mean

of yielding to them certain experiments for sure and certain, which yet the

Adversaries  themselves  had  never  made  tryal  of:  as  for  example,  that  of

things falling from the round-top of a ship whilst it is in motion, and many

others; amongst which I verily believe, that this of experimenting whether the

shot made by a Canon towards the East proveth too high, and the Western

shot too low, is one: and because I believe that they have never made tryal

thereof, I desire that they would tell me what difference they think ought to

happen between the said shots, supposing the Earth moveable, or supposing it

moveable; and let Simplicius for this time answer for them.


SIMP.


I  will  not  undertake  to  answer  so  confidently  as  another  more  intelligent

perhaps might do; but shall speak what thus upon the sudden I think they

would reply; which is in effect the same  with that which hath been said

already, namely, that in case the Earth should move, the shots made Eastward

would prove too high, &c. the ball, as it is probable, being to move along the

tangent.


SALV.


But if I should say, that so it falleth out upon triall, how would you censure

me?SIMP.


It is necessary to proceed to experiments for the proving of it.


SALV.


But do you think, that there is to be found a Gunner so skilful, as to hit the

mark at every shoot, in a distance of v. g. five hundred paces?


SIMP.


No Sir; nay I believe that there is no one, how good a marks-man soever that

would promise to come within a pace of the mark,


SALV.


How can we then, with shots so uncertain, assure our selves of that which is

in dispute?


SIMP.


We  may  be  assured  thereof  two  wayes;  one,  by  making  many  shots;  the

other,  because  in  respect  of  the  great  velocity  of  the  Earths  motion,  the

deviation from the mark would in my opinion be very great.


SALV.


Very great, that is more than one pace; in regard that the varying so much,

yea and more, is granted to happen ordinarily even in the Earths mobility.


SIMP.


I verily believe the variation from the mark would be more than so.


SALV.


Now I desire that for our satisfaction we do make thus in grosse a slight

calculation, A Computation how much the ranges of great shot ought to vary

from  the  marke,  the  Earths  motion  being  granted.  if  you  consent  thereto,which will stand us in stead likewise (if the computation succeed as I expect)

for a warning how we do in other occurrences suffer our selves, as the saying

is, to be taken with the enemies shouts, and surrender up our belief to what

ever first presents it self to our fancy. And now to give all advantages to the

Peripateticks  and  Tychonicks,  let  us  suppose  our  selves  to  be  under  the

Equinoctial, there to shoot a piece of Ordinance point blank Eastwards at a

mark five hundred paces off. First, let us see thus (as I said) in a level, what

time the shot after it is gone out of the Piece taketh to arrive at the mark;

which we know to be very little, and is certainly no more than that wherein a

travailer walketh two steps, which also is less than the second of a minute of

an hour; for supposing that the travailer walketh three miles in an hour, which

are nine thousand paces, being that an hour containes three thousand, six

hundred second minutes, the travailer walketh two steps and an half in a

second, a second therefore is more than the time of the balls motion. And for

that the diurnal revolution is twenty four hours, the Western horizon riseth

fifteen degrees in an hour, that  is, fifteen first minutes of a degree, in one

first minute of an hour; that is, fifteen seconds of a degree, in one second of

an hour; and because one second is the time of the shot, therefore in this time

the Western horizon riseth fifteen seconds of a degree, and so much likewise

the mark; and therefore fifteen seconds of that circle, whose semidiameter is

five hundred paces (for so much the distance of the mark from the Piece was

supposed.) Now let us look in the table of Arches and Chords (see here is

Copernicus  his  book)  what  part  is  the  chord  of  fifteen  seconds  of  the

semidiameter,  that  is,  five  hundred  paces.  Here  you  see  the  chord  (or

subtense) of a first minute to be less than thirty of those parts, of which the

semidiameter is an hundred thousand. Therefore the chord of a second minute

shall be less then half of one of those parts, that is less than one of those

parts, of which the semidiameter is two hundred thousand; and therefore the

chord of fifteen conds shall be less than fifteen of those same two hundred

thousand  parts;  but  that  which  is  less  thanThat  is,  in  plainer  termes  the

fraction  15/200000,  is  more  than  the  fraction  4/50000,  for  dividing  the

denominators by their ominators, and the first produceth 13333 1/3, the other

but  12500.  fifteen  parts  of  two  hundred  thousand,  is  also  more  than  that

which is four centesmes of five hundred; therefore the ascent of the mark in

the time of the balls motion is lesse than four centesmes, that is, than one

twenty fifth part of a pace; it shall be thereforeIt shall be neer 2 2/5 inches,

accounting the pace to be Geometrical, containing 5 foot. about two inches:And so much consequently shall be the variation of each Western shot, the

Earth being supposed to have a diurnal motion. Now if I shall tell you, that

this variation (I mean of falling two inches short of what they would do in

case the Earth did not move) upon triall doth happen in all shots, how will

you convince me Simplicius, shewing me by an experiment that it is not so?

Do you not see that it is impossible to confute me, unless you first find out a

way to shoot at a mark with so much exactnesse, as never to misse an hairs

bredth? For whilst the ranges of great shot consist of different numbers of

paces, as de facto they do, I will affirm that in each of those variations there

is contained that of two inches caused by the motion of the Earth.


SAGR.


Pardon  me,  It  is  demonstrated  with  great  subtilty,  that  the  Earths  motion

supposed, Canon shot ought not to vary more than in rest. Salviatus, you are

too liberal. For I would tell the Peripateticks, that though every shot should

hit  the  very  centre  of  the  mark,  that  should  not  in  the  least  disprove  the

motion of the Earth. For the Gunners are so constantly imployed in levelling

the sight and gun to the mark, as that they can hit the same, notwithstanding

the motion of the Earth. And I say, that if the Earth should stand still, the

shots would not prove true; but the Occidental would be too low, and the

Oriental too high: now let Simplicius disprove me if he can.


SALV.This is a subtilty worthy of Sagredus: But whether this variation be to be

observed in the motion, or in the rest of the Earth, it must needs be very

small, it must needs be swallowed up  in those very great ones which sundry

accidents continually produce. It is requisite to be very cautious in admitting

experim nts for true, to those who never tried them. And all this hath been

spoken and granted on good grounds to Simplicius, and only with n intent to

advertise  him  how  much  it  importeth  to  be  cautious  in  granting  many

experiments for true to those who never had tried them, but only eagerly

alledged them just as they ought to be for the serving their purpose: This is

spoken, I say, by way of surplussage and Corollary to Simplicius, for the real

truth is, Experiments and arguments against the Earths motion seem so far

concluding, as they lie hid under equivokes. that as concerning these shots,

the same ought exactly to befall aswell in the motion as in the rest of the

Terrestrial Globe; as likewise it will happen in all the other experiments that

either  have  been  or  can  be  produced,  which  have  at  first  blush  so  much

semblance of truth, as the antiquated opinion of the Earths motion hath of

equivocation.


SAGR.


As for my part I am fully satisfied, and very well understand that who so

shall imprint in his fancy this general community of the diurnal conversion

amongst all things Terrestrial, to all which it naturally agreeth, aswell as in

the old conceit of its rest about the centre, shall doubtlesse discern the fallacy

and equivoke which made the arguments produced seem eoncluding. There

yet remains in me some haesitancy (as I have hinted before) touching the

flight of birds; the which having as it were an animate faculty of moving at

their pleasure with a thousand motions, and to stay long in the Air separated

from the Earth, and therein with most irregular windings to go fluttering to

and again, I cannot conceive how amongst so great a confusion of motions,

they should be able to retain the first commune motion; and in what manner,

having once made any stay behind, they can get it up again, and overtake the

same with flying, and keep pace with the Towers and trees which hurry with

so precipitant a course towards the East; I say so precipitant, for in the great

circle of the Globe it is little lesse than a thousand miles an hour, whereof the

flight of the swallow I believe makes not fifty.SALV.


If the birds were to keep pace with the course of the trees by help of their

wings, they would of necessity flie very fast; and if they were deprived of the

universal conversion, they would lag as far behind; and their flight would

seem as furious towards the West, and to him that could discern the same, it

would much exceed the flight of an arrow; but I think we could not be able to

perceive it, no more than we see a Canon bullet, whil’st driven by the fury of

the fire, it flieth through the Air: But the truth is that the proper motion of

birds, I mean of their flight, hath nothing to do with the universal motion, to

which it is neither an help, nor an hinderance; and that which maintaineth the

said motion unaltered in the birds, is the Air it self, thorough which they flie,

which naturally follovving the Vertigo of the  Earth, like as it carrieth the

clouds along with it, so it transporteth birds and every thing else which is

pendent in the same; in so much that as to the businesse of keeping pace vvith

the Earth, the birds need take no care thereof, but for that work might sleep

perpetually.


SAGR.


That the Air can carry the clouds along with it, as being matters easie for

their lightnesse to be moved and deprived of all other contrary inclination,

yea more, as being matters that partake also of the conditions and properties

of the Earth; I comprehend without any difficulty; but that birds, which as

having  life,  may  move  with  a  motion  quite  contrary  to  the  diurnal,  once

having surceased the said motion, the Air should restore them to it, seems to

me a little strange, and the rather for that they are solid and weighty bodies;

and withal, we see; as hath been said, stones and other grave bodies to lie

unmoved against the impetus of the air; and when they suffer themselves to

be overcome thereby, they never acquire so much velocity as the wind which

carrieth them.


SALV.


We ascribe not so little force, Sagredus, to the moved Air, which is able to

move and bear before it ships full fraught, to tear up trees by the roots, and

overthrow Towers when it moveth swiftly; and yet we cannot say that themotion of the Air in these violent operations is neer so violent, as that of the

diurnal revolution.


SIMP.


You see then that the moved Air may also cotinue the motion of projects,

according to the Doctrine of Aristotle; and it seemed to me very strange that

he should have erred in this particular.


SALV.


It may without doubt, in case it could continue it self, but lik as when the

wind ceasing neither ships go on, nor trees are blown down, so the motion in

the Air not continuing after the stone is gone out of the hand, and the Air

ceasing to move, it followeth that it must be something else besides the Air

that maketh the projects to move.


SIMP.


But how upon the winds being laid, doth the ship cease to move? Nay you

may  see  that  when  the  wind  is  down,  and  the  sails  furl’d,  the  vessel

continueth to run whole miles.


SALV.


But this maketh against your self Simplicius, for that the wind being laid that

filling the sails drove on the ship, yet neverthelesse doth it without help of the

medium continue its course.


SIMP.


It might be said that the water was the medium which carried forward the

ship, and maintain’d it in motion.


SALV.


It might indeed be so affirmed, if you would speak quite contrary to truth; for

the truth is, that the water, by reason  of its great resistance to the division

made by the hull of the ship, doth with great noise resist the same; nor doth itpermit  it  of  a  great  while  to  acquire  that  velocity  which  the  wind  would

confer upon it, were the obstacle of the water removed. Perhaps Simplicius

you have never considered with what fury the water besets a bark, whil’st it

forceth its way through a standing water by help of Oars or Sails: for if you

had  ever  minded  that  effect,  you  would  not  now  have  produced  such  an

absurdity. And I am thinking that you have hitherto been one of those who to

find out how such things succeed, and to come to the knowledg of natural

effects,  do  not  betake  themselves  to  a  Ship,  a  Crosse-bow,  or  a  piece  of

Ordinance, but retire into their studies, and turn over Indexes and Tables to

see whether Aristotle hath spoken any thing thereof, and being assured of the

true sense of the Text, neither desire nor care for knowing any more.


SAGR.


This  is  a  great  felicity,  The  great  felicity  for  which  they  are  much  to  be

envied who perswade themselves that they know every thing. and they are to

be much envied for it. For if knowledg be desired by all, and if to be wise, be

to think ones self so, they enjoy a very great happinesse, for that they may

perswade themselves that they know and understand all things, in soorn of

those  who  knowing,  that  they  understand  not  what  these  think  they

understand,  and  consequently  seeking  that  they  know  not  the  very  least

particle of what is knowable, kill themselves with waking and studying, and

consume their days  in experiments and observations. But pray you let us

return to our birds; touching which you have said, that the Air being moved

with great velocity, might restore unto them that part of the diurnal motion

which amongst the windings of their flight they might have lost; to which I

reply, that the agitated Air seemeth unable to confer on a solid and grave

body, so great a velocity as its own: And because that of the Air is as great as

that of the Earth, I cannot think that the Air is able to make good the losse of

the birds retardation in flight.


SALV.


Your discourse hath in it much of probability, and to stick at trivial doubts is

not  for  an  acute  wit;  yet  neverthelesse  the  probability  being  removed,  I

believed that it hath not a jot more force than the others already considered

and resolved.SAGR.


It is most certain that if it be not necessarily concludent, its efficacy must

needs be just nothing at all, for it is onely when the conclusion is necessary

that the opponent hath nothing to alledg on the contrary.


SALV.


Your making a greater scruple of this than of the other instances dependeth, if

I mistake not, upon the birds being animated, and thereby enabled to use their

strength at pleasure against the primary motion in-bred in terrene bodies: like

as for  example, we see them whil’st they are alive to fly upwards, a thing

altogether impossible for them to do as they are grave bodies; whereas being

dead they can onely fall downwards; and therefore you hold that the reasons

that are of force in all the kinds of projects above named, cannot take place in

birds: Now this is very true; and because it is so, Sagredus, that doth not

appear to be done in those projects, The answer to the argument taken from

the flight of birds contrary to the motion of the Earth. which we see the birds

to do. For if from the top of a Tower you let fall a dead bird and a live one,

the dead bird shall do the same that a stone doth, that is, it shall first follow

the general motion diurnal, and then the motion of descent, as grave; but if

the bird let fall, be a live, what shall hinder it, (there ever remaining in it the

diurnal  motion)  from  soaring  by  help  of  its  wings  to  what  place  of  the

Horizon it shall please? and this new motion, as being peculiar to the bird,

and not participated by us, must of necessity be visible to us; and if it be

moved  by  help  of  its  wings  towards  the  West,  what  shall  hinder  it  from

returning with a like help of its wings unto the Tower. And, because, in the

last place, the bird swending its flight towards the West was no other than a

withdrawing from the diurnal motion, (which hath, suppose ten degrees of

velocity) one degree onely, there did thereupon remain to the bird whil’st it

was in its flight nine degrees of velocity, and so soon as it did alight upon the

the Earth, the ten common degrees returned to it, to which, by flying towards

the East it might adde one, and with those eleven overtake the Tower. And in

short, if we well consider, and more narrowly examine the effects of the

flight of birds, they differ from the projects shot or thrown to any part of the

World  in  nothing,  save  onely  that  the  projects  are  moved  by  an  external

projicient, An experiment with which alone is shewn the nullity of all theobjections produced against the motion of the Earth. and the birds by an

internal  principle.  And  here  for  a  final  proof  of  the  nullity  of  all  the

experiments before illedged, I conceive it now a time and place convenient to

demonstrate a way how to make an exact trial of them all. Shut your self up

with some friend in the grand Cabbin between the decks of some large Ship,

and there procure gnats, flies, and such other small winged creatures: get also

a great tub (or other vessel) full of water, and within it put certain fishes; let

also a certain bottle be hung up, which drop by drop letteth forth its water

into another bottle placed underneath, having a narrow neck: and, the Ship

lying still, observe diligently how those small winged animals fly with like

velocity towards all parts of the Cabin; how the fishes swim indifferently

towards all sides; and how the distilling drops all fall into the bottle placed

underneath. And casting any thing towards your friend, you need not throw it

with more force one way then another, provided the distances be equal: and

leaping, as the saying is, with your feet closed, you will reach  as far one way

as another. Having observed all these particulars, though no man doubteth

that so long as the vessel stands still, they ought to succeed in this manner;

make the Ship to move with what velocity you please; for (so long as the

motion is uniforme, and not fluctuating this way and that way) you shall not

discern  any  the  least  alteration  in  all  the  forenamed  effects;  nor  can  you

gather by any of them whether the Ship doth move or stand still. In leaping

you shall reach as far upon the floor, as before; nor for that the Ship moveth

shall  you  make  a  greater  leap  towards  the  poop  than  towards  the  prow;

howbeit in the time that you staid in the Air, the floor under your feet shall

have run the contrary way to that of your jump; and throwing any thing to

your companion you shall not need to cast it with more strength that it may

reach him, if he shall be towards the prow, and you towards the poop, then if

you stood in a contrary situation; the drops shall all distill as before into the

inferiour bottle, and not so much as one shall fall towards the poop, albeit

whil’st the drop is in the Air, the Ship shall have run many feet; the Fishes in

their  water  shall  not  swim  with  more  trouble  towards  the  fore-part,  than

towards the hinder part of the tub; but shall with equal velocity make to the

bait  placed  on  any  side  of  the  tub;  and  lastly,  the  flies  and  gnats  shall

continue their flight indifferently towards all parts; nor shall they ever happen

to be driven together towards the side of the Cabbin next the prow, as if they

were  wearied  with  following  the  swift  course  of  the  Ship,  from  which

through their suspension in the Air, they had been long separated; and ifburning a few graines of incense you make a little smoke, you shall see it

ascend on high, and there in manner of a cloud suspend it self, and move

indifferently,  not  inclining  more  to  one  side  than  another:  and  of  this

correspondence of effects the cause is for that the Ships motion is common to

all the things contained in it, and to the Air also; I mean if those things be

shut up in the Cabbin: but in case those things were above deck in the open

Air, and not obliged to follow the course of the Ship, differences more or

lesse notable would be observed in some of the fore-named effects, and there

is no doubt but that the smoke would stay behind as much as the Air it self;

the flies also, and the gnats being hindered by the Air would not be able to

follow the motion of the Ship, if they were separated at any distance from it.

But keeping neer thereto, because the Ship it self as being an unfractuous

Fabrick, carrieth along with it part of its neerest Air, they would follow the

said Ship without any pains or difficulty. And for the like reason we see

sometimes in riding post, that the troublesome flies andTafaris, horse-flyes.

hornets do follow the horses flying sometimes to one, sometimes to another

part of the body, but in the falling drops  the difference would be very small;

and in the salts, and projections of grave bodies altogether imperceptible.


SAGR.


Though it came not into my thoughts to make triall of these observations,

when I was at Sea, yet am I confident that they will succeed in the same

manner, as you have related; in confirmation of which I remember that being

in my Cabbin I have asked an hundred times whether the Ship moved or

stood still; and sometimes I have imagined that it moved one way, when it

steered quite another way. I am therefore as hitherto satisfied and convinced

of the nullity of all those experiments that have been produced in proof of the

negative  part.  There  now  remains  the  objection  founded  upon  that  which

experience shews us, namely, that a swift Vertigo or whirling about hath a

faculty to extrude and disperse the matters adherent to the machine that turns

round; whereupon many were of opinion, and Ptolomy amongst the rest, that

if the Earth should turn round with so great velocity, the stones and creatures

upon it should be tost into the Skie, and that there could not be a morter

strong enough to fasten buildings so to their foundations, but that they would

likewise suffer a like extrusion.SALV.


Before I come to answer this objection, I cannot but take notice of that which

I have an hundred times observed, and not without laughter, to come into the

minds of most men so soon as ever they hear mention made of this motion of

the Earth, which is believed by them so fixt and immoveable, that they not

only never doubted of that rest, but have ever strongly believed that all other

men aswell as they, have held it to be created immoveable, and so to have

continued through all succeeding ages: The stupidity of some that think the

Earth to have begun to move, when Pythagoras began to affirme that it did

so. and being setled in this perswasion, they stand amazed to hear that any

one should grant it motion, as if, after that he had held it to be immoveable,

he had fondly thought it to commence its motion then (and not till then) when

Pythagoras (or whoever else was the first hinter of its mobility) said that it

did move. Now that such a foolish conceit (I mean of thinking that those who

admit the motion of the Earth, have first thought it to stand still from its

creation, untill the time of Pythagoras, and have onely made it moveable after

that Pythagoras esteemed it so) findeth a place in the mindes of the vulgar,

and men of shallow capacities, I do not much wonder; but that such persons

as Aristotle and Ptolomy should also run into this childish mistake, is to my

thinking a more admirable and unpardonable folly.


SAGR.


You believe then, Salviatus, that Ptolomy thought, that in his Disputation he

was to maintain the stability of the Earth against such persons, as granting it

to have been immoveable, untill the time of Pythagoras, did affirm it to have

been but then  made moveable, when the said Pythagoras ascribed unto it

motion.


SALV.


We can think no other, if we do but consider the way he taketh to confute

their assertion; Aristotle and Ptolomy seem to confute the mobility of the

Earth against those who thought that it having a long time stood still, did

begin to move in the time of Pythagoras the confutation of which consists in

the demolition of buildings, and the tossing of stones, living creatures and

men themselves up into the Air. And because such overthrows and extrusionscannot be made upon buildings and men, which were not before on the Earth,

nor can men be placed, nor buildings erected upon the Earth, unlesse when it

standeth still; hence therefore it is cleer, that Ptolomy argueth against those,

who having granted the stability of the Earth for some time, that is, so long as

living creatures, stones, and Masons were able to abide there, and to build

Palaces  and  Cities,  make  it  afterwards  precipitately  moveable  to  the

overthrow and destructiof Edifices, and living creatures, &c. For if he had

undertook to dispute against such as had ascribed that revolution to the Earth

from its first creation, he would have confuted them by saying, that if the

Earth had alwayes moved, there could never have been placed upon it either

men  or  stones;  much  less  could  buildings  have  been  erected,  or  Cities

founded, &c.


SIMP.


I do not well conceive these Aristotelick and Ptolomaick inconveniences.


SALV.


Ptolomey either argueth against those who have esteemed the Earth always

moveable; or against such as have held that it stood for some time still, and

hath since been set on moving. If against the first, he ought to say, that the

Earth did not always move, for that then there would never have been men,

animals,  or  edifices  on  the  Earth,  its  vertigo  not  permitting  them  to  stay

thereon. But in that he arguing, saith that the Earth doth not move, because

that beasts, men, and houses before plac’d on the Earth would precipitate, he

supposeth the Earth to have been once in such a state, as that it did admit men

and beasts to stay, and build thereon; the which draweth on the consequence,

that it did for some time stand still, to wit, was apt for the abode of animals

and erection of buildings. Do you now conceive what I would say?


SIMP.


I do, and I do not: but this little importeth to the merit of the cause; nor can a

small mistake of Ptolomey, committed through inadvertencie be sufficient to

move the Earth, when it is immoveable. But omitting cavils, let us come to

the substance of the argument, which to me seems unanswerable.SALV.


And I, Simplicius, will drive it home, and re-inforce it, by shewing yet more

sensibly, that it is true that grave bodies turn’d with velocity about a settled

centre, do acquire an impetus of moving, and receding to a distance from that

centre, even  then when they are in a state of having a propension of moving

naturally to the same. Tie a bottle that hath water in it, to the end of a cord,

and holding the other end fast in your hand, and making the cord and your

arm the semi-diameter, and the knitting of the shoulder the centre, swing the

bottle very fast about, so as that it may describe the circumference of a circle,

which, whether it be parallel to the Horizon, or perpendicular to it, or any

way inclined, it shall in all cases follow, that the water will not fall out of the

bottle: nay, he that shall swing it, shall find the cord always draw, and strive

to go farther from the shoulder. And if you bore a hole in the bottom of the

bottle, you shall see the water spout forth no less upwards into the skie, than

laterally, and downwards to the Earth; and if instead of water, you shall put

little pebble stones into the bottle, and swing it in the same manner, you shall

find that they will strive in the like manner against the cord. And lastly, we

see boys throw stones a great way, by swinging round a piece of a stick, at

the end of which the stone is let into a slit (which stick is called by them a

sling;) all which are arguments of the truth of the conclusion, to wit, that the

vertigo  or  swing  conferreth  upon  the  moveable,  a  motion  towards  the

circumference, in case the motion be swift: and therefore if the Earth revolve

about its own centre, the motion of the superficies, and especially towards the

great  circle,  as  being  incomparably  more  swift  than  those  before  named,

ought to extrude all things up into the air.


SIMP.


The Argument seemeth to me very well proved and inforced; and I believe it

would be an hard matter to answer and overthrow it.


SALV.


Its solution dependeth upon certain notions no less known and believed by

you, than by my self: but because they come not into your mind, therefore it

is that you perceive not the answer; wherefore, without telling you it (for thatyou know the same already) I shall with onely assisting your memory, make

you to refute this argument.


SIMP.


I have often thought of your way of arguing, which hath made me almost

think  that  you  lean  to  that  opinion  of  Plato,  Our  knowledg  is  a  kind  of

reminiscence according to Plato. Quòd nostrum scire sit quoddam reminisci;

therefore I intreat you to free me from this doubt, by letting me know your

judgment.


SALV.


What I think of the opinion of Plato, you may gather from my words and

actions. I have already in the precedent conferences expresly declared my self

more than once; I will pursue the same style in the present case, which may

hereafter serve you for an example, thereby the more easily to gather what

my opinion is touching the attainment of knowledg, when a time shall  offer

upon  some  other  day:  but  I  would  not  have  Sagred  s  offended  at  this

digression.


SAGR.


I am rather very much pleased with it, for that I remember that when I studied

Logick, I could never comprehend that so much cry’d up and most potent

demonstration of Aristotle.


SALV.


Let us go on therefore; and let Simplicius, tell me what that motion is which

the stone maketh that is held fast in the slit of the sling, when the boy swings

it about to throw it a great way?


SIMP.


The motion of the stone, so long as it is in the slit, is circular, that is, moveth

by the arch of a circle, whose stedfast centre is the knitting of the shoulder,

and its semi-diameter the arm and stick.SALV.


And when the stone leaveth the sling, what is its motion? Doth it continue to

follow its former circle, or doth it go by another line?


SIMP.


It will continue no longer to swing round, for then it would not go farther

from the arm of the projicient, whereas we see it go a great way off.


SALV.


With what motion doth it move then?


SIMP.


Give me a little time to think thereof; For I have never considered it before.


SALV.


Hark  hither,  Sagredus;  this  is  the  Quoddam  reminisci  in  a  subject  well

understood. You have paused a great while, Simplicius.


SIMP.


As far as I can see, the motion received in going out of the sling, can be no

other than by a right line; nay, it must necessarily be so, if we speak of the

pure adventitious impetus. I was a little puzled to see it make an arch, but

because that arch bended all the way upwards, and no other way, I conceive

that  that  incurvation  cometh  from  the  gravity  of  the  stone,  Th    motion

impressed by the projicient is onely by a right line. vvhich naturally dravveth

it dovvnvvards. The impressed impetus, I say, vvithout respecting the natural,

is by a right line.


SALV.


But by what right line? Because infinite, and towards every side may be

produced from the slit of the sling, and from the point of the stones separation

from the sling.SIMP.


It moveth by that line which goeth directly from the motion which the stone

made in the sling.


SALV.


The motion of the stone whilst it was in the slit, you have affirmed already to

be  circular;  now  circularity  opposeth  directness,  there  not  being  in  the

circular line any part that is direct or streight.


SIMP.


I mean not that the projected motion is direct in respect of the whole circle,

but in reference to that ultimate point, where the circular motion determineth.

I know what I would  say, but do not well know how to express my self.


SALV.


And I also perceive that you understand the business, but that you have not

the proper terms, wherewith to express the same. Now these I can easily

teach you; teach you, that is, as to the words, but not as to the truths, which

are things. And that you may plainly see that you know the thing I ask you,

and onely want language to express it, tell me, when you shoot a bullet out of

a gun, towards what part is it, that its acquired impetus carrieth it?


SIMP.


Its acquired impetus carrieth it in a right line, which continueth the rectitude

of the barrel, that is, which inclineth neither to the right hand nor to the left,

nor upwards nor downwards.


SALV.


Which  in  short  is  asmuch  as  to  say,  it  maketh  no  angle  with  the  line  of

streight motion made by the sling.


SIMP.So I would have said.


SALV.


If then the line of the projects motion be to continue without making an angle

upon the circular line described by it, whilst it was with the projicient; and if

from this circular motion it ought to pass to the right motion, what ought this

right line to be?


SIMP.


It must needs be that which toucheth the circle in the point of separation, for

that  all  others,  in  my  opinion,  being  prolonged  would  intersect  the

circumference, and by that means make some angle therewith.


SALV.


You have argued very well, and shewn your self half a Geometrician. Keep in

mind therefore, that your true opinion is exprest in these words, namely, That

the  project  acquireth  an  impetus  of  moving  by  the  Tangent,  the  arch

described by the motion of the projicient, in the point of the said projects

separation from the projicient.


SIMP.


I understand you very well, and this is that which I would say.


SALV.


Of a right line which toucheth a circle, which of its points is the nearest to the

centre of that circle?


SIMP.


That of the contact without doubt: for that is in the circumference of a circle,

and the rest without: and the points of the circumference are all equidistant

from the centre.


SALV.Therefore a moveable departing from the contact, and moving by the streight

Tangent, goeth continually farther and farther from the contact, and also from

the centre of the circle.


SIMP.


It doth so doubtless.


SALV.


Now if you have kept in mind the propositions, which you have told me, lay

them together, and tell me what you gather from them.


SIMP.


I think I am not so forgetful, but that I do remember  them. The project

moveth by the Tangent of the circle of the motion precedent in the point of

separation. From the things premised I gather that the project swiftly swinged

round by the projicient, in its separating from it, doth retain an impetus of

continuing its motion by the right line, which toucheth the circle described by

the motion of the projicient in the point of separation, by which motion the

project goeth continually receding from the centre of the circle described by

the motion of the projicient.


SALV.


You know then by this time the reason why grave bodies sticking to the rim

of  a  wheele,  swiftly  moved,  are  extruded  and  thrown  beyond  the

circumference to yet a farther distance from the centre.


SIMP.


I think I understand this very well; but this new knowledg rather increaseth

than lesseneth my incredulity that the Earth can turn round with so great

velocity, without extruding up into the sky, stones, animals, &c.


SALV.In the same manner that you have understood all this, you shall, nay you do

understand the rest: and with recollecting your self, you may remember the

same without the help of others: but that we may lose no time, I will help

your memory therein. You do already know of your self, that the circular

motion  of  the  projicient  impresseth  on  the  project  an  impetus  of  moving

(when they come to separate) by the right Tangent, the circle of the motion in

the point of separation, and continuing along by the same the motion ever

goeth receding farther and farther from the projicient: and you have said, that

the project would continue to move along by that right line, if there were not

by its proper weight an inclination of descent added unto it; from which the

incurvation of the line of motion is derived. It seems moreover that you knew

of your self, that this incurvation always bended towards the centre of the

Earth, for thither do all grave bodies tend. Now I proceed a little farther, and

ask you, whether the moveable after its separation, in continuing the right

motion goeth always equally receding from the centre, or if you will, from

the circumference of that circle, of which the precedent motion was a part;

which is as much as to say, Whether a moveable, that forsaking the point of a

Tangent, and moving along by the said Tangent, doth equally recede from the

point of contact, and from the circumference of the circle?


SIMP.


No, Sir: for the Tangent near to the point of contact, recedeth very little from

the circumference, wherewith it keepeth a very narrow angle, but in its going

farther  and  farther  off,  the  distance  always  encreaseth  with  a  greater

proportion; so that in a circle that should have v. g. ten yards of diameter, a

point of the Tangent that was distant from the contact but two palms, would

be three or four times as far distant from the circumference  of the circle, as a

point that was distant from the contaction one palm, and the point that was

distant half a palm, I likewise believe would fearse recede the fourth part of

the distance of the second: so that within an inch or two of the contact, the

separation of the Tangent from the circumference is scarse discernable.


SALV.


So that the recession of the project from the circumference of the precedent

circular motion is very small in the begining?SIMP.


Almost insensible.


SALV.


Now tell me a little; the project, which from the motion of the projicient

receiveth an impetus of moving along the Tangent in a right line, and that

would keep unto the same, did not its own weight depress it downwards, how

long is it after the separation, ere it begin to decline downwards.


SIMP.


I believe that it beginneth presently; for it not having any thing to uphold it,

its  proper  gravity  cannot  but  operate.  A  grave  project,  as  s  on  as  it  is

separated from the projicient begineth to decline.


SALV.


So that, if that same stone, which being extruded from that wheel turn’d

about very fast, had as great a natural propension of moving towards the

centre of the said wheel, as it hath to move towards the centre of the Earth, it

would be an easie matter for it to return unto the wheel, or rather not to depart

from it; in regard that upon the begining of the separation, the recession being

so small, by reason of the infinite acuteness of the angle of contact, every

very little of inclination that draweth it back towards the centre of the wheel,

would be sufficient to retain it upon the rim or circumference.


SIMP.


I question not, but that if one suppose that which neither is, nor can be, to wit,

that the inclination of those grave bodies was to go towards the centre of the

wheel, they would never come to be extruded or shaken off.


SALV.


But I neither do, nor need to suppose that which is not; for I will not deny but

that the stones are extruded. Yet I speak this by way of supposition, to the

end that you might grant me the rest. Now fancy to your self, that the Earth isthat great wheel, which moved with so great velocity is to extrude the stones.

You could tell me very well even now, that the motion of projection ought to

be by that right line which toucheth the Earth in the point of separation: and

this  Tangent,  how  doth  it  notably  recede  from  the  superficies  of  the

Terrestrial Globe?


SIMP.


I believe, that in a thousand yards, it will not recede from the Earth an inch.


SALV.


And  did  you  not  say,  that  the  project  being  drawn  by  its  own  weight,

declineth from the Tangent towards the centre of the Earth?


SIMP.


I said so, and also confesse the rest: and do now plainly understand that the

stone will not separate from the Earth, for that its recession in the beginning

would be such, and so small, that it is a thousand times exceeded by the

inclination which the stone hath to move towards the centre of the Earth,

which centre in this case is also the centre of the wheel. And indeed it must

be confessed that the stones, the living creatures, and the other grave bodies

cannot be extruded; but here again the lighter things beget in me a new doubt,

they having but a very weak propension of descent towards the centre; so that

there being wanting in them that faculty of withdrawing from the superficies,

I see not, but that they may be extruded; and you know the rule, that ad

destruendum sufficit unum.


SAVL.


We will also give you satisfaction in this. Tell me therefore in the first place,

what  you  understand  by  light  matters,  that  is,  whether  you  thereby  mean

things really so light, as that they go upvvards, or else not absolutely light,

but of so small gravity, that though they descend downwards, it is but very

slowly; for if you mean the absolutely light, I will be readier than your self to

admit their extrusion.SIMP.


I speak of the other sort, such as are feathers, wool, cotton, and the like; to lift

up which every small force sufficeth: yet neverthelesse we see they rest on

the Earth very quietly.


SALV.


This pen, as it hath a natural propension to descend towards the superficies of

the Earth, though it be very small, yet I must tell you that it sufficeth to keep

it from mounting upwards: and this again is not unknown to you your self;

therefore tell me if the pen were extruded by the Vertigo of the Earth, by

what line would it move?


SIMP.


By the tangent in the point of separation.


SALV.


And when it should be to return, and re-unite it self to the Earth, by what line

would it then move?


SIMP.


By that which goeth from it to the centre of the Earth.


SALV.


So then here falls under our consideration two motions; one the motion of

projection, which beginneth from the point of contact, and proceedeth along

the  tangent;  and  the  other  the  motion  of  inclination  downwards,  which

beginneth from the project it self, and goeth by the secant towards the centre;

and if you desire that the projection follow, it is necessary that the impetus by

the tangent overcome the inclination by the secant: is it not so?


SIMP.


So it seemeth to me.SALV.


But what is it that you think necessary in the motion of the projicient, to

make  that  it  may  prevail  over  that  inclination,    from  which  ensueth  the

separation and elongation of the pen from the Earth?


SIMP.


I cannot tell.


SALV.


How, do you not know that? The moveable is here the same, that is, the same

pen; now how can the same moveable superate and exceed it self in motion?


SIMP.


I do not see how it can overcome or yield to it self in motion, unlesse by

moving one while faster, and another while slower.


SALV.


You see then, that you do know it. If therefore the projection of the pen ought

to follow, and its motion by the tangent be to overcome its motion by the

secant, what is it requisite that their velocities should be?


SIMP.


It is requisite that the motion by the tangent be greater than that other by the

secant. But wretch that I am! Is it not only many thousand times greater than

the descending motion of the pen, but than that of the stone? And yet like a

simple fellow I had suffered my self to be perswaded, that stones could not be

extruded by the revolution of the Earth. I do therefore revoke my former

sentence, and say, that if the Earth should move, stones, Elephants, Towers,

and whole Cities would of necessity be tost up into the Air; and because that

that doth not evene, I conclude that the Earth doth not move.


SALV.Softly Simplicius, you go on so fast, that I begin to be more afraid for you,

than for the pen. Rest a little, and observe what I am going to speap. If for the

reteining of the stone or pen annexed to the Earths surface it were necessary

that its motion of descent were greater, or as much as the motion made by the

tangent; you would have had reason to say, that it ought of necessity to move

as fast, or faster by the secant downwards, than by the tangent Eastwards: But

did not you tell me even now, that a thousand yards of distance by the tangent

from the contact, do remove hardly an inch from the circumference? It is not

sufficient therefore that the motion by the tangent, which is the same with

that of the diurnall Vertigo, (or hasty revolution) be simply more swift than

the  motion  by  the  secant,  which  is  the  same  with  that  of  the  pen  in

descending; but it is requisite that the same be so much more swift as that the

time  which  sufficeth  for  the  pen  to  move  v.  g.  a  thousand  yards  by  the

tangent, be insufficient for it to move one sole inch by the secant. The which

I tell you shall never be, though you should make that motion never so swift,

and this never so slow.


SIMP.


And why might not that by the tangent be so swift, as not to give the pen time

to return to the surface of the Earth?


SALV.


Try whether you can state the case in proper termes,  and I will give you an

answer. Tell me therefore, how much do you think sufficeth to make that

motion swifter than this?


SIMP.


I will say for example, that if that motion by the tangent were a million of

times swifter than this by the secant, the pen, yea, and the stone also would

come to be extruded.


SALV.


You  say  so,  and  say  that  which  is  false,  onely  for  want,  not  of  Logick,

Physicks, or Metaphysicks, but of Geometry; for if you did but understand itsfirst elements, you would know, that from the centre of a circle a right line

may be drawn to meet the tangent, which intersecteth it in such a manner, that

the part of the tangent between the contact and the secant, may be one, two,

or three millions of times greater than that part of the secant which lieth

between the tangent and the circumference, and that the neerer and neerer the

secant shall be to the contact, this proportion shall grow greater and greater in

infinitum; so that it need not be feared, though the vertigo be swift, and the

motion downwards slow, that the pen or other lighter matter can begin to rise

upwards, for that the inclination downwards always exceedeth the velocity of

the projection.


SAGR.


I do not perfectly apprehend this businesse.


SALV.


I  will  give  you  a  most  universal  yet  very  easie  demonstration  thereof.  A

geometrical demonstration to prove the impossibility of extrusion by means

of the terrestrial vertigo. Let a proportion be given between BA [in Fig. 3. ]

and C: And let BA be greater than C at pleasure. And let there be described a

circle, whose centre is D. From which it is required to draw a secant, in such

manner, that the tangent may be in proportion to the said secant, as BA to C.

Let AI be supposed a third proportional to BA and C. And as BI is to IA, so

let the diameter FE be to EG; and from the point G, let there be drawn the

tangent GH. I say that all this is done as was required; and as BA is to C, so is

HG to GE. And in regard that as BI is to IA, so is FE to EG; therefore by

composition, as BA is to AI; so shall FG be to GE. And because C is the

middle proportion between BA and AI; and GH is a middle term between FG

and GE; therefore, as BA is to C, so shall FG be to GH; that is HG to GE,

which was to be demonstrated.


SAGR.


I  apprehend  this  demonstration;  yet  neverthelesse,  I  am  not  left  wholly

without haesitation; for I find certain confused scruples role to and again in

my mind, which like thick and dark clouds, permit me not to discern the

cleernesse and necessity of the conclusion with that perspicuity, which isusual in Mathematical Demonstrations. And that which I stick at is this. It is

true that the spaces between the tangent and the circumference do gradually

diminish in infinitum towards the contact; but it is also true on the contrary,

that the propension of the moveable to  descending groweth less & less in it,

the nearer it is to the first term of its descent; that is, to the state of rest; as is

manifest  from  that  which  you  declare  unto  us,  demonstrating  that  the

descending grave body departing from rest, ought to passe thorow all the

degrees  of  tardity  comprehended  between  the  said  rest,  &  any  assigned

degree of velocity, the which grow less and in infinitum. To which may be

added,  that  the  said  velocity  and  propension  to  motion,  doth  for  another

reason diminish to infinity; and it is because the gravity of the said moveable

may infinitely diminish. So that the causes which diminish the propension of

ascending, and consequently favour the projection, are two; that is, the levity

of  the  moveable,  and  its  vicinity  to  the  state  of  rest;  both  which  are

augmentable in infinit. and these two on the contrary being to contract but

with one sole cause of making the projection, I cannot conceive how it alone,

although it also do admit of infinite augmentation, should be able to remain
                                                                      ch
invincible against the union & confederacy of the others, w are two, and are

in like manner capable of infinite augmentation.


SALV.


This is a doubt worthy of Sagredus; and to explain it so as that we may more

cleerly apprehend it, for that you say that you your self have but a confused

Idea of it, we will distinguish of the same by reducing it into figure; which

may also perhaps afford us some ease in resolving the same. Let us therefore

[in Fig. 4. ] draw a perpendicular line towards the centre, and let it be AC,

and to it at right angles let there be drawn the Horizontal line AB, upon

which the motion of the projection ought to be made; now the project would

continue to move along the same with an even motion, if so be its gravity did

not incline it downwards. Let us suppose from the point A a right line to be

drawn, that may make any angle at pleasure with the line AB; which let be

AE, and upon AB let us mark some equal spaces AF, FH, HK, and from them

let us let fall the perpendiculars FG, HI, KL, as far as AE. And because, as

already hath been said, the descending grave body departing from rest, goeth

from time to time acquiring a greater degrees of velocity, according as the

said time doth successively encrease; we may conceive the spaces AF, FH,HK, to represent unto us equal times; and the perpendiculars FG, HI, KL,

degrees of velocity acquired in the said times; so that the degree of velocity

acquired in the whole time AK, is as the line KL, in respect to the degree HI,

acquired  in  the  time  AH,  and  the  degree  FG  in  the  time  AF;  the  which

degrees KL, HI, FG, are (as is manifest) the same in proportion, as the times

KA, HA, FA, and if other perpendiculars were drawn from the points marked

at pleasure in the line FA, one might successively find degrees lesse and lesse

in infinitum, proceeding towards the point A, representing the first instant of

time, and the first state of rest. And this retreat towards A, representeth the

first propension to the  motion of descent, diminished in infinitum by the

approach of the moveable to the first state of rest, which approximation is

augmentable in infinitum. Now let us find the other diminution of velocity,

which likewise may proceed to infinity, by the diminution of the gravity of

the moveable, and this shall be represented by drawing other lines from the

point A, which contein angles lesse than the angle BAE, which would be this

line AD, the which intersecting the parallels KL, HI, FG, in the points M, N,

and O, represent unto us the degrees FO, HN, KM, acquired in the times AF,

AH,  AK,  lesse  than  the  other  degrees  FG,  HI,  KL,  acquired  in  the  same

times; but these latter by a moveable more ponderous, and those other by a

moveable more light. And it is manifest, that by the retreat of the line EA

towards AB, contracting the angle EAB (the which may be done in infinitum,

like as the gravity may in infinitum be diminished) the velocity of the cadent

moveable  may  in  like  manner  be  diminished  in  infinitum,  and  so

consequently the cause that impeded the projection; and therefore my thinks

that  the  union  of  these  two  reasons  against  the  projection,  diminished  to

infinity, cannot be any impediment to the said projection. And couching the

whole argument in its shortest terms, we will say, that by contracting the

angle  EAB,  the  degrees  of  velocity  LK,  IH,  GF,  are  diminished;  and

moreover by the retreat of the parallels KL, HI, FG, towards the angle A, the

same degrees are again diminished; and both these diminutions extend to

infinity:  Therefore  the  velocity  of  the  motion  of  descent  may  very  well

diminish so much, (it admitting of a twofold diminution in infinitum) as that

it may not suffice to restore the moveable to the circumference of the wheel,

and  thereupon  may  occasion  the  projection  to  be  hindered  and  wholly

obviated.  Again on the contrary, to impede the projection, it is necessary that the

spaces  by  which  the  project  is  to  descend  for  the  reuniting  it  self  to  the

Wheel, be made so short and close together, that though the descent of the

moveable be retarded, yea more, diminished in infinitum, yet it sufficeth to

reconduct it thither: and therefore it would be requisite, that you find out a

diminution of the said spaces, not only produced to infinity, but to such an

infinity,  as  that  it  may  superate  the  double  infinity  that  is  made  in  the

diminution  of  the  velocity  of  the  descending  moveable.  But  how  can  a

magnitude  be  diminished  more  than  another,  which  hath  a  twofold

diminution  in  infinitum?  Now  let  Simplicius  observe  how  hard  it  is  to

philosophate  well  in  nature,  without  Geometry.  The  degrees  of  velocity

diminished  in  infinitum,  as  well  by  the  diminution  of  the  gravity  of  the

moveable, as by the approxination to the first term of the motion, that is, to

the state  of rest, are alwayes determinate, and answer in proportion to the

parallels comprehended between two right lines that concur in an angle, like

to  the  angle  BAE,  or  BAD,  or  any  other  infinitely  more  acute,  alwayes

provided it be rectilineall. But the diminution of the spaces thorow which the

moveable  is  to  be  conducted  along  the  circumference  of  the  wheel,  is

proportionate  to  another  kind  of  diminution,  comprehended  between  lines

that contain an angle infinitely more narrow and acute, than any rectilineal

angle, how acute soever, which is that in our present case. Let any point be

taken  in  the  perpendicular  AC,  and  making  it  the  centre,  describe  at  the

distance  CA,  an  arch  AMP,  the  which  shall  intersect  the  parallels  that

determine  the  degrees  of  velocity,  though  they  be  very  minute,  and

comprehended within a most acute rectilineal angle; of which parallels the

parts that lie between the arch and the tangent AB, are the quantities of the

spaces, and of the returns upon the wheel, alwayes lesser (and with greater

proportion lesser, by how much neerer they approach to the contact) than the

said parallels of which they are parts. The parallels comprehended between

the right lines in retiring towards the angle diminish alwayes at the same rate,

as v. g. AH being divided in two equal parts in F, the parallel HI shall be

double to FG, and sub-dividing FA, in two equal parts, the parallel produced

from the point of the division shall be the half of FG; and continuing the sub-

division in infinitum, the subsequent parallels shall be alwayes half of the

next preceding; but it doth not so fall out in the lines intercepted between the

tangent and the circumference of the circle: For if the same sub-division be

made in FA; and supposing for example, that the parallel which cometh fromthe point H, were double unto that which commeth from F, this shall be more

then double to the next following, and c inually the neerer we come towards

the contact A, we shall fi  the precedent lines contein the next following

three, four, ten, an hundred, a thousand, an hundred thousand, an hundred

millions of times, and more in infinitum. The brevity therefore of such lines

is so reduced, that it far exceeds what is requisite to make the project, though

never  so  light,  return,  nay  more,  continue  unremoveable  upon  the

circumference.


SAGR.


I very well comprehend the whole discourse, and upon what it layeth all its

stresse, yet neverthelesse methinks that he that would take pains to pursue it,

might yet start some further questions, by saying, that of those two causes

which render the descent of the moveable slower and slower in infinitum, it is

manifest, that that which dependeth on the vicinity to the first term of the

descent,  increaseth  alwayes  in  the  same  proportion,  like  as  the  parallels

alwayes retain the same proportion to each other, &c.  but that the diminution

of  the  same  velocity,  dependent  on  the  diminution  of  the  gravity  of  the

moveable  (which  vvas  the  second  cause)  doth  also  observe  the  same

proportion, doth not so plainly appear, And vvho shall assure us that it doth

not proceed according to the proportion of the lines intercepted between the

secant, and the circumference; or vvhether vvith a greater proportion?


SALV.


I  have  assumed  for  a  truth,  that  the  velocities  of  moveables  descending

naturally, vvill follovv the proportion of their gravities, with the favour of

Simplicius, and of Aristotle, who doth in many places affirm the same, as a

proposition manifest: You, in favour of my adversary, bring the same into

question, and say that its possible that the velocity increaseth with greater

proportion, yea and greater in infinitum than that of the gravity; so that all

that hath been said falleth to the ground: For maintaining whereof, I say, that

the proportion of the velocities is much lesse than that of the gravities; and

thereby I do not onely support but confirme the premises. And for proof of

this I appeal unto experience, which will shew us, that a grave body, howbeit

thirty or fourty times bigger then another; as for example, a ball of lead, and

another of sugar, will not move much more than twice as fast. Now if theprojection would not be made, albeit the velocity of the cadent body should

diminish according to the proportion of the gravity, much lesse would it be

made so long as the velocity is but little diminished, by abating much from

the gravity. But yet supposing that the velocity diminisheth with a proportion

much greater than that wherewith the gravity decreaseth, nay though it were

the self-same wherewith those parallels conteined between the tangent and

circumference do decrease, yet cannot I see any necessity why I should grant

the projection of matters of never so great levity; yea I farther averre, that

there  could  no  such  projection  follow,  meaning  alwayes  of  matters  not

properly and absolutely light, that is, void of all gravity, and that of their own

natures move upwards, but that descend very slowly, and have very small

gravity. And that which moveth me so to think is, that the diminution of

gravity, made according to the proportion of the parallels between the tangent

and the circumference, hath for its ultimate and highest term the nullity of

weight,  as  those  parallels  have  for  their  last  term  of  their  diminution  the

contact it self, which is an indivisible point: Now gravity never diminisheth

so far as to its last term, for then the moveable would cease to be grave; but

yet the space of the reversion of the project to the circumference is reduced to

the  ultimate  minuity,  which  is  when  the  moveable  resteth  upon  the

circumference in the very point of contact; so as that to return thither it hath

no need of space: and therefore let the propension to the motion of descent be

never    so  small,  yet  is  it  alwayes  more  than  sufficient  to  reconduct  the

moveable to the circumference, from which it is distant but its least space,

that is, nothing at all.


SAGR.


Your discourse, I must confess, is very accurate; and yet no less concluding

than it is ingenuous; and it must be granted that to go about to handle natural

questions, without Geometry, is to attempt an impossibility.


SALV.


But Simplicius will not say so; and yet I do not think that he is one of those

Peripateticks that disswade their Disciples from studying the Mathematicks,

as Sciences that vitiate the reason, and render it lesse apt for contemplation.


SIMP.I would not do so much wrong to Plato, but yet I may truly say with Aristotle,

that he too much lost himself in, and too much doted upon that his Geometry:

for  that  in  conclusion  these  Mathematical  subtilties  Salviatus  are  true  in

abstract, but applied to sensible and Physical matter, they hold not good. For

the  Mathematicians  will  very  well  demonstrate  for  example,  that  Sphaera

tangit  planum  in  puncto;  a  position  like  to  that  in  dispute,  but  when  one

cometh to the matter, things succeed quite another way. And so I may say of

these angles of contact, and these proportions; which all evaporate into Air,

when they are applied to things material and sensible.


SALV.


You  do  not  think  then,  that  the  tangent  toucheth  the  superficies  of  the

terrestrial Globe in one point only?


SIMP.


No, not in one sole point; but I believe that a right line goeth many tens and

hundreds of yards touching the surface not onely of the Earth, but of the

water, before it separate from the same.


SALV.


But if I grant you this, do not you perceive that it maketh so much the more

against your cause? For if it be supposed that the tangent was separated from

the  terrestrial  superficies,  yet  it  hath  been  however  demonstrated  that  by

reason of the great acuity of the angle of contingence (if happily it may be

call’d an angle) the project would not separate from the same; how much

lesse cause of separation would it have, if that angle should be wholly closed,

The truth sometimes gaines strength by contradiction. and the superficies and

the tangent become all one? Perceive you not that the Projection would do the

same thing upon the surface of the Earth, which is asmuch as to say, it would

do just nothing at all? You see then the power of truth, which while you

strive to oppose it, your own assaults themselves uphold and defend it. But in

regard that you have retracted this errour, I would be loth to leave you in that

other which you hold, namely, that a material Sphere doth not touch a plain

in one sole point: and I could wish some few hours conversation with some

persons conversant in Geometry, might make you a little more intelligent amongst those who know nothing thereof. Now to shew you how great their

errour is who say, that a Sphere v. g. of brasse, doth not touch a plain v. g. of

steel in one sole point, Tell me what conceipt you would entertain of one that

should constantly aver, that the Sphere is not truly a Sphere.


SIMP.


I would esteem him wholly devoid of reason.


SALV.


He is in the same case who saith that the material Sphere doth not touch a

plain, The sphere although material, toucheth the material plane but in one

point onely. also material, in one onely point; for to say this is the same, as to

affirm that the Sphere is not a Sphere. And that this is true, tell me in what it

is that you constitute the Sphere to consist, that is, what it is that maketh the

Sphere differ from all other solid bodies.


SIMP.


I believe that the essence of a Sphere consisteth in having all the right lines

produced from its centre to the circumference, The definition of the sphere.

equal.


SALV.


So that, if those lines should not be equal, that same solidity would be no

longer a sphere?


SIMP.


True.


SALV.


Go to; tell me whether you believe that amongst the many lines that may be

drawn between two points, there may be more than one right line onely.


SIMP.There can be but one.


SALV.


But yet you understand that this onely right line shall again of necessity be

the shortest of them all?


SIMP.


I  know  it,  and  also  have  a  demonstration  thereof,  produced  by  a  great

Peripatetick Philosopher, and as I take it, if my memory do not deceive me,

he  alledgeth  it  by  way  of  reprehending  Archimedes,  that  supposeth  it  as

known, when it may be demonstrated.


SALV.


This must needs be a great Mathematician, that knew how to demonstrate that

which Archimedes neither did, nor could demonstrate. And if you remember

his demonstration, I would gladly hear it: for I remember very well, that

Archimedes in his Books, de Sphaer  & Cylindro, placeth this Proposition

amongst the Postulata; and I verily believe that he thought it demonstrated.


SIMP.


I think I shall remember it, for it is very easie and short.


SALV.


The disgrace of Archimedes, and the honour of this Philosopher shall be so

much the greater.


SIMP.


I  will  describe  the  Figure  of  it.  Between  the  points  A  and  B,  The

demonstration of a Peripatetick▪ to prove the right line to be t e shortest of all

lines. [in Fig. 5. ] draw the right line AB, and the curve line ACB, of which

we will prove the right to be the shorter: and the proof is this; take a point in

the curve-line, which let be C, and draw two other lines, AC and CB, which

two lines together, are longer than the sole line AB, for so demonstratethEuclid.  But the curve-line ACB, is greater than the two right-lines AC, and

CB; therefore, à fortiori, the curve-line ACB, is much greater than the right

line AB, which was to be demonstrated.


SALV.


I do not think that if one should ransack all the Paralogisms of the world, The

Paralogism of the same Peripatetick▪ which proveth ignotum per ignotius.

there could be found one more commodious than this, to give an example of

the  most  solemn  fallacy  of  all  fallacies,  namely,  than  that  which  proveth

ignotum per ignotius.


SIMP.


How so?


SALV.


Do you ask me how so? The unknown conclusion which you desire to prove,

is it not, that the curved line ACB, is longer than the right line AB; the

middle term which is taken for known, is that the curve-line ACB, is greater

than the two lines AC and CB, the which are known to be greater than AB;

And if it be unknown whether the curve-line be greater than the single right-

line AB, shall it not be much more unknown whether it be greater than the

two right lines AC & CB, which are known to be greater than the sole line

AB, & yet you assume it as known?


SIMP.


I do not yet very well perceive wherein lyeth the fallacy.


SALV.


As the two right lines are greater than AB, (as may be known by Euclid) and

in as much as the curve line is longer than the two right lines AC and BC,

shall it not not be much greater than the sole right line AB?


SIMP.It shall so.


SALV.


That the curve-line ACB, is greater than the right line AB, is the conclusion

more  known  than  the  middle  term,  which  is,  that  the  same  curve-line  is

greater than the two right-lines AC and CB. Now when the middle term is

less known than the conclusion, it is called a proving ignotum per ignotius.

But to return to our purpose, it is sufficient that you know the right line to be

the shortest of all the lines that can be drawn between two points. And as to

the principal conclusion, you say, that the material sphere doth not touch the

sphere in one sole point. What then is its contact?


SIMP.


It shall be a part of its superficies.


SALV.


And the contact likewise of another sphere equal to the first, shall be also a

like particle of its superficies?


SIMP.


There is no reason vvhy it should be othervvise.


SALV.


Then the tvvo spheres vvhich touch each other, shall touch vvith the tvvo

same particles of a superficies, for each of them agreeing to one and the same

plane,  they  must  of  necessity  agree  in  like  manner  to  each  other.  A

demonstration that the sphere toucheth the plane but in one point. Imagine

now that the two spheres [in Fig. 6. ] whose centres are A and B, do touch

one another: and let their centres be conjoyned by the right line AB, which

passeth through the contact. It passeth thorow the point C, and  another point

in the contact being taken as D, conjoyn the two right lines AD and BD, so as

that they make the triangle ADB; of which the two sides AD and DB shall be

equal  to  the  other  one  ACB,  both  those  and  this  containing  twosemidiameters, which by the definition of the sphere are all equal: and thus

the right line AB, drawn between the two centres A and B, shall not be the

shortest of all, the two lines AD and DB being equal to it: which by your own

concession is absurd.


SIMP.


This demonstration holdeth in the abstracted, but not in the material spheres.


SALV.


Instance then wherein the fallacy of my argument consisteth, if as you say it

is not concluding in the material spheres, but holdeth good in the immaterial

and abstracted.


SIMP.


The  material  spheres  are  subject  to  many  accidents,  Why  the  sphere  in

abstract,  toucheth  the  plane  onely  in  one  point,  and  not  the  material  in

concrete. which the immaterial are free from. And because it cannot be, that a

sphere of metal passing along a plane, its own weight should not so depress

it, as that the plain should yield somewhat, or that the sphere it self should not

in the contact admit of some impression. Moreover, it is very hard for that

plane to be perfect, if for nothing else, yet at least for that its matter is porous:

and perhaps it will be no less difficult to find a sphere so perfect, as that it

hath all the lines from the centre to the superficies, exactly equal.


SALV.


I very readily grant you all this that you have said; but it is very much beside

our  purpose:  for  whilst  you  go  about  to  shew  me  that  a  material  sphere

toucheth not a material plane in one point alone, you make use of a sphere

that is not a sphere, and of a plane that is not a plane; for that, according to

what you say, either these things cannot be found in the world, or if they may

be found, they are spoiled in applying them to work the effect. It had been

therefore  a  less  evil,  for  you  to  have  granted  the  conclusion,  but

conditionally, to wit, that if there could be made of matter a sphere and aplane that were and could continue perfect, they would touch in one sole

point, and then to have denied that any such could be made.


SIMP.


I  believe  that  the  proposition  of  Philosophers  is  to  be  understood  in  this

sense; for it is not to be doubted, but that the imperfection of the matter,

maketh the matters taken in concrete, to disagree with those taken in abstract.


SALV.


What, do they not agree? Why, that which you your self say at this instant,

proveth that they punctually agree.


SIMP.


How can that be?


SALV.


Do you not say, that through the imperfection of the matter, that body which

ought to be perfectly spherical, and that plane which ought to be perfectly

level, do not prove to be the  same in concrete, as they are imagined to be in

abstract?


SIMP.


This I do affirm.


SALV.


Then when ever in concrete you do apply a material Sphere to a material

plane, Things are exactly the same in abstract as in concrete. you apply an

imperfect Sphere to an imperfect plane, & these you say do not touch only in

one point. But I must tell you, that even in abstract an immaterial Sphere, that

is, not a perfect Sphere, may touch an immaterial plane, that is, not a perfect

plane, not in one point, but with part of its superficies, so that hitherto that

which falleth out in concrete, doth in like manner hold true in abstract. And it

would  be  a  new  thing  that  the  computations  and  rates  made  in  abstractnumbers, should not afterwards answer to the Coines of Gold and Silver, and

to  the  merchandizes  in  concrete.  But  do  you  know  Simplicius,  how  this

commeth to passe? Like as to make that the computations agree with the

Sugars, the Silks, the Wools, it is necessary that the accomptant reckon his

tares  of  chests,  bags,  and  such  other  things▪  So  when  the  Geometricall

Philosopher would observe in concrete the effects demonstrated in abstract,

he must defalke the impediments of the matter, and if he know how to do

that, I do assure you, the things shall jump no lesse exactly, than Arithmetical

computations. The errours therefore lyeth neither in abstract, nor in concrete,

nor in Geometry, nor in Physicks, but in the Calculator, that knoweth not how

to  adjust  his  accompts.  Therefore  if  you  had  a  perfect  Sphere  and  plane,

though they were material, you need not doubt but that they would touch

onely  in  one  point.  And  if  such  a  Sphere  was  and  is  impossible  to  be

procured, it was much besides the purpose to say, Quod Sphaera aenea non

tangit  in  puncto.  Furthermore,  if  I  grant  you  Simplicius,  that  in  matter  a

figure cannot be procured that is perfectly spherical, or perfectly level: Do

you think there may be had two materiall bodies, whose superficies in some

part, and in some sort are incurvated as irregularly as can be desired?


SIMP.


Of these I believe that there is no want.


SALV.


If  such  there  be,  Contact  in  a  single  point  is  not  peculiar  to  the  perfect

Spheres onely, but belongeth to all curved figures. then they also will touch

in one sole point; for this contact in but one point alone is not the sole and

peculiar  priviledge  of  the  perfect  Sphere  and  perfect  plane.  Nay,  he  that

should prosecute this point with more subtil contemplations would finde that

it  is  much  harder  to  procure  two  bodies  that  touch  with  part  of  their  s

perficies, It is more difficult to find Figures that touch with a part of their

surface,  than  in  one  sole  point.  than  with  one  point  onely.  For  if  two

superficies be required to combine well together, it is necessary either, that

they be both exactly plane, or that if one be convex, the other be concave; but

in  such  a  manner  concave,  that  the  concavity  do  exactly  answer  to  the

convexity of the other: the which conditions are much harder to be found, inregard of their too narrow determination, than those others, which in their

casuall latitude are infinite.


SIMP.


You believe then, that two stones, or two pieces of Iron taken at chance, and

put together, do for the most part touch in one sole point?


SALV.


In casual encounters, I do not think they do; as well because for the most part

there  will  be  some  small  yielding  filth  upon  them,  as  because  that  no

diligence is used in applying them without striking one another; and every

small matter sufficeth to make the one superficies yield somewhat to the

other; so that they interchangeably, at least in some small particle, receive

figure from the impression of each other. But in case their superficies were

very terse and polite, and that they were both laid upon a table, that so one

might  not  presse  upon  the  other,  and  gently  put  towards  one  another,  I

question not, but that they might be brought to the simple contact in one

onely point.


SAGR.


It is requisite, with your permission, that I propound a certain scruple of

mine, which came into my minde, whil’st I heard proposed by Simplicius, the

impossibility of finding a materiall and solid body, that is, perfectly of a

Spherical  figure,  and  whil’st  I  saw  Salviatus  in  a  certain  manner,  not

gainsaying,  to  give  his  consent  thereto;  therefore  I  would  know,  whether

there would be the same difficulty in forming a solid of some other figure,

that is, to expresse my self better, whether there is more difficulty in reducing

a piece of Marble into the figure of a perfect Sphere, than into a perfect

Pyramid, or into a perfect Horse, or into a perfect Grasse-hopper?


SALV.


To this I will make you the first answer: and in the first place, I will acquit

my self of the assent which you think I gave to Simplicius, which was only

for a time; for I had it also in my thoughts, before I intended to enter uponany other matter, to speak that, which, it may be, is the same, or very like to

that which you are about to say; The Sphericall Figure is easier to be made

than any other. And answering to your first question, I say, that if any figure

can be given to a Solid, the Spherical is the easiest of all others, as it is

likewise the most simple, and holdeth the same place amongst solid figures,

The circular Figure only is placed amongst the postulat  of Mathematicians.

as  the  Circle  holdeth  amongst  the  superficial.  The  description  of  which

Circle,  as  being  more  easie  than  all  the  rest,  hath  alone  been  judged  by

Mathematicians worthy to be put amongst theDemands or Petitions. postulata

belonging to the description of all other figures. And the formation of the

Sphere is so very easie, that if in a plain plate of hard metal you take an

empty or hollow circle, within which any Solid goeth casually revolving that

was before but grosly rounded, it shall, without any other artifice be reduced

to a Spherical figure, as perfect as is possible for it to be; provided, that that

same Solid be not lesse than the Sphere that would passe thorow that Circle.

And that which is yet more worthy of our consideration is, that within the

self-same  incavity one may form Spheres of several magnitudes. Sphericall

Figures of sundry magnitudes may be made with one onely instrument. But

what is required to the making of an Horse, or (as you say) of a Grass-hopper,

I leave to you to judge, who know that there are but few statuaries in the

world  able  to  undertake  such  a  piece  of  work.  And  I  think  that  herein

Simplicius will not dissent from me.


SIMP.


I know not whether I do at all dissent from you; my opinion is this, that none

of the afore-named figures can be perfectly obteined; but for the approaching

as  neer  as  is  possible  to  the  most  perfect  degree,  I  believe  that  it  is

incomparably more easie to reduce the Solid into a Spherical figure, than into

the shape of an Horse, or Grasse-hopper?


SAGR.


And this greater difficulty, wherein think you doth it depend?


SIMP.Like  as  the  great  facility  in  forming  the  Sphere  ariseth  from  its  absolute

simplicity and uniformity so the great irregularity rendereth the construction

of all other figures difficult. Irregular forms difficult to be introduced.


SAGR.


Therefore the irregularity being the cause of the difficulty, than the figure of

a stone broken with an hammer by chance, shall be one of the figures that are

difficult to be introduced, it being perhaps more irregular than that of the

horse?


SIMP.


So it should be.


SAGR.


But tell me; that figure what ever it is which the stone hath, hath it the same

in perfection, or no?


SIMP.


What it hath, it hath so perfectly, that nothing can be more exact.


SAGR.


Then, if of figures that are irregular, and consequently hard to be procured,

there are yet infinite which are most perfectly obteined, with what reason can

it be said, that the most simple, and consequently the most easie of all, is

impossible to be procured?


SALV.


Gentlemen,  with  your  favour,  I  may  say  that  we  have  sallied  out  into  a

dispute  not  much  more  worth  than  the  wool  of  a  goat;  and  whereas  our

argumentations should continually be conversant about serious and weighty

points, we consume our time in frivolous and impertinent wranglings. The

constitution of the Vniverse is one of the most noble Problems. Let us call to

minde, I pray you, that the search of the worlds constitution, is one of thegreatest and noblest Problems that are in nature; and so much the greater,

inasmuch as it is directed to the resolving of that other; to wit, of the cause of

the Seas ebbing and flowing, enquired into by all the famous men, that have

hitherto been in the world, and possibly found out by none of them. Therefore

if we have nothing more remaining for the full confutation of the argument

taken  from  the  Earths  vertigo,  which  was  the  last,  alledged  to  prove  its

immobility  upon  its  own  centre,  let  us  passe  to  the  examination  of  those

things that are alledged for, and against the Annual Motion.


SAGR.


I would not have you, Salviatus, measure our wits by the scale of yours: you,

who use to be continually busied about the sublimest contemplations, esteem

those notions frivolous and below you, which we think matters worthy of our

profoundest thoughts: yet sometimes for our satisfaction do not disdain to

stoop so low as to give way a little to our curiosity. As to the refutation of the

last argument, taken from the extrusions of the diurnal vertigo, far less than

what hath been said, would have given me satisfaction: and yet the things

superfluously spoken, seemed to me so ingenious, that they have been so far

from  wearying  my  fancy,  as  that  they  have,  by  reason  of  their  novelty,

entertained me all along with so great delight, that I know not how to desire

greater: Therefore, if you have any other speculation to add, produce it, for I,

as to my own particular, shall gladly hearken to it.


SALV.


I have always taken great delight in those things which I have had the fortune

to discover, and next to that, which is my chief content, I find great pleasure

in imparting them to some friends, that apprehendeth and seemeth to like

them: Now, in regard you are one of these, slacking a little the reins of my

ambition, which is much pleased when I shew my self more perspicacious,

than some other that hath the reputation of a sharp sight, I will for a full and

true measure of the past dispute, produce another fallacy of the Sectators of

Ptolomey and Aristotle, which I take from the argument alledged.


SAGR.


See how greedily I wait to hear it.SALV.


We  have  hitherto  over-passed,  and  granted  to  Ptolomey,  as  an  effect

indubitable, that the extrusion of the stone proceeding from the velocity of

the  wheel  turn’d  round  upon  its  centre,  the  cause  of  the  said  extrusion

encreaseth  in  proportion,  as  the  velocity  of  the  vertigo  (or  whirling)  is

augmented:  from  whence  it  was  inferred,  that  the  velocity  of  the  Earth’s

vertigo being very much greater than that of any machin whatsoever, that we

can make to turn round artificially; the extrusion of stones, of animals, &c.

would consequently be far more violent. Now, I observe that there is a great

fallacy in this discourse, in that we do compare these velocities indifferently

and absolutely to one another. It’s true, that if I compare the velocities of the

same wheel, or of two wheels equal to each other, that which shall be more

swiftly turn’d round, shall extrude the stone with greater violence; and the

velocity encreasing, the cause of the projection shall likewise encrease: but

when the velocity is augmented, not by encreasing the velocity in the same

wheel, which would be by causing it to make a greater number of revolutions

in equal times; but by encreasing the diameter, and making the wheel greater,

so as that the conversion taking up the same time in the lesser wheel,  as in

the  greater,  The  cause  of  the  projection  increaseth  not  according  to  the

proportion of the velocity, increased by making the wheel bigger. the velocity

is greater onely in the bigger wheel, for that its circumference is bigger; there

is no man that thinketh that the cause of the extrusion in the great wheel will

encrease according to the proportion of the velocity of its circumference, to

the velocity of the circumference of the other lesser wheel; for that this is

most false, as by a most expeditious experiment I shall thus grosly declare:

We may sling a stone with a stick of a yard long, farther than we can do with

a stick six yards long, though the motion of the end of the long stick, that is

of the stone placed in the slit thereof, were more than double as swift as the

motion of the end of the other shorter stick, as it would be if the velocities

were such that the lesser stick should turn thrice round in the time whilst the

greater is making one onely conversion.


SAGR.


This which you tell me, Salviatus, must, I see, needs succeed in this very

manner; but I do not so readily apprehend the cause why equal velocitiesshould not operate equally in extruding projects, but that of the lesser wheel

much more than the other of the greater wheel; therefore I intreat you to tell

me how this cometh to pass?


SIMP.


Herein, Sagredus, you seem to differ much from your self, for that you were

wont to penetrate all things in an instant, and now you have overlook’d a

fallacy couched in the experiment of the stick, which I my self have been able

to  discover:  and  this  is  the  different  manner  of  operating,  in  making  the

projection one while with the short sling and another while with the long one,

for if you will have the stone fly out of the slit, you need not continue its

motion uniformly, but at such time as it is at the swiftest, you are to stay your

arm, and stop the velocity of the stick; whereupon the stone which was in its

swiftest motion, flyeth out, and moveth with impetuosity: but now that stop

cannot  be  made  in  the  great  stick,  which  by  reason  of  its  length  and

flexibility, doth not entirely obey the check of the arm, but continueth to

accompany the stone for some space, and holdeth it in with so much less

force, and not as if you had with a stiff sling sent it going with a jerk: for if

both the sticks or slings should be check’d by one and the same obstacle, I do

believe they would fly aswell out of the one, as out of the other, howbeit their

motions were equally swift.


SAGR.


With the permission of Salviatus, I will answer something to Simplicius, in

regard he hath addressed himself to me; and I say, that in his discourse there

is somewhat good and somewhat bad: good, because it is almost all true; bad,

because  it  doth  not  agree  with  our  case:  Truth  is,  that  when  that  which

carrieth the stones with velocity, shall meet with a  check that is immoveable,

they shall fly out with great impetuosity: the same effect following in that

case, which we see dayly to fall out in a boat that running a swift course, runs

a-ground, or meets with some sudden stop, for all those in the boat, being

surprized, Gran i g the diurnal vertigo of the Earth, & that by some sudden

stop or obstacle it were arrested, houses, mountains themselves, and perhaps

the whole Globe would be shake n pieces. stumble forwards, and fall towards

the part whither the boat steered. And in case the Earth should meet with such

a check, as should be able to resist and arrest its vertigo, then indeed I dobelieve that not onely beasts, buildings and cities, but mountains, lakes and

seas would overturn, and the globe it self would go near to shake in pieces;

but nothing of all this concerns our present purpose, for we speak of what

may follow to the motion of the Earth, it being turn’d round uniformly, and

quietly about its own centre, howbeit with a great velocity. That likewise

which you say of the slings, is true in part; but was not alledged by Salviatus,

as a thing that punctually agreed with the matter whereof we treat, but onely,

as  an  example,  for  so  in  gross  it  may  prompt  us  in  the  more  accurate

consideration of that point, whether, the velocity increasing at any rate, the

cause of the projection doth increase at the same rate: so that v. g. if a wheel

of  ten  yards  diameter,  moving  in  such  a  manner  that  a  point  of  its

circumference will pass an hundred yards in a minute of an hour, and so hath

an impetus able to extrude a stone, that same impetus shall be increased an

hundred thousand times in a wheel of a million of yards diameter; the which

Salviatus denieth, and I incline to his opinion; but not knowing the reason

thereof, I have requested it of him, and stand impatiently expecting it.


SALV.


I am ready to give you the best satisfaction, that my abilities will give leave:

And though in my first discourse you thought that I had enquired into things

estranged from our purpose, yet neverthelesse I believe that in the sequel of

the dispute, you will find that they do not prove so. Therefore let Sagredus

tell  me  wherein  he  hath  observed  that  the  resistance  of  any  moveable  to

motion doth consist.


SAGR.


I see not for the present that the moveable hath any internal resistance to

motion, unlesse it be its natural inclination and propension to the contrary

motion, as in grave bodies, that have a propension to the motion downwards,

the resistance is to the motion upwards; and I said an internal resistance,

because of this, I think, it is you intend to speak, and not of the external

resistances, which are many and accidental.


SALV.It is that indeed I mean, and your nimblenesse of wit hath been too hard for

my craftinesse, but if I have been too short in asking the question, I doubt

whether Sagredus hath been full enough in his answer to satisfie the demand;

and whether there be not in the moveable, besides the natural inclination to

the  contrary term, another intrinsick and natural quality, The inclination of

grave bodies to the motion downwards, is equal to their resistance to the

motion upwards. which maketh it averse to motion. Therefore tell me again;

do  you  not  think  that  the  inclination  v.  g.  of  grave  bodies  to  move

downwards, is equal to the resistance of the same to the motion of projection

upwards?


SAGR.


I believe that it is exactly the same. And for this reason I see that two equal

weights  being  put  into  a  ballance,  they  do  stand  still  in  equilibrium,  the

gravity of the one resisting its being raised by the gravity wherewith the other

pressing downwards would raise it.


SALV.


Very  well;  so  that  if  you  would  have  one  raise  up  the  other,  you  must

encrease the weight of that which depresseth, or lessen the weight of the

other. But if the resistance to ascending motion cunsist onely in gravity, how

cometh it to passe, that in ballances of unequal arms, to wit in theA portable

ballance wherewith market-people weigh their commodities, giving it gravity

by  removing  the  weight  farther  from  the  cock:  call’d  by  the  Latines,

Campana trutina. Stiliard, a weight sometimes of an hundred pounds, with its

pression downwards, doth not suffice to raise up on of four pounds; that shall

counterpoise with it, nay this of four, descending shall raise up that of an

hundred; for such is the effect of the pendant weight upon the weight which

vve vvould vveigh? If the resistance to motion resideth onely in the gravity,

hovv can the arm with its vveight of four pounds onely, resist the vveight of a

sack of wool, or bale of silk, vvhich shall be eight hundred, or a thousand

vveight; yea more, hovv can it overcome the sack vvith its moment, and raise

it up? It must therefore be confest Sagredus, that here it maketh use of some

other resistance, and other force, besides that of simple gravity.


SAGR.It must needs be so; therefore tell me vvhat this second virtue should be.


SALV.


It is that vvhich vvas not in the ballance of equal arms; you see then vvhat

variety there is in the Stiliard; and upon this doubtlesse dependeth the cause

of the nevv effect.


SAGR.


I think that your putting me to it a second time, hath made me remember

something that may be to the purpose. In both these beams the business is

done by the weight, and by the motion; in the ballance, the motions are equal,

and therefore the one weight must exceed it in gravity before it can move it;

in the stiliard, the lesser weight will not move the greater, unless when this

latter moveth little, as being hung at a lesser distance, and the other much, as

hanging  at  a  greater  distance  from  the  lacquet  or  cock.  It  is  necessary

therefore to conclude, that the lesser weight overcometh the resistance of the

greater, by moving much, whilst the other is moved but little.


SALV.


Which is as much as to say, that the velocity of the moveable less grave,

compensateth the gravity of the moveable more grave and less swift.


SAGR.


But do you think that the velocity doth fully make good the gravity?The

greater  velocity  exactly  compensates  the  greater  gravity.  that  is,  that  the

moment and force of a moveable of v. g. four pounds weight, is as great as

that of one of an hundred weight, whensoever that the first hath an hundred

degrees of velocity, and the later but four onely?


SALV.


Yes doubtless, as I am able by many experiments to demonstrate: but for the

present, let this onely of the stiliard suffice: in which you see that the light

end of the beam is then able to sustain and equilibrate the great Wool-sack,when its distance from the centre, upon which the stiliard resteth and turneth,

shall so much exceed the lesser distance, by how much the absolute gravity

of the Wool-sack exceedeth that of the pendent weight. And we see nothing

that can cause this insufficiencie in the great sack of Wool, to raise with its

weight  the  pendent  weight  so  much  less  grave,  save  the  disparity  of  the

motions which the one and the other should make, whilst that the Wool-sack

by descending but one inch onely, will raise the pendent weight an hundred

inches: (supposing that the sack did weigh an hundred times as much, and

that the distance of the small weight from the centre of the beam were an

hundred times greater, than the distance between the said centre and the point

of the sacks suspension.) And again, the pendent weight its moving the space

of an hundred inches, in the time that the sack moveth but one inch onely, is

the same as to say, that the velocity of the motion of the little pendent weight,

is an hundred times greater than the velocity of the motion of the sack. Now

fix it in your belief, as a true and manifest axiom, that the resistance which

proceedeth from the velocity of motion, compensateth that which dependeth

on the gravity of another moveable: So that consequently, a moveable of one

pound, that moveth with an hundred degrees of velocity, doth as much resist

all obstruction, as another moveable of an hundred weight, whose velocity is

but one degree onely. And two equal moveables will equally resist their being

moved, if that they shall be moved with equal velocity: but if one be to be

moved more swiftly than the other, it shall make greater resistance, according

to  the  greater  velocity  that  shall  be  conferred  on  it.  These  things  being

premised, let us proceed to the explanation of our Problem; and for the better

understanding of things, let us make a short Scheme thereof. Let two unequal

wheels  be  described  about  this  centre  A,  [in  Fig.  7.  ]  and  let  the

circumference  of  the  lesser  be  BG,  and  of  the  greater  CEH,  and  let  the

semidiameter ABC, be perpendicular to the Horizon; and by the points B and

C, let us draw the right lined Tangents BF and CD; and in the arches BG and

CE, take two equal parts BG and CE: and let the two wheels be supposed to

be  turn’d    round  upon  their  centres  with  equal  velocities,  so  as  that  two

moveables, which suppose for example to be two stones placed in the points

B and C, come to be carried along the circumferences BG and CE, with equal

velocities; so that in the same time that the stone B shall have run the arch

BG, the stone C will have past the arch CE. I say now, that the whirl or

vertigo of the lesser wheel is much more potent to make the projection of the

stone B, than the vertigo of the bigger wheel to make that of the stone C.Therefore  the  projection,  as  we  have  already  declared,  being  to  be  made

along the tangent, when the stones B and C are to separate from their wheel,

and to begin the motion of projection from the points B and C, then shall they

be extruded by the impetus conceived from the vertigo by (or along) the

tangents BF and CD. The two stones therefore have equal impetuosities of

running along the tangents BF and CD, and would run along the same, if they

were not turn’d aside by some other force: is it not so Sagredus?


SAGR.


In my opinion the businesse is as you say.


SALV.


But  what  force,  think  you,  should  that  be  which  averts  the  stones  from

moving by the tangents, along which they are certainly driven by the impetus

of the vertigo.


SAGR.


It is either their own gravity, or else some glutinous matter that holdeth them

fast and close to the wheels.


SALV.


But for the diverting of a moveable from the motion to which nature inciteth

it, is there not required greater or lesser force, according as the deviation is

intended to be greater or lesser? that is, according as the said moveable in its

deviation hath a greater or lesser space to move in the same time?


SAGR.


Yes certainly: for it was concluded even now, that to make a moveable to

move;  the  movent  vertue  must  be  increased  in  proportion  to  the  velocity

wherewith it is to move.


SALV.Now consider, that for the deviating the stone upon the lesse wheel from the

motion of projection, which it would make by the tangent BF, and for the

holding of it fast to the wheel, it is required, that its own gravity draw it back

the whole length of the secant FG, or of the perpendicular raised from the

point G, to the line BF, whereas in the greater wheel the retraction needs to

be no more than the secant DE, or the perpendicular let fall from the tangent

DC to the point E, lesse by much than FG, and alwayes lesser and lesser

according as the wheel is made bigger. And forasmuch as these retractions

(as I may call them) are required to be made in equal times, that is, whil’st the

wheels passe the two equal arches BG and CE, that of the stone B, that is, the

retraction FG ought to be more swift than the other DE; and therefore much

greater force will be required for  holding fast the stone B to its little wheel,

than for the holding the stone C to its great one, which is as much as to say,

that such a small thing will impede the extrusion in the great wheel, as will

not at all hinder it in the little one. It is manifest therefore that the more the

wheel augmenteth, the more the cause of the projection diminisheth.


SAGR.


From this which I now understand, by help of your minute dissertation, I am

induced to think, that I am able to satisfie my judgment in a very few words.

For equal impetus being impressed on both the stones that move along the

tangents,  by  the  equal  velocity  of  the  two  wheels,  we  see  the  great

circumference,  by  means  of  its  small  deviation  from  the  tangent,  to  go

seconding, as it were, and in a fair way refraining in the stone the appetite, if

I  may  so  say,  of  separating  from  the  circumference;  so  that  any  small

retention, either of its own inclination, or of some glutination sufficeth to

hold it fast to the wheel. Which, again, is not able to work the like effect in

the  little  wheel,  which  but  little  prosecuting  the  direction  of  the  tangent,

seeketh with too much eagernesse to hold fast the stone; and the restriction

and glutination not being stronger than that which holdeth the other stone fast

to the greater wheel, itStrappar la cavezza, is to break the bridle. breaks loose,

and runneth along the tangent. Therefore I do not only finde that all those

have  erred,  who  have  believed  the  cause  of  the  projection  to  increase

according  to  the  augmentation  of  the  vertigo’s  velocity;  but  I  am  further

thinking, that the projection diminishing in the inlarging of the wheel, so long

as the same velocity is reteined in those wheels; it may possibly be true, thathe that would make the great wheel extrude things like the little one, would

be forced to increase them as much in velocity; as they increase in diameter,

which  he  might  do,  by  making  them  to  finish  their  conversions  in  equal

times; and thus we may conclude, that the Earths revolution or vertigo would

be no more able to extrude stones, than any little wheel that goeth so slowly,

as that it maketh but one turn in twenty four hours.


SALV.


We will enquire no further into this point for the present: let it suffice that we

have abundantly (if I deceive not my self) demonstrated the invalidity of the

argument, which at first sight seemed very concluding, and was so held by

very famous men: and I shall think my time and words well bestowed, if I

have but gained some belief in the opinion of Simplicius, I will not say of the

Earths mobility, but only that the opinion of those that believe it, is not so

ridiculous and fond, as the rout of vulgar Philosophers esteem it.


SIMP.


The answers hitherto produced against the arguments brought against this

Diurnal Revolution of the Earth taken from  grave bodies falling from the top

of  a  Tower,  and  from  projections  made  perpendicularly  upwards,  or

according to any inclination sidewayes towards the East, West, North, South,

&c. have somewhat abated in me the antiquated incredulity I had conceived

against that opinion: but other greater doubts run in my mind at this very

instant, which I know not in the least how to free my self of, and haply you

your self will not be able to resolve them; nay, its possible you may not have

heard them, for they are very modern. And these are the objections of two

Authours, that ex professo write against Copernicus. Other objections of two

modern Authors against Copernicus. Some of which are read in a little Tract

of  natural  conclusions;  The  rest  are  by  a  great  both  Philosopher  and

Mathematician,  inserted  in  a  Treatise  which  he  hath  written  in  favour  of

Aristotle, and his opinion touching the inalterability of the Heavens, where he

proveth, that not onely the Comets, but also the new stars, namely, that anno

1572. in Cassiopeia, and that anno 1604. in Sagittarius were not above the

Spheres of the Planets, but absolutely beneath the concave of the Moon in the

Elementary Sphere, and this he demonstrateth against Tycho, Kepler, and

many  other  Astronomical  Observators,  and  beateth  them  at  their  ownweapon; to wit, the Doctrine of Parallaxes. If you like thereof, I will give you

the reasons of both these Authours, for I have read them more than once, with

attention; and you may examine their strength, and give your opinion thereon.


SALV.


In regard that our principal end is to bring upon the stage, and to consider

what ever hath been said for, or against the two Systemes, Ptolomaick, and

Copernican, it is not good to omit any thing that hath been written on this

subject.


SIMP.


I will begin therefore with the objections which I finde in the Treatise of

Conclusions, and afterwards proceed to the rest. The first objection of the

modern Author of the little tract of Conclusions. In the first place then, he

bestoweth much paines in calculating exactly how many miles an hour a

point of the terrestrial Globe situate under the Equinoctial, goeth, and how

many miles are past by other points situate in other parallels: and not being

content with finding out such motions in horary times, he findeth them also in

a minute of an hour; and not contenting himself with a minute, he findes them

also in a second minute; yea more, he goeth on to shew plainly, how many

miles a Cannon bullet would go in the same time, A Cannon bullet would

spend more than six days in falling from the Concave of the Moon to the

centre of the Earth, according to the opinion of that modern Author of the

Conclusions. being placed in the concave of the Lunar Orb, supposing it also

as big as Copernicus himself representeth it, to take away all subterfuges

from  his  adversary.  And  having  made  this  most  ingenious  and  exquisite

supputation, he sheweth, that a grave body falling from thence above would

consume more than six dayes in attaining to the centre of the Earth, to which

all grave bodies naturally move. Now if by the absolute Divine  Power, or by

some Angel, a very great Cannon bullet were carried up thither, and placed in

our Zenith or vertical point, and from thence let go at liberty, it is in his, and

also in my opinion, a most incredible thing that it, in descending downwards,

should all the way maintain it self in our vertical line, continuing to turn

round with the Earth, about its centre, for so many dayes, describing under

the Equinoctial a Spiral line in the plain of the great circle it self; and under

other Parallels, Spiral lines about Cones, and under the Poles falling by asimple right line. He, in the next place, stablisheth and confirmeth this great

improbability  by  proving,  in  the  way  of  interrogations,  many  difficulties

impossible to be removed by the followers of Copernicus; and they are, if I

do well remember — .


SALV.


Take up a little, good Simplicius, and do not load me with so many novelties

at once: I have but a bad memory, and therefore I must not go too fast. And in

regard it cometh into my minde, that I once undertook to calculate how long

time such a grave body falling from the concave of the Moon, would be in

passing to the centre of the Earth, and that I think I remember that the time

would not be so long; it would be fit that you shew us by what rule this

Author made his calculation.


SIMP.


He hath done it by proving his intent à fortiori, a sufficient advantage for his

adversaries, supposing that the velocity of the body falling along the vertical

line, towards the centre of the Earth, were equal to the velocity of its circular

motion, which it made in the grand circle of the concave of the Lunar Orb.

Which by equation would come to passe in an hour, twelve thousand six

hundred German miles, a thing which indeed savours of impossibility: Yet

neverthelesse, to shew his abundant caution, and to give all advantages to his

adversaries, he supposeth it for true, and concludeth, that the time of the fall

ought however to be more than six dayes.


SALV.


And is this the sum of his method? And doth he by this demonstration prove

the time of the fall to be above six dayes?


SAGR.


Me thinks that he hath behaved himself too modestly, for that having it in the

power of his will to give what velocity he pleased to such a descending body,

and might aswell have made it six moneths, nay, six years in falling to the

Earth, he is content with six dayes. But, good Salviatus, sharpen my appetitea little, by telling me in what manner you made your computation, in regard

you say, that you have heretofore cast it up: for I am confident that if the

question had not required some ingenuity in working it, you would never

have applied your minde unto it.


SALV.


It  is  not  enough,  Sagredus,  that  the  subjects  be  noble  and  great,  but  the

businesse consists in handling it nobly. And who knoweth not, that in the

dissection  of  the  members  of  a  beast,  there  may  be  discovered  infinite

wonders of provident and prudent Nature; and yet for one, that the Anatomist

dissects, the butcher cuts up a thousand. Thus I, who am now seeking how to

satisfie your demand, cannot tell with which of the two shapes I had best to

appear on the Stage; but yet, taking heart from the example of Simplicius, his

Authour, I will, without more delays, give you an account (if I have not

forgot) how I proceeded. But before I go any further, I must not omit to tell

you, that I much fear that Simplicius hath not faithfully related the manner

how  this  his  Authour  found,  that  the  Cannon  bullet  in  coming  from  the

concave of the Moon to the centre of the Earth, would spend more than six

dayes: for if he had supposed that its velocity in descending was equal to that

of the concave (as Simplicius saith he doth suppose) he would have shewn

himself ignorant of the first, and more simple principles of Geometry; yea, I

admire that Simplicius, in admitting the supposition which he speaketh of,

doth not see the monstrous absurdity that is couched in it.


SIMP.


Its possible that I may have erred in relating it; but that I see any fallacy in it,

I am sure is not true.


SALV.


Perhaps I did not rightly apprehend that which you said, Do you not say, that

this Authour maketh the velocity of the bullet in descending equall to that

which it had in turning round, being in the concave of the Moon, and that

comming down with the same velocity, it would reach to the centre in six

dayes?SIMP.


So, as I think, he writeth.


SALV.


And do not you pe ceive a shamefull errour therein? But questionlesse you

dissemble it: For it cannot be, but that you should know that the semidiameter

of the Circle is lesse than the sixth part of the circumference; A shamefull

errour  in  the  Argument  taken  from  the  bullets  falling  out  of  the  Moons

concave. and that consequently, the time in which the moveable shall passe

the semidiameter, shall be lesse than the sixth part of the time; in which,

being moved with the same velocity, it would passe the circumference; and

that therefore the bullet descending with the velocity, wherewith it moved in

the concave, will arrive in lesse than four hours at the centre, supposing that

in the concave one revolution should be consummate in twenty four hours, as

he must of necessity have supposed it, for to keep it all the way in the same

vertical line.


SIMP.


Now I thorowly perceive the mistake: but yet I would not lay it upon him

undeservedly,  for  it’s  possible  that  I    may  have  erred  in  rehearsing  his

Argument, and to avoid running into the same mistakes for the future, I could

wish I had his Book; and if you had any body to send for it, I would take it

for a great favour.


SAGR.


You shall not want a Lacquey that will runne for it with all speed: and he

shall do it presently, without losing any time; in the mean time Salviatus may

please to oblige us with his computation.


SIMP.


If he go, he shall finde it lie open upon my Desk, together with that of the

other Author, who also argueth against Copernicus.SAGR.


We will make him bring that also for the more certainty: and in the interim

Salviatus shall make his calculation: I have dispatch’t away a messenger.


SALV.


Above all things it must be considered, that the motion of descending grave

bodies  is  not  uniform,  but  departing  from  rest  they  go  continually

accelerating: An exact compute of the time of the fall of the Canon bullet

from the Moons concave to the Earths centre. An effect known and observed

by all men, unlesse it be by the forementioned modern Authour, who not

speaking  of  acceleration,  maketh  it  even  and  uniforme.  But  this  general

notion is of no avail, if it be not known according to what proportion this

increase  of  velocity  is  made;  a  conclusion  that  hath  been  until  our  times

unknown to all Philosophers; and was first found out & demonstrated by

theThe Author. Academick, our common friend, who in some of hisBy these

Writings, he every where meanes his Dialogues, De motu, which I promise to

give you in my second Volume. writings not yet published, but in familiarity

shewn to me, and some others of his acquaintance he proveth, how that the

acceleration of the right motion of grave bodies, is made according to the

numbers uneven beginning ab unitate, that is, any number of equal times

being assigned, if in the first time the moveable departing from rest shall

have passed such a certain space, Acceleration of the natural motion of grave

bodies is made according to the odde numbers beginning at unity. as for

example, an ell, in the second time it shall have passed three ells, in the third

five, in the fourth seven, and so progressively, according to the following odd

numbers; which in short is the same, as if I should say, that the spaces passed

by the moveable departing from its rest, The spaces past by the falling grave

body  are  as  the  squares  of  their  times.  are  unto  each  other  in  proportion

double to the proportion of the times, in which those spaces are measured; or

we will say, that the spaces passed are to each other, as the squares of their

times.


SAGR.


This  is  truly  admirable:  and  do  you  say  that  there  is  a  Mathematical

demonstration for it?SALV.


Yes, purely Mathematical; and not onely for this, but for many other very

admirable passions, pertaining to natural motions, An intire and new Science

of the Academick concerning local motion. and to projects also, all invented,

and demonstrated by Our Friend, and I have seen and considered them all to

my very great content and admiration, seeing a new compleat Doctrine to

spring up touching a subject, upon which have been written hundreds of 

Volumes; and yet not so much as one of the infinite admirable conclusions

that those his writings contain, hath ever been observed, or understood by any

one, before Our Friend made them out.


SAGR.


You make me lose the desire I had to understand more in our disputes in

hand, onely that I may hear some of those demonstrations which you speak

of; therefore either give them me presently, or at least promise me upon your

word,  to  appoint  a  particular  conference  concerning  them,  at  which

Simplicius also may be present, if he shall have a mind to hear the passions

and accidents of the primary effect in Nature.


SIMP.


I shall undoubtedly be much pleased therewith, though indeed, as to what

concerneth Natural Philosophy, I do not think that it is necessary to descend

unto minute particularities, a general knowledg of the definition of motion,

and of the distinction of natural and violent, even and accelerate, and the like,

sufficing: For if this were not sufficient, I do not think that Aristotle would

have omitted to have taught us what ever more was necessary.


SALV.


It may be so. But let us not lose more time about this, which I promise to

spend half a day apart in, for your satisfaction; nay, now I remember, I did

promise you once before to satisfie you herein. Returning therefore to our

begun calculation of the time, wherein the grave cadent body would pass

from the concave of the Moon to the centre of the earth, that we may not

proceed arbitrarily and at randon, but with a Logical method, we will firstattempt to ascertain our selves by experiments often repeated, in how long

time  a  ball  v.  g.  of  Iron  descendeth  to  the  Earth  from  an  altitude  of  an

hundred yards.


SAGR.


Let us therefore take a ball of such a determinate weight, and let it be the

same wherewith we intend to make the computation of the time of descent

from the Moon.


SALV.


This is not material, for that a ball of one, of ten, of an hundred, of a thousand

pounds, will all measure the same hundred yards in the same time.


SIMP.


But this I cannot believe, nor much less doth Aristotle think so, who writeth,

that the velocities of descending grave bodies, are in the same proportion to

one another, as their gravities.


SALV.


If you will admit this for true, The error of Aristotle in affirming, falling

grave bodies to move according to the proportion of their gravities. you must

believe also, that two balls of the same matter, being let fall in the same

moment, one of an hundred pounds, and another of one, from an altitude of

an hundred yards, the great one arriveth at the ground, before the other is

descended but one yard onely: Now bring your fancy, if you can, to imagine,

that you see the great  ball got to the ground, when the little one is still within

less than a yard of the top of the Tower.


SAGR.


That this proposition is most false, I make no doubt in the world; but yet that

yours is absolutely true, I cannot well assure my self: nevertheless, I believe

it, seeing that you so resolutely affirm it; which I am sure you would not do,

if you had not certain experience, or some clear demonstration thereof.SALV.


I have both: and when we shall handle the business of motions apart, I will

communicate them: in the interim, that we may have no more occasions of

interrupting  our  discourse,  we  will  suppose,  that  we  are  to  make  our

computation upon a ball of Iron of an hundredNote that these Calculations

are made in Italian weights and measu es. And 100 pounds Haverdupoise

make 1 1 l. Florentine. And 100 Engl   makes 150   Florent. so that the brace

or yard of our Author is 1/4 of our yard. pounds, the which by reiterated

experiments  descendeth  from  the  altitude  of  an  hundredNote  that  these

Calculations  are  made  in  Italian  weights  and  measures.  And  100  pounds

Haverdupoise make 1 1 l. Florentine. And 100 Engl   makes 150   Florent. so

that the brace or yard of our Author is 1/4 of our yard. yards, in five second-

minutes  of  an  hour.  And  because,  as  we  have  said,  the  spaces  that  are

measured  by  the  cadent  moveable,  increase  in  double  proportion;  that  is,

according to the squares of the times, being that the time of one first-minute

is duodecuple to the time of five seconds, if we multiply the hundred yards by

the square of 12, that is by 144, we shall have 14400, which shall be the

number of yards that the same moveable shall pass in one first-minute of an

hour:  and  following  the  same  rule  because  one  hour  is  60  minutes,

multiplying 14400, the number of yards past in one minute, by the square of

60, that is, by 3600, there shall come forth 51840000, the number of yards to

be passed in an hour, which make 17280 miles. And desiring to know the

space that the said ball would pass in 4 hours, let us multiply 17280 by 16,

(which  is  the  square  of  4)  and  the  product  will  be  276480  miles:  which

number is much greater than the distance from the Lunar concave to the

centre of the Earth, which is but 196000 miles, making the distance of the

concave 56 semidiameters of the Earth, as that modern Author doth; and the

semidiameter of the Earth 3500 miles, of 3000The Italian measure which I

commonly transl te yards. Braces to aThe Italian m le is  of our mile. mile,

which are our Italian miles.


Therefore, Simplicius, that space from the concave of the Moon to the centre

of the Earth, which your Accomptant said could not be passed under more

than  six  days,  you  see  that  (computing  by  experience,  and  not  upon  the

fingers ends) that it shall be passed in much less than four hours; and makingthe computation exact, it shall be passed by the moveable in 3 hours, 22 min.

prim. and 4 seconds.


SAGR.


I beseech you, dear Sir, do not defraud me of this exact calculation, for it

must needs be very excellent.


SALV.


So indeed it is: therefore having (as I have said) by diligent tryal observed,

that such a moveable passeth in its descent, the height of 100 yards in 5

seconds of an hour, we will say, if 100 yards are passed in 5 seconds; in how

many seconds shall  588000000 yards (for so many are in 56 diameters of the

Earth) be passed? The rule for this work is, that the third number must be

multiplied by the square of the second, of which doth come 14700000000,

which ought to be divided by the first, that is, by 100, and the root square of

the quotient, that is, 12124 is the number sought, namely 12124 min. secun.

of an hour, which are 3 hours, 22 min. prim. and 4 seconds.


SAGR.


I have seen the working, but I know nothing of the reason for so working, nor

do I now think it a time to ask it.


SALV.


Yet I will give it, though you do not ask it, because it is very easie. Let us

mark these three numbers with the Letters A first, B second, C third. A and C

are the numbers of the spaces, B is the number of the time; the fourth number

is sought, of the time also. And because we know, that look what proportion

the space A, hath to the spuace C, the same proportion shall the square of the

time B have to the sqare of the time, which is sought.


    100.5.588000000.

    ABC25

                    14700000000
  1                    35956
  22
                    10

    24112124

                    602022422

                              324240


Therefore by the Golden Rule, let the number C be multiplied by the square

of the number B, and let the product be divided by the number A, and the

quotient shall be the square of the number sought, and its square root shall be

the  number  it  self  that  is  sought.  Now  you  see  how  easie  it  is  to  be

understood.


SAGR.


So are all truths, when once they are found out, but the difficulty lyeth in

finding them I very well apprehend it, and kindly thank you. And if there

remain any other curiosity touching this point, I pray you let us hear it; for if I

may speak my mind, I will with the favour of Simplicius, that from your

discourses  I  alwayes  learn  some  new  motion,  but  from  those  of  his

Philosophers, I do not remember that I have learn’t any thing of moment.


SALV.


There might be much more said touching these local motions; but according

to agreement, we will reserve it to a particular conference; and for the present

I  will  speak  something  touching  the  Author  named  by  Simplicius,  who

thinketh he hath given a great advantage to the adverse party in granting that,

that Canon bullet in falling from the concave of the Moon may descend with

a velocity equal to the velocity wherewith it would  turn round, staying there

above, and moving along with the diurnal conversion. Now I tell him, that

that same ball falling from the concave unto the centre, will acquire a degree

of velocity much more than double the velocity of the diurnal motion of the

Lunar concave; The falling moveable if it move with a degree of velocity

acquired in a like time with an uniform motion, it shall pass a space double to

that passed with the accelerated motion. and this I will make out by solid and

not impertinent suppositions. You must know therefore that the grave bodyfalling and acquiring all the way new velocity according to the proportion

already mentioned, hath in any whatsoever place of the line of its motion

such  a  degree  of  velocity,  that  if  it  should  continue  to  move  therewith,

uniformly without farther encreasing it; in another time like to that of its

descent,  it  would  passe  a  space  double  to  that  passed  in  the  line  of  the

precedent motion of descent. And thus for example, if that ball in coming

from the concave of the Moon to its centre hath spent three hours, 22 min.

prim. and 4 seconds, I say, that being arrived at the centre, it shall find it self

constituted in such a degree of velocity, that if with that, without farther

encreasing it, it should continue to move uniformly, it would in other 3 hours,

22 min. prim. and 4 seconds, passe double that space, namely as much as the

whole diameter of the Lunar Orb; and because from the Moons concave to

the centre are 196000 miles, which the ball passeth in 3 hours 22 prim. min.

and  4  seconds,  therefore  (according  to  what  hath  been  said)  the  ball

continuing to move with the velocity which it is found to have in its arrival at

the centre, it would passe in other 3 hours 22 min. prim. and 4 seconds, a

space double to that, namely 392000 miles; but the same continuing in the

concave  of  the  Moon,  which  is  in  circuit  1232000  miles,  and  moving

therewith in a diurnal motion, it would make in the same time, that is in 3

hours 22 min. prim. and 4 seconds, 172880 miles, which are fewer by many

than  the  half  of  the  392000  miles.  You  see  then  that  the  motion  in  the

concave is not as the modern Author saith, that is, of a velocity impossible

for the falling ball to partake of, &c.


SAGR.


The discourse would pass for current, and would give me full satisfaction, if

that particular was but salved, of the moving of the moveable by a double

space to that passed in falling in another time equal to that of the descent, in

case it doth continue to move uniformly with the greatest degree of velocity

acquired in descending. A proposition which you also once before supposed

as true, but never demonstrated.


SALV.


This is one of the demonstrations of Our Friend, and you shall see it in due

time; but for the present, I will with some conjectures (not teach you any

thing that is new, but) remember you of a certain contrary opinion, and shewyou, that it may haply so be. A bullet of lead hanging in a long and fine

thread fastened to the  roof, if we remove it far from perpendicularity, and

then let it go, have you not observed that, it declining, will pass freely, and

well near as far to the other side of the perpendicular?


SAGR.


I have observed it very well, and find (especially if the plummet be of any

considerable weight) that it riseth so little less than it descended, so that I

have sometimes thought, that the ascending arch is equal to that descending,

and thereupon made it a question whether the vibrations might not perpetuate

themselves; and I believe that they might, The motion of grave penduli might

be  perpetuated,  impediments  being  removed.  if  that  it  were  possible  to

remove the impediment of the Air, which resisting penetration, doth some

small matter retard and impede the motion of the pendulum, though indeed

that impediment is but small: in favour of which opinion the great number of

vibrations that are made before the moveable wholly ceaseth to move, seems

to plead.


SALV.


The motion would not be perpetual, Sagredus, although the impediment of

the Air were totally removed, because there is another much more abstruse.


SAGR.


And what is that? as for my part I can think of no other?


SALV.


You will be pleased when you hear it, but I shall not tell it you till anon: in

the  mean  time,  let  us  proceed.  I  have  proposed  the  observation  of  this

Pendulum,  to  the  intent,  that  you  should  understand,  that  the  impetus

acquired in the descending arch, where the motion is natural, is of it self able

to drive the said ball with a violent motion, as far on the other side in the like

ascending  arch;  if  so,  I  say,  of  it  self,  all  external  impediments  being

removed: I believe also that every one takes it for granted, that as in the

descending arch the velocity all the way increaseth, till it come to the lowestpoint, or its perpendicularity; so from this point, by the other ascending arch,

it all the way diminisheth, untill it come to its extreme and highest point: and

diminishing with the same proportions, wherewith it did before increase, so

that the dgrees of the velocities in the points equidistant from the point of

perpendicularity, are equal to each other. Hence it seemeth to me (arguing

with  all  due  modesty)  that  I  might  easily  be  induced  to  believe,  If  the

Terrestrial  Globe  were  perforated,  a  grave  body  descending  by  that  bore,

would pass and ascend as far beyond the centre, as it did descend. that if the

Terrestrial Globe were bored thorow the centre, a Canon bullet descending

through that Well, would acquire by that time it came to the centre, such an

impulse of velocity, that, it having passed beyond the centre, would spring it

upwards  the  other  way,  as  great  a  space,  as  that  was  wherewith  it  had

descended,  all  the  way  beyond  the  centre  diminishing  the  velocity  with

decreasements like to the increasements acquired in the descent: and the time

spent in this second motion of ascent, I believe, would be equal to the time of

descent.  Now  if  the  moveable  by  diminishing  that  its  greatest  degree  of

velocity  which  it    had  in  the  centre,  successively  until  it  come  to  total

extinction, do carry the moveable in such a time such a certain space, as it

had gone in such a like quantity of time, by the acquist of velocity from the

total privation of it until it came to that its greatest degree; it seemeth very

reasonable, that if it should move always with the said greatest degree of

velocity it would pass, in such another quantity of time, both those spaces:

For if we do but in our mind successively divide those velocities into rising

and falling 1 degrees, as v. g. these numbers in the margine; so that the 2 first

sort unto 10 be supposed the increasing velocities, and the 3 others unto one

1, be the increasing; and let those of the time 4 of the descent, and the others

of the time of the ascent being 5 added all together, make as many, as if one

of the two sums of 6 them had been all of the greatest degrees, and therefore

the 7 whole space passed by all the degrees of the increasing velocities, 8 and

decreasing, (which put together is the whole diameter) 9 ought to be equal to

the space passed by the greatest velocities, 10 that are in number half the

aggregate of the increasing 10 and decreasing velocities. I know that I have

but obscurely 9 expressed my self, and I wish I may be understood.8


SAGR.I think I understand you very well; and also that I 7 can in a few words shew,

that I do understand you. You had 6 a mind to say, that the motion begining

from rest, and all the 5 way increasing the velocity with equal augmentations,

such as 4 are those of continuate numbers beginning at 1, rather at 0,3 which

representeth the state of rest, disposed as in the margine:2 and continued at

pleasure, so as that the least degree may be 0,1 and the greatest v. g. 5, all

these degrees of velocity wherewith the moveable is moved, make the sum of

15; but if the 0 moveable should move with as many degrees in number as 1

these are, and each of them equal to the biggest, which is 5, the 2 aggregate

of all these last velocities would be double to the 3 others, namely 30. And

therefore the moveable moving with 4 a like time, but with uniform velocity,

which is that of the 5 highest degree 5, ought to pass a space double to that

which it passeth in the accelerate time, which beginneth at the state of rest.


SALV.


According to your quick and piercing way of apprehending things, you have

explained the whole business with more plainness than I my self; and put me

also in mind of adding something more: for in the accelerate motion, the

augmentation  being  continual,  you  cannot  divide  the  degrees  of  velocity,

which continually increase, into any determinate number, because changing

every moment, they are evermore infinite. Therefore we shall be the better

able to exemplifie our intentions by describing a Triangle, which let be this

ABC, [in Fig. 8. ] taking in the  side AC, as many equal parts as we please,

AD, DE, EF, FG, and drawing by the points D, E, F, G, right lines parallel to

the  BC. Now let us imagine the parts marked in the line AC, to be equal

times, and let the parallels drawn by the points D, E, F, G, represent unto us

the degrees of velocity accelerated, and increasing equally in equal times; and

let the Point A be the state of rest, from which the moveable departing, hath

v. g. in the time AD, acquired the degree of velocity DH, in the second time

we will suppose, that it hath increased the velocity from DH, as far as to EI,

and  so  supposing  it  to  have  grown  greater  in  the  succeeding  times,  The

acceleration of grave bodies naturally descendent, increaseth from moment to

moment. according to the increase of the lines FK, GL, &c. but because the

acceleration is made continually from moment to moment, and not disjunctly

from one certain part of time to another; the point A being put for the lowest

moment of velocity, that is, for the state of rest, and AD for the first instant oftime following; it is manifest, that before the acquist of the degree of velocity

DH, made in the time AD, the moveable must have past by infinite other

lesser and lesser degrees gained in the infinite instants that are in the time

DA,  answering  the  infinite  points  that  are  in  the  line  DA;  therefore  to

represent unto us the infinite degrees of velocity that precede the degree DH,

it is necessary to imagine infinite lines successively lesser and lesser, which

are supposed to be drawn by the infinite points of the line DA, and parallels

to  DH,  the  which  infinite  lines  represent  unto  us  the  superficies  of  the

Triangle AHD, and thus we may imagine any space passed by the moveable,

with a motion which begining at rest, goeth uniformly accelerating, to have

spent and made use of infinite degrees of velocity, increasing according to the

infinite  lines  that  begining  from  the  point  A,  are  supposed  to  be  drawn

parallel to the line HD, and to the rest IE, KF, LG, the motion continuing as

far as one will.


Now let us compleat the whole Parallelogram AMBC, and let us prolong as

far as to the side thereof BM, not onely the Parallels marked in the Triangle,

but those infinite others imagined to be drawn from all the points of the side

AC;  and  like  as  BC,  was  the  greatest  of  those  infinite  parallels  of  the

Triangle, representing unto us the greatest degree of velocity acquired by the

moveable  in  the  accelerate  motion,  and  the  whole  superficies  of  the  said

Triangle, was the mass and sum of the whole velocity, wherewith in the time

AC it passed such a certain space, so the parallelogram is now a mass and

aggregate  of  a  like  number  of  degrees  of  velocity,  but  each  equal  to  the

greatest BC, the which mass of velocities will be double to the mass of the

increasing velocities in the Triangle, like as the said Parallelogram is double

to the Triangle: and therefore if the moveable, that falling did make use  of

the  accelerated  degrees  of  velocity,  answering  to  the  triangle  ABC,  hath

passed in such a time such a space, it is very reasonable and probable, that

making use of the uniform velocities answering to the parallelogram, it shall

passe with an even motion in the same time a space double to that passed by

the accelerate motion.


SAGR.


I am entirely satisfied. And if you call this a probable Discourse, what shall

the necessary demonstrations be? I wish that in the whole body of commonPhilosophy, I could find one that was but thus concludent.


SIMP.


It  is  not  necessary  in  natural  Philosophy  to  seek  exquisite  Mathematical

evidence.  In  natural  Sciences  it  is  not  necessary  to  seek  Mathematicall

evidence.


SAGR.


But this point of motion, is it not a natural question? and yet I cannot find

that Aristotle hath demonstrated any the least accident of it. But let us no

longer divert our intended Theme, nor do you fail, I pray you Salviatus, to tell

me  that  which  you  hinted  to  me  to  be  the  cause  of  the  Pendulum’s

quiescence, besides the resistance of the Medium ro penetration.


SALV.


Tell me; of two penduli hanging at unequal distances, doth not that which is

fastned to the longer threed make its vibrations more seldome?


SAGR.


Yes, The pendulum hanging at a longer th eed, maketh its vibrations more

seldome than the pendulum hanging at a shorter threed. if they be moved to

equall distances from their perpendicularity.


SALV.


This  greater  or  lesse  elongation  importeth  nothing  at  all,  for  the  same

pendulum alwayes maketh its reciprocations in equall times, be they longer

or shorter, that is, though the pendulum be little or much removed from its

perpendicularity, The vibrations of the same pendulum are made with the

same frequency, whether they be small or great. and if they are not absolutely

equal, they are insensibly different, as experience may shew you: and though

they were very unequal, yet would they not discountenance, but favour our

cause. Therefore let us draw the perpendicular AB [in Fig. 9. ] and hang from

the point A, upon the threed AC, a plummet C, and another upon the samethreed  also,  which  let  be  E,  and  the  threed  AC,  being  removed  from  its

perpendicularity, and then letting go the plummets C and E, they shall move

by the arches CBD, EGF, and the plummet E, as hanging at a lesser distance,

and  withall,  as  (by  what  you  said)  lesse  removed,  will  return  back  again

faster,  and  make  its  vibrations  more  frequent  than  the  plummet  C,  and

therefore  shall  hinder  the  said  plummet  C,  from  running  so  much  farther

towards the term D, as it would do, if it were free: and thus the plummet E

bringing unto it in every vibration continuall impediment, The cause which

impedeth the pendulum and reduceth it to rest. it shall finally reduce it to

quiescence. Now the same threed, (raking away the middle plummet) is a

composition  of  many  grave  penduli,  that  is,  each  of  its  parts  is  such  a

pendulum fastned neerer and neerer to the point A, and therefore disposed  to

make it, vibrations successively more and more frequent; and consequently is

able to bring a continual impediment to the plummet C; and for a proof that

this is so, if we do but observe the thread AC, we shall see it distended not

directly, but in an arch; and if instead of the thread we take a chain, we shall

discern the effect more perfectly; The thread or chain to which a pendulum is

fastned,  maketh  an  arch,  and  doth  not  stretch  it  selfe  streight  out  in  its

vibrations. and especially removing the gravity C, to a considerable distance

from the perpendicular AB, for that the chain being composed of many loose

particles, and each of them of some weight, the arches AEC, and AFD, will

appear notably incurvated. By reason therefore, that the parts of the chain,

according as they are neerer to the point A, desire to make their vibrations

more frequent, they permit not the lower parts of the said chain to swing so

far as naturally they would: and by continual detracting from the vibrations of

the plummet C, they finally make it cease to move, although the impediment

of the air might be removed.


SAGR.


The books are now come; here take them Simplicius, and find the place you

are in doubt of.


SIMP.


See, here it is where he beginneth to argue against the diurnal motion of the

Earth,  he  having  first  confuted  the  annual.  Motus  terrae  annuus  asserere

Copernicanos  cogit  conversionem  ejusdem  quotidianam;  alias  idem  terraeHemisphaerium  continenter  ad  Solem  esset  conversum  obumbrato  semper

averso. [In English thus: ] The annual motion of the Earth doth compell the

Copernicans  to  assert  the  daily  conversion  thereof;  otherwise  the  same

Hemisphere of the Earth would be continually turned towards the Sun, the

shady side being always averse. And so one half of the Earth would never

come to see the Sun.


SALV.


I find at the very first sight, that this man hath not rightly apprehended the

Copernican Hypothesis, for if he had but taken notice how he alwayes makes

the Axis of the terrestrial Globe perpetually parallel to it self, he would not

have said, that one half of the Earth would never see the Sun, but that the

year would be one entire natural day, that is, that thorow all parts of the Earth

there would be six moneths day, and six moneths night, as it now befalleth to

the inhabitants under the Pole, but let this mistake be forgiven him, and let us

come to what remaineth.


SIMP.


It  followeth,  Hanc  autem  gyrationem  Terrae  impossibilem  esse  sic

demonstramus. Which speaks in English thus: That this gyration of the Earth

is impossible we thus demonstrate. That which ensueth is the declaration of

the following figure, wherein is delineated many descending grave bodies,

and ascending light bodies, and birds that fly to and again in the air, &c.


SAGR.


Let us see them, I pray you. Oh! what fine figures,  what birds, what balls,

and what other pretty things are here?


SIMP.


These are balls which come from the concave of the Moon.


SAGR.


and what is this?SIMP.


This is a kind of Shell-fish, which here at Venice they call buovoli; and this

also came from the Moons concave.


SAGR.


Indeed, it seems then, that the Moon hath a great power over these Oyster-

fishes, which we callPesci armai, or armati. armed sishes.


SIMP.


And this is that calculation, which I mentioned▪ of this Journey in a natural

day, in an hour, in a first minute, and in a second, which a point of the Earth

would make placed under the Equinoctial, and also in the parallel of 48 gr.

And then followeth this, which I doubted I had committed some mistake in

reciting,  therefore  let  us  read  it.  His  positis,  necesse  est,  terra  circulariter

mota,  omnia  ex  aëre  eidem,  &c.  Quod  si  hasce  pilas  aequales  ponemus

pondere,  magnitudine,  gravitate,  &  in  concavo  Sphaerae  Lunaris  positas

libero descensui permittamus, si motum deorsum aequemus celeritate motui

circum,  (quod  tamen  secus  est,  cum  pila  A,  &c.)  elabentur  minimum  (ut

multum cedamus adversariis) dies sex: quo tempore sexies circa terram, &c.

[In English thus. ] These things being supposed, it is necessary, the Earth

being circularly moved, that all things from the air to the same, &c. So that if

we  suppose  these  balls  to  be  equal  in  magnitude  and  gravity,  and  being

placed in the concave of the Lunar Sphere, we permit them a free descent,

and if we make the motion downwards equal in velocity to the motion about,

(which nevertheless is otherwise, if the ball A, &c.) they shall be falling at

least (that we may grant much to our adversaries) six dayes; in which time

they shall be turned six times about the Earth, &c.


SALV.


You have but too faithfully cited the argument of this person. From hence

you may collect Simplicius, with what caution they ought to proceed, who

would give themselves up to believe others in those things, which perhaps

they do not believe themselves. For me thinks it a thing impossible, but that

this  Author  was  advised,  that  he  did  design  to  himself  a  circle,  whosediameter (which amongst Mathematicians, is lesse than one third part of the

circumference) is above 72 times bigger than it self: an errour that affirmeth

that to be considerably more than 200 which is lesse than one.


SAGR.


It may be, that these Mathematical proportions, which are true in abstract,

being once applied in concrete to Physical and Elementary circles, do not so

exactly agree: And yet, I think, that the Cooper, to find the semidiameter of

the bottom, which he is to fit to the Cask, doth make use of the rule of

Mathematicians  in  abstract,  although  such  bottomes  be  things  meerly

material,    and  concrete▪  therefore  let  Simplicius  plead  in  excuse  of  this

Author; and whether he thinks that the Physicks can differ so very much from

the Mathematicks.


SIMP.


The  substractions  are  in  my  opinion  insufficient  to  salve  this  difference,

which is so extreamly too great to be reconciled: and in this case I have no

more to say but that, Quandoque bonus dormilet Homerus. But supposing the

calculation ofNot Sagredus, as the Latine hath it. Salviatus to be more exact,

and that the time of the descent of the ball were no more than three hours; yet

me thinks, that coming from the concave of the Moon, which is so great a

distance off, it would be an admirable thing, that it should have an instinct of

maintaining it self all the way over the self-same point of the Earth, over

which it did hang in its departure thence, and not rather be left a very great

way behind.


SALV.


The effect may be admirable, and not admirable, but natural and ordinary,

according as the things precedent may fall out. For if the ball (according to

the Authors suppositions) whilst it staid in the concave of the Moon, had the

circular motion of twenty four hours together with the Earth, and with the rest

of the things contained within the said Concave; that very vertue which made

it turn round before its descent, will continue it in the same motion in its

descending. And so far it is from not keeping pace with the motion of the

Earth, and from staying behind, that it is more likely to out-go it; being that inits approaches to the Earth, the motion of gyration is to be made with circles

continually lesser and lesser; so that the ball retaining in it self that self-same

velocity which it had in the concave, it ought to anticipate, as I have said, the

vertigo or conversion of the Earth. But if the ball in the concave did want that

circulation, it is not obliged in descending to maintain it self perpendicularly

over that point of the Earth, which was just under it when the descent began.

Nor will. Copernicus, or any of his followers affirm the same.


SIMP.


But the Author maketh an objection, as you see, demanding on what principle

this circular motion of grave and light bodies, doth depend: that is, whether

upon an internal or an external principle.


SALV.


Keeping to the Probleme of which we speak, I say, that that very principle

which made the ball turn round, whil’st it was in the Lunar concave, is the

same  that  maintaineth  also  the  circulation  in  the  descent:  yet  I  leave  the

Author at liberty to make it internal or external at his pleasure.


SIMP.


The Author proveth, that it can neither be inward nor outward.


SALV.


And I will say then, that the ball in the concave did  not move, and so he shall

not  be  bound  to  shew  how  that  in  descending  it  continueth  all  the  way

vertically over one point, for that it will not do any such thing.


SIMP.


Very well; But if grave bodies, and light can have no principle, either internal

or external of moving circularly, than neither can the terrestrial Globe move

with a circular motion: and thus you have the intent of the Author.


SALV.I did not say, that the Earth had no principle, either interne, or externe to the

motion of gyration, but I say, that I do not know which of the two it hath; and

yet my not knowing it hath not a power to deprive it of the same; but if this

Author can tell by what principle other mundane bodies are moved round, of

whose motion there is no doubt; I say, that that which maketh the Earth to

move, is a vertue, like to that, by which Mars and Jupiter are moved, and

wherewith he believes that the starry Sphere it self also doth move; and if he

will  but  assure  me,  who  is  the  mover  of  one  of  these  moveables,  I  will

undertake to be able to tell him who maketh the Earth to move. Nay more; I

will undertake to do the same, if he can but tell me, who moveth the parts of

the Earth downwards.


SIMP.


The cause of this is most manifest, and every one knows that it is gravity.


SALV.


You are out, Simplicius, you should say, that every one knowes, that it is

called Gravity: but I do not question you about the name, but the essence of

the thing, of which essence you know not a tittle more than you know the

essence of the mover of the stars in gyration; unlesse it be the name that hath

been put to this, and made familiar, and domestical, by the many experiences

which we see thereof every hour in the day,: We know  more who moveth

grave b dus downwards; than who moveth the Stars round, nor kn w we any

thing of these cause , more than the names imposed on them by us. but not as

if  we  really  understand  any  more,  what  principle  or  vertue  that  is  which

moveth a stone downwards, than we know who moveth it upwards, when it is

separated from the projicient, or who moveth the Moon round, except (as I

have said) onely the name, which more particularly and properly we have

assigned to the motion of descent, namely, Gravity; whereas for the cause of

circular motion, in more general termes, we assign the Vertue impressed, and

call the same an Intelligence, either assisting, or informing; and to infinite

other motions we ascribe Nature for their cause.


SIMP.It is my opinion, that this Author asketh far lesse than that, to which you deny

to make answer; for he doth not ask what is nominally and particularly the

principle that moveth grave and light bodies circularly, but whatsoever it be,

he  desireth  to  know,  whether  you  think  it  intrinsecal,  or  extrinsecal:  For

howbeit, v. gr. I do not know, what kind of thing that gravity is, by which the

Earth descendeth; yet I know that it is an intern  principle, seeing that if it be

not hindered, it moveth spontaneously: and on the contrary, I know that the

principle which moveth it upwards, is external; although that I do not know,

what thing that vertue is, impressed on it by the projicient.


SALV.


Into  how  many  questions  must  we  excurre,  if  we  would  decide  all  the

difficulties, which successively have dependance one upon another! You call

that an external (and you also call it a preternatural and violent) principle,

which moveth the grave project upwards; but its possible that it may be no

lesse  interne  and  natural,  than  that  which  moveth  it  downwards;  it  may

peradventure be called external and violent, The vertue which carrieth grave

projects upwards, is no lesse natural to them, than the gravity which moveth

them downwards. so long as the moveable is joyned to the projicient; but

being separated, what external thing remaineth for a mover of the arrow, or

ball? In summe, it must necessarliy be granted, that that vertue which carrieth

such  a  moveable  upwards,  is  no  lesse  interne,  than  that  which  moveth  it

downwards; and I think the motion of grave bodies ascending by the impetus

conceived, to be altogether as natural, as the motion of descent depending on

gravity.


SIMP.


I will never grant this; for the motion of descent hath its principle internal,

natural, and perpetual, and the motion of ascent hath its principle externe,

violent, and finite.


SALV.


If you refuse to grant me, that the principles of the motions of grave bodies

downwards and upwards, Contrary principles cannot naturally reside in thesame subject. are equally internal and natural; what would you do, if I should

say, that they may also be the same in number?


SIMP.


I leave it to you to judge.


SALV.


But I desire you your self to be the Judge: Therefore tell me, Do you believe

that in the same natural body, there may reside interne principles, that are

contrary to one another?


SIMP.


I do verily believe there cannot.


SALV.


What do you think to be the natural inclination of Earth, of Lead, of Gold,

and in sum, of the most ponderous matters; that is, to what motion do you

believe that their interne principle draweth them?


SIMP.


To  that  towards  the  centre  of  things  grave,  that  is,  to  the  centre  of  the

Universe, and of the Earth, whither, if they be not hindered, it will carry

them.


SALV.


So that, if the Terrestrial Globe were bored thorow, and a Well made that

should passe through the centre of it, a Cannon bullet being let fall into the

same, as being moved by a natural and intrinsick principle, would passe to

the centre; and it would make all this motion spontaneously, and by intrinsick

principle, is it not so?


SIMP.So I verily believe.


SALV.


But when it is arrived at the centre, do you think that  it will passe any

further,  or  else  that  there  it  would  immediately  stand  still,  and  move  no

further?


SIMP.


I believe that it would continue to move a great way further.


SALV.


But this motion beyond the centre, would it not be upwards, and according to

your assertion preternatural, and violent? And yet on what other principle do

you make it to depend, but only upon the self same, which did carry the ball

to the centre, and which you called intrinsecal, and natural? Finde, if you can,

another external projicient, that overtaketh it again to drive it upwards. And

this that hath been said of the motion thorow the centre, The natural motion

changeth it selfe into that which is called preternatural and violent. is also

seen by us here above; for the interne impetus of a grave body falling along a

declining superficies, if the said superficies be reflected the other way, it shall

carry it, without a jot interrupting the motion, also upwards. A ball of lead

that  hangeth  by  a  thread,  being  removed  from  its  perpendicularity,

descendeth  spontaneously,  as  being  drawn  by  its  internal  inclination,  and

without  any  interposure  of  rest,  passeth  beyond  the  lowest  point  of

perpendicularity: and without any additional mover, moveth upwards. I know

that you will not deny, but that the principle of grave bodies that moveth

them downwards, is no less natural, and intrinsecal, than that principle of

light  bodies,  vvhich  moveth  them  upwards:  so  that  I  propose  to  your

consideration a ball of lead, vvhich descending through the Air from a great

altitude, and so moving by an intern principle, and comming to a depth of

vvater,  continueth  its  descent,  and  without  any  other  externe  mover,

submergeth  a  great  vvay;  and  yet  the  motion  of  descent  in  the  vvater  is

preternatural unto it; but yet nevertheless dependeth on a principle that is

internal, and not external to the ball. You see it demonstrated then, that amoveable  may  be  moved  by  one  and  the  same  internal  principle,  with

contrary motions.


SIMP.


I believe there are solutions to all these objections, though for the present I do

not remember them; but however it be, the Author continueth to demand, on

what principle this circular motion of grave and light bodies dependeth; that

is, whether on a principle internal, or external; and proceeding forvvards,

sheweth, that it can be neither on the one, nor on the other, saying; Si ab

externo; Deusne illum excitat per continuum miraculum? an verò Angelus, an

aër? Et hunc quidem multi assignant. Sed contra — [In English thus] If from

an externe principle; Whether God doth not excite it by a continued Miracle?

or an Angel, or the Air? And indeed many do assign this. But on the contrary

— .


SALV.


Trouble not your self to read his argument; for I am  none of those who

ascribe that principle to the ambient air. As to the Miracle, or an Angel, I

should rather incline to this side; for that which taketh beginning from a

Divine  Miracle,  or  from  an  Angelical  operation;  as  for  instance,  the

transportation of a Cannon ball or bullet into the concave of the Moon, doth

in all probability depend on the vertue of the same principle for performing

the rest. But, as to the Air, it serveth my turn, that it doth not hinder the

circular motion of the moveables, which we did suppose to move thorow it.

And to prove that, it sufficeth (nor is more required) that it moveth with the

same motion, and finisheth its circulations with the same velocity, that the

Terrestrial Globe doth.


SIMP.


And he likewise makes his opposition to this also; demanding who carrieth

the air about, Nature, or Violence? And proveth, that it cannot be Nature,

alledging that that is contrary to truth, experience, and to Copernicus himself.


SALV.It is not contrary to Copernicus in the least, who writeth no such thing; and

this Author ascribes these things to him with two excessive courtesie. It’s

true, he saith, and for my part I think he saith well, that the part of the air neer

to the Earth, being rather a terrestrial evaporation, may have the same nature,

and naturally follow its motion; or, as being contiguous to it, may follow it in

the same manner, as the Peripateticks say, that the superiour part of it, and the

Element of fire, follow the motion of the Lunar Concave, so that it lyeth upon

them to declare, whether that motion be natural, or violent.


SIMP.


The Author will reply, that if Copernicus maketh only the inferiour part of

the  Air  to  move,  and  supposeth  the  upper  part  thereof  to  want  the  said

motion, he cannot give a reason, how that quiet air can be able to carry those

grave bodies along with it, and make them keep pace with the motion of the

Earth.


SALV.


Copernicus  will  say,  The  propension  of  elementary  bodies  to  follow  the

Earth, hath a limited Sphere of activity. that this natural propension of the

elementary bodies to follow the motion of the Earth, hath a limited Sphere,

out of which such a natural inclination would cease; besides that, as I have

said, the Air is not that which carrieth the moveables along with it; which

being  separated  from  the  Earth,  do  follow  its  motion;  so  that  all  the

objections come to nothing, which this Author produceth to prove, that the

Air cannot cause such effects.


SIMP.


To shew therefore, that that cannot be, it will be necessary to say, that such

like effects depend on an interne principle, against which position, oboriuntur

difficillimae,  immò  inextricabiles  quaestiones  secundae,  of  which  sort  are

these that follow. Principium illud internum vel est accidens, vel substantia.

Si primum; quale nam illud? nam qualitas locomotiva circum, hactenus nulla 

videtur agni a. (In English thus:) Contrary to which position there do arise

most difficult, yea inextricable second questions, such as these; That intern

principle is either an accident, or a substance. If the first; what manner ofaccident  is  it?  For  a  locomotive  quality  about  the  centre,  seemeth  to  be

hitherto acknowledged by none.


SALV.


How, is there no such thing acknowledged? Is it not known to us, that all

these elementary matters move round, together with the Earth? You see how

this Author supposeth for true, that which is in question.


SIMP.


He saith, that we do not see the same; and me thinks, he hath therein reason

on his side.


SALV.


We see it not, because we turn round together with them.


SIMP.


Hear his other Argument. Quae etiam si esset, quomodò tamen inveniretur in

rebus tam contrariis? in igne, ut in aquâ; in aëre, ut in terra; in viventibus, ut

in animà carentibus? [in English thus: ] Which although it were, yet how

could it be found in things so contrary? in the fire, as in the water? in the air,

as in the earth? in living creatures, as in things wanting life?


SALV.


Supposing for this time, that water and fire are contraries; as also the air and

earth; (of which yet much may be said) the most that could follow from

thence would be, that those motions cannot be common to them, that are

contrary to one another: so that v. g. the motion upwards, which naturally

agreeth to fire, cannot agree to water; but that, like as it is by nature contrary

to fire: so to it that motion suiteth, which is contrary to the motion of fire,

which shall be the motion deorsum; but the circular motion, which is not

contrary either to the motion sursum, or to the motion deorsum, but may mix

with both, as Aristotle himself affirmeth, why may it not equally suit with

grave bodies and with light? The motions in the next place, which cannot becommon to things alive, and dead, are those which depend on the soul: but

those  which  belong  to  the  body,  in  as  much  as  it  is  elementary,  and

consequently participateth of the qualities of the elements, why may not they

be common as well to the dead corps, as to the living body? And therefore, if

the circular motion be proper to the elements, it ought to be common to the

mixt bodies also.


SAGR.


It must needs be, that this Author holdeth, that a dead cat, falling from a

window, it is not possible that a live cat also could fall; it not being a thing

convenient, that a carcase should partake of the qualities which suit with

things alive.


SALV.


Therefore the discourse of this Author concludeth  nothing against one that

should affirm, that the principle of the circular motions of grave and light

bodies is an intern accident: I know not how he may prove, that it cannot be a

substance.


SIMP.


He brings many Arguments against this. The first of which is in these words:

Si secundum (nempè, si dicas tale principium esse substantiam) illud est aut

materia, aut forma, aut compositum. Sed repugnant iterum tot diversae rerum

naturae,  quales  sunt  aves,  limaces,  saxa,  sagittae,  nives,  fumi,  grandines,

pisces,  &c.  quae  tamen  omnia  specie  &  genere  differentia,  moverentur  à

naturà suâ circulariter, ipsa naturis diversissima, &c. [In English thus] If the

second, (that is, if you shall say that this principle is a substance) it is either

matter, or form, or a compound of both. But such diverse natures of things

are again repugnant, such as are birds, snails, stones, darts, snows, smoaks,

hails, fishes, &c. all which notwithstanding their differences in species and

kind, are moved of their own nature circularly, they being of their natures

most different, &c.


SALV.If these things before named are of diverse natures, and things of diverse

natures cannot have a motion in common, it must follow, if you would give

satisfaction to all, that you are to think of, more than two motions onely of

upwards and downwards: and if there must be one for the arrows, another for

the snails, another for the stones, and another for fishes; then are you to

bethink  your  self  of  worms,  topazes  and  mushrums,  which  are  not  less

different in nature from one another, than snow and hail.


SIMP.


It seems that you make a jest of these Arguments.


SALV.


No indeed, Simplicius, but it hath been already answered above, to wit, that if

one motion, whether downwards or upwards, can agree with all those things

afore named, a circular motion may no less agree with them: and as you are a

Peripatetick,  do  not  you  put  a  greater  difference  between  an  elementary

comet and a celestial star, than between a fish and a bird? and yet both those

move circularly. Now propose your second Argument.


SIMP.


Si terra staret per voluntatem Dei, rotaréntne caetera, an non? si hoc, falsum

est à naturâ gyrare; si illud, redeunt priores quaestiones. Et sanè mirum esset,

quòd Gavia pisciculo, Alauda nidulo suo, & corvus limaci, petraque, etiam

volans, imminere non posset. [Which I thus render: ] If the Earth be supposed

to stand still by the will of God, should the rest of bodies turn round or no? If

not, then it’s false that they are revolved by nature; if the other, the former

questions will return upon us. And truly it would be strange that the Sea-pie

should not be able to hover over the small fish, the Lark over her nest, and

the Crow over the snail and rock, though flying.


SALV.


I would answer for my self in general terms, that if it were appointed by the

will of God, that the Earth should cease from its diurnal revolution, those

birds would do what ever should please the same Divine will. But if thisAuthor desire a more particular answer, I should tell him, that they would do

quite contrary to what they do now, if whilst they, being separated from the

Earth, do bear themselves up in the air, the Terrestrial Globe by the will of

God, should all on a sudden be put upon a precipitate motion; it concerneth

this Author now to ascertain us what would in this case succeed.


SAGR.


I pray you, Salviatus, at my request to grant to this Author, that the Earth

standing still by the will of God, the other things, separated from it, would

continue to turn round of their own natural motion, and let us hear what

impossibilities  or  inconveniences  would  follow:  for  I,  as  to  my  own

particular, do not see how there can be greater disorders, than these produced

by the Author himself, that is, that Larks, though they should flie, could not

be  able  to  hover  over  their  nests,  nor  Crows  over  snails,  or  rocks:  from

whence would follow, that Crows must suffer for want of snails, and young

Larks must die of hunger, and cold, not being able to be fed or sheltered by

the wings of the old ones. This is all the ruine that I can conceive would

follow, supposing the Authors speech to be true. Do you see, Simplicius, if

greater inconveniences would happen?


SIMP.


I know not how to discover greater; but it is very credible, that the Author

besides  these,  discovered  other  disorders  in  Nature,  which  perhaps  in

reverend respect of her, he was not willing to instance in. Therefore let us

proceed to the third Objection. Insuper quî fit, ut istae res tam variae tantùm

moveantur  ab  Occasu  in  Ortum,  parallelae  ad  Aequatorem?  ut  semper

moveantur,  nunquam  quiescant?  [which  speaks  to  this  sense:  ]  Moreover,

how comes it to pass that these things, so diverse, are onely moved from the

West towards the East, parallel to the Aequinoctial? that they always move,

and never rest?


SALV.


They move from West to East parallel to the Aequinoctial without ceasing, in

the same manner as you believe the fixed stars to move from East to West,

parallel to the Aequinoctial, without ever resting.SIMP.


Quarè, quò sunt altiores, celeriùs; quò humiliores, tardiùs? (i. e.) Why are the

higher the swifter, and the lower the lower?


SALV.


Because that in a Sphere or circle, that turns about upon its own centre, the

remoter parts describe greater circuits, and the parts nearer at hand describe

lesser in the same time.


SIMP.


Quare, quae Aequinoctiali propriores, in majori; quae  remotiores, in minori

circulo  feruntur?  [scilicet:  ]  Why  are  those  near  the  Aequinoctial  carried

about in a greater circle, and those which are remote in a lesser?


SALV.


To  imitate  the  starry  Sphere,  in  which  those  nearest  to  the  Aequinoctial,

move in greater circles, than the more remote.


SIMP.


Quarè  Pila  eadem  sub  Aequinoctiali  tota  circa  centrum  terrae,  ambitu

maximo, celeritate incredibili; sub Polo verò circa centrum proprium, gyro

nullo, tarditate supremà volveretur? [That is: ] Why is the same ball under the

Aequinoctial  wholly  turned  round  the  centre  of  the  Earth  in  the  greatest

circumference, with an incredible celerity; but under the Pole about its own

centre, in no circuite, but with the ultimate degree of tardity?


SALV.


To imitate the stars of the Firmament, that would do the like if they had the

diurnal motion.


SIMP.Quare  eadem  res,  pila  v.  g.  plumbea,  si  semel  terram  circuivit,  descripto

circulo  maximo,  eandem  ubique  non  circummigret  secundùm  circulum

maximum, sed translata extra Aequinoctialem in circulis minoribus agetur?

[Which speaketh thus: ] Why doth not the same thing, as for example, a ball

of lead turn round every where according to the same great circle, if once

describing a great circle, it hath incompassed the Earth, but being removed

from the Aequinoctial, doth move in lesser circles?


SALV.


Because so would, nay, according to the doctrine of Ptolomey, so have some

fixed stars done, which once were very near the Aequinoctial, and described

very vast circles, and now that they are farther off, describe lesser.


SAGR.


If I could now but keep in mind all these fine notions, I should think that I

had made a great purchase; I must needs intreat you, Simplicius, to lend me

this Book, for there cannot chuse but be a sea of rare and ingenious matters

contained in it.


SIMP.


I will present you with it.


SAGR.


Not so, Sir; I would not deprive you of it: but are the Queries yet at an end?


SIMP.


No Sir; hearken therefore. Si latio circularis gravibus & levibus est naturalis,

qualis est ea quae fit secundùm lineam rectam? Nam si naturalis, quomodo &

is  motus  qui  circum  est,  naturalis  est,  cùm  specie  differat  à  recto?  Si

violentus,  quî  fit,  ut  missile  ignitum  sursum  evolans  scintillosum  caput

sursùm à terrâ, non autem circum volvatur, &c. [Which take in our idiom: ] If

a circular lation is natural to heavy and light things, what is that which is

made according to a right line? For if it be natural, how then is that motionwhich is about the centre natural, seeing it  differs in species from a right

motion? If it be violent, how is it that a fiery dart flying upwards, sparkling

over our heads at a distance from the Earth, but not turning about, &c.


SALV.


It hath been said already very often, Of the mixt motion we see not the part

that is circular, because we partake thereof. that the circular motion is natural

to the whole, and to its parts, whilst they are in perfect disposure, and the

right is to reduce to order the parts disordered; though indeed it is better to

say,  that  neither  the  parts  ordered  or  disordered  ever  move  with  a  right

motion, but with one mixed, which might as well be averred meerly circular:

but to us but one part onely of this motion is visible and observable, that is,

the part of the right, the other part of the circular being imperceptible to us,

because  we  partake  thereof.  And  this  answers  to  the  rays  which  move

upwards, and round about, but we cannot distinguish their circular motion,

for that, with that we our selves move also. But I believe that this Author

never thought of this mixture; for you may see that he resolutely saith, that

the rays go directly upwards, and not at all in gyration.


SIMP.


Quare  centrum  sphaere  delapsae  sub  Aequatore  spiram  describit  in  ejus

plano: sub aliis parallelis spiram describit in cono? sub Polo descendit in axe

lineam gyralem, decurrens in superficie cylindricâ consignatam? (In English

to  this  purpose:)  Why  doth  the  centre  of  a  falling  Globe  under  the

Aequinoctial describe a spiral line in the plane of the Aequator; and in other

parallels  a  spiral  about  a  Cone;  and  under  the  Pole  descend  in  the  axis

describing a gyral line, running in a Cylindrical Superficie?


SALV.


Because  of  the  lines  drawn  from  the  Centre  to  the  circumference  of  the

sphere, which are those by which graves descend, that which terminates in

the Aequinoctial designeth a circle, and those that terminate in other parallels

describe  conical  superficies;  now  the  axis  describeth  nothing  at  all,  but

continueth in its own being. And if I may give you my judgment freely, I will

say, that I cannot draw from all these Queries, any sense that interfereth withthe motion of the Earth; for if I demand of this Author, (granting him that the

Earth doth not move) what would follow in all these particulars, supposing

that it do move, as Copernicus will have it; I am very confident, that he

would  say  that  all  these  effects  would  happen,  that  he  hath  objected,  as

inconveniences  to  disprove  its  mobility:  so  that  in  this  mans  opinion

necessary consequences are accounted absurdities: but I beseech you, if there

be any more, dispatch them, and free us speedily from this wearisom task.


SIMP.


In this which follows he opposes Copernicus & his Sectators, who affirm,

that the motion of the parts separated from their whole, is onely to unite

themselves to their whole; but that the moving  circularly along with the

vertigenous  diurnal  revolution  is  absolutely  natural:  against  which  he

objecteth, saying, that according to these mens opinion; Si tota terra, unà cum

aquà in nihilum redigeretur, nulla grando aut pluvia è nube decideret, sed

naturalater tantùm circumferetur, neque ignis ullus, aut igneum ascenderet,

cùm  illorum  non  improbabili  sententià  ignis  nullus  sit  suprà.  [Which  I

translate to this sense: ] If the whole Earth, together with the Water were

reduced into nothing, no hail or rain would fall from the clouds, but would be

onely naturally carried round; neither any fire or fiery thing would ascend,

seeing to these that men it is no improbable opinion that there is no fire

above.


SALV.


The  providence  of  this  Philosopher  is  admirable,  and  worthy  of  great

applause; for he is not content to provide for things that might happen, the

course of Nature continuing, but will shew hic care in what may follow from

those things that he very well knows shall never come to pass. I will grant

him therefore, (that I may get som pretty passages out of him) that if the

Earth and Water should be reduced to nothing, there would be no more hails

or rains, nor would igneal matters ascend any longer upwards, but would

continually turn round: what will follow? what will the Philosopher say then?


SIMP.The  objection  is  in  the  words  which  immediately  follow;  here  they  are:

Quibus tamen experientia & ratio adversatur. Which nevertheless (saith he) is

contrary to experience and reason.


SALV.


Now I must yield, seeing he hath so great an advantage of me as experience,

of which I am unprovided. For as yet I never had the fortune to see the

Terrestrial Globe and the element of Water turn’d to nothing, so as to have

been able to observe what the hail and water did in that little Chaos. But he

perhaps tells us for our instruction what they did.


SIMP.


No, he doth not.


SALV.


I would give any thing to change a word or two with this person, to ask him,

whether when this Globe vanished, it carried away with it the common centre

of gravity, as I believe it did; in which case, I think that the hail and water

would  remain  insensate  and  stupid  amongst  the  clouds,  without  knowing

what to do with themselves. It might be also, that attracted by that great void

Vacuum, left by the Earths absenting, all the ambients would be rarified, and

particularly, the air, which is extreme easily drawn, and would run thither

with very great haste to fill it up. And perhaps the more solid and material

bodies, as birds, (for there would in all probability be many of them scattered

up and down in the air) would retire more towards the centre of the great

vacant sphere; (for it seemeth very reasonable, that substances that  under

small bulk contain much matter, should have narrower places assigned them,

leaving  the  more  spacious  to  the  more  ra  ified)  and  there  being  dead  of

hunger, and resolved into Earth, would form a new little Globe, with that

little water, which at that time was among the clouds. It might be also, that

those  matters  as  not  beholding  the  light,  would  not  perceive  the  Earths

departure,  but  like  blind  things,  would  descend  according  to  their  usual

custom to the centre, whither they would now go, if that globe did not hinder

them. And lastly, that I may give this Philosopher a less irresolute answer, I

do tell him, that I know as much of what would follow upon the annihilationof the Terrestrial Globe, as he would have done that was to have followed in

and about the same, before it was created. And because I am certain he will

say, that he would never have been able to have known any of all those things

which experience alone hath made him knowing in, he ought not to deny me

pardon, and to excuse me if I know not that which he knows, touching what

would ensue upon the annihilation of the said Globe: for that I want that

experience which he hath. Let us hear if he have any thing else to say.


SIMP.


There remains this figure, which represents the Terrestrial Globe with a great

cavity  about  its  centre,  full  of  air;  and  to  shew  that  Graves  move  not

downwards  to  unite  with  the  Terrestrial  Globe,  as  Copernicus  saith,  he

constituteth this stone in the centre; and demandeth, it being left at liberty,

what it would do; and he placeth another in the space of this great vacuum,

and  asketh  the  same  question.  Saying,  as  to  the  first:  Lapis  in  centro

constitutus,  aut  ascendet  ad  terram  in  punctum  aliquod,  aut  non.  Si

secundum; falsum est, partes ob solam sejunctionem à toto, ad illud moveri.

Si primum; omnis ratio & experientia renititur, neque gravia in suae gravitatis

centro conquiescent. Item si suspensus lapis, liberatus decidat in centrum,

separabit  se  à  toto,  contra  Copernicum:  si  pendeat,  refragatur  omnis

experientia,  cùm  videamus  integros  fornices  corruere.  (Wherein  he  saith:)

The stone placed in the centre, either ascendeth to the Earth in some point, or

no. If the second, it is false that the parts separated from the whole, move

unto it. If the first; it contradicteth all reason and experience, nor doth the

grave body rest in the centre of its gravity. And if the stone being suspended

in the air, be let go, do descend to the centre, it will separate from its vvhole,

contrary to Copernicus: if it do hang in the air, it contradicteth all experience:

since we see whole Vaults to fall dovvn.


SALV.


I vvill ansvver, though vvith great disadvantage to my self, seeing I have to

do vvith one vvho hath seen by experience, vvhat these stones do in this great

Cave: a thing, vvhich for my part I have not seen; and vvill say, that things

grave have an existence  before the common centre of gravity: Things grave

are before the centre of gravity. so that it is not one centre alone, vvhich is no

other than indivisible point, and therefore of no efficacie, that can attract untoit grave matters; but that those matters conspiring naturally to unite, form to

themselves  a  common  centre,  which  is  that  about  which  parts  of  equal

moment consist: The great ma  of grave bodies being transfe red cut of their

place, the separated parts would follow that  so that I hold, that if the great

aggregate of grave bodies vvere gathered all into any one place, the small

parts that vvere separated from their vvhole, vvould follovv the same, and if

they vvere not hindered, vvould penetrate vvherever they should find parts

less  grave  than  themselves:  but  coming  vvhere  they  should  meet  vvith

matters more grave, they vvould descend no farther. And therefore I hold,

that in the Cave full of air, the vvhole Vault vvould press, and violently rest it

self  onely  upon  that  air,  in  case  its  hardness  could  not  be  overcome  and

broken by its gravity; but loose stones, I believe, would descend to the centre,

and not swim above in the air: nor may it be said, that they move not to their

whole, though they move whither all the parts of the whole would transfer

themselves, if all impediments were removed.


SIMP.


That which remaineth, is a certain Errour which he observeth in a Disciple of

Copernicus, who making the Earth to move with an annual motion, and a

diurnal, in the same manner as the Cart-wheel moveth upon the circle of the

Earth, and in it self, did constitute the Terrestrial Globe too great, or the great

Orb too little; for that 365 revolutions of the Aequinoctial, are less by far than

the circumference of the great Orb.


SALV.


Take notice that you mistake, and tell us the direct contrary to what must

needs be written in that Book; for you should say, that that same Copernican

Author did constitute the Terrestrial Globe too little, and the great Orb too

big; and not the Terrestrial Globe too big, and the annual too little.


SIMP.


The mistake is not mine; see here the words of the Book. Non videt, quòd vel

circulum annuum aequo minorem, vel orbem terreum justo multò fabricet

majorem. (In English thus:) He seeth not, that he either maketh the annual

circle equal to the less, or the Terrestrial Orb much too big.SALV.


I cannot tell whether the first Author erred or no, since the Author of this

Tractate  doth  not  name  him;  but  the  error  of  this  Book  is  certain  and

unpardonable, whether that follower of Copernicus erred or not erred; for that

your  Author  passeth  by  so  material  an  error,  without  either  detecting  or

correcting  it.  But  let  him  be  forgiven  this  fault,  as  an  error  rather  of

inadvertencie, than of any thing else: Farthermore, were it not, that I am

already wearied and tired with talking and spending so much time with very

little profit, in these frivolous janglings and altercations, I could shew, that it

is not impossible for a circle, though  no bigger than a Cart-wheel, It is not

impo sible with the circumference of a small  for times volved to measure and

describ   great circle whatsoever. with making not 365, but lesse than 20

revolutions,  to  describe  and  measure  the  circumference,  not  onely  of  the

grand Orb, but of one a thousand times greater; and this I s y to shew, that

there  do  not  want  far  greater  subtilties,  than  this  wherewith  your  Author

goeth about to detect the errour of Copernicus: but I pray you, let us breath a

little, that so we may proceed to the other Philosopher, that opposeth of the

same Copernicus.


SAGR.


To confesse the truth, I stand as much in need of respite as either of you;

though I have onely wearied my eares: and were it not that I hope to hear

more ingenious things from this other Author, I question whether I should not

go my ways, to take the air in myGo d  la. Pleasure-boat.


SIMP.


I  believe  that  you  will  hear  things  of  greater  moment;  for  this  is  a  most

accomplished  Philosopher,  and  a  great  Mathematician,  and  hath  confuted

Tycho in the businesse of the Comets, and new Stars. The ame of the Author

is Scipio Claramontius.


SALV.


Perhaps he is the same with the Author of the Book, called Anti-Tycho?SIMP.


He is the very same: but the confutation of the new Stars is not in his Anti-

Tycho,  onely  so  far  as  he  proveth,  that  they  were  not  prejudicial  to  the

inalterability and ingenerability of the Heavens, as I told you before; but after

he had published his Anti-Tycho, having found out, by help of the Parallaxes,

a way to demonstrate, that they also are things elementary, and contained

within the concave of the Moon, he hath writ this other Book, de tribus novis

Stellis, &c. and therein also inserted the Arguments against Copernicus: I

have already shewn you what he hath written touching these new Stars in his

Anti-Tycho, where he denied not, but that they were in the Heavens; but he

proved, that their production altered not the inalterability of the Heavens, and

that he did, with a Discourse purely philosophical, in the same manner as you

have already heard. And I then forgot to tell you, how that he afterwards did

finde out a way to remove them out of the Heavens; for he proceeding in this

confutation, by way of computations and parallaxes, matters little or nothing

at all understood by me, I did not mention them to you, but have bent all my

studies  upon  these  arguments  against  the  motion  of  the  Earth,  which  are

purely natural.


SALV.


I understand you very well: and it will be convenient after we have heard

what he hath to say against Copernicus, that we hear, or see at least the

manner wherewith he, by way of Parallaxes, proveth those new stars to be

elementary, which so many famous Astronomers constitute to be all very

high,  and  amongst  the  stars  of  the  Firmament;  and  as  this  Author

accomplisheth such  an enterprize of pulling the new stars out of heaven, and

placing  them  in  the  elementary  Sphere,  he  shall  be  worthy  to  be  highly

exalted, and transferred himself amongst the stars, or at least, that his name

be by fame etern ed amongst them. Yet before we enter upon this, let us hear

what he alledgeth against the opinion of Copernicus, and do you begin to

recite his Arguments.


SIMP.


It will not be necessary that we read them ad verbum, because they are very

prolix; but I, as you may see, in reading them several times attentively, havemarked in the margine those words, wherein the strength of his arguments lie,

and it will suffice to read them. The opinion of Copernicus overthrows the

Criterium  of  Philosophy  The  first  Argument  beginneth  here.  Et  primo,  si

opinio  Copernici  recipiatur,  Criterium  naturalis  Philosophiae,  ni  prorsus

tollatur, vehementer sal em labefactari videtur. [In our Idiom thus] And first,

if Copernicus his opinion be imbraced, the Criterium of natural Philosophy

will be, if not wholly subverted, yet at least extreamly shaken.


Which, according to the opinion of all the sects of Philosophers requireth,

that  Sense  and  Experience  be  our  guides  in  philosophating:  But  in  the

Copernican position the Senses are greatly deluded, whil’st that they visibly

discover  neer  at  hand  in  a  pure  Medium,  the  gravest  bodies  to  descend

perpendicularly  downwards,  never  deviating  a  single  hairs  breadth  from

rectitude; and yet according to the opinion of Copernicus, the sight in so

manifest a thing is deceived, and that motion is not reall straight, but mixt of

right and circular.


SALV.


This is the first argument, that Aristotle, Ptolomy, and all their followers do

produce;  to  vvhich  we  have  abundantly  answered,  and  shewn  the

Paralogisme,  and  with  sufficient  plainnesse  proved,  that  the  motion  in

common to us and other moveables, is, as if there were no such thing; but

because true conclusions meet with a thousand accidents, Common motion is,

as  if  it  never  were.  that  confirme  them,  I  vvill,  with  the  favour  of  this

Philosopher,  adde  something  more;  and  you  Simplicius  personating  him,

answer me to vvhat I shall ask you: The argument taken from things falling

perpendicularly, another way confuted. And first tell me, vvhat effect hath

that stone upon you, which falling from the top of the Tower, is the cause that

you perceive that motion; for if its fall doth operate upon you neither more

nor lesse, than its standing still on the Towers top, you doubtlesse could not

discern its descent, or distinguish its moving from its lying still.


SIMP.


I comprehend its moving, in relation to the Tower, for that I see it one while

just against such a mark in the said Tower, and another while against another

lower, and so successively, till that at last I perceive it arrived at the ground.SALV.


Then if that stone were let fall from the tallons of an Eagle flying, and should

descend thorow the simple invisible Air,  and you had no other object visible

and stable, wherewith to make comparisons to that, you could not perceive its

motion?


SIMP.


No, nor the stone it self; for if I would see it, when it is at the highest, Where

e motion of  body is collected. I must raise up my head, and as it descendeth,

I must hold it lower and lower, and in a word, must continually move either

that, or my eyes, following the motion of the said stone.


SALV.


You have novv rightly answered: you knovv then that the stone lyeth still,

The motion of the eye argueth the motion of the ob ect looked on. vvhen

without moving your eye, you alwayes see it before you; and you know that it

moveth, when for the keeping it in sight, you must move the organ of sight,

the eye. So then vvhen ever without moving your eye, you continually behold

an object in the self same aspect, you do alvvays judge it immoveable.


SIMP.


I think it must needs be so.


SALV.


Novv fancy your self to be in a ship, and to have fixed your eye on the point

of the Sail-yard: Do you think, that because the ship moveth very fast, you

must move your eye, to keep your sight alvvayes upon the point of the Sail-

yard, and to follow its motion?


SIMP.


I am certain, that I should need to make no change at all; and that not only in

the sight; but if I had aimed a Musket at it, I should never have need, let the

ship move how it vvill, to stir it an hairs breadth to keep it full upon the same.SALV.


And this happens because the motion, which the Ship conferreth on the Sail-

yard, it conferreth also upon you, and upon your eye; so that you need not stir

it a jot to behold the top of the Sail-yard: and consequently, it vvill seem to

you immoveaable. Now this Discourse being applied to the revolution of the

Earth, and to the stone placed in the top of the Tower, in which you cannot

discern any motion, because that you have that motion vvhich is necessary

for the following of it, in common with it from the Earth; so that you need not

move your eye. When again there is conferred upon it the motion of descent,

which is its particular motion, and not yours, and that it is intermixed with the

circular, that part of the circular which is common to the stone, and to the

eye, continueth to be imperceptible, and the right onely is perceived, for that

to the perception of it, you must follow it with your eye, looking lower and

lower. I wish for the undeceiving of this Philosopher, that I could advise him,

that some time or other going by water, An experiment that  how the common

motion  is  imperc  ptible.  he  would  carry  along  with  him  a  Vessel  of

reasonable depth full of water, and prepare a ball of wax, or other matter that

would descend very slowly to the bottome, so that in a minute of an hour, it

would scarce sink a yard; and that rowing the boat as fast as could be, so that

in a minute of an hour  it should run above an hundred yards, he would let the

ball  submerge  into  the  water,  &  freely  descend,  &  diligently  observe  its

motion. If he would but do thus, he should see, first, that it would go in a

direct line towards that point of the bottom of the vessel, whither it would

tend, if the boat should stand still; & to his eye, and in relation to the vessel,

that motion would appear most straight and perpendicular, and yet he could

not say, but that it would be composed of the right motion downwards, and of

the circular about the element of water. And if these things befall in matters

not natural, and in things that we may experiment in their state of rest; & then

again in the contrary state of motion, and yet as to appearance no diversity at

all  is  discovered,  &  that  they  seem  to  deceive  our  sense  what  can  we

distinguish  touching  the  Earth,  which  hath  been  perpetually  in  the  same

constitution, as to motion and rest? And in what time can we experiment

whether  any  difference  is  discernable  amongst  these  accidents  of  local

motion, in its diverse states of motion and rest, if it eternally indureth in but

one onely of them?SAGR.


These Discourses have somewhat whetted my stomack, which those fishes,

and snails had in part nauseated; and the former made me call to minde the

correction of an errour, that hath so much appearance of truth, that I know not

whether one of a thousand would refuse to admit it as unquestionable. And it

was this, that sailing into Syria, and carrying with me a very good Telescope,

that had been bestowed on me by our Common Friend, who not many dayes

before had invented, I proposed to the Mariners, that it would be of great

benefit in Navigation to make use of it upon the round top of a ship, to

discover and kenne Vessels afar off. The benefit was approved, but there was

objected  the  difficulty  of  using  it,  An  ingenuous  consideration  about  the

possibility of using the Telescope with as much facility on the round top of

the  Mast  of  a  ship,  as  on  the  Deck.  by  reason  of  the  Ships  continual

fluctuation; and especially on the round top, where the agitation is so much

greater, and that it would be better for any one that would make use thereof to

stand at the Partners upon the upper Deck, where the tossing is lesse than in

any other place of the Ship. I (for I will not conceal my errour) concurred in

the same opinion, and for that time said no more: nor can I tell you by what

hints I was moved to return to ruminate with my self upon this businesse, and

in the end came to discover my simplicity (although excusable) in admitting

that for true, which is most false; false I say, that the great agitation of the

basket or round top, in comparison of the small one below, at the partners of

the Mast, should render the use of the Telescope more difficult in finding out

the object.


SALV.


I should have accompanied the Mariners, and your self at the beginning.


SIMP.


And so should I have done, and still do: nor can I believe, if I should think of

it an hundred years, that I could understand it otherwise.


SAGR.I may then, it seems, for once prove a Master to you both. And because the

proceeding  by  interrogatories  doth  in  my  opinion  much  dilucidate  things,

besides the pleasure which it affords of confounding our companion, forcing

from him that which he thought he knew not, I will make use of that artifice.

And first, I suppose that the Ship, Gally, or other Vessel, which we would

discover, is a great way off, that is, four, six, ten, or twentyI deviate here

from the strict Sea Diallect, which denominates all distances by Leagues.

miles, for that to kenne those neer at hand there is no need of these Glasses:

& consequently, the Telescope may at such a distance of four or six miles

conveniently  discover  the  whole  Vessel,  &  a  muchgreater  bulk.  Now  I

demand what for species, & how many for number are the motions that are

made upon the round top, depending on the fluctuation of the Ship.


SALV.


We  will  suppose  that  the  Ship  goeth  towards  the  East.  First,  Different

motions depending on the fluctuation of the Ship. in a calme Sea, it would

have no other motion than this of progression, but adding the undulation of

the  Waves,  there  shall  result  thence  one,  which  alternately  hoysting  and

lowering the poop and prow, maketh the round top, to lean forwards and

backwards; other waves driving the vessel sidewayes, bow the Mast to the

Starboard and Larboard; others, may bring the ship somewhat abovt, and bear

her away by the Misne from East, one while towards theGreco, which the

Latine Translator according to his usual carelessenesse (to call it no worse)

translates  Corum  Ventum,  the  Northwest  Wind;  for  Ventum  Libanotum.

Northeast, another while toward the Southeast; others bearing her up by the

Carine may make her onely to rise, and fall; and in sum, these motions are for

species two, one that changeth the direction of the Telescope angularly, the

other lineally, without changing angle, that is, alwayes keeping the tube of

the Instrument parallel to its self.


SAGR.


Tell me, Two mutations made in the Telescope, depending on the agitation of

the Ship. in the next place, if we, having first directed the Telescope yonder

away towards the Tower ofThis is a Castle six Italian miles from Venice

Northwards. Burano, six miles from hence, do turn it angularly to the right

hand, or to the left, or else upwards or downwards, but aVn nero d’ ugna, theblack or paring of a nail. straws breadth, what effect shall it have upon us

touching the finding out of the said tower?


SALV.


It would make us immediately lose sight of it, for such a declination, though

small here, may import there hundreds and thousands of yards.


SAGR.


But if without changing the angle, keeping the tube alwayes parallel to it self,

we should transfer it ten or twelve yards farther off to the right or left hand,

upwards or downwards, what alteration would it make as to the Tower?


SALV.


The change would be absolutely undiscernable; for that the spaces here and

there being contained between parallel rayes, the mutations made here and

there,  ought  to  be  equal,  and  because  the  space  which  the  Instrument

discovers yonder, is capable of many of those Towers; therefore we shall not

lose sight of it.


SAGR.


Returning now to the Ship, we may undoubtedly affirm, that the Telescope

moving to the right or left, upwards, or  downwards, and also forwards or

backwards ten or fifteen fathom; keeping it all the while parallel to its self,

the visive ray cannot stray from the point observed in the object, more than

those fifteen fathom; and because in a distance of eight or ten miles, the

Instrument  takes  in  a  much  greater  space  than  the  Gally  or  other  Vessel

kenn’d; therefore that small mutation shall not make me lose sight of her. The

impediment therefore, and the cause of losing the object cannot befall us,

unlesse  upon  the  mutation  made  angularly;  since  that  Telescopes

transportation higher or lower, to the right, or to the left, by the agitation of

the ship, cannot import any great number of fathomes. Now suppose that you

had two Telescopes fixed, one at the Partners close by the Deck, and the

other at the round top, nay at the main top, or main top-gallant top, where you

hang  forth  the  Pennon  or  streamer,  and  that  they  be  both  directed  to  theVessel that is ten miles off, tell me, whether you believe that any agitation of

the ship, & inclination of the Mast, can make greater changes, as to the angle,

in the higher tube, than in the lower? One wave arising, the prow will make

the main top give back fifteen or twenty fathom more than the foot of the

Mast, and it shall carry the upper tube along with it so greata space, & the

lower it may be not a palm; but the angle shall change in one Instrument

aswell as in the other; and likewise a side-billow shall bear the higher tube an

hundred times as far to the Larboard or Starboard, as it will the other below;

but the angles change not at all, or else alter both alike. But the mutation to

the  right  hand  or  left,  forwards  or  backwards,  upwards  or  downwards,

bringeth no sensible impediment in the kenning of objects remote, though the

alteration  of  the  angle  maketh  great  change  therein;  Therefore  it  must  of

necessity be confessed, that the use of the Telescope on the round top is no

more difficult than upon the Deck at the Partners; seeing that the angular

mutations are alike in both places.


SALV.


How  much  circumspection  is  there  to  be  used  in  affirming  or  denying  a

proposition? I say again, thar hearing it resolutely affirmed, that there is a

greater motion made on the Masts top, than at its partners, every one will

perswade himself, that the use of the Telescope is much more difficult above

than  below.  And  thus  also  I  will  excuse  those  Philosophers,  who  grow

impatient and fly out into passion against such as will not grant them, that

that  Cannon  bullet  which  they  cleerly  see  to  fall  in  a  right  line

perpendicularly,  doth  absolutely  move  in  that  manner;  but  will  have  its

motion to be by an arch, and also very much inclined and transversal: but let

us leave them in these labyrinths, and let us hear the other objections, that our

Author in hand brings against Copernicus.


SIMP.


The Author goeth on to demonstrate that in the Doctrine of Copernicus, it is

requisite to deny the Senses, and the  greatest Sensations, The annual motion

of the  a perpetual and strong winde. as for instance it would be, if we that

feel  the  respirations  of  a  gentle  gale,  should  not  feel  the  impulse  of  a

perpetual winde that beateth upon us with a velocity that runs more than 2529

miles an hour, for so much is the space that the centre of the Earth in itsannual motion passeth in an hour upon the circumference of the grand Orb, as

he  diligently  calculates;  and  because,  as  he  saith,  by  the  judgment  of

Copernicus,  Cum  terra  movetur  circumpositus  aër,  motus  tamen  ejus,

velocior licet ac rapidior celerrimo quocunque vento, à nobis non sentiretur,

sed summa tum tranquilitas reputaretur, nisi alius motus accederet. Quid est

verò decipi sensum, nisi haec esset deceptio? [Which I make to speak to this

sense.  ]  The  circumposed  air  is  moved  with  the  Earth,  yet  its  motion,

although more speedy and rapid than the swiftest wind whatsoever, would

not be perceived by us, but then would be thought a great tranquillity, unlesse

some other motion should happen; what then is the deception of the sense, if

this be not?


SALV.


It  must  needs  be  that  this  Philosopher  thinketh,  that  that  Earth  which

Copernicus maketh to turn round, together with the ambient air along the

circumference of the great Orb, is not that whereon we inhabit, but some

other separated from this; for that this of ours carrieth us also along with it

with the same velocity, The air alwayes touching us with the same part of it

cannot make us feel it. as also the circumjacent air: And what beating of the

air can we feel, when we fly vvith equal speed from that vvhich should accost

us? This Gentleman forgot, that vve no less than the Earth and air are carried

about, and that consequently vve are alvvays touch’d by one and the same

part of the air, vvhich yet doth not make us feel it.


SIMP.


But I rather think that he did not so think; hear the vvords vvhich immediatey

follovv. Praeterea nos quoque rotamur ex circumductione terrae &c.


SALV.


Now I can no longer help nor excuse him; do you plead for him and bring

him off, Simplicius.


SIMP.


I cannot thus upon the sudden think of an excuse that pleaseth me.SALV.


Go to; take this whole night to think on it, and defend him to morrow; in the

mean time let us hear some other of his objections.


SIMP.


He prosecuteth the same Objection, shewing, that in the way of Copernicus,

He that will follow Copernicus, must deny his senses. a man must deny his

own senses. For that this principle whereby we turn round with the Earth,

either is intrinsick to us, or external; that is, a rapture of that Earth; and if it

be this second, we not feeling any such rapture, it must be confessed that the

sense of feeling, doth not feel its own object touching it, nor its impression on

the sensible part: but if the principle  be intrinsecal, we shall not perceive a

local motion that is derived from our selves, and we shall never discover a

propension perpetually annexed to our selves.


SALV.


So that the instance of this Philosopher lays its stress upon this, that whether

the principle by which we move round with the Earth be either extern, or

intern, yet however we must perceive it, and not perceiving it, it is neither the

one nor the other, and therefore we move not, nor consequently the Earth.

Now I say, Our motion may be either  or extern , and yet we never perceive

or feel it. that it may be both ways, and yet we not perceive the same. And

that it may be external, the experiment of the boat superabundantly satisfieth

me; I say, superabundantly, because it being in our power at all times to make

it move, and also to make it stand still, and with great exactness to make

observation, whether by some diversity that may be comprehended by the

sense of feeling, we can come to know whether it moveth or no, seeing that

as yet no such science is obtained: Will it then be any matter of wonder, if the

same accident is unknown to us on the Earth, the which may have carried us

about perpetually, and we, without our being ever able to experiment its rest?

The motion of a Boat insensible to those that are with in it, as to the sense of

feeling.  You,  Simplicius,  as  I  believe,  have  gone  by  boat  many  times  to

Padoua, and if you will confess the truth, you never felt in your self the

participation  of  that  motion,  unless  when  the  boat  running  a-ground,  or

encountring some obstacle, did stop, and that you with the other Passengersbeing taken on a sudden, were with danger over-set. It would be necessary

that the Terrestrial Globe should meet with some rub that might arrest it, for I

assure you, that then you would discern the impulse residing in you, when it

should toss you up towards the Stars. It’s true, that by the other senses, but

yet assisted by Reason, The boats motion is perceptible to the sight joyn’d

with reason. you may perceive the motion of the boat, that is, with the sight,

in  that  you  see  the  trees  and  buildings  placed  on  the  shoar,  which  being

separated  from  the  boat,  seem  to  move  the  contrary  way.  The  terrestrial

motion collected from the stars. But if you would by such an experiment

receive intire satisfaction in this business of the Terrestrial motion, look on

the stars, which upon this reason seem to move the contrary way. As to the

wondering  that  we  should  not  feel  such  a  principle,  supposing  it  to  be

internal, is a less reasonable conceit; for if we do not feel such a one, that

cometh to us from without, and that frequently goeth away, with what reason

can we expect to feel it, if it immutably and continually resides in us? Now

let us see what you have farther to allege on this argument.


SIMP.


Take  this  short  exclamation.  Ex  hac  itaque  opinione  necesse  est  diffidere

nostris  sensibus,  ut  penitùs  fallacibus  vel  stupidis  in  sensilibus,  etiam

conjunctissimis,  dijudicandis.  Quam  ergò  veritatem  sperare  possumus  à

facultate adeò fallaci ortum trahentem? [Which I render thus: ] From this

opinion likewise, we must of  necessity suspect our own senses, as wholly

fallible, or stupid in judging of sensible things even very near at hand. What

truth therefore can we hope for, to be derived from so deceiveable a faculty?


SALV.


But I desire not to deduce precepts more profitable, or more certain, learning

to be more circumspect and less confident about that which at first blush is

represented to us by the senses, which may easily deceive us. And I would

not have this Author trouble himself in attempting to make us comprehend by

sense, that this motion of descending Graves is simply right, and of no other

kind; nor let him exclaim that a thing so clear, manifest, and obvious should

be brought in question; for in so doing, he maketh others believe, that he

thinketh  those  that  deny  that  motion  to  be  absolutely  streight,  but  rather

circular,  the  stone  did  sensibly  see  it  to  move  in  an  arch,  seeing  that  heinviteth their senses more than their Reason, to judg of that effect: which is

not true, Simplicius, for like as I, that am indifferent in all these opinions, and

onely  in  the  manner  of  a  Comedian,  personate  Copernicus  in  these  our

representations, have never seen, nor thought that I have seen that stone fall

otherwise than perpendicularly, so I believe, that to the eyes of all others it

seemed to do the same. Better it is therefore, that deposing that appearance in

which all agree, we make use of our Reason, either to confirm the reality of

that, or to discover its fallacy.


SAGR.


If I could any time meet with this Philosopher, who yet me thinks is more

sublime than the rest of the followers of the same doctrines, I would in token

of my affection put him in mind of an accident which he hath doubtless very

often  beheld;  from  which,  with  great  conformity  to  that  which  we  now

discourse of, it may be collected how easily one may be deceived by the bare

appearance, or, if you will, representation of the sense. And the accident is,

the Moons seeming to follow those that walk the streets in the night, with a

pace equal to theirs, whilst they see it go gliding along the Roofs of houses,

upon which it sheweth just like a cat, that really running along the ridges of

houses, leaveth them behind. An appearance that, did not reason interpose,

would but too manifestly delude the sight.


SIMP.


Indeed there want not experiments that render us certain of the fallacy of the

meer senses; Arguments against the Earths motion taken, ex rerum natura.

therefore  suspending  such  sensations  for  the  present,  let  us  hear  the

Arguments that follow which are taken, as he saith, ex rerum natura. The first

of which is, that the Earth cannot of its own nature move with three motions

very different; or otherwise we must deny many manifest Axioms. Three

Axioms that are supposed manifest. The first whereof is, that Omnis effectus

dependeat ab aliquâ causà; [i. e. ] that every effect dependeth on some cause. 

The second, that Nulla res seipsam producat; [i. e. ] that nothing produceth it

self: from whence it follows, that it is not possible that the move and moved

should be totally the same thing: And this is manifest, not onely in things that

are moved by an extrinsick mover; but it is gathered also from the principles

propounded, that the same holdeth true in the natural motion dependent on anintrinsick principle; otherwise, being that the mover, as a mover, is the cause,

and the thing moved, as moved, is the effect, the same thing would totally be

both the cause and effect. Therefore a body doth not move its whole self, that

is, so as that all moveth, and all is moved; but its necessary in the thing

moved to distinguish in some manner the efficient principle of the motion,

and that which with that motion is moved. The third Axiom is, that in rebus

quae sensui subjiciuntur, unum, quatenus unum, unam solam rem producat; i.

e. That in things subject to the senses, one, as it is one, produceth but onely

one thing: That is, the soul in animals produceth its true divers operations, as

the sight, the hearing, the smell, generation, &c. but all these with several

instruments. And in short, in things sensible, the diversity of operations, is

observed to derive it self from the diversity that is in the cause. A simple

body at the Earth, cannot move with three several motions. Now if we put all

these Axioms together, it will be a thing very manifest, that one simple body,

as is the Earth, cannot of its own nature move at the same time with three

motions, very divers: For by the foregoing suppositions, all moveth not its

self all; it is necessary therefore to distinguish in it three principles of its three

motions; otherwise one and the same principle would produce many motions;

but if it contein in it three principles of natural motions, besides the part

moved, it shall not be a simple body, but compounded of three principle

movers,  The  Earth  cannot  move  with  any  of  the  motions  assigned  it  by

Copernicus. and of the part moved. If therefore the Earth be a simple body, it

shall not move with three motions; nay more, it will not move with any of

those which Copernicus ascribeth to it, it being to move but with one alone,

for that it is manifest, by the reasons of Aristotle, that it moveth to its centre,

as its parts do shew, which descend at right angles to the Earths Spherical

Surface.


SALV.


Many things might be said, and considered touching the connection of this

argument; Answers to the arguments contrary to the Earths motion, taken ex

rerum natura. but in regard that we can resolve it in few words, I will not at

this time without need inlarge upon it; and so much the rather, because the

same Author hath furnished me with an answer, when he saith that from one

sole prinple in animals, there are produced divers operations; so that for thepresent my answer shall be, that in the same manner the Earth from one onely

principle deriveth several operations.


SIMP.


But this answer will not at all satisfie the Author who  makes the objection,

yea, it is totally overthrown by that which immediately after he addeth for a

greater confirmation of his argument, as you shall hear. He re-inforceth his

argument, I say, with another Axiome, A fourth Axiome against the motion

of the Earth which is this; That natura in rebus necessariis nec deficiat, nec

abundat:  i.  e.  That  nature  in  things  necessary  is  neither  defective,  nor

superfluous. Flexures necessary in animals for the diversity of their motions.

This is obvious to the observers of natural things, and chiefly of animals, in

which, because they are to move with many motions, Nature hath made many

flexures, and hath thereunto commodiously knitted the parts for motion, as to

the knees, to the hips, for the inabling of living creatures to go, and run at

their pleasure. Moreover in man he hath framed many flexions, and joynts, in

the  elbow,  and  hand,  to  enable  them  to  perform  many  motions.  Another

argument against the threefold motion of the Earth. From these things the

argument is taken against the threefold motion of the Earth. [Either the Body,

that is one, and continuate, without any manner of knittings or flexions, can

exercise divers motions, or cannot: If it can without them, then in vain hath

nature framed the flexures in animals; which is contrary to the Axiome: but if

it  cannot  without  them,  then  the  Earth,  one  body,  and  continuate,  and

deprived of flexures, and joynts, cannot of its own nature move with plurality

of motions. ] You see now how craftily he falls upon your answer, as if he

had foreseen it.


SALV.


Are you serious, or do you jest?


SIMP.


I speak it with the best judgment I have.


SALV.You must therefore see that you have as fortunate an hand in defending the

reply  of  this  Philosopher,  against  some  other  rejoynders  made  to  him;

therefore answer for him, I pray you, seeing we cannot have him here. You

first admit it for true, that Nature hath made the joynts, flexures, and knuckles

of living creatures, to the intent that they might move with sundry and divers

motions; and I deny this proposition; and say, that these flexions are made,

that the animal may move one, or more of its parts, The Flexures in animals

are not made for the diversity of motions. the rest remaining immoved: and I

say, that as to the species and differences of motions those are of one kind

alone,  to  wit,  all  circular,  and  for  this  cause  you  see  all  the  ends  of  the

moveable bones to be convex or concave, The motions of animals are of one

sort. and of these some are spherical, as are those that are to move every way,

as in the shoulderjoynt, The ends of the bones are all rotund. the arme of the

Ensigne doth, in displaying the Colours, and that of the Falconer in bringing

his Hawk to the lure; and such is the flexure of the elbow, upon which the

hand turns round, in boring with an augure: others are circular onely one way,

and as it were cylindrical, which serve for the members that bend onely in

one fashion, It is demonstrated, that the ends of the bones are of necessity to

be rotund. as the joynts of the fingers one above another, &c. But without

more particular inductions, one only general discourse may make this truth

understood; and this is, that of a solid  body that moveth, one of its extreams

standing  still  without  chanching  place,  The  motions  of  animals  are  all

circular. the motion must needs be circular, and no other: and because in the

living creatures moving, one of its members doth not separate from the other

its conterminal, therefore that motion is of necessity circular.


SIMP.


How can this be? For I see the animal move with an hundred motions that are

not circular, and very different from one another, as to run, to skip, to climbe,

to descend, to swim, and many others.


SALV.


Tis well: Secondary motions of animals dependent on the first. but these are

secondary motions, depending on the preceding motions of the joynts and

flexures. Upon the plying of the legs to the knees, and the thighs to the hips,

which are circular motions of the parts, is produced, as consequents, the skip,or running, which are motions of the whole body, and these may possibly not

be circular. Now because one part of the terrestrial Globe is not required to

move upon another part immoveable, The Terrestriall Globe hath noe need of

flexures. but that the motion is to be of the whole body, there is no need in it

of flexures.


SIMP.


This (will the aduersary rejoyn) might be, if the motion were but one alone,

but  they  being  three,  and  those  very  different  from  each  other,  it  is  not

possible that they should concur in anWithout joynts articulate body.


SALV.I verily believe that this would be the answer of the Philosopher. Against

which I make opposition another way; and ask you, whether you think that by

way  of  joynts  and  flexures  one  may  adapt  the  terrestrial  Globe  to  the

participation  of  three  different  circular  motions?  Do  you  not  answer  me?

Seeing you are speechlesse, I will undertake to answer for the Philosopher,

who would absolutely reply that they might; for that otherwise it would have

been superfluous, and besides the purpose to have proposed to consideration,

that nature maketh the flexions, to the end, the moveable may move with

different motions; and that therefore the terrestrial Globe having no flexures,

it cannot have those three motions which are ascribed to it. For if he had

thought, that neither by help of flexures, it could be rendered apt for such

motions, he would have freely affirmed, that the Globe could not move with

three motions. Now granting this, I intreat you, It is desired to know, by

means of what flexures and joynts the Terrestrial Globe might move with

three  diverse  motions.  and  by  you,  if  it  were  possible,  that  Philosopher,

Author of the Argument, to be so courteous as to teach me in what manner

those flexures should be accommodated, so that those three motions might

commodiously be excercised; and I grant you four or six moneths time to

think of an answer. As to me, it seemeth that one principle onely may cause a

plurality of motions in the Terrestrial Globe, One only principle may cause a

plurality of motions in the Earth. just in the same manner that, as I told you

before, one onely principle with the help of various instruments  produceth

sundry and divers motions in living creatures. And as to the flexures there is

no need of them, the motions being of the whole, and not of some particular

parts; and because they are to be circular, the meer spherical figure is the

most perfect articulation or flection that can be desired.


SIMP.


The most that ought to be granted upon this, would be, that it may hold true

in one single motion, but in three different motions, in my opinion, and that

of the Author, it is impossible; as he going on, prosecuting the objection,

writes in the following words. Let us suppose, with Copernicus, that the Earth

moveth of its own faculty, and upon an intrinsick principle from West to East

in the plane of the Ecliptick; and again, that it also by an intrinsick principle

revolveth about its centre, from East to West; and for a third motion, that it of

its own inclination deflecteth from North to South, and so back again. Itbeing a continuate body, and not knit together with joints and flections, our

fancy and our judgment will never be able to comprehend, that one and the

same  natural  and  indistinct  principle,  that  is,  that  one  and  the  same

propension, should actuate it at the same instant with different, and as it were

of contrary motions. I cannot believe that any one would say such a thing,

unlesse he had undertook to maintain this position right or wrong.


SALV.


Stay a little; and find me out this place in the Book. Fingamus modo cum

Copernico, terram aliqua suâ vi, & ab indito principio impelli ab Occasu ad

Ortum in Eclipticae plano; tum rursus revolvi ab indito etiam principio, circa

suimet  centrum,  ab  Ortu  in  Occasum;  A  grosse  error  of  the  opposer  of

Copernicus. tertio deflecti rursus suopte nutu à septentrione in Austrum, &

vicissim. I had thought, Simplicius, that you might have erred in reciting the

words of the Author, but now I see that he, and that very grossely, deceiveth

himself; and to my grief, I find that he hath set himself to oppose a position,

which  he  hath  not  well  understood;  for  these  are  not  the  motions  which

Copernicus assignes to the Earth. Where doth he find that Copernicus maketh

the  annual  motion  by  the  Ecliptick  contrary  to  the  motion  about  its  own

centre? It must needs be that he never read his Book, which in an hundred

places,  and  in  the  very  first  Chapters  affirmeth  those  motions  to  be  both

towards the same parts, that is from West to East. But without others telling

him, ought he not of himself to comprehend, that attributing to the Earth the

motions that are taken, one of them from the Sun, and the other from the

primum mobile, they must of necessity both move one and the same way.


SIMP.


Take heed that you do not erre your self, A subtil and withal simple argument

against Copernicus. and Copernicus also. The Diurnal motion of the primum

mobile, is it not from  East to West? And the annual motion of the Sun

through the Ecliptick, is it not on the contrary from West to East? How then

can you make these motions being conferred on the Earth, of contraries to

become consistents?


SAGR.Certainly, Simplicius hath discovered to us the original cause of error of this

Philosopher; and in all probability he would have said the very same.


SALV.


Now if it be in our power, let us at least recover Simplicius from this errour,

who seeing the Stars in their rising to appear above the Oriental Horizon, will

make it no difficult thing to understand,  that in case that motion should not

belong to the Stars, it would be necessary to confesse, that the Horizon, with

a contrary motion would go down; and that consequently the Earth would

reoolve in it self a contrary way to that wherewith the Stars seem to move,

that is from West to East, which is according to the order of the Signes of the

Zodiack. As, in the next place, to the other motion, the Sun being fixed in the

centre of the Zodiack, and the Earth moveable about its circumference, to

make the Sun seem unto us to move about the said Zodiack, according to the

order of the Signes, it is necessary, that the Earth move according to the same

order, to the end that the Sun may seem to us to possesse alwayes that degree

in the Zodiack, that is opposite to the degree in which we find the Earth; and

thus the Earth running, verbi gratia, through Aries, the Sun will appear to run

thorow Libra; and the Earth passing thorow the signe Taurus, the Sun will

passe  thorow  Scorpio,  and  so  the  Earth  going  thorow  Gemini,  the  Sun

seemeth to go thorow Sagittarius; but this is moving both the same way, that

is according to the order of the signes; as also was the revolution of the Earth

about its own centre.


SIMP.


I understand you very well, and know not what to alledge in excuse of so

grosse an error.


SALV.


And yet, Simplicius, there is one yet worse then this; and it is, that he makes

the Earth move by the diurnal motion about its own centre from East to West;

and  perceives  not  that  if  this  were  so,  the  motion  of  twenty  four  hours

appropriated by him to the Universe, would, in our seeming, proceed from

West to East; the quite contrary to that which we behold.SIMP.


Oh strange! Why I, that have scarce seen the first elements of the Sphere,

would not, I am confident, have erred so horribly.


SALV.


Judg now what pains this Antagonist may be thought to have taken in the

Books of Copernicus, By another  error it is seen that the Autagonist had but

little studied Copernicus. if he absolutely invert the sense of this grand and

principal  Hypothesis,  upon  which  is  founded  the  whole  summe  of  those

things wherein Copernicus


SAGR.


I have twice or thrice observed in the discourses of this Authour, that to prove

that a thing is so, or so, he still alledgeth, that in that manner it is conformable

with  our  understanding;  or  that  otherwise  we  should  never  be  able  to

conceive of it; or that the Criterium of Philosophy would be overthrown.

Never first  of them. As if that nature had first made mens brains, and then

disposed all things in conformity to the capacity of their intellects. But I

incline rather to think that Nature first made the things themselves, as she

best liked, and afterwards framed the reason of men capable of conceiving

(though not without great pains) some part of her secrets.


SALV.


I am of the same opinion. But tell me, Simplicius, which are these different

natures, to which, contrary to experience and reason, Copernicus assignes the

same motions and operations.


SIMP.


They are these. The Water, the Air, (which doubtlesse are Natures different

from the Earth) and all things that are in those elements comprised, shall each

of them have those three motions, which Copernicus pretends to be in the

Terrestriall Globe; Copernicus erroneously assigneth the same operations to

different natures and my Authour proceedeth to demonstrate Geometrically,that, according to the Copernican Doctrine, a cloud that is suspended in the

Air, and that hangeth a long time over our heads without changing place,

must of necessity have all those three motions that belong to the Terrestrial

Globe. The demonstration is this, which you may read your self, for I cannot

repeat it without book.


SALV.


I shall not stand reading of it, nay I think it an impertinency in him to have

inserted it, for I am certain, that no Copernican will deny the same. Therefore

admitting  him  what  he  would  demonstrate,  let  us  speak  to  the  objection,

which in my judgment hath no great strength to conclude any thing contrary

to the Copernican Hypothesis, seeing that it derogates nothing from those

motions, and those operations, whereby we come to the knowledge of the

natures, &c. Answer me, I pray you, Simplicius: Those accidents wherein

some  things  exactly  concur,  can  they  serve  to  inform  us  of  the  different

natures of those things?


SIMP.


No Sir: From commune accidents one cannot know different natures. nay

rather  the  contrary,  for  from  the  idendity  of  operations  and  of  accidents

nothing can be inferred, but an idendity of natures.


SALV.


So  that  the  different  natures  of  the  Water,  Earth,  Air,  and  other  things

conteined in these Elements, is not by you argued from those operations,

wherein all these Elements and their affixes agree, but from other operations;

is it so?


SIMP.


The very same.


SALV.So that he who should leave in the Elements all those  motions, operations,

and  other  accidents,  by  which  their  natures  are  distinguished,  would  not

deprive us of the power of coming to the knowledge of them; although he

should remove those operations, in which they unitedly concur, and which for

that reason are of no use for the distinguishing of those natures.


SIMP.


I think your dissertation to be very good.


SALV.


But that the Earth, Water, Air, are of a nature equally constituted immoveable

about the centre, is it not the opinion of your self, Aristotle, Prolomy, and all

their sectators?


SIMP.


Its on all hands granted as an undeniable truth.


SALV.


Then from this common natural condition of quiescence about the centre,

there is no argument drawn of the different natures of these Elements, and

things elementary, but that knowledge must be collected from other qualities

not  common;  and  therefore  whoso  should  deprive  the  Elements  of  this

common rest only, and should leave unto them all their other operations,

would not in the least block up the way that leadeth to the knowledge of their

essences.  But  Copernicus  depriveth  them  onely  of  this  common  rest,  and

changeth the same into a common motion, leaving them gravity, levity, the

motions upwards, downwards, slower, The concurrence of the Elements in a

common  motion  importeth  no  more  or  lesse,  than  their  concurrence  in  a

common rest. faster, rarity, density, the qualities of hot, cold, dry, moist, and

in a word, all things besides. Therefore such an absurdity, as this Authour

imagineth to himself, is no Copernican position; nor doth the concurrence in

an identity of motion import any more or less, than the concurrence in an

identity of rest about the diversifying, or not diversifying of natures. Now tell

us, if there be any argument to the contrary.SIMP.


There followeth a fourth objection, taken from a natural observation, which

is, A fourth argument against Copernicus. That bodies of the same kind, have

motions that agree in kinde, or else they agree in rest. But by the Copernican

Hypothesis,  Bodies  of  the  same  kinde  have  motions  that  agree  in  kinde.

bodies that agree in kinde, and are most semblable to one another, would be

very discrepant, yea diametrically repugnant as to motion; for that Stars so

like to one another, would be neverthelesse so unlike in motion, as that six

Planets would perpetually turn round; but the Sun and all the fixeed Stars

would stand perpetually immoveable.


SALV.


The  forme  of  the  argument  appeareth  good;  but  yet  I  believe  that  the

application or matter is defective: and if the Authour will but persist in his

assumption, the consequence shall make directly against him. The Argument

runs  thus;  Amongst  mundane  bodies,  From  the  Earths  obscurity,  and  the

splendour of the Sun, and fixed Stars, is argued, that it is moveable, and they

immoveable. six there are that do perpetually move, and they are the six

Planets; of the rest, that is, of the Earth, Sun, and fixed Stars, it is disputable

which of them moveth, and which stands still, it being necessary, that if the

Earth stand still, the Sun and fixed Stars do move; and it being also possible,

that the Sun  and fixed Stars may stand immoveable, in case the Earth should

move: the matter of fact in dispute is, to which of them we may with most

convenience ascribe motion, and to which rest. Natural reason dictates, that

motion ought to be assigned to the bodies, which in kind and essence most

agree with those bodies which do undoubtedly move, and rest to those which

most  dissent  from  them;  and  in  regard  that  an  eternal  rest  and  perpetual

motion are most different, it is manifest, that the nature of the body always

moveable ought to be most different from the body alwayes stable. Therefore,

in regard that we are dubious of motion and rest, let us enquire, whether by

the  help  of  some  other  eminent  affection,  we  may  discover,  which  most

agreeth with the bodies certainly moveable, either the Earth, or the Sun and

fixed  Stars.  But  see  how  Nature,  in  favour  of  our  necessity  and  desire,

presents us with two eminent qualities, and no less different than motion and

rest, and they are light and darkness, to wit, the being by nature most bright,and the being obscure, and wholly deprived of light: the bodies therefore

adorned with an internal and eternal splendour, are most different in essence

from those deprived of light: The Earth is deprived of light, the Sun is most

splendid in it self, and so are the fixed Stars. The six Planets do absolutely

want light, as the Earth; therefore their essence agreeth with the Earth, and

differeth  from  the  Sun  and  fixed  Stars.  Therefore  is  the  Earth  moveable,

immoveable the Sunne and Starry Sphere.


SIMP.


But the Authour will not grant, that the six Planets are tenebrose, and by that

negative  will  he  abide.  Or  he  will  argue  the  great  conformity  of  nature

between  the  six  Planets,  and  the  Sun,  and  Fixed  Stars;  and  the  disparity

between them and the Earth from other conditions than from tenebrosity and

light; yea, now I remember in the fifth objection, which followeth, he layeth

down the vast difference between the Earth and the Coelestial Bodies, A fifth

argument  against  Copernicus.  in  which  he  writeth,  That  the  Copernican

Hypothesis would make great confusion and perturbation in the Systeme of

the Vniverse, and amongst its parts: As for instance, amongst Coebodies that

are immutable and incorruptible, Another difference between the Earth and

the Coelestial bodies, taken from purity & impurity. according to Aristotle,

Tycho, and others; amongst bodies, I say, of such nobility, by the confession

of every one, and Copernicus himself, who affirmeth them to be ordinate, and

disposed in a perfect constitution, and removeth from them all inconstancy of

vertue  amongst,  these  bodies,  I  say  once  more,  so  pure,  that  is  to  say,

amongst Venus, Mars, &c. to place the very sink of all corruptible matters, to

wit, the Earth, Water, Air, and all mixt bodies.


But how much properer a distribution, and more with nature, yea with God

himself, the Architect, is it, to sequester the pure  from the impute, the mortal

from the immortal, as other Schools teach; which tell us that these impure

and frail matters are contained within the angust concave of the Lunar Orb,

above  which  with  uninterrupted  Series  the  things  Celestial  distend

themselves.


SALV.It’s true that the Copernican Systeme introduceth distraction in the universe

of Aristotle; Copernicus introduceth confusion in the Universe of Aristotle.

but we speak of our own Universe, that is true and real. Again if this Author

will infer the disparity of essence between the Earth and Celestial bodies

from the incorruptibility of them, and the corruptibility of it in the method of

Aristotle, from which disparity he concludeth motion to belong to the Sun

and fixed Stars, and the immobility of the Earth, The Paralogisme of the

Author of Anti-Tycho. he will flatter himself with a Paralogisme, supposing

that  which  is  in  question;  for  Aristotle  inferreth  the  incorruptibility  of

Celestial bodies from motion, which is in dispute, whether it belongeth to

them or to the Earth. Of the vanity of these Rhetorical Illations enough hath

been spoken. It seemeth a folly to affirm the Earth to be without the Heavens.

And what can be more fond, than to say, that the Earth and Elements are

banished and sequestred from the Celestial Spheres, and confined within the

Lunar Orb? Is, not then the Moons Orb one of the Celestial Spheres, and

according to consent comprised in the middle of all the rest? Its a new way to

separate the pure from the impure, and the sick from the sound, to assigne the

infected quarters in the heart of the City: I had thought that theLazeretto.

Pest-house  ought  to  have  been  removed  as  far  off  as  was  possible.

Copernicus admireth the disposition of the parts of the Universe, for that God

hath constituted the grand Lamp, which is to give light all over his Temple in

the centre of it, and not on one side. And as to the Earths being betwixt

Venus and Mars, we will but hint the same; and do you, in favour of this

Author, trie to remove it thence. But let us notIntrecciare, to twine flowers in

a garland. mix these Rhetorical Flowers with solid Demonstrations, rather let

us leave them to the Orators, or if you will to the Poets, who know how in

their  drolling  way  to  exalt  by  their  prayses  things  most  sordid,  yea  and

sometimes most pernicious. And if any thing else remain, let us dispatch it, as

we have done the rest.


SIMP.


There is the sixth and last argument; A sixth argument against Copernicus,

taken from animals, who have need of rest▪ though their motion be natural.

wherein  he  maketh  it  a  very  improbale  thing.  [That  a  corruptible  and

dissipable body should move with a perpetual and regular motion; and this be

confirmeth with the example of living creatures, which moving with a motionnatural to them, yet grow weary, and have need of repose to restore their

strength. ] But what hath this motion to do with that of the Earth, that in

comparision  to  theirs  is  immense?  Besides,  to  make  it  move  with  three

motions  that  run  and  draw  several  wayes:  Who  would  ever  assert  such

Paradoxes, unlesse he had sworn to be their defender? Nor doth that avail in

this  case, which Copernicus alledgeth, that by reason this motion is natural to

the Earth and not violent, it worketh contrary effects to violent motions; and

that  those  things  dissolve  and  cannot  long  subsist,  to  which  impulse  is

conferred, but those so made by nature do continue in their perfect disposure;

this answer sufficeth not, I say, for it is overthrown by that of ours. For the

animal is a natural body, and not made by art, and its motion is natural,

deriving it self from the soul, that is, from an intrinsick principle; and that

motion is violent, whose beginning is without, and on which the thing moved

conferreth nothing; however, if the animal continueth its motion any long

time, it grows weary, and also dyeth, if it obstinately strive to persist therein.

You see then that in nature we meet on all sides with notions contrary to the

Copernican Hypothesis, and none in favour of it. And for that I have nothing

more  wherein  to  take  the  part  of  this  Opponent,  hear  what  he  produceth

against Keplerus (with whom he disputeth) upon that argument, which the

said  Kepler  bringeth  against  those  who  think  it  an  inconvenient,  nay

impossible thing, to augment the Starry Sphere immensely, as the Copernican

Hypothesis requireth. Kepler therefore instanceth, saying: Difficilius est, An

argument from Kepler in favour of Copernicus. accidens praeter modulum

subjecti intendere, quàm subjectum sine accidente augere. Copernicus ergo

verisimilius facit, qui auget Orbem Stellarum fixarum absque motu, quam

Ptolomaeus, qui anget motum fixarum immensâ velocitate. [Which makes

this English. ] Its harder to stretch the accident beyond the model of the

subject than to augment the subject without the accident. Copernicus hath

more  probability  on  his  side,  who  encreaseth  the  Orb  of  the  fixed  Stars

without motion, than Ptolomy who augmenteth the motion of the fixed Stars

to an immense degree of velocity. Which objection the Author answereth,

The Author of the Anti-Tycho opposeth Kepler. wondering how much Kepler

deceived himself, in saying, that in the Ptolomaick Hypothesis the motion

encreaseth beyond the model of the subject, for in his judgment it doth not

encrease, save onely in conformity to the model, and that according to its

encreasement, the velocity of the motion is augmented. The velocity of the

circular motion increaseth, according to the encrease of the diameter of thecircle. Which he proveth by supposing a machine to be framed, that maketh

one revolution in twenty four hours, which motion shall be called most slow;

afterwards  supposing  its  semidiameter  to  be  prolonged,  as  far  as  to  the

distance of the Sun, its extreme will equal the velocity of the Sun; and it

being continued out unto the Starry Sphere, it will equal the velocity of the

fixed Stars, though in the circumference of the machine it be very slow. Now

applying  this  consideration  of  the  machine  to  the  Starry  Sphere,  let  us

imagine  any  point  in  its  semidiameter,  as  neer  to  the  centre  as  is  the

semidiameter of the machine; the same motion that in the Starry Sphere is

exceeding    swift,  shall  in  that  point  be  exceeding  slow;  But  the  great

magnitude of the body is that which maketh it of exceeding slow, to become

exceeding swift, although it continueth still the same, and thus the velocity

encreaseth, not beyond the model of the subject, but rather according to it,

and to its magnitude; very differently from the imagination of Kepler.


SALV.


I do not believe that this Author hath entertained so mean and poor a conceit

of Kepler, as to perswade himself that he did not understand, that the highest

term of a line drawn from the centre unto the Starry Sphere, moveth more

swiftly than a point of the same line taken within a yard or two of the centre.

And therefore of necessity he must have conceived and comprehended that

the mind and intention of Kepler was to have said, An explanation of the true

sense of Kepler and his  fence. that it is lesse inconvenient to encrease an

immoveable  body  to  an  extraordinary  magnitude,  than  to  ascribe  an

extraordinary velocity to a body, though very bigge, having regard to the

model, that is to the gauge, and to the example of other natural bodies; in

which  we  see,  that  the  distance  from  the  centre  encreasing,  the  velocity

diminisheth; that is, that the periods of their circulations take up longer times.

The greatnesse and smalnesse of the body make a differeuce in motion and

not in rest. But in rest which is not capable of augmentation or diminution,

the grandure or smalnesse of the body maketh no difference. So that if the

answer of the Author would be directed against the argument of Kepler, it is

necessary, that that Author doth hold, that to the movent principle its one and

the same to move in the same time a body very small, or very immense, in

regard that the augmentation of velocity inseparably attends the augmentation

of the masse. The order of nature is to make the lesser Orbs to circulate inshorter times, and the bigger in longer times. But this again is contrary to the

Architectonical rule of nature, which doth in the lesser Spheres, as we see in

the Planets, and most sensibly in the Medicean Stars, observe to make the

lesser  Orbs  to  circulate  in  shorter  times:  Whence  the  time  of  Saturns

revolution is longer than all the times of the other lesser Spheres, it being

thirty years; now the passing from this to a Sphere very much bigger, and to

make it move in 24. hours, may very well be said to exceed the rules of the

model. So that if we would but attentively consider it, the Authors answer

opposeth not the intent and sense of the argument, but the expressing and

manner of delivering of it; where again the Author is injurious, and cannot

deny but that he artificially dissembled his understanding of the words, that

he might charge Kepler with grosse ignorance; but the imposture was so very

dull and obvions, that he could not with all his craft alter the opinion which

Kepler hath begot of his Doctrine in the minds of all the Learned. As in the

next place, to the instance against the perpetual motion of the Earth, taken

from the impossibility of its moving long without wearinesse, in regard that

living creatures  themselves, which yet move naturally, and from an intern

principle, do grow weary, and have need of rest to relax and refresh their

members —


SAGR.


Methinks I hear Kepler answer him to that, that there are some kinde of

animals which refresh themselves after wearinesse, by rowling on the Earth;

and that therefore there is no need to fear that the Terrestrial Globe should

tire, The feigned answer of Kepler covered with an artificial Irony. nay it may

be reasonably affirmed, that it enjoyeth a perpetual & most tranquil repose,

keeping it self in an eternal rowling.


SALV.


You are too tart and Satyrical, Sagredus: but let us lay aside jests, whilst we

are treating of serious things.


SAGR.


Excuse me, Salviatus, this that I say is not so absolutely besides the business,

as  you  perhaps  make  it;  for  a  motion  that  serveth  instead  of  rest,  andremoveth weariness from a body tired with travail, may much more easily

serve  to  prevent  the  coming  of  that  weariness,  Animals  would  not  grow

weary of their motion, proceeding as that which is assigned to the terrestrial

Globe. like as preventive remedies are more easie than curative. And I hold

for certain, that if the motion of animals should proceed in the same manner

as this that is ascribed to the Earth, they would never grow weary; Seeing that

the weariness of the living creature, deriveth it self, in my opinion, from the

imployment of but one part alone in the moving of its self, The cause of the

wearinesse of animals. and all the rest of the body; as v. g. in walking, the

thighs and the legs onely are imployed for carrying themselves and all the

rest:  on  the  contrary,  you  see  the  motion  of  the  heart  to  be  as  it  were

indefatigable, because it moveth it self alone. Besides, I know not how true it

may be, The motion of an animal is rather to be called violent than natural.

that the motion of the animal is natural, and not rather violent: nay, I believe

that one may truly say, that the soul naturally moveth the members of an

animal with a motion preternatural, for if the motion upwards is preternatural

to grave bodies, the lifting up of the legs, and the thighs, which are grave

bodies,  in  walking,  cannot  be  done  without  violence,  and  therefore  not

without labour to the mover. The climbing upwards by a ladder carrieth the

grave  body  contrary  to  its  natural  inclination  upwards,  from  whence

followeth weariness, by reason of the bodies natural aversness to that motion:

but in moving a moveable with a motion, to which it hath no aversion, what

lassitude,  The  strength  diminisheth  not,  where  it  is  not  imployed.  what

diminution of vertue and strength need we fear in the mover? and how should

the forces waste, where they are not at all imployed?


SIMP.


They are the contrary motions wherewith the Earth is pretended to move,

against which the Authour produceth his argument.


SAGR.


It hath been said already, that they are no wise contraries, and that herein the

Authour is extteamly deceived, so that the whole strength of the argument

recoileth upon the Opponent  himself, The argument of Chramontius,  upon

himself. whilst he will make the First Mover to hurry along with it all the

inferiour Spheres, contrary to the motion which they themselves at the sametime exercise. It belongs therefore to the Primum Mobile to grow weary,

which besides the moving of its self is made to carry so many other Spheres,

and which also strive against it with a contrary motion. So that the ultimate

conclusion that the Authour inferred, saying, that discoursing of the effects of

Nature, a man alwayes meets with things that favour the opinion of Aristotle

and  Ptolomy,  and  never  any  one  that  doth  not  interfer  with  Copernicus,

stands in need of great consideration; and it is better to say, that one of these

two Hypotheses being true, and the other necessarily false, it is impossible

that a man should ever be able to finde any argument, experience, or right

reason, in favour of that which is false, True Propositions meet with many

conclusive arguments, so do not the false. like as to the truth none of these

things  can  be  repugnant.  Vast  difference,  therefore,  must  needs  be  found

between the reasons and arguments produced by the one and other party, for

and against these two opinions, the force of which I leave you your self to

judge of, Simplicius.


SALV.


But you, Sagredus, being transported by the velocity of your wit, have taken

my words out of my mouth, whilst I was about to say something, touching

this  last  argument  of  the  Author;  and  although  you  have  more  then

sufficiently refuted him, yet neverthelesse I will adde somewhat, which then

ran  in  my  minde.  He  proposeth  it  as  a  thing  very  unlikely,  that  a  body

dissipable  and  corruptible,  as  the  Earth,  should  perpetually  move  with  a

regular motion, especially for that we see living creatures in the end to grow

weary, and to stand in need of rest: and the improbability is increased, in that

the said motion is required to be of velocity incomparable and immense, in

respect to that of animals. Now, I cannot see why the velocity of the Earth

should, at present, trouble it; so long as that of the starry Sphere so very much

bigger doth not occasion in it any disturbance more considerable, than that

which  the  velocity  of  a  machine,  that  in  24  hours  maketh  but  one  sole

revolution, produceth in the same. If the being of the velocity of the Earths

conversion, according to the model of that machine, inferreth things of no

greater moment than that, let the Author cease to fear the Earths growing

weary; for that not one of the most feeble and slow-pac’t animals, no not a

Chamaeleon  would  tire  in  moving  no  more  thanCinque    se    braccia

Fiorentini. four or five yards in 24 hours; but if he please to consider thevelocity to be no longer, Weariness more to be feared in the starry Sphere

than in the terrestriall Globe. in relation to the model of the machine, but

absolutely, and inasmuch as the moveable in 24 hours is to pass a very great

space, he ought to shew himself so much more reserved in granting it to the

starry Sphere, which with a velocity incomparably greater than that of the 

Earth is to carry along with it a thousand bodies, each much bigger than the

Terrestrial Globe.


Here it remains for us to see the proofs, whereby the Authour concludes the

new stars Anno 1572. and Anno 1604. to be sublunary, and not coelestial, as

the Astronomers of those times were generally perswaded; an enterprize very

great certainly; but I have considered, that it will be better, in regard the Book

is new and long, by reason of its many calculations, that between this evening

and to morrow morning I make them as plain as I can, and so meeting you

again to morrow to continue our wonted conferences, give you a brief of

what I shall observe therein; and if we have time left, we will say something

of the Annual motion ascribed to the Earth. In the mean time, if either of you,

and  Simplicius  in  particular,  hath  any  thing  to  say  more,  touching  what

relates to the Diurnal motion, at large examined by me, we have a little time

still left to treat thereof.


SIMP.


I have no more to say, unlesse it be this, that the discourses that this day have

falne under our debate, have appeared to me fraught with very acute and

ingenious notions, alledged on Copernicus his side, in confirmation of the

motion of the Earth, but yet I find not my self perswaded to believe it; for in

short,  the  things  that  have  been  said  conclude  no  more  but  this,  that  the

reasons for the stability of the Earth are not necessary; but all the while no

demonstration hath been produced on the other side, that doth necessarily

convince and prove its mobility.


SALV.


I never undertook, Simplicius, to remove you from that your opinion; much

less dare I presume to determine definitively in this controversie: it onely

was, and still shall be in the ensuing disputations my intent, to make it appear

to you, that those who have thought that most swift motion of 24 hours dothbelong to the Earth alone, and not to the Universe, the Earth onely excluded,

were not induced to believe, that so it might and ought to do out of any blind

perswasion; but that they did very well see, try, and examine the reasons on

the contrary side, and also not slightly answer them. With the same intention,

if  it  stand  with  your  liking,  and  that  of  Sagredus,  we  may  passe  to  the

consideration  of  that  other  motion;  first,  by  Aristarchus  Samius,  and

afterwards by Nicholaus Copernicus ascribed to the said Terrestrial Globe,

which is, as, I believe, you have heretofore heard, made under the Zodiack

within the space of a year about the Sun, immoveably placed in the centre of

the said Zodiack.


SIMP.


The disquisition is so great, and so noble, that I shall gladly hearken to the

discussion thereof, perswading my self that I shall hear what ever can be said

of that matter. And I will afterwards  by my self, according to my usual

custome, make more deliberate reflexions upon what hath been, and is to be

spoken; and if I should gain no more but this, it will be no small benefit that I

shall be able to discourse more Logically.


SAGR.


Therefore, that we may no further weary Salviatus, we will put a period to the

disputations of this day, and reassume our conference to morrow in the usual

manner, with hope to hear very pleasing novelties.


SIMP.


I will leave with you the Book De stellis novis, and carry back this of the

Conclusions, to see what is written therein against the Annual motion, which

are to be the arguments of our discourse to morrow.


Place this Plate at the end of the Second Dialogue.                          THE THIRD DIALOGUE.


INTERLOCVTORS. SALVIATUS, SAGREDUS, and SIMPLICIUS.


SAGR.


THE great desire wherewith I have expected your coming, that I might hear

the novel conceits touching the annual conversion of this our Globe, hath

made me think the houres of the last night, and those of this morning very

tedious, although I spent them not idly, but lying awake I imployed a good

part  thereof  in  ruminating  upon  our  yesterdayes  discourses,  weighing  the

reasons alledged by both parties, in favour of the two contrary Hypotheses,

that of Aristotle and Ptolomy, and this of Aristarchus, and Copernicus. And

really methinks, that which ever of these parties have been deceived, they are

worthy of excuse, so specious and valid in appearance are the reasons that

may have perswaded them either way; though neverthelesse we  do for the

most  part  close  with  those  produced  by  the  grave  Authours  first  above

mentioned.  But  albeit  that  the  Peripatetick  Hypothesis,  by  reason  of  its

antiquity, hath had many followers and fautors, and the other very few; first,

for its obscurity, and next, for its novelty, yet methinks I discover amongst

those  many,  and  particularly  amongst  the  modernes  some,  who  for  the

support of the opinion by them esteemed true, have introduced other reasons

sufficiently childish, I could say ridiculous.


SALV.


I have met with the like, and so much worse than yours, Some in arguing first

fix  in  their  minds  the  conclusion  beleeved  by  them,  and  then  adapt  their

reasons to that. that I blush to rehearse them, not so much to spare the fame

of their Authours, the names of whom might be perpetually concealed, as

because I am ashamed so much to stain the honour of mankinde. In observing

of these men, I have found that some there are who preposterously reasoning,

first stablish the conclusion in their fancy, and (either because it is their own,

or else belongs to a person whom they much confide in) so firmly imprint it

in their opinions, that it is altogether impossible ever wholly to efface it: and

those reasons which they themselves stumble upon, or which they hear others

to alledge in confirmation of the conceit entertained, though never so simple

and insipid, instantly find credit and applause with them: but on the contrary,those  which  are  brought  against  their  opinion,  though  ingenuous  and

concluding, they receive not only with nauseating, but with disdain and bitter

indignation, yea, you shall have one of these so inraged, as that he will not be

backward to try all wayes to suppress and silence their adversaries: and of

this I my self have had some experience.


SAGR.


Indeed these men deduce not the conclusion from the premises, nor confirme

them  with  reasons,  but  accomodate,  or  to  say  better,  discommodate  and

distort the premises and arguments to make them speak in favour of their pre-

assumed and pertinacious conclusions. It is not good therefore to contract

familiarity with these men; and the rather, for that their conversation is not

only unpleasant, but also dangerous. Yet let us continue our conference with

Simplicius however, whom I have known this long while for a man of great

ingenuity;  and  altogether  void  of  malice:  besides  he  is  well  verst  in  the

Peripatetick Doctrine; so that I may assure my self, that what shall not fall

within the reach of his reason for the support of the Aristotelian Hypothesis,

will not easily be found out by others. But see yonder he comes, quite out of

winde, whose company we have so long desired: we were just now speaking

against the small hast you made to come to us.


SIMP.


You must not blame me, but Neptune, for this my long stay; which in the

ebbe of this mornings tide hath in a manner drain’d away the waters, for the

Gondola that brought me, being entered not far from hence into a certain

Channel, wanting depth,  where I was stranded, and forced to stay there more

than a full hour, in expecting the return of the tide: and there waiting in this

manner, without being able to get out of the boat, which on a sudden ran a

ground, The motion of the water in ebbing and flowing not interrupted by

rest. I observed a certain accident, which to me seemed very strange; and it

was this, that in the waters ebbing I saw it retreat very fast by several small

rivolets, the ouze being in many places discovered, and whilst I stood looking

upon  this  effect,  I  saw  this  motion  in  an  instant  to  cease,  and  without  a

minutes interval the same water to begin to return back again, and the tide

from ebbing to become young flood, without standing still a moment: an

effect that as long as I have dwelt in Venice, I never took notice of before.SAGR.


It  is  very  much,  that  you  should  be  left  thus  on  ground,  amongst  small

Channels;  in  which  rivolets,  as  having  very  little  declivity,  the  rising  or

falling of the main sea, the thickness onely of a paper is sufficient to make

the water to ebbe and flow for good long spaces of time: like as in some

creeks  of  the  Sea,  its  flowing  four  or  sixPertiche  venetiani.  yards  onely,

maketh the water to overflow the adjacent Marshes for some hundreds and

thousands ofPertiche venetiani. acres.


SIMP.


This I know very well, but I should have thought, that between the ultimate

terme of ebbing, and the first beginnng to flow, there should have interposed

some considerable interval of rest.


SAGR.


This will appear unto you, if you cast your eye upon the bank or piles, where

these mutations are made perpendicularly, but not that there is any real time

of cessation.


SIMP.


I did think, that because these two motions were contrary, there ought to be in

the midst between them some kind of rest; conformable to the Doctrine of

Aristotle, which demonstrates that in puncto regressus mediat quies.


SAGR.


I very well remember this place: but I bear in minde also, that when I read

Philosophy, I was not thorowly satisfied with Aristotles demonstration; but

that I had many experiments on the contrary, which I could still rehearse unto

you, but I am unwilling to sally out into any other digressions, we being met

here  to  discourse  of  the  proposed  mattes,  if  it  be  possible,  without  these

excursions wherewith we have interrupted our disputes in those dayes that are

past.SIMP.


And yet we may with convenience, if not-interrupt them, at least prolong

them  very  much,  for  returning  yesterday  home,  I  set  my  self  to  read  the

Tractate  of  Conclusions,  where  I  find  Demonstrations  against  this  annual

motion ascribed to the Earth, very solid; and because I would not trust my

memory with the punctual relation of them, I have brought back the Book

along with me.


SAGR.


You  have  done  very  well;  but  if  we  would  re-assume  our  Disputations

according to yesterdayes appointment, it is requisite that we first hear what

account Salviatus hath to give us of the Book, De stellis novis, and then

without interruption we may proceed to the Annual motion. Now what say

you, Salviatus touching those stars? Are they really pull’d down from Heaven

to  these  lower  regions,  by  vertue  of  that  Authours  calculations,  whom

Simplicius mentioneth?


SALV.


I set my self last night to peruse his proceedings, and I have this morning had

another view of him, to see whether that which he seemed over night to

affirm,  were  really  his  sense,  or  my  dreams  and  phantastical  nocturnal

imaginations; and in the close found to my great grief that those things were

really written and printed, which for the reputation-sake of this Philosopher I

was unwilling to believe. It is in my judgment impossible, but that he should

perceive  the  vanity  of  his  undertaking,  aswell  because  it  is  too  apert,  as

because I remember, that I have heard him mentioned with applause by the

Academick our Friend: it seemeth to me also to be a thing very unlikely, that

in complacency to others, he should be induced to set so low a value upon his

reputation, as to give consent to the publication of a work, for which he could

expect no other than the censure of the Learned.


SAGR.


Yea, but you know, that those will be much fewer than one for an hundred,

compared to those that shall celebrate and extoll him above the greatest witsthat are, or ever have been in the world: He is one that hath mentioned the

Peripatetick inalterability of Heaven against a troop of Astronomers, and that

to their greater disgrace hath foiled them at their own weapons: and what do

you think four or five in a Countrey that discern his triflings, can do against

the innumerable multitude, that, not being able to discover or comprehend

them, suffer themselves to be taken with words, and so much more applaud

him, by how much the lesse they understand him? You may adde also, that

those few who understand, scorn to give an answer to papers so trivial and

unconcludent; and that upon very good reasons, because to the intelligent

there is no need thereof, and to those that do not understand, it is but labour

lost.


SALV.


The most deserved punishment of their demerits would certainly be silence, if

there were not other reasons, for which it is haply no lesse than necessary to

resent  their  timerity:  one  of  which  is,  that  we  Italians  thereby  incur  the

censure of Illiterates, and attract the laughter of Forreigners; and especially to

such who are separated from our Religion; and I could shew you many of

those  of  no  small  eminency,  who  scoff  at  our  Academick,  and  the  many

Mathematicians that are in Italic, for suffering the  follies of such a  Fabler

against  Astronomers  to  come  into  the  light,  and  to  be  openly  maintained

without contradiction; but this also might be dispensed with, in respect of the

other  greater  occasions  of  laughter,  wherewith  we  may  confront  them

depending on the dissimulation of the intelligent, touching the follies of these

opponents of the Doctrines that they well enough understand.


SAGR.


I desire not a greater proof of those mens petulancy, and the infelicity of a

Copernican, subject to be opposed by such as understand not so much as the

very first positions, upon which he undertakes the quarrel.


SALV.


You  will  be  no  lesse  astonished  at  their  method  in  confuting  the

Astronomers, who affirm the new Stars to be superiour to the Orbs of thePlanets; and peradventure in theHe taketh  Firmament  the S arry Sphere, and

not as we vulg ly receive the word. Firmament it self.


SAGR.


But how could you in so short a time examine all this Book, which is so great

a Volume, and must needs contain very many demonstrations?


SALV.


I have confined my self to these his first confutations, in which with twelve

demonstrations founded upon the observations of twelve Astronomers, (who

all held, that the Star, Anno 1572. which appeared in Cassiopeia, was in the

Firmament) he proveth it on the contrary, to be beneath the Moon, conferring,

two by two, the meridian altitudes, proceeding in the method that you shall

understand by and by. And because, I think, that in the examination of this

his first progression, I have discovered in this Authour a great unlikelihood of

his ability to conclude any thing against the Astronomers, in favour of the

Peripatetick  Philosophers,  and  that  their  opinion  is  more  and  more

concludently confirmed, I could not apply my self with the like patience in

examining his other methods, but have given a very slight glance upon them,

and am certain, that the defect that is in these first impugnations, is likewise

in the rest. And as you shall see, by experience, very few words will suffice

to  confute  this  whole  Book,  though  compiled  with  so  great  a  number  of

laborious  calculations,  The  method  observed  by  Clar.  in  confuting  the

Astronomers, and by Salviatus in confuting him. as here you see. Therefore

observe my proceedings. This Authour undertaketh, as I say, to wound his

adversaries  with  their  own  weapons,  i.  e.  a  great  number  of  observations

made by themselves, to wit, by twelve or thirteen Authours in number, and

upon part of them he makes his supputations, and concludeth those stars to

have been below the Moon. Now because the proceeding by interrogatories

very  much  pleaseth  me,  in  regard  the  Authour  himself  is  not  here,  let

Simplicius answer me to the questions that I shall ask him, as he thinks he

himself would, if he were present. And presupposing that we speak of the

foresaid Star, of Anno 1572. appearing  in Cassiopeia, tell me, Simplicius,

whether you believe that it might be in the same time placed in divers places,

that is, amongst the Elements, aud also amongst the planetary Orbs, and also

above these amongst the fixed Stars, and yet again infinitely more high.SIMP.


There is no doubt, but that it ought to be confessed that it is but in one only

place, and at one sole and determinate distance from the Earth.


SALV.


Therefore if the observations made by the Astronomers were exact, and the

calculations made by this Author were not erroneous, it were easie from all

those and all these to recollect the same distances alwayes to an hair, is not

this true?


SIMP.


My reason hitherto tells me that so it must needs be; nor do I believe that the

Author would contradict it.


SALV.


But when of many and many computations that have been made, there should

not be so much as two onely that prove true, what would you think of them?


SIMP.


I  would  think  that  they  were  all  false,  either  through  the  fault  of  the

computist, or through the defect of the observators, and at the most that could

be said, I would say, that but onely one of them and no more was true; but as

yet I know not which to choose.


SALV.


Would you then from false fundamentals deduce and establish a doubtful

conclusion for true? Certainly no. Now the calculations of this Author are

such, that no one of them agrees with another, you may see then what credit

is to be given to them.


SIMP.


Indeed, if it be so, this is a notable failing.SAGR.


But by the way I have a mind to help Simplicius, and the Author by telling

Salviatus, that his arguments would hold good if the Author had undertook to

go about to find out exactly the distance of the Star from the Earth, which I

do not think to be his intention; but onely to demonstrate that from those

observations he collected that the Star was sublunary. So that if from those

observations, and from all the computations made thereon, the height of the

Star be alwayes collected to be lesse than that of the Moon, it serves the

Authors  turn  to  convince  all  those  Astronomers  of  most  impardonable

ignorance, that through the defect either of Geometry or Arithmetick, have

not  known  how  to  draw  true  conclusions  from  their  own  observations

themselves.


SALV.


It will be convenient therefore that I turn my self to you, Sagredus, who so

cunningly aphold the Doctrine of this Author. And to see whether I can make

Simplicius,  though  not  very  expert  in  calculations,  and  demonstrations  to

apprehend  the    inconclusivenesse  at  least  of  the  demonstrations  of  this

Author,  first  proposed  to  consideration,  and  how  both  he,  and  all  the

Astronomers with whom he contendeth, do agree that the new Star had not

any motion of its own, and onely went round with the diurnal motion of the

primum mobile; but dissent about the placing of it, the one party putting it in

the Celestial Region, that is above the Moon, and haply above the fixed Stars,

and the other judging it to be neer to the Earth, that is, under the concave of

the Lunar Orb. And because the situation of the new star, of which we speak,

was towards the North, and at no very great distance from the Pole, so that to

us Septentrionals, it did never set, it was an easie matter with Astronomical

instruments to have taken its several meridian altitudes, as well its smallest

under the Pole, as its greatest above the same; from the comparing of which

altitudes, made in several places of the Earth, situate at different distances

from  the  North,  that  is,  different  from  one  another  in  relation  to  polar

altitudes,  the  stars  distance  might  be  inferred:  The  greatest  and  least

elevations of the new star differ not from each other more than the polar

altitudes, the said star being in the Firmnment. For if it was in the Firmament

amongst the other fixed stars, its meridian altitudes taken in divers elevationsof  the  pole,  ought  necessarily  to  differ  from  each  other  with  the  same

variations that are found amongst those elevations themselves; that is, for

example, if the elevation of the star above the horizon was 30 degrees, taken

in the place where the polar altitude was v. gr. 45 degrees, the elevation of the

same  star  ought  to  have  been  encreased  4  or  5  degrees  in  those  more

Northernly places where the pole was higher by the said 4 or 5 degrees. But if

the stars distance from the Earth was but very little, in comparison of that of

the  Firmament;  its  meridian  altitudes  ought  approaching  to  the  North  to

encrease  considerably  more  than  the  polar  altitudes;  and  by  that  greater

encrease, that is, by the excesse of the encrease of the stars elevation, above

the  encrease  of  the  polar  elevation  (which  is  called  the  difference  of

Parallaxes)  is  readily  calculated  with  a  cleer  and  sure  method,  the  stars

distance  from  the  centre  of  the  Earth.  Now  this  Author  taketh  the

observations made by thirteen Astronomers in sundry elevations of the pole,

and  conferring  a  part  of  them  at  his  pleasure,  he  computeth  by  twelve

collations the new stars height to have been alwayes beneath the Moon; but

this he adventures to do in hopes to find so grosse ignorance in all those, into

whose hands his book might come, that to speak the truth, it hath turn’d my

stomack; and I wait to see how those other Astronomers, and particularly

Kepler,  against  whom  this  Author  principally  inveigheth,  can  contein

themselves  in  silence,  for  he  doth  not  use  to  hold  his  tongue  on  such

occasions; unlesse he did possibly think the enterprize too much below him.

Now to give you to  understand the same, I have upon this paper transcribed

the  conclusions  that  he  inferreth  from  his  twelve  indagations;  the  first  of

which is upon the two observations:


    Of Maurolicus and Hainzelius, from which the Star is collected to have

    been distant from the centre lesse than 3 semidiameters of the Earth, the

    difference of Parallaxes being 4 gr. 42 m. 30 sec. 3 semid.


    2. And is calculated on the observations of Hainzelius, with Parall. of 8.

    m. 30 sec. and its distance from the centre is computed to be more than

    25 semid.


    3. And upon the observations of Tycho and Hainzelius, with Parall. of

    10 m. and the distance of the centre is collected to be little lesse than 19

    semid.    4. And upon the observations of Tycho and the Landgrave, with Parall.

    of 14 m. the distance from the centre is made to be about 10 semid.


    5. And upon the observations of Hainzelius and Gemma, with Parall. of

    42 m. 30 sec. whereby the distance is gathered to be about 4 semid.


    6. And upon the observations of the Landgrave and Camerarius, with

    Parall. of 8 m. the distance is concluded to be about 4 semid.


    7. And upon the observations of Tycho and Hagecius, with Parall. of 6

    m. and the distance is made 31 semid.


    8. And upon the observations of Hagecius and Vrsinus with Parall. of 43

    m. and the stars distance from the superficies of the Earth is rendred 1/2

    semid.


    9. And upon the observations of Landgravius and Buschius, with Parall.

    of  15  m.  and  the  distance  from  the  superficies  of  the  Earth  is  by

    supputation 1/48 semid.


    10. And upon the observations of Maurolice and Munocius, with Parall.

    of 4 m. 30 sec. and the compnted distance from the Earths surface is 1/5

    semid.


    11. And upon the observations of Munocius and Gemma, with Parall. of

    55 m. and the distance from the centre is rendred 13 semid.


    12. And upon the observations of Munosius and Vrsinus with Parall. of

    1 gr. 36 m. and the distance from the centre cometh forth lesse than 7

    semid.


These are twelve indagations made by the Author at his election, amongst

many which, as he saith, might be made by combining the observations of

these thirteen observators. The which twelve we may believe to be the most

favourable to prove his intention.


SAGR.