self, that there can be any men so much more learned, read, and versed in

Authors, than we, that in despite of nature, they should be able to make that

become true, which is false. And seeing that of all the opinions that have

been  hitherto  alledged  touching  the  essence  of  these  Solar  spots,  this

instanced in by you, is in your judgment the truest, it followeth (if this be so)

that all the rest are false; and to deliver you from this also, which doubtlesse

is a most false Chimaera, over-passing infinite other improbabilities that are

therein, An Argument that necessarily proveth the Solar spots to generate and

dissolve. I shall propose against it onely two experiments; one is, that many

of those spots are seen to arise in the midst of the Solar ring, and many

likewise to dissolve and vanish at a great distance from the circumference of

the Sun; a necessary Argument  that they generate and dissolve; for if without

generating or corrrupting, they should appear there by onely local motion,

they would all be seen to enter, A conclusive demonstration, that the spots are

contiguous to the body of the Sun. and pass out by extreme circumference.

The  other  observation  to  such  as  are  not  situate  in  the  lowest  degree  of

ignorance in Perspective, by the mutation of the appearing figures, and by the

apparent mutations of the velocity of motion is necessarily concluding, that

the  spots  are  contiguous  to  the  body  of  the  Sun,  and  that  touching  its

superficies, they move either with it or upon it, and that they in no wise move

in  circles  remote  from  the  same.  The  motion  of  the  spots  towards  the

circumference of the Sun appears slow. The motion proves it, which towards

the circumference of the Solar Circle, appeareth very slow, and towards the

midst, more swift; the figures of the spots confirmeth it, The figure of the

spots appears narrow towards the circumference of the Suns discus, & why.

which towards the circumference appear exceeding narrow in comparison of

that which they seem to be in the parts nearer the middle; and this because in

the midst they are seen in their full luster, and as they truly be; and towards

the circumference by reason of the convexity of the globous superficies, they

seem more compress’d: And both these diminutions of figure and motion, to

such as know how to observe and calculate them exactly, precisely answer to

that which should appear, the spots being contiguous to the Sun, and differ

irreconcileably from a motion in circles remote, though but for smal intervalls

from the body of the Sun; as hath been diffusely demonstrated by ourUnder

this word Friend, as also that of Academick, & Common Friend, Galilaeus

modestly conceals himself throughout these Dialogues. Friend, in his Letters

about the Solar spots, to Marcus Velserus. It may be gathered from the samemutation of figure, that none of them are stars, or other bodies of spherical

figure; for that amongst all figures the sphere never appeareth compressed,

nor can ever be represented but onely perfectly round; and thus in case any

particular spot were a round body, as all the stars are held to be, the said

roundness would as well appear in the midst of the Solar ring, as when the

spot is near the extreme: whereas, its so great compression, and shewing its

self  so  small  towards  the  extreme,  and  contrariwise,  spatious  and  large

towards the middle, assureth us, The Solar spots are not spherical, but flat

like thin plates. that these spots are flat plates of small thickness or depth, in

comparison of their length and breadth. Lastly, whereas you say that the spots

after their determinate periods are observed to return to their former aspect,

believe it not, Simplicius, for he that told you so, will deceive you; and that I

speak the truth, you may observe them to be hid in the face of the Sun far

from the circumference; nor hath your Observator told you a word of that

compression, which necessarily argueth them to be contiguous to the Sun.

That which he tells you of the return of the said spots, is nothing else but

what is read in the forementioned Letters, namely, that some of them may

sometimes so happen that are of so long a duration, that  they cannot be

dissipated by one sole conversion about the Sun, which is accomplished in

less than a moneth.


SIMPL.


I, for my part, have not made either so long, or so exact observations, as to

enable me to boast my self Master of the Quod est of this matter: but I will

more  accurately  consider  the  same,  and  make  tryal  my  self  for  my  own

satisfaction, whether I can reconcile that which experience shews us, with

that which Aristotle teacheth us; for it’s a certain Maxim, that two Truths

cannot be contrary to one another.


SALV.


If  you  would  reconcile  that  which  sense  shewed  you,  with  the  solider

Doctrines  of  Aristotle,  One  cannot  (saith  Aristotle)  speak  confidently  of

Heaven, by reason of its great distance. you will find no great difficulty in the

undertaking; and that so it is, doth not Aristotle say, that one cannot treat

confidently of the things of Heaven, by reason of their great remoteness?SIMPL.


He expresly saith so.


SALV.


And doth he not likewise affirm, Aristotle prefers sense before ratiocination.

that we ought to prefer that which sense demonstrates, before all Arguments,

though in appearance never so well grounded? and saith he not this without

the least doubt or haesitation?


SIMPL.


He doth so.


SALV.


Why then, the second of these propositions, which are both the doctrine of

Aristotle, Its a doctrine more agreeing with Aristotle, to say the Heavens are

alterable, than that which affirms them inalterable. that saith, that sense is to

take place of Logick, is a doctrine much more solid and undoubted, than that

other which holdeth the Heavens to be unalterable; and therefore you shall

argue more Aristotelically, saying, the Heavens are alterable, for that so my

sense telleth me, than if you should say, the Heavens are ualterable, for that

Logick so perswaded Aristotle. We may by help of the Telescope discourse

better  of  coelestical  matters,  than  Aristot.  himself.  Furthermore,  we  may

discourse  of  Coelestial  matters  much  better  than  Aristotle;  because,  he

confessing the knowledg thereof to be difficult to him, by reason of their

remoteness from the senses, he thereby acknowledgeth, that one to whom the

senses can better represent the same, may philosophate upon them with more

certainty. Now we by help of the Telescope, are brought thirty or forty times

nearer to the Heavens, than ever Aristotle came; so that we may discover in

them an hundred things, which he could not see, and amongst the rest, these

spots in the Sun, which were to him absolutely invisible; therefore we may

discourse of the Heavens and Sun, with more certainty than Aristolte.


SAGR.I see into the heart of Simplicius, and know that he is much moved at the

strength of these so convincing Arguments; but on the other side, when he

considereth the great authority which Aristotle hath won with all men, and

remembreth the great number of famous Interpreters, which have made it

their business to explain his sense; and seeth other Sciences, so necessary

and    profitable  to  the  publick,  to  build  a  great  part  of  their  esteem  and

reputation on the credit of Aristotle he is much puzzled and perplexed: The

Declamation  of Simplicius. and methinks I hear him say, To whom then

should  we  repair  for  the  decision  of  our  controversies,  if  Aristotle  were

removed from the chair? What other Author should we follow in the Schools,

Academies and Studies? What Philosopher hath writ all the parts of Natural

Philosophy, and that so methodically without omitting so much as one single

conclusion?  Shall  we  then  overthrow  that  Fabrick  under  which  so  many

passengers  find  shelter?  Shall  we  destroy  that  Asylum,  that  Prytaneum,

wherein so many Students meet with commodious harbour, where without

exposing themselves to the injuries of the air, with the onely turning over of a

few leaves, one may learn all the secrets of Nature? Shall we dismantle that

fort in which we are safe from all hostile assaults? But I pitie him no more

than I do that Gentleman who with great expence of time and treasure, and

the  help  of  many  hundred  artists,  erects  a  very  sumptuous  Pallace,  and

afterwards beholds it ready to fall, by reason of the bad foundation; but being

extremely unwilling to see the Walls stript which are adorned with so many

beautifull Pictures; or to suffer the columns to fall, that uphold the stately

Galleries; or the gilded roofs, chimney-pieces, the freizes, the cornishes of

marble, with so much cost erected, to be ruined; goeth about with girders,

props, shoars, butterasses, to prevent their subversion.


SALV.


But alass, Simplicius as yet fears no such fall, and I would undertake to

secure him from that mischief at a far less charge. Peripatetick Philosophy

unchangeable. There is no danger that so great a multitude of subtle and wise

Philosophers, should suffer themselves to be Hector’d by one or two, who

make a little blustering; nay, they will rather, without ever turning the points

of their pens against them, by their silence onely render them the object of

universal scorn and contempt. It is a fond conceit for any one to think to

introduce new Philosophy, by reproving this or that Author: it will be firstnecessary to new-mold the brains of men, and make them apt to distinguish

truth from falshood. A thing which onely God can do. But from one discourse

to another whither are we stray’d? your memory must help to guide me into

the way again.


SIMPL.


I remember very well where we left. We were upon the answer of Anti-

Tycho,  to  the  objections  against  the  immutability  of  the  Heavens,  among

which you inserted this of the Solar spots, not spoke of by him; and I believe

you intended to examine his answer to the instance of the New Stars.


SALV.


Now I remember the rest, and to proceed, Methinks there are some things in

the answer to Anti-Tycho, worthy of reprehension. And first, if the two New

Stars,  which  he  can  do  no  less  than  place  in  the  uppermost  parts  of  the

Heavens, and which were of a long duration, but finally vanished, give him

no obstruction in maintaining the inalterability of Heaven, in that they were

not certain parts thereof, nor mutations made in the antient Stars, why doth he

set himself so vigorously and earnestly against the Comets, to banish them by

all ways from the Coelestial Regions? Was it not enough that he could say of

them the same which he spoke of the New stars? to wit, that in regard they

were no certain parts of Heaven, nor mutations made in any of the Stars, they

could  no  wise  prejudice  either  Heaven,  or  the  Doctrine  of  Aristotle?

Secondly, I am not very well satisfied of his meaning; when he saith that the

alterations  that  should  be  granted  to  be  made  in  the  Stars,  would  be

destructive to the prerogative of Heaven; namely, its incorruptibility, &c. and

this, because the Stars are Coelestial substances, as is manifest by the consent

of every one; and yet is nothing troubled that the same alterations should be

madeExtra Stellas. without the Stars in the rest of the Coelestial expansion.

Doth he think that Heaven is no Coelestial substance? I, for my part, did

believe that the Stars were called Coelestial bodies, by reason that they were

in Heaven, or for that they were made of the substance of Heaven; and yet I

thought that Heaven was more Coelestial than they; in like sort, as nothing

can  be  said  to  be  more  Terrestrial,  or  more  fiery  than  the  Earth  or  Fire

themselves. And again, in that he never made any mention of the Solar spots,

which have been evidently demonstrated to be produced, and dissolved, andto be neer the Sun, and to turn either with, or about the same, I have reason to

think that this Author probably did write more for others pleasure, than for

his own satisfaction; and this I affirm, forasmuch as he having shewn himself

to be skilful in the Mathematicks, it is impossible but that he should have

been convinced by Demonstrations, that those substances are of necessity

contiguous  with  the  body  of  the  Sun,  and  are  so  great  generations  and

corruptions, that none comparable to them, ever happen in the Earth: And if

such, so many, and so frequent be made in the very Globe of the Sun, which

may with reason be held one of the noblest parts of Heaven, what should

make us think that others may not happen in the other Orbs.


SAGR.


I cannot without great admiration, Generability and alteration is a greater

perfection in the Worlds bodies than the contrary qualities. nay more, denial

of my understanding, hear it to be attributed to natural bodies, for a great

honour  and  perfection  that  they  areImpatible.  impassible,  immutable,

inalterable,  &c.  And  on  the  contrary,  to  hear  it  to    be  esteemed  a  great

imperfection to be alterable, generable, mutable, &c. The Earth very noble,

by reason of the many mutations made therein. It is my opinion that the Earth

is  very  noble  and  admirable,  by  reason  of  so  many  and  so  different

alterations, mutations, generations, &c. which are incessantly made therein;

and if without being subject to any alteration, it had been all one vast heap of

sand, or a masse of Jasper, or that in the time of the Deluge, the waters

freezing which covered it, it had continued an immense Globe of Christal,

The  Earth  unprofitable  and  full  of  idlenesse,  its  alterations  taken  away

wherein nothing had ever grown, altered, or changed, I should have esteemed

it  a  lump  of  no  benefit  to  the  World,  full  of  idlenesse,  and  in  a  word

superfluous, and as if it had never been in nature; and should make the same

difference in it, as between a living and dead creature: The like I say of the

Moon, Jupiter, and all the other Globes of the World. But the more I dive into

the consideration of the vanity of popular discourses, the more empty and

simple I find them. And what greater folly can there be imagined, than to call

Jems, Silver and Gold pretious; and Earth and dirt vile?The Earth more noble

than Gold and Jewels. For do not these persons consider, that if there should

be as great a scarcity of Earth, as there is of Jewels and pretious metals, there

would be no Prince, but would gladly give a heap of Diamonds and Rubies,and  many  Wedges  of  Gold,  to  purchase  onely  so  much  Earth  as  should

suffice to plant a Gessemine in a little pot, or to set therein a China Orange,

that he might see it sprout, grow up, and bring forth so goodly leaves, so

odiriferous  flowers,  Scarcity  and  plenty  enhanse  and  debase  the  price  of

things. and so delicate fruit? It is therefore scarcity and plenty that make

things esteemed and contemned by the vulgar; who will say that same is a

most beautiful Diamond, for that it resembleth a cleer water, and yet will not

part with it for ten Tun of water: Incorruptibility esteemed by the vulgar out

of their fear of death. These men that so extol incorruptibility, inalterability,

&c. speak thus I believe out of the great desire they have to live long, and for

fear of death; not considering, that if men had been immortal, they should

have  had  nothing  to  do  in  the  World.  The  disparagers  of  corruptibility

deserve to be turned into Statua’s. These deserve to meet with a Medusa’s

head, that would transform them into Statues of Dimond and Jasper, that so

they might become more perfect than they are.


SALV.


And it may be such a Metamorphosis would not be altogether unprofitable to

them; for I am of opinion that it is better not to discourse at all, than to argue

erroniously.


SIMPL.


There is not the least question to be made, but that the Earth is much more

perfect, being as it is alterable, mutable, &c. than if it had been a masse of

stone;  yea  although  it  were  one  entire  Diamond,  The  Coelestial  bodies

designed to serve the Earth, need no more but motion and light. most hard

and impassile. But look how much these qualifications enoble the Earth, they

render  the  Heavenly  bodies  again  on  the  other  side  so  much  the  more

imperfect, in which, such conditions would be superfluous; in regard that the 

Coelestial bodies, namely, the Sun, Moon, and the other Stars, which are

ordained for no other use but to serve the Earth, need no other qualities for

attaining of that end, save onely those of light and motion.


SAGR.How? Will you affirm that nature hath produced and designed so many vast

perfect and noble Coelestial bodies, impassible, immortal, and divine, to no

other use but to serve the passible, frail, and mortal Earth? to serve that which

you  call  the  drosse  of  the  World,  and  sink  of  all  uncleannesse?  To  what

purpose were the Coelestial bodies made immortal, &c. to serve a frail, &c.

Take away this subserviency to the Earth, and the innumerable multitude of

Coelestial  bodies  become  wholly  unuseful,  Celestial  bodies  want  an

interchangeable  operation  upon  each  other.  and  superfluous,  since  they

neither have nor can have any mutual operation betwixt themselves; because

they  are  all  unalterable,  immutable,  impassible:  For  if,  for  Example,  the

Moon be impassible, what influence can the Sun or any other Star have upon

her? it would doubtlesse have far lesse effect upon her, than that of one who

would with his looks or imagination, lignifie a piece of Gold. Moreover, it

seemeth to me, that whilst the Coelestial bodies concurre to the generation

and alteration of the Earth, they themselves are also of necessity alterable; for

otherwise I cannot understand how the application of the Sun or Moon to the

Earth, to effect production, should be any other than to lay a marble Statue by

a Womans side, and from that conjunction to expect children.


SIMPL.


Corruptibility, Alterability, &c. are not in the whole Terrestrial Globe, but in

some of its parts. alteration, mutation, &c. are not in the whole Terrestrial

Globe, which as to its whole, is no lesse eternal than the Sun or Moon, but it

is generable and corruptible as to its external parts; but yet it is also true that

likewise in them generation and corruption are perpetual, and as such require

the  heavenly  eternal  operations;  and  therefore  it  is  necessary  that  the

Coelestial bodies be eternal.


SAGR.


All this is right; but if the corruptibility of the superficial parts of the Earth be

nowise  prejudicial  to  the  eternity  of  its  whole  Globe,  yea,  if  their  being

generable,  corruptible,  alterable,  &c.  gain  them  great  ornament  and

perfection; why cannot, Coelestial bodies alterable in their outward parts. and

ought not you to admit alteration, generation, &c. likewise in the external

parts of the Coelestial Globes, adding to them ornament, without taking from

them  perfection,  or  bereaving  them  of  action;  yea  rather  encreasing  theireffects, by granting not onely that they all operate on the Earth, but that they

mutually operate upon each other, and the Earth also upon them all?


SIMPL.


This cannot be, because the generations, mutations, &c. which we should

suppose v. g. in the Moon; would be vain and uselesse, & natura nihil frustra

facit.


SAGR.


And why should they be vain and uselesse?


SIMPL.


Because we cleerly see, The generations & mutations happening in the Earth,

are all for the good of Man. and feel with our hands, that all generations,

corruptions, &c. made in the Earth, are all either mediately or immediately

directed to the use, convenience, and benefit of man; for the use of man are

horses brought forth, for the feeding of horses, the Earth produceth grasse,

and the Clouds water it; for the use and nourishment of man, herbs, corn,

fruits, beasts, birds, fishes, are brought forth; and in sum, if we should one by

one dilligently examine and resolve all these things, we should find the end to

which they are all directed, to be the necessity, use, convenience, and delight

of man. Now of what use could the generations which we suppose to be made

in the Moon or other Planets, ever be to mankind? unlesse you should say

that there were also men in the Moon, that might enjoy the benefit thereof; a

conceit either fabulous or impious.


SAGR.


That in the Moon or other Planets, The Moon hath no generatings of things,

like as we have, nor is it inhabited by men. there are generated either herbs,

or plants, or animals, like to ours, or that there are rains, winds, or thunders

there, as about the Earth, I neither know, nor believe, and much lesse, that it

is inhabited by men: but yet I understand not, because there are not generated

things like to ours, that therefore it necessarily followeth, that no alteration is

wrought therein, or that there may not be other things that change, In theMoon  may  be  a  generation  of  things  different  from  ours.  generate,  and

dissolve, which are not onely different from ours, but exceedingly beyond our

imagination, and in a word, not to be thought of by us. And if, as I am

certain, that one born and brought up in a spatious Forrest, amongst beasts

and birds, and that hath no knowledg at all of the Element of Water, He that

had not heard of the Element of Water, could never fancy to himself Ships

and Fishes. could never come to imagine another World to be in Nature,

different from the Eatth, full of living creatures, which without legs or wings

swiftly move, and not upon the surface onely, as beasts do upon the Earth,

but in the very bowels thereof; and not onely move, but also stay themselves

and cease to move at their pleasure, which birds cannot do in the air; and that

moreover men live therein, and build Palaces and Cities, and have so great

convenience in travailing, that without the least trouble, they can go with

their Family, House, and whole Cities, to places far remote, like as I say, I am

certain, such a person, though of never so piercing an imagination, could

never fancy to himself Fishes, the Ocean, Ships, Fleets, Armado’s at Sea;

thus, and much more easily, may it happn, that in the Moon, remote from us

by so great a space, and of a substance perchance very different from the

Earth, there may be matters, and operations, not only wide off, but altogether

beyond all our imaginations, as being such as have no resemblance to ours,

and therefore wholly inexcogitable, in regard, that what we  imagine to our

selves, must necessarily be either a thing already seen, or a composition of

things, or parts of things seen at another time; for such are the Sphinxes,

Sirenes, Chimaera’s. Centaurs, &c.


SALV.


I have very often let my fancy ruminate upon these speculations, and in the

end, have thought that I had found some things that neither are nor can be in

the Moon; but yet I have not found therein any of those which I believe are,

and may be there, save onely in a very general acceptation, namely, things

that adorn it by operating, moving and living; and perhaps in a way very

different from ours; There may be substances in the Moon very different

from ours. beholding and admiring the greatness and beauty of the World,

and  of  its  Maker  and  Ruler,  and  with  continual  Encomiums  singing  his

prayses;  and  in  summe  (which  is  that  which  I  intend)  doing  what  sacredWriters so frequently affirm, to wit, all the creatures making it their perpetual

imployment to laud God.


SAGR.


These are the things, which speaking in general terms, may be there; but I

would gladly hear you instance in such as you believe neither are nor can be

there; which perchance may be more particularly named.


SALV.


Take notice Sagredus that this will be the third time that we have unawares

by running from one thing to another, lost our principal subject; and if we

continue these digressions, it will be long ere we come to a conclusion of our

discourse; therefore I should judg it better to remit this, as also such other

points, to be decided on a particular occasion.


SAGR.


Since we are now got into the Moon, if you please, let us dispatch such things

as concern her, that so we be not forced to such another tedious journey.


SALV.


It shall be as you would have it. And to begin with things more general, I

believe that the Lunar Globe is far different from the Terrestrial, though in

some things they agree. I will recount first their resemblances, and next their

differences. The Moon is manifestly like to the Earth in figure, The First

resemblance between the Moon and Earth; which is that of figure; is proved

by  the  manner  of  being  illuminated  by  the  Sun.  which  undoubtedly  is

spherical, as may be necessarily concluded from the aspect of its surface,

which is perfectly Orbicular, and the manner of its receiving the light of the

Sun, from which, if its surface were flat, it would come to be all in one and

the  same  time  illuminated,  and  likewise  again  in  another  instant  of  time

obscured, and not those parts first, which are situate towards the Sun, and the

rest successively, so that in its opposition, and not till then, its whole apparent

circumference  is  enlightned;  which  would  happen  quite  contrary,  if  the

visible surface were concave; namely, the illumination would begin from theparts opposite or averse to the Sun. The Second conformity is the Moons

being opacous as the Earth. Secondly she is as the Earth, in her self obscure

and opacous, by which opacity it is enabled to receive, and reflect the light of

the  Sun;  Moon is  and  as the Earth. which were it not so, it could not do.

Thirdly, I hold its matter to be most dense and solid as the Earth is, which I

clearly argue from the unevenness of its superficies in most places, by means

of  the  many  eminencies  and  cavities  discovered  therein  by  help  of  the

Telescope:  of  which  eminencies  there  are  many  all  over  it,  directly

resembling our most sharp and craggy mountains, of which you shall there

perceive some extend and run in ledges of an hundred miles long; others are

contracted into rounder forms; and there are also many craggy, solitary, steep

and cliffy rocks. But that of which there are frequentest appearances, are

certain Banks (I use this word, because I cannot thing of another that better

expresseth  them)  pretty  high  raised,  which  environ  and  inclose  fields  of

several bignesses, and from sundry figures, but for the most part circular;

many of which have in the midst a mount raised pretty high, and some few

are replenished with a matter somewhat obscure, to wit, like to the great spots

discerned  by  the  bare  eye,  and  these  are  of  the  greatest  magnitude;  the

number moreover of those that are lesser and lesser is very great, and yet

almost all circular. Fourthly, Fourthly, The Moon is distinguished into two

different parts for clarity and obscurity, as the Terrestrial Globe into Sea and

Land. The surface of the Sea would shew at a distance more obscure than that

of  the  Earth.  like  as  the  surface  of  our  Globe  is  distinguished  into  two

principal parts, namely, into the Terrestrial and Aquatick: so in the Lunar

surface we discern a great distinction of some great fields more resplendant,

and some less: whose aspect makes me believe, that that of the Earth would

seem very like it, beheld by any one from the Moon, or any other the like

distance,  to  be  illuminated  by  the  Sun:  and  the  surface  of  the  sea  would

appear more obscure, and that of the Earth more bright. Fifthly, like as we

from the Earth behold the Moon, one while all illuminated, another while

half; Fiftly, Mutation of figures in the Earth, like to those of the Moon, and

made with the same periods. sometimes more, sometimes less; sometimes

horned, sometimes wholly invisibly; namely, when its just under the Sun

beams; so that the parts which look towards the Earth are dark: Thus in every

respect, one standing in the Moon would see the illumination of the Earths

surface by the Sun, with the same periods to an hair, and under the same

changes of figures. Sixtly, —SAGR.


Stay a little, Salviatus; That the illumination of the Earth, as to the several

figures, would represent it self to a person placed in the Moon, like in all

things to that which we discover in the Moon, I understand very well, but yet

I cannot conceive how it shall appear to be done in the same period; seeing

that  that  which  the  Suns  illumination  doth  in  the  Lunar  superficies  in  a

month, it doth in the Terrestrial in twenty four hours.


SALV.


Its true, the effect of the Sun about the illuminating these two bodies, and

replenishing with its splendor their whole surfaces, is dispatch’d in the Earth

in a Natural day, and in the Moon in a Month; but the variation of the figures

in which the  illuminated parts of the Terrestrial superficies appear beheld

from the Moon, depends not on this alone, but on the divers aspects which

the Moon is still changing with the Sun; so that, if for instance, the Moon

punctually followed the motion of the Sun, and stood, for example, always in

a  direct  line  between  it  and  the  Earth,  in  that  aspect  which  we  call

Conjunction, it looking always to the same Hemisphere of the Earth which

the Sun looks unto, she would behold the same all light: as on the contrary, if

it should always stay in Opposition to the Sun, it would never behold the

Earth, of which the dark part would be continually turn’d towards the Moon,

and therefore invisible. But when the Moon is in Quadrature of the Sun, that

half of the Terrestrial Hemisphere exposed to the sight of the Moon which is

towards the Sun, is luminous; and the other towards the contrary is obscure:

and therefore the illuminated part of the Earth would represent it self to the

Moon in a semi-circular figure.


SAGR.


I clearly perceive all this, and understand very well, that the Moon departing

from its Opposition to the Sun, where it saw no part of the illumination of the

Terrestrial  superficies,  and  approaching  day  by  day  nearer  the  Sun,  she

begins by little and little to discover some part of the face of the illuminated

Earth; and that which appeareth of it shall resemble a thin sickle, in regard

the figure of the Earth is round: and the Moon thus acquiring by its motion

day by day greater proximity to the Sun, successively discovers more andmore of the Terrestrial Hemisphere enlightned, so that at the Quadrature there

is just half of it visible, insomuch that we may see the other part of her:

continuing next to proceed towards the Conjunction, it successively discovers

more and more of its surface to be illuminated, and in fine, at the time of

Conjunction seeth the whole Hemisphere enlightned. And in short, I very

well conceive, that what befalls the Inhabitants of the Earth, in beholding the

changes  of  the  Moon,  would  happen  to  him  that  from  the  Moon  should

observe the Earth; but in a contrary order, namely, that when the Moon is to

us  at  her  full,  and  in  Opposition  to  the  Sun,  then  the  Earth  would  be  in

Conjunction with the Sun, and wholly obscure and invisible; on the contrary,

that position which is to us a Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun, and for

that cause a Moon silent and unseen, would be there an Opposition of the

Earth to the Sun, and, to so speak, Full Earth, to wit, all enlightned. And

lastly, look what part of the Lunar surface appears to us from time to time

illuminated, so much of the Earth in the same time shall you behold from the

Moon to be obscured: and look how much of the Moon is to us deprived of

light, so much of the Earth is to the Moon illuminated. In one thing yet these

mutual operations in my judgment seem to differ, and it is, that it  being

supposed,  and  not  granted,  that  some  one  being  placed  in  the  Moon  to

observe the Earth, he would every day see the whole Terrestrial superficies,

by means of the Moons going about the Earth in twenty four or twenty five

hours; but we never see but half of the Moon, since it revolves not in it self,

as it must do to be seen in every part of it.


SALV.


So that this, befals not contrarily, namely, that her revolving in her self, is the

cause that we see not the other half of her, for so it would be necessary it

should  be,  if  she  had  the  Epicycle.  But  what  other  difference  have  you

behind, to exchange for this which you have named?


SAGR.


Let me see; Well for the present I cannot think of any other.


SALV.And what if the Earth (as you have well noted) seeth no more than halfAll the

Earth seeth half onely of the Moon, & the half onely of the Moon seeth all the

Earth. the Moon, whereas from the Moon one may see all the Earth; and on

the contrary, all the Earth seeth the Moon, and but onely half of it seeth the

Earth? For the inhabitants, to so speak, of the superior Hemisphere of the

Moon, which is to us invisible, are deprived of the sight of the Earth: and

these haply are the Anti thones. But here I remember a particular accident,

newly observed by our Academian, From the Earth we see more than half the

Lunar  Globe.  in  the  Moon,  from  whch  are  gathered  two  necessary

consequences; one is, that we see somewhat more than half of the Moon; and

the other is, that the motion of the Moon hath exact concentricity with the

Earth: and thus he finds the Phoenomenon and observation. When the Moon

hath a correspondence and natural sympathy with the Earth, towards which it

hath its aspect in such a determinate part, it is necessary that the right line

which conjoyns their centers, do passe ever by the same point of the Moons

superficies; so that, who so shall from the center of the Earth behold the

same, shall alwayes see the same Discus or Face of the Moon punctually

determined by one and the same circumference; But if a man be placed upon

the Terrestrial surface, the ray which from his eye passeth to the centre of the

Lunar Globe, will not pass by the same point of its superficies, by which the

line passeth that is drawn from the centre of the Earth to that of the Moon,

save onely when it is vertical to him: but the Moon being placed in the East,

or in the West, the point of incidence of the visual ray, is higher than that of

the line which conjoyns the centres; and therefore the observer may discern

some part of the Lunar Hemisphere towards the upper circumference, and

alike part of the other is invisible: they are discernable and undiscernable, in

respect  of  the  Hemisphere  beheld  from  the  true  centre  of  the  Earth:  and

because the part of the Moons circumference, which is superiour in its rising,

is nethermost in its setting; therefore the difference of the said superiour and

inferiour  our parts must needs be very observable; certain spots and other

notable things in those parts, being one while discernable, and another while

not.  A  like  variation  may  also  be  observed  towards  the  North  and  South

extremities of the same Discus (or Surface) according as the Moons position

is in its greatest North or South Latitude; For, if it be North, some of its parts

towards the North are hid, and some of those parts towards the South are

discovered, and so on the contrary. Now that these consequences are really

true, Two spots in the Moon, by which it is perceived that she hath respect tothe centre of the Earth in her motion. is verified by the Telescope, for there be

in the Moon two remarkable spots, one of which, when the Moon is in the

meridian, is situate to the Northwest, and the other is almost diametrically

opposite unto it; and the first of these is visible even without the Telescope;

but the other is not. That towards the Northwest is a reasonable great spot of

oval figure, separated from the other great ones; the opposite one is lesse, and

also severed from the biggest, and situate in a very cleer field; in both these

we may manifestly discern the foresaid variations, and see them one after

another; now neer the edge or limb of the Lunar Discus, and anon remote,

with  so  great  difference  that  the  distance  betwixt  the  Northwest  and  the

circumference of the Discus is more than twice as great at one time, as at the

other; and as to the second spot (because it is neerer to the circumference)

such mutation importeth more, than twice so much in the former. Hence its

manifest,  that  the  Moon,  as  if  it  were  drawn  by  a  magnetick  vertue,

constantly beholds the Terrestrial Globe with one and the same aspect, never

deviating from the same.


SAGR.


Oh! when will there be an end put to the new observations and discoveries of

this admirable Instrument?


SALV.


If this succeed according to the progresse of other great inventions, it is to be

hoped, that in processe of time, one may arrive to the sight of things, to us at

present not to be imagined. But returning to our first discourse, Sixthly, The

Earth  and  Moon  interchangeably  do  illuminate.  I  say  for  the  sixth

resemblance betwixt the Moon and Earth, that as the Moon for a great part of

time,  supplies  the  want  of  the  Suns  light,  and  makes  the  nights,  by  the

reflection of its own, reasonable clear; so the Earth, in recompence, affordeth

it when it stands in most need, by reflecting the Solar rayes, a very cleer

illumination, and so much, in my opinion, greater than that which cometh

from her to us, by how much the superficies of the Earth is greater than that

of the Moon.


SAGR.Hold there, Salviatus hold there, and permit me the pleasure of relating to

you, how at this first hint I have penetrated the cause of an accident, which I

have a thousand times thought upon, Light reflected from the Earth into the

Moon.  but  could  never  find  out.  You  would  say,  that  the  imperfect  light

which is seen in the Moon, especially when it is horned,  comes from the

reflection of the light of the Sun on the Supersicies of the Earth and Sea; and

that  light  is  more  clear,  by  how  much  the  horns  are  lesse,  for  then  the

luminous part of the Earth, beheld by the Moon, is greater, according to that

which was a little before proved; to wit, that the luminous part of the Earth,

exposed to the Moon, is alway as great as the obscure part of the Moon, that

is visible to the Earth; whereupon, at such time as the Moon is sharp-forked,

and consequently its tenebrous part great, great also is the illuminated part of

the Earth beheld from the Moon, and its reflection of light so much the more

potent.


SALV.


This is exactly the same with what I was about to say. In a word, it is a great

pleasure to speak with persons judicious and apprehensive, and the rather to

me,  for  that  whilest  others  converse  and  discourse  touching  Axiomatical

truths, I have many times creeping into my brain such arduous Paradoxes,

that though I have a thousand times rehearsed this which you at the very first,

have of your self apprehended, yet could I never beat it into mens brains.


SIMPL.


If you mean by your not being able to perswade them to it, that you could not

make  them  understand  the  same,  I  much  wonder  thereat,  and  am  very

confident that if they did not understand it by your demonstration (your way

of expression, being, in my judgment, very plain) they would very hardly

have apprehended it upon the explication of any other man; but if you mean

you have not perswaded them, so as to make them believe it, I wonder not, in

the least, at this; for I confesse my self to be one of those who understand

your discourses, but am not satisfied therewith; for there are in this, and some

of the other six congruities, or resemblances, many difficulties, which I shall

instance in, when you have gone through them all.


SALV.The desire I have to find out any truth, in the acquist whereof the objections

of intelligent persons (such as your self) may much assist me, will cause me

to be very brief in dispatching that which remains. Seventhly, The Earth and

Moon do mutually eclipse. For a seventh conformity, take their reciprocal

responsion as well to injuries, as favours; whereby the Moon, which very

often in the height of its illumination, by the interposure of the Earth betwixt

it and the Sun, is deprived of light, and eclipsed, doth by way of revenge, in

like manner, interpose it self between the Earth and the Sun, and with its

shadow obscureth the Earth; and although the revenge be not answerable to

the injury, for that the Moon often continueth, and that for a reasonable long

time, wholly immersed in the Earths shadow, but never was the Earth wholly,

nor  for  any  long  time,  eclipsed  by  the  Moon;  yet,  neverthelesse,  having

respect to the  smalnesse of the body of this, in comparision to the magnitude

of the other, it cannot be denied but that the will and as it were valour of this,

is very great. Thus much for their congruities or resemblances. It should next

follow that we discourse touching their disparity; but because Simplicius will

favour us with his objections against the former, its necessary that we hear

and examine them, before we proceed any farther.


SAGR.


And the rather, because it is to be supposed that Simplicius will not any

wayes oppose the disparities, and incongruities betwixt the Earth and Moon,

since that he accounts their substances extremely different.


SIMPL.


Amongst the resemblances by you recited, in the parallel you make betwixt

the Earth and Moon, I find that I can admit none confidently save onely the

first, and two others; I grant the first, namely, the spherical figure; howbeit,

even in this there is some kind of difference, for that I hold that of the Moon

to be very smooth and even, as a looking-glasse, whereas, we find and feel

this of the Earth to be extraordinary montuous and rugged; but this belonging

to the inequality of superficies, it shall be anon considered, in another of

those Resemblances by you alledged; I shall therefore reserve what I have to

say thereof, till I come to the consideration of that. Of what you affirm next,

that the Moon seemeth, as you say in your second Resemblance, opacous and

obscure in its self, like the Earth; I admit not any more than the first attributeof opacity, of which the Eclipses of the Sun assure me. For were the Moon

transparent, the air in the total obscuration of the Sun, would not become so

duskish, as at such a time it is, but by means of the transparency of the body

of  the  Moon,  a  refracted  light  would  passe  through  it,  as  we  see  it  doth

through the thickest clouds. But as to the obscurity, I believe not that the

Moon is wholly deprived of light, as the Earth; nay, that clarity which is seen

in  the  remainder  ot  its  Discus,  over  and  the  above  the  small  crescent

enlightened by the Sun, I repute to be its proper and natural light, and not a

reflection of the Earth, The second clarity of the Moon esteemed to be its

native light. which I esteem unable, by reason of its asperity (cragginesse)

and obscurity, to reflect the raies of the Sun. In the third Parallel I assent unto

you in one part, The Earth unable to reflect the Suns raies. and dissent in

another: I agree in judging the body of the Moon to be most solid and hard,

like  the  Earth,  yea  much  more;  for  if  from  Aristotle  we  receive  that  the

Heavens  are  impenetrable,  The  substance  of  the  Heavens  impenetrable,

according to Aristotle. and the Stars the most dense parts of Heaven, it must

necessarily follow, that they are most solid and most impenetrable.


SAGR.


What excellent matter would the Heavens afford us for to make Pallaces of, if

we could procure a substance so hard and so transparent?


SALV.


Rather how improper, for being by its transparence, wholly invisible, a man

would not be able without stumbling at the thresholds, and breaking his head

against the Walls, to pass from room to room.


SAGR.


This danger would not befall him, The substance of Heaven intangible. if it

be true, as some Peripateticks say, that it is intangible: and if one cannot

touch it, much less can it hurt him.


SALV.This would not serve the turn, for though the matter of the Heavens cannot be

touch, as wanting tangible qualities: yet may it easily touch the elementary

bodies; and to offend us it is as sufficient that it strike us, nay worse, than if

we should strike it. But let us leave these Pallaces, or, to say better, these

Castles in the air, and not interrupt Simplicius.


SIMPL.


The question which you have so casually started, is one of the most difficulty

that  is  disputed  in  Philosophy;  and  I  have  on  that  subject  most  excellent

conceits of a very learned Doctor of Padoua, but it is not now time to enter

upon them. Therefore returning to our purpose, I say that the Moon, in my

opinion, is much more solid than the Earth, but do not infer the same, as you

do, The superficies of the Moon more sleek than any Looking-glass. from the

cragginess and montuousity of its superficies; but rather from the contrary,

namely, from its aptitude to receive (as we see it experimented in the hardest

stones) a polish and lustre exceeding that of the smoothest glass, for such

necessarily must its superficies be, to render it apt to make so lively reflection

of  the  Suns  rays.  And  for  those  appearances  which  you  mention,  of

Mountains, Cliffs, Hills, Valleys, &c. they are all illusions: and I have been

present at certain publick disputes, where I have heard it strongly maintained

against  these  introducers  of  novelties,  The  eminencies  and  cavities  in  the

Moon  are  illusions  of  its  opacous  and  perspicuous  parts.  that  such

appearances proceed from nothing else, but from the unequal distribution of

the  opacous  and  perspicuous  parts,  of  which  the  Moon  is  inwardly  and

outwardly composed: as we see it often fall out in chrystal, amber, and many

other precious stones of perfect lustre; in which by reason of the opacity of

some  parts,  and  the  transparency  of  others,  there  doth  appear  several

concavities and prominencies. In the fourth resemblance, I grant, that the

superficies of Terrestrial Globe beheld from afar, would make two different

appearances, namely, one more clear, the other more dark; but I believe that

such diversity would succeed quite contrary to what you say; that is, I hold

that the surface of the water would appear lucid, because that it is smooth and

transparent; and that of the Earth would appear obscure, by reason of its

opacity and scabrosity, ill accommodated for reflecting the light of the Sun.

Concerning the fifth comparison, I grant it wholly, and am able, in case the

Earth did shine as the Moon, to show the same to any one that should fromthence above behold it, represented  by figures answerable to those which we

see in the Moon: I comprehend also, how the period of its illumination and

variation of figure, would be monthly, albeit the Sun revolves round about it

in twenty four hours: and lastly, I do not scruple to admit, that the half onely

of the Moon seeth all the Earth, and that all the Earth seeth but onely half of

the Moon. For what remains, I repute it most false, that the Moon can receive

light from the Earth, which is most obscure, opacous, and utterly unapt to

reflect the Suns light, as the Moon doth reflect it to us: and as I have said, I

hold that that light which we see in the remainder of the Moons face (the

splendid crescents subducted) by the illumination, is the proper and natural

light of the Moon, and no easie matter would induce me to believe otherwise.

The seventh, touching the mutual Eclipses, may be also admitted; howbeit

that is wont to be called the eclipse of the Sun, which you are pleased to

phrase the eclipse of the Earth. And this is what I have at this time to say in

opposition to your seven congruities or resemblances, to which objections, if

you are minded to make any reply, I shall willingly hear you.


SALV.


If I have well apprehended what you have answered, it seems to me, that

there still remains in controversie between us, certain conditions, which I

made common betwixt the Moon & Earth, and they are these; You esteem the

Moon to be smooth and polisht, as a Looking-glass, and as such, able to

reflect the Suns light; and contrarily, the Earth, by reason of its montuosity,

unable to make such reflection: You yield the Moon to be solid and hard, and

that  you  argue  from  its  being  smooth  and  polite,  and  not  from  its  being

montuous; and for its appearing montuous, you assign as the cause, that it

consists of parts more and less opacous and perspicuous. And lastly, you

esteem that secondary light, to be proper to the Moon, and not reflected from

the  Earth;  howbeit  you  seem  not  to  deny  the  sea,  as  being  of  a  smooth

surface, some kind of reflection. As to the convincing you of that error, that

the reflection of the Moon is made, as it were, like that of a Looking-glass, I

have small hope, whilst I see, that what hath been read in theIl Saggiatore, &

Lettere Solari, two Treatises of Galilaeus. Saggiator and in the Solar Letters

of our Common Friend, hath profited nothing in your judgment, if haply you

have attentively read what he hath there written on this subject.SIMPL.


I  have  perused  the  same  so  superficially,  according  to  the  small  time  of

leasure allowed me from more solid studies; therefore, if you think you can,

either by repeating some of those reasons, or by alledging others, resolve me

these doubts, I will hearken to them attentively.


SALV.


I will tell you what comes into my mind upon the  instant, and its possible it

may be a commixtion of my own conceipts, and those which I have sometime

read  in  the  fore-said  Books,  by  which  I  well  remember,  that  I  was  then

perfectly satisfied, although the conclusions, at first sight seem’d unto me

strange Paradoxes. We enquire Simplicius, whether to the making a reflection

of light, like that which we receive from the Moon, it be necessary that the

superficies from whence the reflection commeth, be so smooth and polite, as

the face of a Looking-Glasse, or whether a superficies not smooth or polisht,

but rough and uneven, be more apt for such a purpose. Now supposing two

reflections should come unto us, one more bright, the other lesse, from two

superficies opposite unto us, I demand of you, which of the two superficies

you think would represent it self to our sight, to be the clearest, and which the

obscurest.


SIMPL.


I am very confident, that that same, which most forcibly reflected the light

upon me, would shew its self in its aspect the clearer, and the other darker.


SALV.


Be pleased to take that Glasse which hangs on yonder Wall, It is proved at

large that the Moons surface is sharp. and let us go out into the Court-yard.

Come Sagredus. Now hang the glasse yonder, against that same Wall, on

which the Sun shines, and now let us with-draw our selves into the shade. See

yonder two superficies beaten by the Sun, namely, the Wall and the Glasse.

Tell me now which appears clearest unto you, that of the Wall or that of the

Glasse? Why do you not answer me?SAGR.


I leave the reply to Simplicius, who made the question; but I, for my own

part, am perswaded upon this small beginning of the experiment, that the

Moon must be of a very unpolisht surface.


SALV.


What say you Simplicius, if you were to depaint that Wall, and that Glasse

fastened unto it, where would you use your darkest colours, in designing the

Wall, or else in painting the Looking-Glasse.


SIMPL.


Much the darker in depainting the Glasse.


SALV.


Now  if  from  the  superficies,  which  represents  it  self  more  clear,  there

proceedeth a more powerful reflection of light, the Wall will more forcibly

reflect the raies of the Sun, than the Glasse.


SIMPL.


Very well, Sir, have you ever a better experiment than this? you have placed

us where the Glasses doth not reverberate upon us; but come along with me a

little this way; how, will you not stir?


SAGR.


You perhaps seek the place of the reflection, which the Glasse maketh.


SIMPL.


I do so.


SAGR.Why look you, there it is upon the opposite Wall, just as big as the Glasse,

and little lesse bright than if the Sun had directly shined upon it.


SIMPL.


Come hither therefore, and see from hence the surface of the Glasse, and tell

me whether you think it more obscure than that of the Wall.


SAGR.


Look on it your self, for I have no mind at this time, to dazle my eyes; and I

know very well, without seeing it, that it there appears as splendid and bright

as the Sun it self, or little lesse.


SIMPL.


What say you therefore, is the reflection of a Glasse lesse powerful than that

of a Wall? I see, that in this opposite Wall, where the reflection of the other

illuminated Wall comes, together with that of the Glasse, this of the Glasse is

much clearer; and I see likewise, that, from this place where I stand, the

glasse it self appears with much more lustre than the Wall.


SALV.


You have prevented me with your subtlety; for I stood in need of this very

observation to demonstrate what remains. You see then the difference which

happens betwixt the two reflections made by the two superficies of the Wall

and Glasse, percu t in the self-same manner, by the rayes of the Sun; and you

see, how the reflection which comes from the Wall, diffuseth it self towards

all the parts opposite to it, but that of the Glasse goeth towards one part

onely, not at all bigger than the Glasse it self: you see likewise, how the

superficies of the Wall, beheld from what part soever, alwayes shews it self

of one and the same cleernesse, and every way, much clearer than that of the

Glasse, excepting only in that little place, on which the Glasses reflection

reverberates, for from thence indeed the Glasse appears much more lucid than

the Wall. By these so sensible, and palpable experiments, my thinks one may

soon come to know, whether the reflection which the Moon sends upon us,proceed as from a Glasse, or else, as from a Wall, that is, from a smooth

superficies, or a rugged.


SAGR.


If I were in the Moon it self, I think I could not with my hands more plainly

feel  the  unevennesse  of  its  superficies,  than  I  do  now  perceive  it,  by

apprehending your discourse. The Moon beheld in any posture, in respect of

the Sun and us, sheweth us its superficies, touch’t by the Suns rayes, alwayes

equally clear; an effect, which answers to an hair that of the Wall, which

beheld from what place soever, appeareth equally bright, and differeth from

the Glasse, which from one place onely appeareth lucid, and from all others

obscure. Moreover, the light which cometh to me from the reflection of the

Wall, is tollerable, and weak, in comparison of that of the Glasse, which is

little  lesse forcible and offensive to the sight, than that primary and direct

light  of  the  Sun.  And  thus  without  trouble  do  we  behold  the  face  of  the

Moon; which were it as a Glasse, it appearing to us by reason of its vicinity,

as big as the Sun it self, its splendor would be absolutely intollerable, and

would seem as if we beheld another Sun.


SALV.


Ascribe  not,  I  beseech  you  Sagredus,  more  to  my  demonstration,  than  it

produceth. I will oppose you with an instance, which I see not well how you

can easily resolve. You insist upon it as a grand difference between the Moon

and Glasse, that it emits its reflection towards all parts equally, as doth the

Wall; whereas the Glasse casts it upon one onely determinate place; and from

hence you conclude the Moon to be like to the Wall, and not to the Glasse:

Flat Looking-glasses cast forth the reflection towards but one place, but the

spherical  every  way.  But  I  must  tell  you,  that  that  same  Glasse  casts  its

reflection on one place onely, because its surface is flat, and the reflex rayes

being to depart at angles equal to those of the rayes of incidence, it must

follow that from a plane or flat superficies, they do depart unitedly towards

the same place; but in regard that the superficies of the Moon is not plain, but

spherical, and the incident rayes upon such a superficies, being to reflect

themselves at angles equal to those of the incidence towards all parts, by

means  of  the  infinity  of  the  inclinations  which  compose  the  spherical

superficies, therefore the Moon may send forth its reflection every way; andthere is no necessity for its repercussion upon one place onely, as that Glasse

which is flat.


SIMPL.


This  is  one  of  the  very  same  objections,  which  I  intended  to  have  made

against him.


SAGR.


If this be one, you had need have more of them; yet I tell you, that as to this

first, it seems to me to make more against you, than for you.


SIMPL.


You have pronounced as a thing manifest, that the reflection made by that

Wall, is as cleer and lucid as that which the Moon sends forth, and I esteem it

nothing in comparison thereto. For, in this businesse of the illumination, its

requisite to respect, and to distinguish the Sphere of Activity; The sphere of

Activity  greater  in  the  Coelestial  bodies  than  in  Elementary.  and  who

questions  but  the  Coelestial  bodies  have  greater  Spheres  of  activity,  than

these our elementary, frail, and mortal ones? and that Wall, finally, what else

is it but a little obscure Earth, unapt to shine?


SAGR.


And here also I believe, that you very much deceive your felf. But I come to

the first objection moved by Salviatus; and I consider, that to make a body

appear unto us luminous, it sufficeth not that the rayes of the illuminating

body fall upon it, but it is moreover requisite that the reflex rayes arrive to

our eye; as is manifestly seen in the example of that Glasse, upon  which,

without  question,  the  illuminating  rayes  of  the  Sun  do  come;  yet

neverthelesse, it appears not to us bright and shining, unlesse we set our eye

in that particular place, where the reflection arriveth. Now let us consider

what would succeed, were the glasse of a spherical figure; for without doubt,

we should find, that of the reflection made by the whole surface illuminated,

that to be but a very small part, which arriveth to the eye of a particular

beholder; by reason that that is but an incosiderable particle of the wholespherical superficies, the inclination of which casts the ray to the particular

place of the eye; whence the part of the spherical superficies, which shews it

self  shining  to  the  eye,  must  needs  be  very  small;  all  the  rest  being

represented obscure. So that were the Moon smooth, as a Looking-glasse,

The Moon if it were smooth, like a spherical glasse, would be invisible. a

very small part would be seen by any particular eye to be illustrated by the

Sun, although its whole Hemisphere were exposed to the Suns rayes; and the

rest would appear to the eye of the beholder as not illuminated, and therefore

invisible; and finally, the whole Moon would be likewise invisible, for so

much as that particle, whence the reflection should come, by reason of its

smalnesse and remotenesse, would be lost. And as it would be invisible to the

eye, so would it not afford any light; for it is altogether impossible, that a

bright body should take away our darknesse by its splendor, and we not to see

it.


SALV.


Stay  good  Sagredus,  for  I  see  some  emotions  in  the  face  and  eyes  of

Simplicius, which are to me as indices that he is not either very apprehensive

of, or satisfied with this which you, with admirable proof, and absolute truth

have spoken. And yet I now call to mind, that I can by another experiment

remove  all  scruple.  I  have  seen  above  in  a  Chamber,  a  great  spherical

Looking-glasse; let us send for it hither, and whilest it is in bringing, let

Simplicius return to consider, how great the clarity is which cometh to the

Wall here, under the penthouse, from the reflection of the flat glasse.


SIMPL.


I see it is little lesse shining, than if the Sun had directly beat upon it.


SALV.


So indeed it is. Now tell me, if taking away that small flat glasse, we should

put that great spherical one in the same place, what effect (think you) would

its reflection have upon the same Wall?


SIMPL.I believe that it would eject upon it a far greater and more diffused light.


SALV.


But if the illumination should be nothing, or so small, that you would scarse

discern it, what would you say then?


SIMPL.


When I have seen the effect, I will bethink my self of an answer.


SALV.


See here is the glasse, which I would have to be placed close to the other. But

first let us go yonder towards the reflection of that flat one, and attentively

observe  its  clarity;  see  how  bright  it  is  here  where  it  shines,  and  how

distinctly one may discern these small unevennesses in the Wall.


SIMPL.


I have seen and very well observed the same, now place the other glasse by

the side of the first.


SALV.


See where it is. It was placed there assoon as you began to look upon the

Walls  small  unevennesses,  and  you  perceived  it  not,  so  great  was  the

encrease of the light all over the rest of the Wall. Now take away the flat

glasse. Behold now all reflection removed, though the great convex glasse

still remaineth. Remove this also, and place it there again if you please, and

you shall see no alteration of light in all the Wall. See here then demonstrated

to sense, that the reflection of the Sun, made upon a spherical convex glasse,

doth not sensibly illuminate the places neer unto it. Now what say you to this

experiment?


SIMPL.


I am afraid that there may be some Leigerdemain, used in this affair; yet in

beholding that glasse I see it dart forth a great splendor, which dazleth myeyes; and that which imports most of all, I see it from what place soever I

look upon it; and I see it go changing situation upon the superficies of the

glasse,  which  way  soever  I  place  my  self  to  look  upon  it;  a  necessary

argument,  that  the  light  is  livelily  reflected  towards  every  side,  and

consequently, as strongly upon all that Wall, as upon my eye.


SALV.


Now you see how cautiously and reservedly you ought to proceed in lending

your assent to that, which discourse alone representeth to you. There is no

doubt but that this which you say, carrieth with it probability enough, yet you

may see, how sensible experience proves the contrary.


SIMPL.


How then doth this come to pass?


SALV.


I will deliver you my thoughts thereof, but I cannot tell how you may be

pleas’d  therewith.  And  first,  that  lively  splendor  which  you  see  upon  the

glass, and which you think occupieth a good part thereof, is nothing near so

great, nay is very exceeding small; but its liveliness occasioneth in your eye,

(by means of the reflection made on the humidity of the extream parts of the

eye-brows, which distendeth upon the pupil) an adventitious irradiation, like

to that blaze which we think we see about the flame of a candle placed at

some  distance;  or  if  you  will,  you  may  resemble  it  to  the  adventitious

splendor of a star; The small body of the stars fringed round about with rays,

appeareth very much bigger than plain and naked, and in its native clarity for

if you should compare the small body v. g. of the Canicula, seen in the day

time with the Telescope, when it is seen without such irradiation, with the

same seen by night by the eye it self, you will doubtless comprehend that

being irradiated, it appeareth above a thousand  times bigger than the naked

and real body: and a like or greater augmentation doth the image of the Sun

make, which you see in that glass. I say greater, for that it is more lively than

the star, as is manifest from our being able to behold the star with much less

offence, than this reflection of the glass. The reverberation therefore which is

to dispere it self all over this wall, cometh from a small part of that glass, andthat which even now came from the whole flat glass dispersed and restrain’d

it self to a very small part of the said wall. What wonder is it then, that the

first  reflection  very  lively  illuminates,  and  that  this  other  is  almost

imperceptible?


SIMPL.


I find my self more perplexed than ever, and there presents it self unto me the

other difficulty, how it can be that that wall, being of a matter so obscure, and

of a superficies so unpolish’d, should be able to dart from it greater light,

than a glass very smooth and polite.


SALV.


Greater light it is not, but more universal; for as to the degree of brightness,

you see that the reflection of that small flat glass, where it beamed forth

yonder under the shadow of the penthouse, illuminateth very much; and the

rest of the wall which receiveth the reflection of the wall on which the glass

is placed, is not in any great measure illuminated, as was the small part on

which the reflection of the glass fell. And if you would understand the whole

of this business, you must consider that the superficies of that wall’s being

rough, The reflex light of uneven bodies, is more universal than that of the

smooth, & why. is the same as if it were composed of innumerable small

superficies,  disposed  according  to  innumerable  diversities  of  inclinations:

amongst which it necessarily happens, that there are many disposed to send

forth their reflex rays from them into such a place, many others into another:

and in sum, there is not any place to which there comes not very many rays,

reflected from very many small superficies, dispersed throughout the whole

superficies of the rugged body, upon which the rays of the Sun fall. From

which  it  necessarily  followeth,  That  upon  any,  whatsoever,  part  of  any

superficies, opposed to that which receiveth the primary incident rays, there

is  produced  reflex  rays,  and  consequently  illumination.  There  doth  also

follow thereupon, That the same body upon which the illuminating rays fall,

beheld  from  whatsoever  place,  appeareth  all  illuminated  and  shining:  and

therefore the Moon, as being of a superficies rugged and not smooth, The

Moon, if it were smooth and sle k, would be invisible. beameth forth the light

of the Sun on every side, and to all beholders appeareth equally lucid. But if

the  surface  of  it,  being  spherical,  were  also  smooth  as  a  glass,  it  wouldbecome wholly invisible; forasmuch as that small part, from which the image

of the Sun should be reflected unto the eye  of a particular person, by reason

of its great distance would be invisible, as I have said before.


SIMPL.


I am very apprehensive of your discourse; yet methinks I am able to resolve

the same with very little trouble; and easily to maintain, that the Moon is

rotund and polite, and that it reflects the Suns light unto us in manner of a

glass; nor therefore ought the image of the Sun to be seen in the middle of it,

forasmuch as the species of the Sun it self admits not its small figure to be

seen at so great a distance, but the light produced by the Sun may help us to

conceive that it illuminateth the whole Lunar Body: a like effect we may see

in  a  plate  gilded  and  well  pollish’d,  which  touch’t  by  a  luminous  body,

appeareth to him that beholds it at some distance to be all shining; and onely

near at hand one may discover in the middle of it the small image of the

luminous body.


SALV.


Ingenuously confessing my dullness of apprehension, I must tell you, that I

understand not any thing of this your discourse, save onely what concerns the

gilt plate: and if you permit me to speak freely, I have a great conceit that you

also understand not the same, but have learnt by heart those words written by

some  one  out  of  a  desire  of  contradiction,  and  to  shew  himself  more

intelligent than his adversary; but it must be to those, which to appear also

more wise, applaud that which they do not understand, and entertain a greater

conceit  of  persons,  the  less  they  are  by  them  understood:  and  the  writer

himself may be one of those (of which there are many) who write what they

do  not  understand,  Some  write  what  they  understand  not,  and  therefore

understand not what they write. and consequently understand not what they

write. Therefore, omitting the rest, I reply, as to the gilt plate, that if it be flat

and not very big, it may appear at a distance very bright, whilst a great light

beameth upon it, but yet it must be when the eye is in a determinate line,

namely in that of the reflex rays: and it will appear the more shining, if it

were v. g. of silver, by means of its being burnished, and apt through the

great  density  of  the  metal,  to  receive  a  perfect  polish.  And  though  its

superficies, being very well brightned, were not exactly plain, but shouldhave  various  inclinations,  yet  then  also  would  its  splendor  be  seen  many

ways; namely, from as many places as the various reflections, made by the

several superficies, Diamonds ground to divers sides, & why. do reach: for

therefore are Diamonds ground to many sides, that so their pleasing lustre

might be beheld from many places. But if the Plate were very big, though it

should be all plain, yet would it not at a distance appear all over shining: and

the better to express my self, Let us suppose a very large gilt plate exposed to

the Sun, it will shew to an eye far distant, the image of the Sun, to occupy no

more  but  a  certain  part  of  the  said  plate;  to  wit,  that  from  whence  the

reflection of the incident  solar rays come: but it is true that by the vivacity of

the light, the said image will appear fringed about with many rays, and so

will seem to occupie a far greater part of the plate, than really it doth. And to

shew that this is true, when you have noted the particular place of the plate

from whence the reflection cometh, and conceived likewise how great the

shining place appeared to you, cover the greater part of that same space,

leaving it only visible about the midst; and all this shall not any whit diminish

the apparent splendor to one that beholds it from afar; but you shall see it

largely dispers’d upon the cloth or other matter, wherewith you covered it. If

therefore any one, by seeing from a good distance a small gilt plate to be all

over shining, should imagine that the same would also even in a plate as

broad as the Moon, he is no less deceived, than if he should believe the Moon

to be no bigger than the bottom of a tub. If again the plate were turn’d into a

spherical  superficies,  the  reflection  would  be  seen  strong  in  but  one  sole

particle of it; but yet by reason of its liveliness, it will appear fringed about

with many glittering rays: the rest of the Ball would appear according as it

was burnished; Silver  wished appears ma e obscu e,  the not burnished, &

why. and this also onely then when it was not very much polished, for should

it be perfectly brightned, it would appear obscure. An example of this we

have  dayly  before  our  eyes  in  silver  vessels,  which  whilst  they  are  only

boyl’d in the Argol and Salt, they are all as white as snow, and do not reflect

any image; but if they be in any part burnish’d, they become in that place

presently obscure: and in them one may see the representation of any thing as

in Looking-glasses. And that chanto obscurity, proceeds from nothing else

but the smoothing and plaining of a fine grain, which made the superficies of

the silver rough, and yet such, as that it reflected the light into all parts,

whereby  it  seemed  from  all  parts  equally  illuminated:  which  small

unevennesses, when they come to be exquisitely plained by the burnish, sothat  the  reflection  of  the  rays  of  incidence  are  all  directed  unto  one

determinate place; then, from that same place, the burnish’d part shall shew

much  more  bright  and  shining  than  the  rest  which  is  onely  whitened  by

boyling; but from all other places it looks very obscure. And note, that the

diversity of sights of looking upon burnish’d superficies, Burnish’d Steel 

from  one    very    from  ,  very  obscure.  occasioneth  such  difference  in

appearances, that to imitate and represent in picture, v. g. a polish’d Cuirace,

one must couple black plains with white, one sideways to the other, in those

parts of the arms where the light falleth equally.


SAGR.


If  therefore  these  great  Philosophers  would  acquiese  in  granting,  that  the

Moon,  Venus  and  the  other  Planets,  were  not  of  so  bright  and  smooth  a

surface as a Looking-glass, but wanted some small matter of it, namely, were

as  a  silver  plate,  onely  boyled    white,  but  not  burnished;  would  this  yet

suffice to the making of it visible, and apt for darting forth the light of the

Sun?


SALV.


It would suffice in part; but would not give a light so strong, as it doth being

mountainous, and in sum, full of eminencies and great cavities. But these

Philosophers will never yield it to be lesse polite than a glasse; but far more,

if more it can be imagined; for they esteeming that to perfect bodies perfect

figures are most sutable; it is necessary, that the sphericity of those Coelestial

Globes be most exact; besides, that if they should grant me some inequality,

though never so small, I would not scruple to take any other greater; for that

such perfection consisting in indivisibles, an hair doth as much detract from

its perfection as a mountain.


SAGR.


Here I meet with two difficulties, one is to know the reason why the greater

inequality of superficies maketh the stronger reflection of light; the other is,

why these Peripatetick Gentlemen are for this exact figure.


SALV.I will answer to the first; The more rough superficies make greater reflection

of light, than the less rough. and leave to Simplicius the care of making reply

to the second. You must know therefore, that the same superficies happen to

be  by  the  same  light  more  or  less  illuminated,  according  as  the  rayes  of

illumination  fall  upon  them  more  or  lesse  obliquely;  Perpendicular  rays

illuminate more than the oblique, and why. so that the greatest illumination is

where the rayes are perpendicular. And see, how I will prove it to your sense.

I bend this paper, so, that one part of it makes an angle upon the other: and

exposing both these parts to the reflection of the light of that opposite Wall,

you see how this side which receiveth the rayes obliquely, is lesse shining

than this other, where the reflection fals at right angles; and observe, that as I

by degrees receive the illumination more obliquely, it groweth weaker.


SAGR.


I see the effect, but comprehend not the cause.


SALV.


If you thought upon it but a minute of an hour, you would find it; but that I

may not waste the time, see a kind of demonstration thereof in Fig. 7.


SAGR.


The bare sight of this Figure hath fully satisfied me, therefore proceed.


SIMPL.


Pray you let me hear you out, for I am not of so quick an apprehension.


SALV.


Fancie to your self, that all the paralel lines, which you see to depart from the

terms A. B. are the rays which fall upon the line C. D. at right angles: The

more oblique Rayes illuminate less, and why. then incline the said C. D. till it

hang as D. O. now do not you see that a great part of those rays which peirce

C. D. pass by without touching D. O? If therefore D. O. be illuminated by

fewer rays, it is very reasonable, that the light received by it be more weak.Let us return now to the Moon,  which being of a spherical figure, if its

superficies were smooth, as this paper, the parts of its hemisphere illuminated

by the Sun, which are towards its extremity, would receive much less light,

than the middle parts; the rays falling upon them most obliquely, and upon

these  at  right  angles;  whereupon  at  the  time  of  full  Moon,  when  we  see

almost its whole Hemisphere illuminated, the parts towards the midst, would

shew themselves to us with more splendor, than those others towards the

circumference: which is not so in effect. Now the face of the Moon being

represented to me full of indifferent high mountains, do not you see how their

tops and continuate ridges, being elevated above the convexity of the perfect

spherical  superficies,  come  to  be  exposed  to  the  view  of  the  Sun,  and

accommodated to receive its rays much less obliquely, and consequently to

appear as luminous as the rest?


SAGR.


All this I well perceive: and if there are such mountains, its true, the Sun will

dart upon them much more directly than it would do upon the inclination of a

polite superficies: but it is also true, that betwixt those mountains all the

valleys would become obscure, by reason of the vast shadows, which in that

time  would  be  cast  from  the  mountains,  whereas  the  parts  towards  the

middle, though full of valleys and hills, by reason they have the Sun elevated,

would  appear  without  shadow,  and  therefore  more  lucid  by  far  than  the

extreme parts, which are no less diffused with shadow than light, and yet we

can perceive no such difference.


SIMPL.


I was ruminating upon the like difficulty.


SALV.


How much readier is Simplicius to apprehend the objections which favour the

opinions of Aristotle, than their solutions? I have a kind of suspition, that he

strives also sometimes to dissemble them; and in the present case, he being of

himself able to hit upon the doubt, which yet is very ingenious, I cannot

believe but that he also was advis’d of the answer; wherefore I will attempt towrest the same (as they say) out of his mouth. Therefore tell me, Simplicius,

do you think there can be any shadow, where the rays of the Sun do shine?


SIMPL.


I  believe,  nay  I  am  certain  that  there  cannot;  for  that  it  being  the  grand

luminary, which with its rays driveth away darkness, it is impossible any

tenebrosity should remain where it cometh; moreover, we have the definition,

that Tenebrae sunt privatio luminis.


SALV.


Therefore the Sun, beholding the Earth, Moon or other opacous body, never

seeth any of its shady parts, it not having any other eyes to see with, save its

rays, the conveyers of light: and consequently, one standing in the Sun would

never see any thing of umbrage, forasmuch as his visive rays would ever  go

accompanied with those illuminating beams of the Sun.


SIMPL.


This is true, without any contradiction.


SALV.


But when the Moon is opposite to the Sun, what difference is there between

the tract of the rayes of your sight, and that motion which the Suns rayes

make?


SIMPL.


Now I understand you; for you would say, that the rayes of the sight and

those of the Sun, moving by the same lines, we cannot perceive any of the

obscure valleys of the Moon. Be pleased to change this your opinion, that I

have either simulation or dissimulation in me; for I protest unto you, as I am

a Gentleman, that I did not guesse at this solution, nor should I have thought

upon it, without your help, or without long study.


SAGR.The resolutions, which between you two have been alledged touching this

last doubt, hath, to speak the truth, satisfied me also. But at the same time this

consideration of the visible rayes accompanying the rayes of the Sun, hath

begotten in me another scruple, about the other part, but I know not whether I

can expresse it right, or no: for it but just now comming into my mind, I have

not yet methodized it to my mind: but let us see if we can, all together, make

it  intelligible.  There  is  no  question,  but  that  the  parts  towards  the

circumference  of  that  polish’t,  but  not  burnish’t  Hemisphere,  which  is

illuminated by the Sun, receiving the rayes obliquely, receive much fewer

thereof,  than  the  middlemost  parts,  which  receive  them  directly.  And  its

possible, that a tract or space of v. g. twenty degrees in breadth, and which is

towards the extremity of the Hemisphere, may not receive more rays than

another  towards  the  middle  parts,  of  but  four  degree  broad:  so  that  that

doubtless will be much more obscure than this; and such it will appear to

whoever shall behold them both in the face, or (as I may say) in their full

magnitude. But if the eye of the beholder were constituted in such a place,

that the breadth of the twenty degrees of the obscure space, appeared not to it

longer than one of four degrees, placed in the midst of the Hemisphere, I hold

it not impossible for it to appear to the said beholder equally clear and lucid

with the other; because, finally, between two equal angles, to wit, of four

degrees apiece, there come to the eye the reflections of two equal numbers of

rayes: namely, those which are reflected from the middlemost space, four

degrees in breadth, and those reflected from the other of twenty degrees, but

seen by compression, under the quantity of four degrees: and such a situation

shall the eye obtain, when it is placed between the said Hemisphere, and the

body which illuminates it; for then the sight and rayes move in the same

lines. It seemeth not impossible therefore, but that the Moon may be of a very

equal superficies; and that neverthelesse, it may appear when it is at the full,

no less  light in the extremities, than in the middle parts.


SALV.


The doubt is ingenious and worthy of consideration; and as it but just now

came into your mind unawares, so I will like wise answer with what first

comes into my thoughts, and it may happily fall out, that by thinking more

upon it, I may stumble upon a better reply. But before, that I labyrinth my

self any farther, it would be necessary, that we assure our selves by someexperiment,  whether  your  objection  prove  in  effect,  what  it  seemeth  to

conclude in appearance; and therefore taking once more the same paper, and

making it to incline, by bending a little part thereof upon the remainder, let us

try whether exposing it to the Sun, so that the rayes of light fall upon the

lesser part directly, and upon the other obliquely; this which receiveth the

rayes directly appeareth more lucid; and see here by manifest experience, that

it is notably more clear. Now if your objection be conclusive, it will follow,

that stooping with our eye so, that in beholding the other greater part, less

illuminated, in compression or fore-shortning, it appear unto us no bigger

than the other, more shining; and that consequently, it be not beheld at a

greater  angle  than  that;  it  will  necessarily  ensue,  I  say,  that  its  light  be

encreased, so that it do seem to us as bright as the other. See how I behold,

and look upon it so obliquely, that it appeareth to me narrower than the other;

but yet, notwithstanding its obscurity, doth not to my perceiving, at all grow

clearer. Try now if the same succeed to you.


SAGR.


I have look’t upon it, and though I have stooped with my eye, yet cannot I see

the said superficies encrease in light or clarity; nay me thinks it rather grows

more dusky.


SALV.


We are hitherto confident of the invalidity of the objection; In the next place,

as to the solution, I believe, that, by reason the Superficies of this paper is

little lesse than smooth, the rayes are very few, which be reflected towards

the point of incidence, in comparison of the multitude, which are reflected

towards the opposite parts; and that of those few more and more are lost, the

nearer  the  visive  rayes  approach  to  those  lucid  rayes  of  incidence;  and

because it is not the incident rayes, but those which are reflected to the eye,

that make the object appear luminous; therefore, in stooping the eye, there is

more lost than got, as you your self confesse to have seen in looking upon the

obscurer part of the paper.


SAGR.I  rest  satisfied  with  this  experiment  and  reason:  It  remains  now,  that

Simplicius  answer  to  my  other  question,  and  tell  me  what  moves  the

Peripateticks to require this so exact rotundity in the Coelestial bodies.


SIMPL.


The Coelestial bodies being ingenerable, inalterable, impassible,  immortal,

Perfect  why ascribed is Coelestial bodies, by the Peripateticks. &c. they must

needs  be  absolutely  perfect;  and  their  being  absolute  perfect,  necessarily

implies that there is in them all kinds of perfection; and consequently, that

their  figure  be  also  perfect,  that  is  to  say,  spherical;  and  absolutely  and

perfectly spherical, and not rough and irregular.


SALV.


And this incorruptibility, from whence do you prove it?


SIMPL.


Immediately by its freedom from contraries, and mediately, by its simple

circular motion.


SALV.


So that; The Figure is not the cause of incorruptibili r, but of longer duration.

by what I gather from your discourse, in making the essence of the Coelestial

bodies to be incorruptible, inalterable, &c, there is no need of rotundity as a

cause, or requisite; for if this should cause inalterability, we might at our

pleasure make wood, wax, and other Elementary matters, incorruptible, by

reducing them to a spherical figure.


SIMPL.


And is it not manifest that a ball of Wood will better and longer be preserved,

than an oblong, or other angular figure, made of a like quantity of the same

wood.


SALV.This is most certain, but yet it doth not of corruptible become incorruptible,

but still remains corruptible, though of a much longer duration. Corruptibility

admits of more or lesse; so doth not incorruptibili y. Therefore you must note,

that a thing corruptible, is capable of being more or lesse such, and we may

properly say this is lesse corruptible than that; as for example, the Jasper,

than the Pietra Sirena; but incorruptibility admits not of more, or lesse, so as

that it may be said this is more incorruptible than that, The perfection of

figure,  operateth  in  corruptible  bodies,  but  not  in  the  eternal.  if  both  be

incorruptible and eternal. The diversity of figure therefore cannot operate:

save onely in matters capable of more or lesse duration; but in the eternal,

which cannot be other than equally eternal, the operation of figure ceaseth.

And therefore, since the Coelestial matter is not incorruptible by figure, but

otherwayes no man needs to be so solicitous for this perfect sphericity; for if

the matter be incorruptible, let it have what figure it will, it shall be alwayes

such.


SAGR.


But I am considering another thing, If the spherical figure conferreth eternity,

all bodies would be eternal. and say, that if we should grant the spherical

figure a faculty of conferring incorruptibility, all bodies of whatsoever figure,

would be incorruptible; forasmuch as if the rotund body be incorruptible,

corruptibility  would  then  subsist  in  those  parts  which  alter  the  perfect

rotundity; as for instance, there is in a Die a body perfectly round, and, as

such, incorruptible; therefore it remaineth that those angles be corruptible

which cover and hide the rotundity; so that the most that could happen, would

be, that those angles, and (to so speak) excrescencies, would corrupt. But if

we proceed to a more inward consideration, that in those parts also towards

the angles, there are comprised other lesser bals of the same matter;  and

therefore they also, as being round, must be also incorruptible; and likewise

in  the  remainders,  which  environ  these  eight  lesser  Spheres,  a  man  may

understand that there are others: so that in the end, resolving the whole Die

into innumerable balls, it must necessarily be granted incorruptible. And the

same discourse and resolution may be made in all other figures.


SALV.Your method in making the conclusion, for if v. g. a round Chrystal were, by

reason of its figure, incorruptible; namely, received from thence a faculy of

resisting all internal and external alterations, we should not find, that the

joyning to it other Chrystal, and reducing it v. g. into a Cube, would any whit

alter it within, or without; so as that it would thereupon become lesse apt to

resist the new ambient, made of the same matter, than it was to resist the

other, of a matter different; and especially, if it be true, that corruption is

generated by contraries, as Aristotle saith; and with what can you enclose that

ball of Crystal, that is lesse contrary to it, than Crystal it self? But we are not

aware how time flies away; and it will be too late before we come to an end

of our dispute, if we should make so long discourses, upon every particular;

besides our memories are so confounded in the multiplicity of notions, that I

can very hardly recal to mind the Propotsiions, which I proposed in order to

Simplicius, for our consideration.


SIMPL.


I  very  well  remember  them:  And  as  to  this  particular  question  of  the

montuosity of the Moon, there yet remains unanswered that which I have

alledged, as the cause, (and which may very well serve for a solution) of that

Phaenomenon, saying, that it is an illusion proceeding from the parts of the

Moon, being unequally opacous, and perspicuous.


SAGR.


Even  now,  when  Simplicius  ascribed  the  apparent  Protnberancies  or

unevennesses of the Moon (according to the opinion of a certain Peripatetick

his friend) to the diversly opacous, and perspicuous parts of the said Moon,

Mother of Pearl accommodated to imitate the apparent unevennesses of the

Moons surface. conformable to which the like illusions are seen in Crystal,

and  Jems  of  divers  kinds,  I  bethought  my  self  of  a  matter  much  more

commodious for the representing such effects; which is such, that I verily

believe, that that Philosopher would give any price for it; and it is the mother

of Pearl, which is wrought into divers figures, and though it be brought to an

extreme evennesse, yet it seemeth to the eye in several parts, so variously

hollow and knotty, that we can scarce credit our feeling of their evennesse.


SALV.This invention is truly ingenious; and that which hath not been done already,

may be done in time to come; and if there have been produced other Jems,

and Crystals, which have nothing to do with the illusions of the mother of

Pearl, these may  be produced also; in the mean time, that I may not prevent

any one, I will suppresse the answer which might be given, and onely for this

time betake my self to satisfie the objections brought by Simplicius. I say

therefore, that this reason of yours is too general, and as you apply it not to

all the appearances one by one; which are seen in the Moon, and for which

my self and others are induced to hold it mountainous, I believe you will not

find any one that will be satisfied with such a doctrine; nor can I think, that

either  you,  or  the  Author  himself,  find  in  it  any  greater  quietude,  The

apparent unevennesses of the Moon cannot be imitated by way of more and

less opacity & perspicuity. than in any other thing wide from the purpose. Of

the  very  many  several  appearances  which  are  seen  night  by  night  in  the

course of Moon, you cannot imitate so much as one, by making a Ball at your

choice,  more  or  less  opacous  and  perspicuous,  and  that  is  of  a  polite

superficies;  The  various  aspects  of  the  Moon,  imitable  with  any  opacous

matter. whereas on the contrary, one may make Balls of any solid matter

whatsoever, that is not transparent, which onely with eminencies and cavities,

and  by  receiving  the  illumination  several  ways,  shall  represent  the  same

appearances and mutations to an hair, Various appearances from which the

Moons montuosity is argued. which from hour to hour are discovered in the

Moon. In them you shall see the ledges of Hills exposed to the Suns light, to

be very shining, and after them the projections of their shadows very obscure;

you shall see them greater and less, according as the said eminencies shall be

more  or  less  distant  from  the  confines  which  distinguish  the  parts  of  the

Moon  illuminated,  from  the  obscure:  you  shall  see  the  same  term  and

confine, not equally distended, as it would be if the Ball were polish’d, but

craggie and rugged. You shall see beyond the same term, in the dark parts of

the  Moon  many  bright  prominencies,  and  distinct  from  the  rest  of  the

illuminations:  you  shall  see  the  shadows  aforesaid,  according  as  the

illumination  gradually  riseth,  to  deminish  by  degrees,  till  they  wholly

disappear; nor are there any of them to be seen when the whole Hemisphere

is enlightned. Again on the contrary, in the lights passage towards the other

Hemisphere of the Moon, you shall again observe the same eminencies that

were marked, and you shall see the projections of their shadows to be made a

contrary way, and to decrease by degrees: of which things, once more I say,you  cannot  shew  me  so  much  as  one  in  yours  that  are  opacous  and

perspicuous.


SAGR.


One of them certainly he may imitate, namely, that of the Full-Moon, when

by reason of its being all illuminated, there is not to be seen either shadow, or

other thing, which receiveth any alteration from its eminencies and cavities.

But I beseech you, Salviatus, let us spend no more time on this Argument, for

a person that hath had but the patience to make observation of but one or two

Lunations, and is not satisfied with this most sensible truth, may well be

adjudged void of all judgment; and upon  such why should we throw away

our time and breath in vain?


SIMPL.


I must confess I have not made the observations, for that I never had so much

curiosity, or the Instruments proper for the business; but I will not fail to do

it. In the mean time, we may leave this question in suspense, and pass to that

point which follows, producing the motives inducing you to think that the

Earth may reflect the light of the Sun no less forceably than the Moon, for it

seems to me so obscure and opacous, that I judg such an effect altogether

impossible.


SALV.


The cause for which you repute the Earth unapt for illumination, may rather

evince  the  contrary:  And  would  it  not  be  strange,  Simplicius,  if  I  should

apprehend your discourses better than you your self?


SIMPL.


Whether I argue well or ill, it may be, that you may better understand the

same than I; but be it ill or well that I discourse, I shall never believe that you

can penetrate what I mean better than I my self.


SALV.Well, I will make you believe the same presently. Tell me a little, when the

Moon is near the Full, so that it may be seen by day, and also at midnight, at

what do you think it more splendid, by day or by night?


SIMPL.


By  night,  The  Moon  appears  brighter  by  night  than  by  day.  without  all

comparison. And methinks the Moon resembleth that pillar of Clouds and

pillar of Fire, which guided the Israelites; which at the presence of the Sun,

appeared like a Cloud, but in the night was very glorious. Thus I have by day

observed the Moon amidst certain small Clouds, The Moon beheld in the day

time, is like to a little cloud. just as if one of them had been coloured white,

but by night it shines with much splendor.


SALV.


So that if you had never happened to see the Moon, save onely in the day

time, you would not have thought it more shining than one of those Clouds.


SIMPL.


I verily believe I should not.


SALV.


Tell me now; do you believe that the Moon is really more shining in the night

than day, or that by some accident it seemeth so?


SIMPL.


I am of opinion, that it resplends in it self as much in the day as night, but

that its light appears greater by night, because we behold it in the dark mantle

of Heaven; and in the day time, the whole Atmosphere being very clear, so

that she little exceedeth it in lustre, she seems to us much less bright.


SALV.


Now  tell  me;  have  you  ever  at  midnight  seen  the  Terrestrial  Globe

illuminated by the Sun?SIMPL.


This seemeth to me a question not to be ask’d, unless in jest, or of some

person known to be altogether void of sense.


SALV.


No, no; I esteem you to be a very rational man, and  do ask the question

seriously; and therefore answer me: and if afterwards you shall think that I

speak impertinently, I will be content to be the senseless man: for he is much

more a fool who interrogates simply, than he to whom the question is put.


SIMPL.


If then you do not think me altogether simple, take it for granted that I have

answered you already, and said, that it is impossible, that one that is upon the

Earth, as we are, should see by night that part of the Earth where it is day,

namely, that is illuminated by the Sun.


SALV.


Therefore you have never seen the Earth enlightned, save onely by day; but

you see the Moon to shine also in the dead of night. And this is the cause,

Simplicius, which makes you believe that the Earth doth not shine like the

Moon; but if you could see the Earth illuminated, whilst you were in some

dark place, like our night, you would see it shine brighter than the Moon.

Now if you desire that the comparison may proceed well, you must compare

the light of the Earth, with that of the Moon seen in the day time, and not

with the same by night: for it is not in our power to see the Earth illuminated,

save onely in the day. Is it not so?


SIMPL.


So it ought to be.


SALV.


And forasmuch as you your self have already confessed to have seen the

Moon by day among some little white Clouds, and very nearly, as to itsaspect, resembling one of them; you did thereby grant, Clouds are no less apt

than the Moon to be illuminated by the Sun. that those Clouds, which yet are

Elementary  matters,  are  as  apt  to  receive  illumination,  as  the  Moon,  yea

more, if you will but call to mind that you have sometimes seen some Clouds

of vast greatness, and as perfect white as the Snow; and there is no question,

but that if such a Cloud could be continued so luminous in the deep of night,

it would illuminate the places near about it, more than an hundred Moons. If

therefore we were assured that the Earth is illuminated by the Sun, like one of

those Clouds, it would be undubitable, but that it would be no less shining

than the Moon. But of this there is no question to be made, in regard we see

those very Clouds in the absence of the Sun, to remain by night, as obscure as

the Earth: and that which is more, there is not any one of us, but hath seen

many times some such Clouds low, and far off, and questioned whether they

were Clouds or Mountains: an evident sign that the Mountains are no less

luminous than those Clouds. A wall illuminated by the Sun, compared to the

Moon shineth no less than it.


SAGR.


But what needs more discourse? See yonder the Moon is risen, and more than

half of it illuminated; see there that wall, on which the Sun shineth; retire a

little this way, so that you see the Moon sideways with the wall: look now;

which  of  them  shews  more  lucid?  Do  not  you  see,  that  if  there  is  any

advantage,  the wall hath it? The Sun shineth on that wall; from thence it is

reverberated  upon  the  wall  of  the  Hall,  The  third  reflection  of  a  Wall

illuminates more than the first of the Moon. from thence it’s reflected upon

that chamber, so that it falls on it at the third reflection: and I am very certain,

that there is in that place more light, than if the Moons light had directly faln

upon it.


SIMPL.


But this I cannot believe; for the illumination of the Moon, especially when it

is at the full, is very great.


SAGR.It seemeth great by reason of the circumjacent dark places; The light of the

Moon weaker than that of the twilight. but absolutely it is not much, and is

less  than  that  of  the  twilight  half  an  hour  after  the  Sun  is  set;  which  is

manifest, because you see not the shadows of the bodies illuminated by the

Moon till then, to begin to be distinguished on the Earth. Whether, again, that

third  reflection  upon  that  chamber,  illuminates  more  than  the  first  of  the

Moon, may be known by going thether, and reading a Book, and afterwards

standing there in the night by the Moons light, which will shew by which of

them lights one may read more or less plainly, but I believe without further

tryal, that one should see less distinctly by this later.


SALV.


Now, Simplicius, (if haply you be satisfied) you may conceive, as you your

self know very well, that the Earth doth shine no less than the Moon; and the

only  remembring  you  of  some  things,  which  you  knew  of  your  self,  and

learn’d not of me, hath assured you thereof: for I taught you not that the

Moon shews lighter by night than by day, but you understood it of your self;

as also you could tell me that a little Cloud appeareth as lucid as the Moon:

you knew also, that the illumination of the Earth cannot be seen by night; and

in a word, you knew all this, without knowing that you knew it. So that you

have no reason to be scrupulous of granting, that the dark part of the Earth

may  illuminate  the  dark  part  of  the  Moon,  with  no  less  a  light  than  that

wherewith the Moon illuminates the obscurities of the night, yea rather so

much the greater, inasmuch as the Earth is forty times bigger than the Moon.


SIMPL.


I  must  confess  that  I  did  believe,  that  that  secondary  light  had  been  the

natural light of the Moon.


SALV.


And this also you know of your self, and perceive not that you know it. Tell

me, do not you know without teaching, that the Moon shews it self more

bright  by  night  than  by  day,  Lum  nous  bodies  appear  the  brighter  in  an

obscurer ambient. in respect of the obscurity of the space of the ambient? andconfequently, do you not know in genere, that every bright body shews the

clearer, by how much the ambient is obscurer?


SIMPL.


This I know very well.


SALV.


When the Moon is horned, and that secondary light seemeth to you very

bright,  is  it  not  ever  nigh  the  Sun,  and  consequently,  in  the  light  of  the

crepusculum, (twilight?)


SIMPL.


It is so; and I have oftentimes wish’d that the Air would grow thicker, that I

might be able to see that same light more plainly; but it ever disappeared

before dark night.


SALV.


You know then very certainly, that in the depth of night, that light would be

more conspicuous.


SIMPL.


I do so; and also more than that, if one could but take away the great light of

the crescent illuminated by the Sun, the presence of which much obscureth

the other lesser.


SALV.


Why, doth it not sometimes come to pass, that one may in a very dark night

see the whole face of the Moon, without being at all illuminated by the Sun?


SIMPL.


I know not whether this ever happeneth, save onely in the total Ecclipses of

the Moon.SALV.


Why, at that time this its light would appear very clear, being in a most

obscure medium, and not darkned by the clarity of the luminous crescents:

but in that position, how light did it appear to you?


SIMPL.


I have sometimes seen it of the colour of brass, and a little whitish; but at

other times it hath been so obscure, that I have wholly lost the sight of it.


SALV.


How then can that light be so natural, which you see so cleer in the close of

the  twilight,  notwithstanding  the  impediment  of  the  great  and  contiguous

splendor of the crescents; and which again, in the more obscure time of night,

all other light removed, appears not at all?


SIMPL.


I have heard of some that believed that same light to be participated to these

crescents  from  the  other  Stars,  and  in  particular  from  Venus,  the  Moons

neighbour.


SALV.


And this likewise is a vanity; because in the time of its total obscuration, it

ought to appear more shining than ever; for you cannot say, that the shadow

of the Earth intercepts the sight of Venus, or the other Stars. But to say true, it

is  not  at  that  instant  wholly  deprived  thereof,  for  that  the  Terrestrial

Hemisphere, which in that time looketh towards the Moon, is that where it is

night,  that  is,  an  intire  privation  of  the  light  of  the  Sun.  And  if  you  but

diligently observe, you will very sensibly perceive, that like as the Moon,

when it is sharp-horned, doth give very little light to the Earth; and according

as in her the parts illuminated by the Suns light do encrease: so likewise the

splendor to our seeming encreaseth, which from her is reflected towards us;

thus the Moon, whilst it is sharp-forked, and that by being between the Sun

and the Earth, it discovereth a very great part of the Terrestrial Hemisphereilluminated, appeareth very clear: and departing from the Sun, and passing

towards theBy the Moons two Quadratures you are to understand its first and

last quarters, as Astrologers call them▪ Quadrature, you may see the said light

by degrees to grow dim; and after the  Quadrature, the same appears very

weak,  because  it  continually  loseth  more  and  more  of  the  view  of  the

luminous part of the Earth: and yet it should succeed quite contrary, if that

light were its own, or communicated to it from the Stars; for then we should

see it in the depth of night, and in so very dark an ambient.


SIMPL.


Stay a little; for I just now remember, that I have read in a little modern tract,

full of many novelties; ‘That this secondary light is not derived from the

Stars, nor innate in the Moon, and least of all communicated by the Earth, but

that it is received from the same illumination of the Sun, The secondary light

of the Moon caused by the Sun, according to some. which, the substance of

the Lunar Globe being somewhat transparent, penetrateth thorow all its body;

but more livelily illuminateth the superficies of the Hemisphere exposed to

the  rays  of  the  Sun▪  and  its  profundity  imbuing,  and  (as  I  may  say)

swallowing that light, after the manner of a cloud or chrystal, transmits it, and

renders  it  visibly  lucid.  And  this  (if  I  remember  aright)  he  proveth  by

Authority, Experience and Reason; citing Cleomedes, Vitellion, Macrobius,

and a certain other modern Author: and adding, That it is seen by experience

to shine most in the days nearest the Conjunction, that is, when it is horned,

and is chiefly bright about its limb. And he farther writes, That in the Solar

Ecclipses, when it is under the Discus of the Sun, it may be seen translucid,

and more especially towards its utmost Circle. And in the next place, for

Arguments, as I think, he saith, That it not being able to derive that light

either from the Earth, or from the Stars, or from it self, it necessarily follows,

that it cometh from the Sun. Besides that, if you do but grant this supposition,

one may easily give convenient reasons for all the particulars that occur. For

the reason why that secundary light shews more lively towards the outmost

limb, is, the shortness of the space that the Suns rays hath to penetrate, in

regard that of the lines which pass through a circle, the greatest is that which

passeth through the centre, and of the rest, those which are farthest from it,

are always less than those that are nearer. From the same principle, he saith,

may be shewn why the said light doth not much diminish. And lastly, by thisway the cause is assigned whence it comes, that that same more shining circle

about the utmost edge of the Moon, is seen at the time of the Solar Ecclipse,

in that part which lyeth just under the Discus of the Sun, but not in that which

is  beside  the  Discus:  which  happeneth  because  the  rays  of  the  Sun  pass

directly to our eye, through the parts of the Moon underneath: but as for the

parts which are besides it, they fall besides the eye.’


SALV.


If this Philosopher had been the first Author of this opinion, I would not

wonder that he should be so affectionate to it,  as to have received it for truth;

but borrowing it from others, I cannot find any reason sufficient to excuse

him for not perceiving it  fallacies; and especially after he had heard the true

cause of that effect, and had it in his power to satisfie himself by a thousand

experiments, and manifest circumstances, that the same proceeded from the

reflection of the Earth, and from nothing else: and the more this speculation

makes something to be desired, in the judgment of this Author, and of all

those  who  give  no  credit  to  it:  so  much  the  more  doth  their  not  having

understood and remembred it, excuse those more recess Antients, who, I am

very certain, did they now understand it, would without the least repugnance

admit thereof. And if I may freely tell you what I think, I cannot believe but

that this Modern doth in his heart believe it; but I rather think, that the conceit

he should not be the first Author thereof, did a little move him to endeavour

to suppresse it, or to disparage it at least amongst the simple, whose number

we know to be very great; and many there are, who much more affect the

numerous applauds of the people, than the approbation of a few not vulgar

judgments.


SAGR.


Hold good Salviatus, for me thinks, I see that you go not the way to hit the

true mark in this your discourse, for these thatTendono le parete al commune.

confound all propriety, know also how to make themselves Authors of others

Inventions, provided they be not so stale, and publick in the Schools and

Market-places, as that they are more then notorious to every one.


SALV.Ha! well aimed, you blame me for roving from the point in hand; but what

have you to do with Schools and Markets? Its all one whether opinions be

new to men, or men new to opinions. Is it not all one whether opinions and

inventions be new to men, or the men new to them? If youContestare falsly

rendered in the Latine Translation contentare. contend about the esteem of the

Founders of Sciences, which in all times do start up, you may make your self

their inventor, even to the Alphabet it self, and so gain admiration amongst

that illiterate rabble; and though in processe of time your craft should be

perceived, that would but little prejudice your designe; for that others would

succeed them in maintaining the number of your fautors; but let us return to

prove to Simplicius the invalidity of the reasons of his modern Author, in

which there are several falsities, inconsequencies, The secondary light of the

Mo  n  appears  in  form  of  a  Ring,  that  is  to  say,  bright  in  the  extreme

circumference, and not n the midst, and why▪ and incredible Paradoxes. And

first, it is false that this secondary light is clearer about the utmost limb than

in the middle parts, so as to form, as it were, a ring or circle more bright than

the rest of its space or contence. True it is, indeed, that looking on the Moon

at the time of twilight, at first sight there is the resemblance of such a circle,

but by an illusion arising from the diversity of confines that bound the Moons

Discus, which are confused by means of this secondary light; forasmuch as

on the part  towards the Sun it is bounded by the lucid horns of the Moon,

and on the other part, its confining term is the obscure tract of the twilight;

whose relation makes us think the candor of the Moons Discus to be so much

the clearer; the which happens to be obfuscated in the opposite part, by the

greater clarity of the crescents; but if this modern Author had essaied to make

an  interposition  between  the  eye  and  the  primary  splendor,  The  way  to

observe the secondary light of the Moon. by the ridg of some house, or some

other screen, so as to have left visible only the grose of the Moon, the horns

excluded, he might have seen it all alike luminous.


SIMPL,


I think, now I remember, that he writes of his making use of such another

Artifice, to hide from us the false lucidum.


SALV.Oh!  how  is  this  (as  I  believed)  inadvertency  of  his,  changed  into  a  lie,

bordering on rashnesse; for that every one may frequently make proof of the

contrary. That in the next place, The Moons Discus in a solar Eclipse can be

seen  onely  by  privation.  at  the  Suns  Eclipse,  the  Moons  Discus  is  seen

otherwayes than by privation, I much doubt, and specially when the Eclipse

is not total, as those must necessarily have been, which were observed by the

Author;  but  if  also  he  should  have  discovered  somewhat  of  light,  this

contradicts  not,  rather  favoureth  our  opinion;  for  that  at  such  a  time,  the

whole  Terrestrial  Hemisphere  illuminated  by  the  Sun,  is  opposite  to  the

Moon, so that although the Moons shadow doth obscure a part thereof, yet

this  is  very  small  in  comparison  of  that  which  remains  illuminated.  That

which he farther adds, that in this case, the part of the limb, lying under the

Sun, doth appear very lucid, but that which lyeth besides it, not so; and that to

proceed from the coming of the solar rayes directly through that part to the

eye, but not through this, is really one of those fopperies, which discover the

other fictions, of him which relates them: For if it be requisite to the making a

secondary light visible in the lunar Discus, that the rayes of the Sun came

directly through it to our eyes, doth not this pitiful Philosopher perceive, that

we should never see this same secondary light, save onely at the Eclipse of

the Sun? And if a part onely of the Moon, far lesse than half a degree, by

being remote from the Suns Discus, can deflect or deviate the rayes of the

Sun, so that they arrive not at our eye; what shall it do when it is distant

twenty or thirty degrees, as it is at its first apparition? and what course shall

the rayes of the Sun keep, which are to passe thorow the body of the Moon,

that  they  may  find  out  our  eye?The  Author  of  the  Book  of  conclusions,

accommodates the things to his purposes, and not his purposes to the things.

This man doth go successively considering what things ought to be, that they

may serve his purpose, but doth not gradually proceed, accommodating his

conceits to the things, as really they are. As for instance, to make the light  of

the Sun capable to penetrate the substance of the Moon, he makes her in part

diaphanous, as is v. g. the transparence of a cloud, or crystal: but I know not

what he would think of such a transparency, in case the solar rayes were to

passe a depth of clouds of above two thousand miles; but let it be supposed

that he should boldly answer, that might well be in the Coelestial, which are

quite other things from these our Elementary, impure, and feculent bodies;

and let us convict his error by such wayes, as admit him no reply, or (to say

better) subter-fuge. If he will maintain, that the substance of the Moon isdiaphanous, he must say that it is so, whilest that the rayes of the Sun are to

penetrate its whole profundity, that is, more than two thousand miles; but that

if  you  oppose  unto  them  onely  one  mile,  or  lesse,  they  should  no  more

penetrate that, than they penetrate one of our mountains.


SAGR.


You put me in mind of a man, A jest put upon one that would sell a certain

secret for holding correspondency with a person a thousand miles off. who

would  have  sold  me  a  secret  how  to  correspond,  by  means  of  a  certain

sympathy  of  magnetick  needles,  with  one,  that  should  be  two  or  three

thousand miles distant; and I telling him, that I would willingly buy the same,

but that I desired first to see the experiment thereof, and that it did suffice me

to make it, I being in one Chamber, and he in the next, he answered me, that

in  so  small  a  distance  one  could  not  so  well  perceive  the  operation;

whereupon I turn’d him going, telling him, that I had no mind, at that time, to

take a journey unto Grand Cairo, or to Muscovy, to make the experiment; but

that,  if  he  would  go  himself,  I  would  perform  the  other  part,  staying  in

Venice. But let us hear whither the deduction of our Author tendeth, and what

necessity there is, that he must grant the matter of the Moon to be most

perforable by the rayes of the Sun, in a depth of two thousand miles, but more

opacous than one of our mountains, in a thicknesse of one mile onely.


SALV.


The  very  mountains  of  the  Moon  themselves  are  a  proof  thereof,  which

percussed on one side of the Sun, do cast on the contrary side very dark

shadows, terminate, and more distinct by much, than the shadows of ours; but

had  these  mountains  been  diaphanous,  we  could  never  have  come  to  the

knowledg of any unevennesse in the superficies of the Moon, not have seen

those luminous montuosities distinguished by the terms which separate the

lucid  parts  from  the  dark:  much  lesse,  should  we  see  this  same  term  so

distinct, if it were true, that the Suns light did penetrate the whole thicknesse

of the Moon; yea rather, according to the Authors own words, we should of

necessity discern the passage, and confine, between the part of the Sun seen,

and the part not seen, to be very confused, and mixt with light and  darknesse;

for that that matter which admits the passage of the Suns rayes thorow a

space of two thousand miles, must needs be so transparent, that it would veryweakly  resist  them  in  a  hundredth,  or  lesser  part  of  that  thicknesse;

neverthelesse,  the  term  which  separateth  the  part  illuminated  from  the

obscure,  is  incident,  and  as  distinct,  as  white  is  distinct  from  black;  and

especially where the Section passeth through the part of the Moon, that is

naturally more clear and montanous; but where the old spots do part, which

are certain plains, that by means of their spherical inclination, receive the

rayes of the Sun obliquely, there the term is not so distinct, by reason of the

more  dimme  illumination.  That,  lastly,  which  he  saith,  how  that  the

secondary  light  doth  not  diminish  and  languish,  according  as  the  Moon

encreaseth, but conserveth it self continually in the same efficacy; is most

false; nay it is hardly seen in the quadrature, when, on the contrary, it should

appear more splendid, and be visible after the crepusculum in the dark of

night. Let us conclude therefore, that the Earths reflection is very strong upon

the Moon; and that, which you ought more to esteem, we may deduce from

thence another admirable congruity between the Moon and Earth; namely,

The Earth may reciprocally operate upon Coelestial bodies, with its light. that

if it be true, the Planets operate upon the Earth by their motion and light, the

Earth may probably be no lesse potent in operating reciprocally upon them

with the same light, and peradventure, motion also. And though it should not

move, yet may it retain the same operation; because, as it hath been proved

already, the action of the light is the self same, I mean of the light of the Sun

reflected; and motion doth nothing, save only vary the aspects, which fall out

in the same manner, whether we make the Earth move, and the Sun stand

still, or the contrary.


SIMPL.


None of the Philosophers are found to have said, that these inferiour bodies

operate on the Coelestial, nay, Aristotle affirmes the direct contrary.


SALV.


Aristotle  and  the  rest,  who  knew  not  that  the  Earth  and  Moon  mutually

illuminated each other, are to be excused; but they would justly deserve our

censure, if whilest they desire that we should grant and believe with them,

that the Moon operateth upon the Earth with light, they should deny to us,

who have taught them that the Earth illuminates the Moon, the operation the

Earth hath on the Moon.SIMPL.


In short, I find in my self a great unwillingnesse to admit this commerce,

which you would perswade me to be betwixt the Earth and Moon, placing it,

as we say, amongst the number of the Stars; for if there were nothing else, the

great separation and distance between it and the Coelestial bodies, doth in my

opinion necessarily conclude a vast disparity between them.


SALV.


See Simplicius what an inveterate affection and radicated opinion can do,

since it is so powerful, that it makes you think that those very things favour

you, which you produce against your self. For if separation and distance are

accidents sufficient to perswade with you a great diversity of natures, it must

follow that proximity and contiguity import similitude. Affinity between the

Earth & Moon in respect of their vicinity. Now how much more neerer is the

Moon  to  the  Earth,  than  to  any  other  of  the  Coelestial  Orbs?  You  must

acknowledg therefore, according to your own concession (and you shall have

other  Philosophers  bear  you  company)  that  there  is  a  very  great  affinity

betwixt the Earth and Moon. Now let us proceed, and see whether any thing

remains to be considered, touching those objections which you made against

the resemblances that are between these two bodies.


SIMPL.


It rests, that we say something touching the solidity of the Moon, which I

argued  from  its  being  exquisite  smooth  and  polite,  and  you  from  its

montuosity.  There  is  another  scruple  also  comes  into  my  mind,  from  an

opinion which I have, that the Seas reflection ought by the equality of its

surface, to be rendered stronger than that of the Earth, whose superficies is so

rough and opacous.


SALV.


As to the first objection; I say, that like as among the parts of the Earth,

Solidity of the Lunar Globe argued from its being montainous. which all by

their gravity strive to approach the nearest they can possible to the center,

some of them alwayes are more remote from it than the rest, as the mountainsmore than the valleys, and that by reason of their solidity and firmnesse (for

if they were of fluid, they would be even) so the seeing some parts of the

Moon to be elevated above the sphericity of the lower parts, argueth their

hardnesse; for it is probable that the matter of the Moon is reduced into a

spherical form by the harmonious conspiration of all its parts to the same

sentense. Touching the second doubt, my thinks that the particulars already

observed to happen in the Looking-glasses, may very well assure us, that the

reflection of light comming from the Sea, The Seas reflection of light much

weaker than that of the Earth. is far weaker than that which cometh from

Land;  understanding  it  alwayes  of  the  universal  reflection;  for  as  to  that

particular, on which the water being calm, casteth upon a determinate place,

there is no doubt, but that he who shall stand in that place, shall see a very

great reflection in the water, but every way else he shall see the surface of the

Water  more  obscure  than  that  of  the  Land;  An  experimen    to  prove  the

reflection of the Water lesse clear than that of the Land. and to prove it to

your senses, let us go into yonder Hall, and power forth a little water upon the

Pavement. Tell me now, doth not this wet brick shew more dull than the other

dry ones? Doubtlesse it doth, and will so appear, from what place soever you

behold it, except one onely, and this is that way which the light cometh, that

entereth in at yonder window; go backwards therefore by a little and a little.


SIMPL.


Here I see the west part shine more than all the rest of the pavement, and I

see that it so hapneth, because the reflection of the light which entereth in at

the window, cometh towards me.


SALV.


That moisture hath done no more but filled those little cavities which are in

the  brick  with  water,  and  reduced  its  superficies  to  an  exact  evenesse;

whereupon the reflex rayes issue unitedly towards one and the same place;

but the rest of the pavement which is dry, hath its protuberances, that is, an

innumerable variety of inclinations in its smallest particles; whereupon the

reflections of the light scatter towards all parts, but more weakly than if they

had gone all united together; and therefore, the same sheweth almost all alike,

beheld several wayes, but far lesse clear than the moistned brick. I conclude

therefore, that the surface of the Sea, beheld from the Moon, in like manner,as it would appear most equal, (the Islands and Rocks deducted) so it would

shew lesse clear than that of the Earth, which is montanous and uneven. And

but that I would not seem, as the saying is, to harp too much on one string, I

could tell you that I have observed in the Moon that secondary light which I

told  you  came  to  her  from  the  reflection  of  the  Terrestrial  Globe,  to  be

notably more clear two or three dayes before the conjunction, The secondary

light of the Moon clearer before the conjunction, than after. than after, that is,

when we see it before break of day in the East, than when it is seen at night

after Sun-set in the West; of which difference the cause is, that the Terrestrial

Hemisphere,  which  looks  towards  the  Eastern  Moon,  hath  little  Sea,  and

much Land, to wit, all Asia, whereas, when it is in the West, it beholds very

great  Seas,  that  is,  the  whole  Atlantick  Ocean  as  far  as  America:  An

Argument sufficiently probable that the surface of the water appears lesse

splendid than that of the Earth.


SIMPL.


So that perhaps you believe, those great spots discovered in the face of the

Moon, to be Seas, and the other clearer parts to be Land, or some such thing?


SALV.


This  which  you  ask  me,  is  the  beginning  of  those  incongruities  which  I

esteem to be between the Moon and the Earth, out of which it is time to dis-

ingage our selves, for we have stayed too long in the Moon. I say therefore,

that  if  there  were  in  nature  but  one  way  onely,  to  make  two  superficies

illustrated by the Sun, to appear one more clear than the other, and that this

were  by  the  being  of  the  one  Earth,  and  the  other  Water;  it  would  be

necessary  to  say  that  the  surface  of  the  Moon  were  part  earthy  and  part

aquatick; but because we know many wayes to produce the same effect (and

others there may be which we know not of;) therefore I dare not affirm the

Moon to consist of one thing more than another: It hath been seen already 

that a silver plate boiled, being toucht with the Burnisher, becometh of white

obscure; that the moist part of the Earth shews more obscure than the dry;

that in the tops of Hills, the woody parts appear more gloomy than the naked

and barren; which hapneth because there falleth very much shadow among

the Trees, but the open places are illuminated all over by the Sun. And this

mixtion of shadow hath such operation, that in tufted velvet, the silk which iscut, is of a far darker colour than that which is not cut, by means of the

shadows diffused betwixt thred and thred, and a plain velvet shews much

blacker than a Taffata, made of the same silk. So that if there were in the

Moon  things  which  should  look  like  great  Woods,  their  aspect  might

represent unto us the spots which we discover; alike difference would be

occasioned, if there were Seas in her: and lastly, nothing hindreth, but that

those spots may really be of an obscurer colour than the rest; for thus the

snow makes the mountains shew brighter. The obscurer parts of the Moon are

plains, and the more bright mountainous. That which is plainly observed in

the Moon is, that its most obscure parts are all plains, with few rises and

bancks in them; though some there be; the rest which is of a brighter colour,

is all full of rocks, mountains, hillocks of spherical and other figures; and in

particular, round about the spots are very great ledges of mountains. Long

ledges of mountains about the spots of the Moon. That the spots be plain

superficies, we have assured proof, in that we see, how that the term which

distinguisheth the part illuminated from the obscure, in crossing the spots

makes the intersection even, but in the clear parts it shews all craggy and

shagged. But I know not as yet whether this evennesse of superficies may be

sufficient of it self alone, to make the obscurity appear, and I rather think not.

Besides, I account the Moon exceeding different from the Earth; for although

I imagine to my self that those are not idle and dead Regions, There are not

generated in the Moon things like to ours, but if there be any productions,

they are very different. yet I affirm not, that there are in them motion and life,

much less that there are bred plants, animals or other things like to ours; but,

if such there be, they should nevertheless be very different, and remote from

our imagination. And I am induced so to think, because in the first place, I

esteem that the matter of the Lunar Globe consists not of Earth and Water;

and  this  alone  sufficeth  to  take  away  the  generations  and  alterations

resembling  ours:  The  Moon  not  composed  of  Water  and  Earth.  but  now

supposing that there were in the Moon, Water and Earth, yet would they not

produce plants and animals like to ours; Those aspects of the Sun necessary

for  our  generations,  are  not  so  in  the  Moon.  and  this  for  two  principal

reasons: The first is, that unto our productions there are required so many

variable aspects of the Sun, that without them they would all miscarry: now

the  habitudes  of  the  Sun  towards  the  Earth  are  far  different  from  those

towards the Moon. We as to the diurnal illumination, have, in the greater part

of the Earth, every twenty four hours part day, and part night, which effect inthe Moon is monethly: and that annual declination  and elevation of the Sun

in the Zodiack, Natural dayes in the Moon are of a Moneth long. by which it

produceth  diversity  of  Seasons,  and  inequality  of  dayes  and  nights,  are

finished in the Moon in a moneth; and whereas the Sun to us riseth and

declineth so much, To the Moon the Sun ascendeth and declineth with a

difference of ten degrees, and to the Earth of forty seven degrees. that from

the greatest to the least altitude, there is a difference of almost 47 degrees, for

so much is the distance from one to the other Tropick; this is in the Moon but

ten degrees only, or little more; namely, as much as the greatest Latitudes of

the Dragon on each side the Ecliptick. Now consider what effect the Sun

would have in the torrid Zone, should it continually for fifteen dayes together

beam  forth  its  Rayes  upon  it;  which  without  all  question  would  destroy

plants, herbs, and living creatures: and if it should chance that there were any

production, it would be of herbs, plants, and creatures very different from

those which are now there. There are no rains in the Moon. Secondly, I verily

believe that in the Moon there are no rains, for if Clouds should gather in any

part thereof, as they do about the Earth, they would thereupon hide from our

sight some of those things, which we with the Telescope behold in the Moon,

and in a word, would some way or other change its Phaenomenon, an effect

which I could never by long and diligent observations discover; but alwayes

beheld it in a even and pure serenity.


SAGR.


To this may be answered, either that there might be great mists, or that it

might rain in the time of their night, that is, when the Sun doth not illuminate

it.


SALV.


If other passages did but assure us, that there were generations in it like to

ours, and that there was onely wanting the concourse of rains, we might find

out this, or some other temperament to serve instead thereof, as it happens in

Egypt by the inundation of Nile: but not meeting with any accident, which

corresponds with ours, of many that have been sought out for the production

of the like effects, we need not trouble our selves to introduce one alone; and

that also, not because we have certain observation of it, but for a bare non-

repugnance that we find therein. Moreover, if I was demanded what my firstapprehension,  and  pure  natural  reason  dictated  to  me  concerning  the

production of things like or unlike there above, I would alwayes reply, that

they are most different, and to us altogether unimaginable, for so me thinks

the riches of Nature, and the omnipotence of our Creator and Governour, do

require.


SAGR.


I  ever  accounted  extraordinary  madnesse  that  of  those,  who  would  make

humane  comprehension  the  measure  of  what  nature  hath  a  power  or

knowledge to effect; whereas on the contrary there is not any the least effect

in Nature, The having a perfect knowledg of nothing, maketh some believe

they  understand  all  things.  which  can  be  fully  understood  by  the  most

speculative wits in the world. This their so vain presumption of knowing all,

can take beginning from nothing,  unlesse from their never having known any

thing; for if one hath but once onely experienced the perfect knowledg of one

onely thing, and but truly tasted what it is to know, he shall perceive that of

infinite other conclusions, he understands not so much as one.


SALV.


Your discourse is very concluding; in confirmation of which we have the

example of those who understand, or have known some thing, which the

more knowing they are, the more they know, and freely confesse that they

know little; nay, the wisest man in all Greece, and for such pronounced by

the Oracle, openly professed to know that he knew nothing.


SIMPL.


It must be granted therefore, either that Socrates or that the Oracle it self was

a lyar, that declaring him to be most wise, and he confessing that he knew

himself to be most ignorant.


SALV.


Neither  one  nor  the  other  doth  follow,  The  answer  of  the  Oracle  true  in

judging Socrates the wisest of his time. for that both the assertions may be

true. The Oracle adjudged Socrates the wisest of all men, whose knowledg islimited; Socrates acknowledgeth that he knew nothing in relation to absolute

wisdome, which is infinite; and because of infinite, much is the same part, as

is little, and as is nothing (for to arrive v. g. to the infinite number, it is all

one  to  accumulate  thousands,  tens,  or  ciphers,)  therefore  Socrates  well

perceived his wisdom to be nothing, in comparison of the infinite knowledg

which he wanted. But yet, because there is some knowledg found amongst

men, and this not equally shared to all, Socrates might have a greater share

thereof than others, and therefore verified the answer of the Oracle.


SAGR.


I think I very well understand this particular amongst men, Simplicius there is

a  power  of  operating,  but  not  equally  dispensed  to  all;  and  it  is  without

question, that the power of an Emperor is far greater than that of a private

person;  but,  both  this  and  that  are  nothing  in  comparison  of  the  Divine

Omnipotence.  Amongst  men,  there  are  some  that  better  understand

Agriculture  than  many  others;  but  the  knowledg  of  planting  a  Vine  in  a

trench, what hath it to do with the knowledg of making it to sprout forth, to

attract  nourishment,  to  select  this  good  part  from  that  other,  for  to  make

thereof leaves, another to make sprouts, another to make grapes, another to

make raisins, another to make the huskes of them, which are the works of

most wise Nature? This is one only particular act of the innumerable, which

Nature doth, Divine Wisdom infinitely infinite. and in it alone is discovered

an infinite wisdom, so that Divine Wisdom may be concluded to be infinitely

infinite.


SALV.


Take hereof another example. Do we not say that the  judicious discovering

of a most lovely Statua in a piece of Marble, hath sublimated the wit of

Buonarruotti far above the vulgar wits of other men?Buonarruotti, a statuary

of admirable ingenitity. And yet this work is onely the imitation of a meer

aptitude  and  disposition  of  exteriour  and  superficial  members  of  an

immoveable man; but what is it in comparison of a man made by nature,

composed of as many exteriour and interiour members, of so many muscles,

tendons, nerves, bones, which serve to so many and sundry motions? but

what shall we say of the senses, and of the powers of the soul, and lastly, of

the understanding? May we not say, and that with reason, that the structure ofa  Statue  fals  far  short  of  the  formation  of  a  living  man,  yea  more  of  a

contemptible worm?


SAGR.


And what difference think you, was there betwixt the Dove of Architas, and

one made by Nature?


SIMPL.


Either  I  am  none  of  these  knowing  men,  or  else  there  is  a  manifest

contradiction in this your discourse. You account understanding amongst the

greatest (if you make it not the chief of the) Encomiums ascribed to man

made by Nature, and a little before you said with Socrates, that he had no

knowledg at all; therefore you must say, that neither did Nature understand

how to make an understanding that understandeth.


SALV.


You  argue  very  cunningly,  but  to  reply  to  your  objection  I  must  have

recourse to a Philosophical distinction, and say that the understanding is to be

taken too ways, Man understandeth very well intensivè, but little extensivè.

that is intensivè, or extensivè; and that extensivè, that is, as to the multitude

of intelligibles, which are infinite, the understanding of man is as nothing,

though he should understand a thousand propositions; for that a thousand, in

respect of infinity is but as a cypher: but taking the understanding intensive,

(in  as  much  as  that  term  imports)  intensively,  that  is,  perfectly  some

propositions, I say, that humane wisdom understandeth some propositions so

perfectly, and is as absolutely certain thereof, as Nature her self; and such are

the pure Mathematical sciences, to wit, Geometry and Arithmetick: in which

Divine Wisdom knows infinite more propositions, because it knows them all;

but  I  believe  that  the  knowledge  of  those  few  comprehended  by  humane

understanding, equalleth the divine, as to the certainty objectivè, for that it

arriveth to comprehend the necessity thereof, than which there can be no

greater certainty.


SIMPL.This seemeth to me a very bold and rash expression.


SALV.


These  are  common  notions,  and  far  from  all  umbrage  of  temerity,  or

boldness, and detract not in the least from the Majesty of divine wisdom; as it

nothing diminisheth the omnipotence thereof to say, that God cannot make

what is once done, to be undone: but I doubt, Simplicius, that your scruple

ariseth from an opinion you have, that my words are somewhat equivocal;

therefore  the better to express my self I say, that as to the truth, of which

Mathematical demonstrations give us the knowledge, it is the same, which

the  divine  wisdom  knoweth;  but  this  I  must  grant  you,  G  ds  manner  of

knowing different from that of men. that the manner whereby God knoweth

the infinite propositions, of which we understand some few, is highly more

excellent  than  ours,  Humane  understanding  done  by  raciocination.  which

proceedeth  by  ratiocination,  and  passeth  from  conclusion  to  conclusion,

whereas his is done at one single thought or intuition; and whereas we, for

example, to attain the knowledg of some passion of the Circle, which hath

infinite,  beginning  from  one  of  the  most  simple,  and  taking  that  for  its

definition, do proceed with argumentation to another, and from that to a third,

and then to a fourth, &c. the Divine Wisdom, by the apprehension of its

essence  comprehends,  without  temporary  raciocination,  all  these  infinite

passions;  which  notwithstanding,  are  in  effect  virtually  comprised  in  the

definitions of all things; Definitions contein virtually all the passions of the

things defined. and, to conclude, as being infinite, perhaps are but one alone

in their nature, and in the Divine Mind; the which neither is wholly unknown

to humane understanding, Infinite Passions are perhaps but one onely. but

onely  be-clouded  with  thick  and  grosse  mists;  which  come  in  part  to  be

dissipated  and  clarified,  when  we  are  made  Masters  of  any  conclusions,

firmly demonstrated, and so perfectly made ours, as that we can speedily run

through them; for in sum, what other, is that proposition, that the square of

the side subtending the right angle in any triangle, is equal to the squares of

the  other  two,  which  include  it,  but  onely  the  Paralellograms  being  upon

common bases, and between parallels equal amongst themselves? and this,

lastly, is it not the same, as to say that those two superficies are equal, of

which  equal  parts  applyed  to  equal  parts,  The  discourses  which  humane

reason makes in a certain time, the Divine Wisdom resolveth in a moment;that  is,  hath  them  alwayes  present.  possesse  equal  place?  Now  these

inferences, which our intellect apprehendeth with time and a gradual motion,

the Divine Wisdom, like light, penetrateth in an instant, which is the same as

to  say,  hath  them  alwayes  present:  I  conclude  therefore,  that  our

understanding,  both  as  to  the  manner  and  the  multitude  of  the  things

comprehended by us, is infinitely surpast by the Divine Wisdom; but yet I do

not so vilifie it, as to repute it absolutely nothing; yea rather, when I consider

how many and how great misteries men have understood, discovered, and

contrived, I very plainly know and understand the mind of man to be one of

the works, yea one of the most excellent works of God.


SAGR.


I have oft times considered with my self, The wit of man admirably acute. in

pursuance  of  that  which  you  speak  of,  how  great  the  wit  of  man  is;  and

whil’st I run thorow such and so many admirable inventions found out by

him, as well in the Arts, as Sciences; and again reflecting upon my own wit,

so far from promising me the discovery of any thing new, that I despair of

comprehending what is already discovered,  confounded with wonder, and

surprised with desperation, I account my self little lesse than miserable. If I

behold a Statue of some excellent Master, I say with my self; When wilt thou

know how to chizzle away the refuse of a piece of Marble, and discover so

lovely a figure, as lyeth hid therein? When wilt thou mix and spread so many

different colours upon a Cloth, or Wall, and represent therewith all visible

objects, like a Michael Angelo, a Raphaello, or a Tizvano? If I behold what

inventions  men  have  in  comparting  Musical  intervals,  in  establishing

Precepts and Rules for the management thereof with admirable delight to the

ear: When shall I cease my astonishment? What shall I say of such and so

various Instruments of that Art? The reading of excellent Poets, with what

admiration doth it swell any one that attentively considereth the invention of

conceits, and their explanation? What shall we say of Architecture? What of

Navigation?The invention of writing stupendious above all others. But, above

all other stupendious inventions, what sublimity of mind was that in him, that

imagined  to  himself  to  find  out  a  way  to  communicate  his  most  secret

thoughts to any other person, though very far distant from him either in time,

or place, speaking with those that are in the India’s; speaking to those that are

not yet born, nor shall be this thousand, or ten thousand years? and with howmuch  facility?  but  by  the  various  collocation  ofFor  of  so  many  only  the

Italian Alphabet consists. twenty little letters upon a paper? Let this be the

Seal of all the admirable inventions of man, and the close of our Discourse

for this day: For the warmer hours being past, I suppose that Salviatus hath a

desire to go and take the air in his Gondelo; but too morrow we will both wait

upon you, to continue the Discourses we have begun, &c.                        THE SECOND DIALOGUE.


INTERLOCVTORS. SALVIATUS, SAGREDUS, and SIMPLICIUS.


SALV.


THE yesterdayes diversions which led us out of the path of our principal

discourse, were such and so many, that I know not how I can without your

assistance recover the track in which I am to proceed.


SAGR.


I wonder not, that you, who have your fancy charged and laden with both

what hath been, and is to be spoken, do find your self in some confusion; but

I,  who  as  being  onely  an  Auditor,  have  nothing  to  burthen  my  memory

withal, but such things as I have heard, may haply by a succinct rehearsal of

them, recover the first thred of our Discourse. As far therefore as my memory

serves me, the sum of yester-dayes conferences were an examination of the

Principles  of Ptolomy and Copernicus, and which of their opinions is the

more  probable  and  rational;  that,  which  affirmeth  the  substance  of  the

Coelestial  bodies  to  be  ingenerable,  incorruptible,  unalterable,  impassible,

and  in  a  word,  exempt  from  all  kind  of  change,  save  that  of  local,  and

therefore to be a fifth essence, quite different from this of our Elementary

bodies,  which  are  generable,  corruptible,  alterable,  &c.  or  else  the  other,

which taking away such deformity from the parts of the World, holdeth the

Earth  to  enjoy  the  same  perfections  as  the  other  integral  bodies  of  the

universe; and esteemeth it a moveable and erratick Globe, no lesse than the

Moon,  Jupiter,  Venus,  or  any  other  Planet:  And  lastly,  maketh  many

particular parallels betwixt the Earth and Moon; and more with the Moon,

than with any other Planet; haply by reason we have greater and more certain

notice of it, as being lesse distant from us. And having, lastly, concluded this

second opinion to have more of probability with it than the first, I should

think it best in the subsequent discourses to begin to examine whether the

Earth be esteemed immoveable, as it hath been till now believed by most

men, or else moveable, as some ancient Philosophers held, and others of not

very recesse times, were of opinion; and if it be moveable, to enquire of what

kind its motion may be?SALV.


I see already what way I am to take; but before we offer to proceed any

farther, I am to say something to you touching those last words which you

spake, how that the opinion which holds the Earth to be endued with the same

conditions that the Coelestial bodies enjoy, seems to be more true than the

contrary;  for  that  I  affirmed  no  such  thing,  nor  would  I  have  any  of  the

Propositions in controversie, be made to speak to any definitive sense: but I

onely  intended  to  produce  on  either  part,  those  reasons  and  answers,

arguments and solutions, which have been hitherto thought upon by others,

together  with  certain  others,  which  I  have  stumbled  upon  in  my  long

searching thereinto, alwayes remitting the decision thereof to the judgment of

others.


SAGR.


I was unawares transported by my own sense of the thing; and believing that

others ought to judg as I did, I made that conclusion universal, which should

have been particular; and therefore confesse I have erred, and the rather, in

that I know not what Simplicius his judgment is in this particular.


SIMPL.


I  must  confesse,  that  I  have  been  ruminating  all  this  night  of  what  past

yesterday, and to say the truth, I meet therein with many acute, new, aud

plausible  notions;  yet  nevertheless,  I  find  my  self  over-perswaded  by  the

authority of so many great Writers, and in particular — &c. I see you shake

your head Sagredus, and smile to your self, as if I had uttered some great

absurdity.


SAGR.


I not onely smile, but to tell you true, am ready to burst with holding in my

self from laughing outright, for you have put me in mind of a very pretty

passage, that I was a witnesse of, not many years since, together with some

others of my worthy friends, which I could yet name unto you.


SALV.It would be well that you told us what it was, that so Simplicius may not still

think that he gave you the occasion of laughter.


SAGR.


I am content. I found one day, at home in his house, at Venice, a famous

Phisician, to whom some flockt for their studies, and others out of curiosity,

sometimes came thither to see certain Anatomies diffected by the hand of a

no lesse learned, than careful and experienced Anatomist. The original of the

Nerves according to Aristotle, and according to Phisicians. It chanced upon

that day, when I was there, that he was in search of the original and rise of the

Nerves, about which there is a famous controversie between the Galenists

and Peripateticks; and the Anatomist shewing, how that the great number of

Nerves departing from the Brain, as their root, and passing by the nape of the

Neck,  distend  themselves  afterwards  along  by  the  Back-bone,  and  branch

themselves thorow all the Body; and that a very small filament, as fine as a

thred went to the Heart; he turned to a Gentleman whom he knew to be a

Peripatetick  Philosopher,  and  for  whose  sake  he  had  with  extraordinary

exactnesse, discovered and proved every thing, and demanded of him, if he

was  at  length  satisfied  and  perswaded  that  the  original  of  the  Nerves

proceeded from the Brain, and not from the Heart?The ridiculous answer of a

Philosopher,  determining  the  original  of  the  Nerves.  To  which  the

Philosopher, after he had stood musing a while, answered; you have made me

to see this businesse so plainly and sensibly, that did not the Text of Aristotle

assert the contrary, which positively affirmeth the Nerves to proceed from the

Heart, I should be constrained to confesse your opinion to be true.


SIMPL.


I would have you know my Masters, that this controversie about the original

of  the  Nerves  is  not  yet  so  proved  and  decided,  as  some  may  perhaps

perswade themselves.


SAGR.


Nor questionlesse ever shall it be, if it find such like contradictors; but that

which you say, doth not at all lessen the extravagance of the answer of that

Peripatetick,  who  against  such  sensible  experience  produced  not  otherexperiments,  or  reasons  of  Aristotle,  but  his  bare  authority  and  pure  ipse

dixit.


SIMPL.


Aristotle  had  not  gained  so  great  authority,  but  for  the  force  of  his

Demonstrations, and the profoundnesse of his arguments; but it is requisite

that we understand him, and not onely understand him, but have so great

familiarity with his Books, that we form a perfect Idea thereof in our minds,

so as that every saying of his may be alwayes as it were, present in our 

memory for he did not write to the vulgar, nor is he obliged to spin out his

Sillogismes with the trivial method of disputes; nay rather, using a freedome,

he hath sometimes placed the proof of one Proposition amongst Texts, which

seem to treat of quite another point; Requisites to fit a man to philosophate

well after the manner of Aristotle. and therefore it is requisite to be master of

all that vast Idea, and to learn how to connect this passage with that, and to

combine  this  Text  with  another  far  remote  from  it;  for  it  is  not  to  be

questioned but that he who hath thus studied him, knows how to gather from

his  Books  the  demonstrations  of  every  knowable  deduction,  for  that  they

contein all things.


SAGR.


But good Simplicius, like as the things scattered here and there in Aristotle,

give you no trouble in collecting them, but that you perswade your self to be

able by comparing and connecting several small sentences to extract thence

the juice of some desired conclusion, A cunning way to gather Philosophy

out  of  any  book  whatsoever.  so  this,  which  you  and  other  egregious

Philosophers do with the Text of Aristotle, I could do by the verses of Virgil,

or of Ovid, composing thereofA word signifying works composed of many

fragments  of  verses  collected  out  of  the  Poets.  Centones,  and  therewith

explaining all the affairs of men, and secrets of Nature. But what talk I of

Virgil, or any other Poet? I have a little Book much shorter than Aristotle and

Ovid, in which are conteined all the Sciences, and with very little study, one

may gather out of it a most perfect Idea, and this is the Alphabet; and there is

no doubt but that he who knows how to couple and dispose aright this and

that  vowel,  with  those,  or  those  other  consonants,  may  gather  thence  the

infallible answers to all doubts, and deduce from them the principles of allSciences and Arts, just in the same manner as the Painter from divers simple

colours, laid severally upon his Pallate, proceedeth by mixing a little of this

and a little of that, with a little of a third, to represent to the life men, plants,

buildings,  birds,  fishes,  and  in  a  word,  counterfeiting  what  ever  object  is

visible,  though  there  be  not  on  the  Pallate  all  the  while,  either  eyes,  or

feathers, or fins, or leaves, or stones. Nay, farther, it is necessary, that none of

the things to be imitated, or any part of them, be actually among colours, if

you  would  be  able  therewith  to  represent  all  things;  for  should  there  be

amongst them v. gr. feathers, these would serve to represent nothing save

birds, and plumed creatures.


SALV.


And there are certain Gentlemen yet living, and in health, who were present,

when a Doctor, that was Professor in a famous Academy, Invention of the

Telescope taken from Aristotle. hearing the description of the Telescope, by

him not seen as then, said, that the invention was taken from Aristotle, and

causing his works to be fetch’t, he turned to a place where the Philosopher

gives the reason, whence it commeth, that from the bottom of a very deep

Well, one may see the stars in Heaven, at noon day; and, addressing himself

to the company,  see here, saith he, the Well, which representeth the Tube,

see  here  the  gross  vapours,  from  whence  is  taken  the  invention  of  the

Crystals, and see here lastly the sight fortified by the passage of the rays

through a diaphanous, but more dense and obscure medium.


SAGR.


This  is  a  way  to  comprehend  all  things  knowable,  much  like  to  that

wherewith  a  piece  of  marble  conteineth  in  it  one,  yea,  a  thousand  very

beautiful Statua’s, but the difficulty lieth in being able to discover them; or

we may say, that it is like to the prophesies of Abbot Joachim, or the answers

of the Heathen Oracles, which are not to be understood, till after the things

fore-told are come to passe.


SALV.


And why do you not adde the predictions of the Genethliacks, which are with

like  cleernesse  seen  after  the  event,  in  their  Horoscopes,  or,  if  you  will,Configurations of the Heavens.


SAGR.


In this manner the Chymists find, Chymists interpret the Fables of the Poets

to be secrets for making of Gold. being led by their melancholly humour, that

all the sublimest wits of the World have writ of nothing else in reality, than of

the way to make Gold; but, that they might transmit the secret to posterity

without discovering it to the vulgar, they contrived some one way, and some

another how to conceal the same under several maskes; and it would make

one merry to hear their comments upon the ancient Poets, finding out the

important misteries, which lie hid under their Fables; and the signification of

the Loves of the Moon, and her descending to the Earth for Endimion; her

displeasure against Acteon, and what was meant by Jupiters turning himself

into a showre of Gold; and into flames of fire; and what great secrets of Art

are conteined in that Mercury the Interpreter; in those thefts of Pluto; and in

those Branches of Gold.


SIMPL.


I believe, and in part know, that there want not in the World very extravagant

heads,  the  vanities  of  whom  ought  not  to  redound  to  the  prejudice  of

Aristotle, of whom my thinks you speak sometimes with too little respect,

and the onely antiquity and bare name that he hath acquired in the opinions of

so many famous men, should suffice to render him honourable with all that

professe themselves learned.


SALV.


You state not the matter rightly, Simplicius; There are some of his followers

that fear before they are in danger, who give us occasion, or, to say better,

would give us cause to esteem him lesse, Some of Aristotles Sectators impare

the reputation of their Master, in going about to enhanse it. should we consent

to applaud their Capricio’s. And you, pray you tell me, are you for your part

so simple, as not to know that had Aristotle been present, to have heard the

Doctor that would have made him Author of the Telescope, he would have

been much more displeased with him, than with those, who laught at the

Doctor and his Comments? Do you question  whether Aristotle, had he butseen  the  novelties  discovered  in  Heaven,  would  not  have  changed  his

opinion,  amended  his  Books,  and  embraced  the  more  sensible  Doctrine;

rejecting those silly Gulls, which too scrupulously go about to defend what

ever he hath said; not considering, that if Aristotle were such a one as they

fancy  him  to  themselves,  he  would  be  a  man  of  an  untractable  wit,  an

obstinate mind, a barbarous soul, a stubborn will, that accounting all men else

but  as  silly  sheep,  would  have  his  Oracles  preferred  before  the  Senses,

Experience, and Nature her self? They are the Sectators of Aristotle that have

given him this Authority, and not he that hath usurped or taken it upon him;

and because it is more easie for a man to sculk under anothers shield than to

shew himself openly, they tremble, and are affraid to stir one step from him;

and rather than they will admit some alterations in the Heaven of Aristotle,

they will impertinently deny those they behold in the Heaven of Nature.


SAGR.


These  kind  of  Drolleries  put  me  in  mind  of  that  Statuary  which  having

reduced a great piece of Marble to the Image of an Hercules, A ridiculous

passage of a certain Statuary. or a thundring Jupiter, I know not whether, and

given it with admirable Art such a vivacity and threatning fury, that it moved

terror in as many as beheld it; he himself began also to be affraid thereof,

though all its sprightfulnesse, and life was his own workmanship; and his

affrightment was such, that he had no longer the courage to affront it with his

Chizzels and Mallet.


SALV.


I have many times wondered how these nice maintainers of what ever fell

from Aristotle, are not aware how great a prejudice they are to his reputation

and credit; and how that the more they go about to encrease his Authority, the

more they diminish it; for whilest I see them obstinate in their attempts to

maintain those Propositions which I palpably discover to be manifestly false;

and in their desires to perswade me that so to do, is the part of a Philosopher;

and that Aristotle himself would do the same, it much abates in me of the

opinion that he hath rightly philosophated about other conclusions, to me

more  abstruse:  for  if  I  could  see  them  concede  and  change  opinion  in  a

manifest truth, I would believe, that in those in which they should persist,

they may have some solid demonstrations to me unknown, and unheard of.SAGR.


Or when they should be made to see that they have hazarded too much of

their  own  and  Aristotle’s  repuatation  in  confessing,  that  they  had  not

understood this or that conclusion found out by some other man; would it not

be a less evil for them to seek for it amongst his Texts, by laying many of

them together, according to the art intimated to us by Simplicius? for if his 

works  contain  all  things  knowable,  it  must  follow  also  that  they  may  be

therein discovered.


SALV.


Good Sagredus, make no jest of this advice, which me thinks you rehearse in

too Ironical a way; for it is not long since that a very eminent Philosopher

having composed a Book de animà, wherein, citing the opinion of Aristotle,

about its being or not being immortal, he alledged many Texts, (not any of

those heretofore quoted by Alexander ab Alexandro: for in those he said, that

Aristotle had not so much as treated of that matter, much less determined any

thing pertaining to the same, but others) by himself found out in other more

abstruse places, which tended to an erroneous sense: and being advised, that

he would find it an hard matter to get a Licence from the Inquisitors, A brave

resolution of a certain Peripatetick Philosopher. he writ back unto his friend,

that he would notwithstanding, with all expedition procure the same, for that

if no other obstacle should interpose, he would not much scruple to change

the  Doctrine  of  Aristotle,  and  with  other  expositions,  and  other  Texts  to

maintain  the  contrary  opinion,  which  yet  should  be  also  agreeable  to  the

sense of Aristotle.


SAGR.


Oh most profound Doctor, this! that can command me that I stir not a step

from Aristotle, but will himself lead him by the nose, and make him speak as

he pleaseth. See how much it importeth to learn to take Time by the Fore-top.

Nor is it seasonable to have to do with Hercules, whil’st he is enraged, and

amongst the Furies, but when he is telling merry tales amongst the Meonion

Damosels. The servile spirit of some of Aristotles followers. Ah, unheard of

sordidnesse of servile souls! to make themselves willing slaves to other mens

opinions; to receive them for inviolable Decrees, to engage themselves toseem  satisfied  and  convinced  by  arguments,  of  such  efficacy,  and  so

manifestly concludent, that they themselves cannot certainly resolve whether

they were really writ to that purpose, or serve to prove that assumption in

hand, or the contrary. But, which is a greater madnesse, they are at variance

amongst themselves, whether the Author himself hath held the affirmative

part, or the negative. What is this, but to make an Oracle of a Log, and to run

to that for answers, to fear that, to reverence and adore that?


SIMPL.


But in case we should recede from Aristotle, who have we to be our Guid in

Philosophy? Name you some Author.


SALV.


We need a Guid in unknown and uncouth wayes, but in champion places, and

open plains, the blind only stand in need of a Leader; and for such, it is better

that they stay at home. But he that hath eyes in his head, and in his mind, him

should  a  man  choose  for  his  Guid.  Too  close  adhering  to  Aristotle  is

blameable.  Yet  mistake  me  not,  thinking  that  I  speak  this,  for  that  I  am

against hearing of Aristotle; for on the  contrary, I commend the reading, and

diligently studying of him; and onely blame the servile giving ones self up a

slave  unto  him,  so,  as  blindly  to  subscribe  to  what  ever  he  delivers,  and

without  search  of  any  farther  reason  thereof,  to  receive  the  same  for  an

inviolable  decree.  Which  is  an  abuse,  that  carrieth  with  it  another  great

inconvenience, to wit, that others will no longer take pains to understand the

validity  of  his  Demonstrations.  And  what  is  more  shameful,  than  in  the

middest of publique disputes, whilest one person is treating of demonstrable

conclusions, to hear another interpose with a passage of Aristotle, and not

seldome writ to quite another purpose, and with that to stop the mouth of his

opponent? But if you will continue to study in this manner, I would have you

lay aside the name of Philosophers; and call your selves either Historians or

Doctors of Memory, It is not just, that those who never philosophate, should

surp  the  title  of  Philosophers.  for  it  is  not  fit,  that  those  who  never

philosophate, should usurp the honourable title of Philosophers. But it is best

for us to return to shore, and not lanch farther into a boundlesse Gulph, out of

which we shall not be able to get before night. Therefore Simplicius, come

either with arguments and demonstrations of your own, or of Aristotle, andbring us no more Texts and naked authorities, The Sensible World. for our

disputes are about the Sensible World, and not one of Paper. And forasmuch

as in our discourses yesterday, we retriev’d the Earth from darknesse, and

exposed it to the open skie, shewing, that the attempt to enumerate it amongst

those  which  we  call  Coelestial  bodies,  was  not  a  position  so  foil’d,  and

vanquish’t, as that it had no life left in it; it followeth next, that we proceed to

examine  what  probability  there  is  for  holding  of  it  fixt,  and  wholly

immoveable,  scilicet  as  to  its  entire  Globe,  what  likelihood  there  is  for

making it moveable with some motion, and of what kind that may be. And

forasmuch  as  in  this  same  question  I  am  ambiguous,  and  Simplicius  is

resolute, as likewise Aristotle for the opinion of its immobility, he shall one

by one produce the arguments in favour of their opinion, and I will alledge

the answers and reasons on the contrary part; and next Sagredus shall tell us

his thoughts, and to which side he finds himself inclined.


SAGR.


Content;  provided  alwayes  that  I  may  reserve  the  liberty  to  my  self  of

alledging what pure natural reason shall sometimes dictate to me.


SALV.


Nay more, it is rhat which I particularly beg of you; for, amongst the more

easie, and, to so speak, material considerations, I believe there are but few of

them that have been omitted by Writers, so that onely some of the more

subtle, and remote can be desired, or wanting; and to investigate these, what

other ingenuity can be more fit than that of the most acute and piercing wit of

Sagredus?


SAGR.


I am what ever pleaseth Salviatus, but I pray you, let us not sally out into

another kind of digression complemental; for at this time I am a Philosopher,

and in the Schools, not in the Court.


SALV.Let  our  contemplation  begin  therefore  with  this  consideration,  that

whatsoever motion may be ascribed to the Earth, it is necessary that it be to

us, (as inhabitants upon it, and consequently partakers of the same) altogether

imperceptible, and as if it were not at all, so long as we have regard onely to

terrestrial  things;  The  motions  of  the  Earth  are  imperceptible  to  its

inhabitants. but yet it is on the contrary, as necessary that the same motion do

seem common to all other bodies, and visible objects, that being separated

from the Earth, participate not of the same. So that the true method to find

whether any kind of motion may be ascribed to the Earth, and that found, to

know what it is, is to consider and observe if in bodies separated from the

Earth, The Earth can have no other motions, than those which to us appear

commune  to  all  the  rest  of  the  Vniverse,  the  Earth  excepted.  one  may

discover any appearance of motion, which equally suiteth to all the rest; for a

motion that is onely seen, v. gr. in the Moon, and that hath nothing to do with

Venus or Jupiter, or any other Stars, cannot any way belong to the Earth, or

to any other save the Moon alone. Now there is a most general and grand

motion above all others, and it is that by which the Sun, the Moon, The

Diurnal Motion, seemeth commune to all the Vniverse, save onely the Earth

excepted. the other Planets, and the Fixed Stars, and in a word, the whole

Universe, the Earth onely excepted, appeareth in our thinking to move from

the East towards the West, in the space of twenty four hours; and this, as to

this first appearance, hath no obstacle to hinder it, that it may not belong to

the Earth alone, as well as to all the World besides, the Earth excepted; for

the same aspects will appear in the one position, as in the other. Hence it is

that Aristotle and Ptolomy, Aristotle and Ptolomy argue against the Diurnal

Motion attributed to the Earth. as having hit upon this consideration, in going

about to prove the Earth to be immoveable, argue not against any other than

this Diurnal Motion; save onely that Aristotle hinteth something in obscure

terms against another Motion ascribed to it by an Ancient, of which we shall

speak in its place.


SAGR.


I very well perceive the necessity of your illation: but I meet with a doubt

which I know not how to free my self from, and this it is, That Copernicus

assigning to the Earth another motion beside the Diurnal, which, according to

the  rule  even  now  laid  down,  ought  to  be  to  us,  as  to  appearance,imperceptible in the Earth, but visible in all the rest of the World; me thinks I

may necessarily infer, either that he hath manifestly erred in assigning the

Earth  a  motion,  to  which  there  appears  not  a  general  correspondence  in

Heaven; or else that if there be such a congruity therein, Ptolomy on the other

hand hath been deficient in not confuting this, as he hath done the other.


SALV.


You have good cause for your doubt: and when we come to treat of the other

Motion, you shall see how far Copernicus excelled Ptolomey in clearness and

sublimity of wit, in that he saw what the other did not, I mean the admirable

harmony wherein that Motion agreed with all the other Coelestial Bodies. But

for  the  present  we  will  suspend  this  particular,  and  return  to  our  first

consideration; touching which I will proceed to propose (begining with things

more general) those reasons which seem to favour the mobility of the Earth,

Why the diurnal motion more probably should belong to the Earth, than to

the rest of the Vniverse. and then wait the answers which Simplicius shall

make thereto. And first, if we consider onely the immense magnitude of the

Starry Sphere, compared to the smalness of the Terrestrial Globe, contained

therein so many millions of times; and moreover weigh the velocity of the

motion which must in a day and night make an entire revolution thereof, I

cannot  perswade  my  self,  that  there  is  any  man  who  believes  it  more

reasonable and credible, that the Coelestial Sphere turneth round, and the

Terrestrial Globe stands still.


SAGR.


If from the universality of effects, which may in nature have dependence

upon  such  like  motions,  there  should  indifferently  follow  all  the  same

consequences to an hair, aswell in one Hypothesis as in the other; yet I for

my  part,  as  to  my  first  and  general  apprehension,  would  esteem,  that  he

which should hold it more rational to make the whole Universe move, and

thereby to salve the Earths mobility, is more unreasonable than he that being

got to the top of your Turret, should desire, to the end onely that he might

behold the City, and the Fields about it, that the whole Country might turn

round, that so he might not be put to the trouble to stir his head. And yet

doubtless the advantages would be many and great which the Copernican

Hypothesis is attended with, above those of the Ptolomaique, which in myopinion resembleth, nay surpasseth that other folly; so that all this makes me

think that far more probable than this. But haply Aristotle Ptolomey, and

Simplicius may find the advantages of their Systeme, which they would do

well to communicate to us also, if any such there be; or else declare to me,

that there neither are or can be any such things.


SALV.


For my part, as I have not been able, as much as I have thought upon it, to

find any diversity therein; so I think I have found, that no such diversity can

be in them: in so much that I esteem it to no purpose to seek farther after it.

Motion, as to the things that equally move thereby, is as if it never were, & so

far  operates  as  it  hath  relation  to  things  deprived  of  motion.  Therefore

observe: Motion is so far Motion, and as Motion operateth, by how far it hath

relation to things which want Motion: but in those things which all equally

partake thereof it hath nothing to do, and is as if it never were. And thus the

Merchandises with which a ship is laden, so far move, by how far leaving

London,  they  pass    by  France,  Spain,  Italy,  and  sail  to  Aleppo,  which

London, France, Spain &c. stand still, not moving with the ship: but as to the

Chests, Bales and other Parcels, wherewith the ship is stow’d and and laden,

and in respect of the ship it self, the Motion from London to Syria is as much

as nothing; and nothing-altereth the relation which is between them: and this,

because it is common to all, and is participated by all alike: and of the Cargo

which is in the ship, if a Bale were romag’d from a Chest but one inch onely,

this alone would be in that Cargo, a greater Motion in respect of the Chest,

than the whole Voyage of above three thousand miles, made by them as they

were stived together.


SIMPL.


This Doctrine is good, sound, and altogether Peripatetick.


SALV.


I hold it to be much more antient: A proposition taken by Aristotle from the

Antients, but somewhat altered by him. and suspect that Aristotle in receiving

it from some good School, did not fully understand it, and that therefore,

having  delivered  it  with  some  alteration,  it  hath  been  an  occasion  ofconfusion amongst those, who would defend whatever he saith. And when he

writ,  that  whatsoever  moveth,  doth  move  upon  something  immoveable,  I

suppose that he equivocated, and meant, that whatever moveth, moveth in

respect to something immoveable; which proposition admitteth no doubt, and

the other many.


SAGR.


Pray you make no digression, but proceed in the dissertation you began.


SALV.


It  being  therefore  manifest,  The  first  discourse  to  prove  that  the  diurnal

motion  belongs  to  the  Earth.  that  the  motion  which  is  common  to  many

moveables, is idle, and as it were, null as to the relation of those moveables

between  themselves,  because  that  among  themselves  they  have  made  no

change: and that it is operative onely in the relation that those moveables

have to other things, which want that motion, among which the habitude is

changed: and we having divided the Universe into two parts, one of which is

necessarily  moveable,  and  the  other  immoveable;  for  the  obtaining  of

whatsoever may depend upon, or be required from such a motion, it may as

well be done by making the Earth alone, as by making all the rest of the

World to move: for that the operation of such a motion consists in nothing

else, save in the relation or habitude which is between the Coelestial Bodies,

and  the  Earth,  the  which  relation  is  all  that  is  changed.  Now  if  for  the

obtaining of the same effect ad unguem, it be all one whether the Earth alone

moveth, the rest of the Universe standing still; Nature never doth that by

many things, which may be done by a few. or that, the Earth onely standing

still, the whole Universe moveth with one and the same motion; who would

believe,  that  Nature  (which  by  common  consent,  doth  not  that  by  many

things, which may be done by few) hath chosen to make an innumerable

number of most vast bodies move, and that with an unconceivable  velocity,

to perform that, which might be done by the moderate motion of one alone

about its own Centre?


SIMPL.I do not well understand, how this grand motion signifieth nothing as to the

Sun,  as  to  the  Moon,  as  to  the  other  Planets,  and  as  to  the  innumerable

multitude of fixed stars: or why you should say that it is to no purpose for the

Sun to pass from one Meridian to another; to rise above this Horizon, to set

beneath that other; to make it one while day, another while night: the like

variations  are  made  by  the  Moon,  the  other  Planets,  and  the  fixed  stars

themselves.


SALV.


All these alterations instanced by you, are nothing, save onely in relation to

the Earth: and that this is true, do but imagine the Earth to move, The diurnal

motion causeth no mutation amongst the Coelestial Bodies, but all changes

have relation to the Earth. and there will be no such thing in the World as the

rising or setting of the Sun or Moon, nor Horizons, nor Meridians, nor days,

nor nights; nor, in a word, will such a motion cause any mutation between the

Moon and Sun, or any other star whatsoever, whether fixed or erratick; but all

these changes have relation to the Earth: which all do yet in sum import no

other than as if the Sun should shew it self now to China, anon to Persia, then

to Egypt, Greece, France, Spain, America, &c. and the like holdeth in the

Moon, and the rest of the Coelestial Bodies: which self same effect falls out

exactly  in  the  same  manner,  if,  without  troubling  so  great  a  part  of  the

Universe,  the  Terrestrial  Globe  be  made  to  revolve  in  it  self.  A  second

confirmation  that  the  diurnal  motion  belongs  to  the  Earth.  But  we  will

augment the difficulty by the addition of this other, which is a very great one,

namely, that if you will ascribe this Great Motion to Heaven, you must of

necessity make it contrary to the particular motion of all the Orbs of the

Planets, each of which without controversie hath its peculiar motion from the

West towards the East, and this but very easie and moderate: and then you

make them to be hurried to the contrary part, i. e. from East to West, by this

most furious diurnal motion: whereas, on the contrary, making the Earth to

move  in  it  self,  the  contrariety  of  motions  is  taken  away,  and  the  onely

motion from West to East is accommodated to all appearances, and exactly

satisfieth every Phoenomenon.


SIMPL.As to the contrariety of Motions it would import little, Circular motions are

not contrary, according to Aristotle. for Aristotle demonstrateth, that circular

motions, are not contrary to one another; and that theirs cannot be truly called

contrariety.


SALV.


Doth Aristotle demonstrate this, or doth he not rather barely affirm it, as

serving  to  some  certain  design  of  his?  If  contraries  be  those  things,  that

destroy one another, as he himself affirmeth, I do not see how two moveables

that  encounter  each  other  in  a  circular  line,  should  lesse  prejudice  one

another, than if they interfered in a right line.


SAGR.


Hold a little, I pray you. Tell me Simplicius, when two Knights encounter

each other, tilting in open field, or when two whole Squadrons, or two Fleets

at  Sea,  make  up  to  grapple,  and  are  broken  and  sunk,  do  you  call  these

encounters contrary to one another?


SIMPL.


Yes, we say they are contrary.


SAGR.


How then, is there no contrariety in circular motions. These motions, being

made upon the superficies of the Earth or Water, which are, as you know,

spherical, come to be circular. Can you tell, Simplicius, which those circular

motions be, that are not contrary to each other? They are (if I mistake not)

those of two circles, which touching one another without, one thereof being

turn’d round, naturally maketh the other move the contrary As you see in a

Mill, wherein the implicated cogs set the wheels on moving. way; but if one

of them shall be within the other, it is impossible that their motion being

made towards different points, they should not justle one another.


SALV.But be they contrary, or not contrary, these are but alterations of words; and I

know, that upon the matter, it would be far more proper and agreeable with

Nature, if we could salve all with one motion onely, than to introduce two

that are (if you will not call them contrary) opposite; yet do I not censure this

introduction  (of  contrary  motions)  as  impossible;  nor  pretend  I  from  the

denial  thereof,  to  inferre  a  necessary  Demonstration,  but  onely  a  greater

probability, A third confirmation of the same Doctrine. of the other. A third

reason which maketh the Ptolomaique Hypothesis lesse probable is, that it

most  unreasonably  confoundeth  the  order,  which  we  assuredly  see  to  be

amongst  those  Coelestial  Bodies,  the  circumgyration  of  which  is  not

questionable, The greater Orbs make their conversions in greater times. but

most  certain.  And  that  Order  is,  that  according  as  an  Orb  is  greater,  it

finisheth its revolution in a longer time, and the lesser, in shorter. And thus

Saturn describing a greater Circle than all the other Planets, compleateth the

same in thirty yeares: Jupiter finisheth his; that is lesse, in twelve years: Mars

in two: The Moon runneth thorow hers, so much lesse than the rest, in a

Moneth onely. Nor do we lesse sensibly see that of the Medicean Stars, The

times of the Medicean Planets conversions. which is nearest to Jupiter, to

make its revolution in a very short time, that is, in four and forty hours, or

thereabouts, the next to that in three dayes and an half, the third in seven

dayes, and the most remote in sixteen. And this rate holdeth well enough, nor

will it at all alter, whilest we assign the motion of 24 hours to the Terrestrial

Globe, for it to move round its own center in that time; but if you would have

the Earth immoveable, it is necessary, that when you have past from the short

period of the Moon, to the others successively bigger, until you come to that

of Mars in two years, and from thence to that of the bigger Sphere of Jupiter

in twelve years, and  from this to the other yet bigger of Saturn, whose period

is of thirty years, it is necessary, I say, that you passe to another Sphere

incomparably greater still than that, and make this to accomplish an entire

revolution  in  twenty  four  hours.  The  motion  of  24  hours  ascribed  to  the

highest Sphere disorders the period of the inferiour. And this yet is the least

disorder that can follow. For if any one should passe from the Sphere of

Saturn to the Starry Orb, and make it so much bigger than that of Saturn, as

proportion  would  require,  in  respect  of  its  very  slow  motion,  of  many

thousands of years, then it must needs be a Salt much more absurd, to skip

from this to another bigger, and to make it convertible in twenty four hours.

But the motion of the Earth being granted, the order of the periods will beexactly observed, and from the very slow Sphere of Saturn, we come to the

fixed Stars, which are wholly immoveable, The fourth Confirmation. and so

avoid a fourth difficulty, which we must of necessity admit, if the Starry

Sphere be supposed moveable, and that is the immense disparity between the

motions of those stars themselves; Great disparity amongst the motions of the

particular  fixed  stars,  if  their  Sphere  be  moveable.  of  which  some  would

come to move most swiftly in most vast circles, others most slowly in circles

very  small,  according  as  those  or  these  should  be  found  nearer,  or  more

remote from the Poles; which still is accompanied with an inconvenience, as

well because we see those, of whose motion there is no question to be made,

to move all in very immense circles; as also, because it seems to be an act

done with no good consideration, to constitute bodies, that are designed to

move  circularly,  at  immense  distances  from  the  centre,  and  afterwards  to

make them move in very small circles. And not onely the magnitudes of the

circles, and consequently the velocity of the motions of these Stars, shall be

most  different  from  the  circles  and  motions  of  those  others,  The  fifth

Confirmation. but (which shall be the fifth inconvenience) the self-same Stars

shall successively vary its circles and velocities: The motions of the fixed

stars would accelerate and grow slow in divers times, if the starry Sphere

were moueable. For that those, which two thousand years since were in the

Equinoctial,  and  consequently  did  with  their  motion  describe  very  vast

circles,  being  in  our  dayes  many  degrees  distant  from  thence,  must  of

necessity become more slow of motion, and be reduced to move in lesser

circles, and it is not altogether impossible but that a time may come, in which

some of them which in aforetime had continually moved, shall be reduced by

uniting with the Pole, to a state of rest, and then after some time of cessation,

shall return to their motion again; whereas the other Stars, touching whose

motion none stand in doubt, do all describe, as hath been said, the great circle

of their Orb, and in that maintain themselves without any variation. The sixth

Confirmation.  The  absurdity  is  farther  enlarged  (which  let  be  the  sixth

inconvenience) to him that more seriously examineth the thing, in that no

thought  can  comprehend  what  ought  to  be  the  solidity  of  that  immense

Sphere, whose depth so stedfastly  holdeth fast such a multitude of Stars,

which  without  ever  changing  site  among  themselves,  are  with  so  much

concord carried about, with so great disparity of motions. Or else, supposing

the Heavens to be fluid, as we are with more reason to believe, so as that

every Star wandereth to and fro in it, by wayes of its own, what rules shallregulate their motions, and to what purpose, so, as that being beheld from the

Earth,  they  appear  as  if  they  were  made  by  one  onely  Sphere?  It  is  my

opinion,  that  they  might  so  much  more  easily  do  that,  and  in  a  more

commodious manner, by being constituted immoveable, than by being made

errant, by how much more facile it is to number the quarries in the Pavement

of a Piazza, than the rout of boyes which run up and down upon them. The

Seventh  Confirmation.  And  lastly,  which  is  the  seventh  instance,  if  we

attribute the Diurnal Motion to the highest Heaven, it must be constituted of

such a force and efficacy, as to carry along with it the innumerable multitude

of fixed Stars, Bodies all of vast magnitude, and far bigger than the Earth;

and moreover all the Spheres of the Planets; notwithstanding that both these

and those of their own nature move the contrary way. And besides all this, it

must be granted, that also the Element of Fire, and the greater part of the Air,

are likewise forcibly hurried along with the rest, and that the sole little Globe

of the Earth pertinaciously stands still, and unmoved against such an impulse;

a thing, which in my thinking, is very difficult; nor can I see how the Earth, a

pendent body, The Earth a pendent Body, and equilibrated in a fluid Medium

seems unable to resist the rapture of the Diurnal Motion. and equilibrated

upon its centre, exposed indifferently to either motion or rest, and environed

with a liquid ambient, should not yield also as the rest, and be carried about.

But we find none of these obstacles in making the Earth to move; a small

body, and insensible, compared to the Universe, and therefore unable to offer

it any violence.


SAGR.


I find my fancy disturbed with certain conjectures so confusedly sprung from

your  later  discourses;  that,  if  I  would  be  enabled  to  apply  my  self  with

atention to what followeth, I must of necessity attempt whether I can better

methodize them, and gather thence their true construction, if haply any can be

made of them; and peradventure, the proceeding by interrogations may help

me  the  more  easily  to  expresse  my  self.  Therefore  I  demand  first  of

Simplicius, whether he believeth, that divers motions may naturally agree to

one and the same moveable body, or else that it be requisite its natural and

proper motion be onely one.


SIMPL.To  one  single  moveable,  A  single  moveable  hath  but  onely  one  natural

motion, and all the rest are by participation. there can naturally agree but one

sole  motion,  and  no  more;  the  rest  all  happen  accidentally  and  by

participation; like as to him that walketh upon the Deck of a Ship, his proper

motion is that of his walk, his motion by participation that which carrieth him

to his Port, whither he  would never with his walking have arrived, if the Ship

with its motion had not wafted him thither.


SAGR.


Tell me secondly. That motion, which is communicated to any moveable by

participation, whilest it moveth by it self, with another motion different from

the participated, is it necessary, that it do reside in some certain subject by it

self, or else can it subsist in nature alone, without other support.


SIMPL.


Aristotle giveth you an answer to all these questions, Motion cannot be made

without its moveable subject. and tels you, that as of one sole moveable the

motion  is  but  one;  so  of  one  sole  motion  the  moveable  is  but  one;  and

consequently, that without the inherence in its subject, no motion can either

subsist, or be imagined.


SAGR.


I would have you tell me in the third place, whether you beblieve that the

Moon and the other Planets and Coelestial bodies, have their proper motions,

and what they are.


SIMPL.


They have so, and they be those according to which they run through the

Zodiack, the Moon in a Moneth, the Sun in a Year, Mars in two, the Starry

Sphere in those so many thousand. And these are their proper, or natural

motions.


SAGR.But that motion wherewith I see the fixed Stars, and with them all the Planets

go unitedly from East to West, and return round to the East again in twenty

four hours, how doth it agree with them?


SIMPL.


It suiteth with them by participation.


SAGR.


This then resides not in them, and not residing in them, nor being able to

subsist without some subject in which it is resident, it must of force be the

proper and natural motion of some other Sphere.


SIMPL.


For  this  purpose  Astronomers,  and  Philosophers  have  found  another  high

Sphere, above all the rest, without Stars, to which Natural agreeth the Diurnal

Motion; and this they call the Primum mobile; the which carrieth along with

it all the inferiour Spheres, contributing and imparting its motion to them.


SAGR.


But  when,  without  introducing  other  Spheres  unknown  and  hugely  vast,

without other motions or communicated raptures, with leaving to each Sphere

its sole and simple motion, without intermixing contrary motions, but making

all turn one way, as it is necessary that they do, depending all upon one sole

principle,  all  things  proceed  orderly,  and  correspond  with  most  perfect

harmony, why do we reject this Phoenomenon, and give our assent to those

prodigious and laborious conditions?


SIMPL.


The difficulty lyeth in finding out this so natural and expeditous way.


SAGR.


In my judgment this is found. Make the Earth the Primum mobile, that is,

make it turn round its own axis in twenty four hours, and towards the samepoint with all the other Spheres; and without participating this same motion

to any other Planet or Star, all shall have their risings, settings, and in a word,

all their other appearances.


SIMPL.


The  business  is,  to  be  able  to  make  the  Earth  move  without  a  thousand

inconveniences.


SALV.


All the inconveniences shall be removed as fast as you propound them: and

the  things  spoken  hitherto  are  onely  the  primary  and  more  general

inducements which give us to believe that the diurnal conversion may not

altogether without probability be applyed to the Earth, rather than to all the

rest  of  the  Universe:  the  which  inducements  I  impose  not  upon  you  as

inviolable  Axioms,  but  as  hints,  which  carry  with  them  somewhat  of

likelihood. One single experiment, or sound demonstration batereth down all

arguments meerly probable. And in regard I know very well, that one sole

experiment,  or  concludent  demonstration,  produced  on  the  contrary  part,

sufficeth  to  batter  to  the  ground  these  and  a  thousand  other  probable

Arguments; therefore it is not fit to stay here, but proceed forwards and hear

what  Simplicius  answereth,  and  what  greater  probabilities,  or  stronger

arguments he alledgeth on the contrary.


SIMPL.


I will first say something in general upon all these considerations together,

and then I will descend to some particulars. It seems that you universally

bottom all you say upon the greater simplicity and facility of producing the

same effects, whilst you hold, that as to the causing of them, the motion of

the Earth alone, serveth as well as that of all the rest of the World, the Earth

deducted: but as to the operations, you esteem that much easier than this. To

which I reply, that I am also of the same opinion, so long as I regard my own

not onely finite, but feeble power; but having a respect to the strength of the

Mover, which is infinite, its no lesse easie to move the Universe, than the

Earth, yea than a straw. And if his power be infinite, Of an infinite power one

would think a greater part should rather be imploy’d than a lesse. why shouldhe not rather exercise a greater part thereof than a lesse? Therefore, I hold

that your discourse in general is not convincing.


SALV.


If I had at any time said, that the Universe moved not for want of power in

the  Mover,  I  should  have  erred,  and  your  reproof  would  have  been

seasonable; and I grant you, that to an infinite power, it is as easie to move an

hundred thousand, as one. But that which I did say, concerns not the Mover,

but  onely  hath  respect  to  the  Moveables;  and  in  them,  not  onely  to  their

resistance, which doubtlesse is lesser in the Earth, than in the Universe; but to

the many other particulars, but even now considered. As to what you say in

the next place, that of an infinite power it is better to exercise a great part

than a small: I answer,  that of infinite one part is not greater than another,

since  both  are  infinite;  Of  infinity,  one  part  is  no  bigger  than  another,

although  they  are  comparatively  unequal.  nor  can  it  be  said,  that  of  the

infinite number, an hundred thousand is a greater part than two, though that

be fifty thousand times greater than this; and if to the moving of the Universe

there be required a finite power, though very great in comparison of that

which sufficeth to move the Earth onely; yet is there not implied therein a

greater  part  of  the  infinite  power,  nor  is  that  part  lesse  infinite  which

remaineth unimploy’d. So that to apply unto a particular effect, a little more,

or a little lesse power, importeth nothing; besides that the operation of such

vertue, hath not for its bound or end the Diurnal Motion onely; but there are

several other motions in the World, which we know of, and many others there

may be, that are to us unknown. Therefore if we respect the Moveables, and

granting it as out of question, that it is a shorter and easier way to move the

Earth, than the Universe; and moreover, having an eye to the so many other

abreviations, and facilities that onely this way are to be obtained, an infallible

Maxime of Aristotle, which he teacheth us, that, frustra fit per plura, quod

potest fieri per pauciora, rendereth it more probable that the Diurnal Motion

belongs to the Earth alone, than to the Universe, the Earth subducted.


SIMPL.


In reciting that Axiom, you have omitted a small clause, which importeth as

much as all the rest, especially in our case, that is to say, the words aequèbene.  It  is  requisite  therefore  to  examine  whether  this  Hypothesis  doth

equally well satisfie in all particulars, as the other.


SALV.


The knowledg whether both these positions do aequè bene, satisfie, may be

comprehended from the particular examination of the appearances which they

are to satisfie; for hitherto we have discoursed, and will continue to argue ex

hypothesi, namely, supposing, that as to the satisfaction of the appearances,

both the assumptions are equally accomodated. In the Axiome Frustra fit per

plura, &c. the addition of aeque benè, is superfluous. As to the clause which

you  say  was  omitted  by  me,  I  have  more  reason  to  suspect  that  it  was

superfluously inserted by you. For the expression aequè bene, is a relative

that necessarily requireth two terms at least, for a thing cannot have relation

to its self, nor do we say, v. gr. rest to be equally good, as rest. And because,

when we say, that is done in vain by many means, which may be done with

fewer, we mean, that that which is to be done, ought to be the same thing, not

two different ones; and because the same thing cannot be said to be done as

well  as  its  self;  therefore,  the  addition  of  the  Phrase  aequè  bene  is

superfluous, and a relation, that hath but one term onely.


SAGR.


Unlesse you will have the same befal us, as did yesterday, let us return to our

matter in hand; and let Simplicius begin  to produce those difficulties that

seem in his opinion, to thwart this new disposition of the World.


SIMPL.


That disposition is not new, but very old; and that you may see it is so,

Aristotle confuteth it; and his confutations are these: Aristotles Arguments

for the Earths quiessence. ‘First if the Earth moveth either in it self about its

own Centre, or in an Excentrick Circle, it is necessary that that same motion

be violent; for it is not its natural motion, for if it were, each of its parts

would partake thereof; but each of them moveth in a right line towards its

Centre.  It  being  therefore  violent  and  pteternatural,  it  could  never  be

perpetual: But the order of the World is perpetual. Therefore, &c. Secondly,

all the other moveables that move circularly, seem toResti  indietz , which ismeant here of that motion which a bowl makes when is born by its by as to

one side or other, and so hindered in its direct motion.  stay behind, and to

move with more than one motion, the Prmum Mobile excepted: Whence it

would be necessary that the Earth also do move with two motions; and if that

should be so, it would inevitably follow, that mutations should be made in the

Fixed Stars, the which none do perceive; nay without any variation, the same

Stars alwayes rise from towards the same places, and in the same places do

set. Thirdly, the motion of the parts is the same with that of the whole, and

naturally tendeth towards the Centre of the Universe; and for the same cause

rest,  being  arrived  thither.  He  thereupon  moves  the  question  whether  the

motion of the parts hath a tendency to centre of the Universe, or to the centre

of the Earth; and concludeth that it goeth by proper instinct to the centre of

the  Universe,  and  per  accidence  to  that  of  the  Earth;  of  which  point  we

largely discoursed yesterday. He lastly confirmeth the same with a fourth

argument taken from the experiment of grave bodies, which faling from on

high,  descend  perpendicularly  unto  the  Earths  surface;  and  in  the  same

manner Projections shot perpendicularly upwards, do by the same lines return

perpendicularly down again, though they were shot to a very great height. All

which arguments necessarily prove their motion to be towards the Centre of

the Earth, which without moving at all waits for, and receiveth them. He

intimateth  in  the  last  place  that  the  Astronomers  alledg  other  reasons  in

confirmation  of  the  same  conclusions,  I  mean  of  the  Earths  being  in  the

Centre  of  the  Universe,  and  immoveable;  and  instanceth  onely  in  one  of

them, to wit, that all the Phaenomena or appearances that are seen in the

motions of the Stars, perfectly agree with the position of the Earth in the

Centre; which would not be so, were the Earth seated otherwise.’ The rest

produced by Ptolomy and the other Astronomers, I can give you now if you

please, or after you have spoken what you have to say in answer to these of

Aristotle.


SALV.


The arguments which are brought upon this occasion  are of two kinds: Two

kindes of Arguments touching the Earths motion or rest. some have respect to

the accidents Terrestrial, without any relation to the Stars, and others are

taken  from  the  Phaenomena  and  observations  of  things  Coelestial.  The

arguments of Aristotle are for the most part taken from things neer at hand,and he leaveth the others to Astronomers; and therefore it is the best way, if

you like of it, to examine these taken from experiments touching the Earth,

and  then  proceed  to  those  of  the  other  kind.  Arguments  of  Ptolomy  and

Tycho, and other persons, over and above those of Aristotle. And because

Ptolomy, Tycho, and the other Astronomers and Philosophers, besides the

arguments  of  Aristotle  by  them  assumed,  confirmed,  and  made  good,  do

produce certain others; we will put them all together, that so we may not

answer twice to the same, or the like objections. Therefore Simplicius, choose

whether you will recite them your self, or cause me to ease you of this task,

for I am ready to serve you.


SIMPL.


It is better that you quote them, because, as having taken more pains in the

study of them, you can produce them with more readinesse, and in greater

number.


SALV.


All, The first argument taken from grave bodies falling from on high to the

ground. for the strongest reason, alledge that of grave bodies, which falling

downwards from on high, move by a right line, that is perpendicular to the

surface of the Earth, an argument which is held undeniably to prove that the

Earth is immoveable: for in case it should have the diurnal motion, a Tower,

from the top of which a stone is let fall, being carried along by the conversion

of the Earth, in the time that the stone spends in falling, would be transported

many hundred yards Eastward, and so far distant from the Towers foot would

the  stone  come  to  ground.  The  which  effect  they  back  with  another

experiment; Which is confirmed by the experiment of a body let fall from the

round top of a Ship. to wit, by letting a bullet of lead fall from the round top

of a Ship, that lieth at anchor, and observing the mark it makes where it

lights, which they find to be neer theThat is, at the foot of the Mast, upon the

upper deck. partners of the Mast; but if the same bullet be let fall from the

same place when the ship is under sail, it shall light as far from the former

place, as the ship hath run in the time of the leads descent; and this for no

other reason, than because the natural motion of the ball being at liberty is by

a right line towards the centre of the Earth. The second argument taken from

a Projection shot very high. They fortifie this argument with the experimentof a projection shot on high at a very great distance; as for example, a ball

sent  out  of  a  Cannon,  erected  perpendicular  to  the  horizon,  the  which

spendeth  so  much  time  in  ascending  and  falling,  that  in  our  parallel  the

Cannon and we both should be carried by the Earth many miles towards the

East, so that the ball in its return could never come neer the Peece, but would

fall  as  far  West,  The  third  argument  taken  from  the  shots  of  a  Cannon,

towards the East, and towards the West▪ as the Earth had run East. They

againe adde a third, and very evident experiment, scilicet, that shooting a

bullet point blank (or as Gunners say, neither above nor under metal) out of a

Culverin towards the East, and afterwards another,  with the same charge, and

at the same elevation or disport towards the West, the range towards the West

should be very much greater then the other towards the East: for that whil’st

the  ball  goeth  Westward,  and  the  Peece  is  carried  along  by  the  Earth

Eastward, the ball will fall from the Peece as far distant as is the aggregate of

the two motions, one made by it self towards the West, and the other by the

Peece carried about by the Earth towards the East; and on the contrary, from

the range of the ball shot Eastward you are to substract the space the Peece

moved, being carried after it. Now suppose, for example, that the range of the

ball shot West were five miles, and that the Earth in the same parallel and in

the time of the Bals ranging should remove three miles, the Ball in this case

would  fall  eight  miles  distant  from  the  Culverin,  namely,  its  own  five

Westward, and the Culverins three miles Eastward: but the range of the shot

towards the East would be but two miles long, for so much is the remainder,

after you have substracted from the five miles of the range, the three miles

which the Peece had moved towards the same part. But experience sheweth

the Ranges to be equal, therefore the Culverin, and consequently the Earth are

immoveable. This argument is confirmed by two shots towards the South and

towards the North. And the stability of the Earth is no lesse confirmed by two

other shots made North and South; for they would never hit the mark, but the

Ranges  would  be  alwayes  wide,  or  towards  the  West,  by  meanes  of  the

remove the mark would make, being carried along with the Earth towards the

East, whil’st the ball is flying. And it is likewise confirmed by two shots

towards the East, and towards the West. And not onely shots made by the

Meridians, but also those aimed East or West would prove uncertain; for

those  aim’d  East  would  be  too  high,  and  those  directed  West  too  low,

although they were shot point blank, as I said. For the Range of the Ball in

both the shots being made by the Tangent, that is, by a line parallel to theHorizon,  and  being  that  in  the  diurnal  motion,  if  it  be  of  the  Earth,  the

Horizon goeth continually descending towards the East, and rising from the

West (therefore the Oriental Stars seem to rise, and the Occidental to decline)

so that the Oriental mark would descend below the aime, and thereupon the

shot would fly too high, and the ascending of the Western mark would make

the shot aimed that way range too low; so that the Peece would never carry

true towards any point; and for that experience telleth us the contrary, it is

requisite to say, that the Earth is immoveable.


SIMPL.


These are solid reasons, and such as I believe no man can answer.


SALV.


Perhaps they are new to you?


SIMPL.


Really they are; and now I see with how many admirable experiments Nature

is pleased to favour us, wherewith to assist us in the knowledge of the Truth.

Oh! how exactly one  truth agreeth with another, and all conspire to render

each other inexpugnable!


SAGR.


What pity it is that Guns were not used in Aristotles age, he would with help

of them have easily battered down ignorance, and spoke without haesitation

of these mundane points.


SALV.


I am very glad that these reasons are new unto you, that so you may not rest

in the opinion of the major part of Peripateticks, who believe, that if any one

forsakes the Doctrine of Aristotle, it is because they did not understand or

rightly  apprehend  his  demonstrations.  Copernicus  his  followers  are  not

moved through ignorance of the arguments on the other part. But you may

expect to hear of other Novelties, and you shall see the followers of this newSysteme produce against themselves observations, experiences, and reasons

of farre greater force than those alledged by Aristotle, Ptolomy, and other

opposers  of  the  same  conclusions,  and  by  this  means  you  shall  come  to

ascertain your self that they were not induced through want of knowledge or

expetience to follow that opinion.


SAGR.


It is requisite that upon this occasion I relate unto you some accidents that

befell me, so soon as I first began to hear speak of this new doctrine. Being

very young, and having scarcely finished my course of Philosophy, which I

left off, as being set upon other employments, there chanced to come into

these parts a certain Foreigner of Rostock, whose name, as I remember, was

Christianus Vurstitius, Christianus Vurstitius read certain Lectures touching

the  opinion  of  Copernicus,  &  what  ensued  thereupon.  a  follower  of

Copernicus, who in an Academy made two or three Lectures upon this point,

to whom many flock’t as Auditors; but I thinking they went more for the

novelty  of  the  subject  than  otherwise,  did  not  go  to  hear  him:  for  I  had

concluded with my self that that opinion could be no other than a solemn

madnesse. And questioning some of those who had been there, I perceived

they all made a jest thereof, execpt one, who told me that the businesse was

not altogether to be laugh’t at, and because this man was reputed by me to be

very intelligent and wary, I repented that I was not there, and began from that

time forward as oft as I met with any one of the Copernican perswasion, to

demand of them, if they had been alwayes of the same judgment; and of as

many as I examined, I found not so much as one, who told me not that he had

been a long time of the contrary opinion, but to have changed it for this, as

convinced by the strength of the reasons proving the same: and afterwards

questioning them, one by one, to see whether they were well possest of the

reasons of the other side, I found them all to be very ready and perfect in

them; The followers of Copernicus were all first against that opinion, but the

Sectators of Aristotle & Ptolomy, were never of the other side. so that I could

not truly say, that they had took up this opinion out of ignorance, vanity, or to

shew  the  acutenesse  of  their  wits.  On  the  contrary,  of  as  many  of  the

Peripateticks and Ptolomeans as I have asked (and out of curiosity I have

talked with many) what pains they had taken in the Book of Copernicus, I

found very  few that had so much as superficially perused it; but of thosewhom, I thought, had understood the same, not one; and moreover, I have

enquired amongst the followers of the Peripatetick Doctrine, if ever any of

them  had  held  the  contrary  opinion,  and  likewise  found  none  that  had.

Whereupon considering that there was no man who followed the opinion of

Copernicus, that had not been first on the contrary side, and that was not very

well  acquainted  with  the  reasons  of  Aristotle  and  Ptolomy;  and,  on  the

contrary, that there is not one of the followers of Ptolomy that had ever been

of the judgment of Copernicus, and had left that, to imbrace this of Aristotle,

considering, I say, these things, I began to think, that one, who leaveth an

opinion imbued with his milk, and followed by very many, to take up another

owned by very few, and denied by all the Schools, and that really seems a

very great Paradox, must needs have been moved, not to say forced, by more

powerful reasons. For this cause, I am become very curious to dive, as they

say, into the bottom of this businesse, and account it my great good fortune

that I have met you two, from whom I may without any trouble, hear all that

hath been, and, haply, can be said on this argument, assuring my self that the

strength of your reasons will resolve all scruples, and bring me to a certainty

in this subject.


SIMPL.


But its possible your opinion and hopes may be disappointed, and that you

may find your selves more at a losse in the end than you was at first.


SAGR.


I am very confident that this can in no wise befal me.


SIMPL.


And why not? I have a manifest example in my self, that the farther I go, the

more I am confounded.


SAGR.


This is a sign that those reasons that hitherto seemed concluding unto you,

and assured you in the truth of your opinion, begin to change countenance in

your mind, and to let you by degrees, if not imbrace, at least look towards thecontrary tenent; but I, that have been hitherto indifferent, do greatly hope to

acquire rest and satisfaction by our future discourses, and you will not deny

but I may, if you please but to hear what perswadeth me to this expectation.


SIMPL.


I will gladly hearken to the same, and should be no lesse glad that the like

effect might be wrought in me.


SAGR.


Favour me therefore with answering to what I shall ask you. And first, tell

me, Simplicius, is not the conclusion, which we seek the truth of, Whether we

ought  to  hold  with  Aristotle  and  Ptolomy,  that  the  Earth  onely  abiding

without motion in the Centre of the Universe, the Coelestial bodies all move,

or else, Whether the Starry Sphere and the Sun standing still in the Centre, 

the Earth is without the same, and owner of all those motions that in our

seeming belong to the Sun and fixed Stars?


SIMPL.


These are the conclusions which are in dispute.


SAGR.


And these two conclusions, are they not of such a nature, that one of them

must necessarily be true, and the other false?


SIMPL.


They are so. We are in a Dilemma, one part of which must of necessity be

true,  and  the  other  untrue;  for  between  Motion  and  Rest,  which  are

contradictories, there cannot be instanced a third, so as that one cannot say

the Earth moves not, nor stands still; the Sun and Stars do not move, and yet

stand not still.


SAGR.The Earth, the Sun, and Stars, what things are they in nature? are they petite

things not worth our notice, or grand and worthy of consideration?


SIMPL.


They  are  principal,  noble,  integral  bodies  of  the  Universe,  most  vast  and

considerable.


SAGR.


And Motion, and Rest, what accidents are they in Nature?


SIMPL.


So great and principal, Motion and rest principal accidents in nature. that

Nature her self is defined by them.


SAGR.


So  that  moving  eternally,  and  the  being  wholly  immoveable  are  two

conditions very considerable in Nature, and indicate very great diversity; and

especially when ascribed to the principal bodies of the Universe, from which

can ensue none but very different events.


SIMPL.


Yea doubtlesse.


SAGR.


Now answer me to another point. Do you believe that in Logick, Rhethorick,

the Physicks, Metaphysicks, Mathematicks, and finally, in the universa ity of

Disputations there are arguments sufficient to perswade and demonstrate to a

person the fallacious, no lesse then the true conclusions?


SIMPL.


No Sir; Vntruths cannot be demonstrated, as Truths are. rather I am very

confident and certain, that for the proving of a true and necessary conclusion,there are in nature not onely one, For proof of true conclusions, many solid

arguments may be produced, but to prove a falsity, none. but many very

powerfull demonstrations: and that one may discusse and handle the same

divers and sundry wayes, without ever falling into any absurdity; and that the

more  any  Sophist  would  disturb  and  muddy  it,  the  more  clear  would  its

certainty appear: And that on the contrary to make a false position passe for

true, and to perswade the belief thereof, there cannot be any thing produced

but fallacies, Sophisms, Paralogismes, Equivocations, and Discourses vain,

inconsistant, and full of repugnances and contradictions.


SAGR.


Now if eternal motion, and eternal rest be so principal accidents of Nature,

and  so  different,  that  there  can  depend  on  them  only  most  different

consequences, and especially when  applyed to the Sun, and to the Earth, so

vast and famous bodies of the Universe; and it being, moreover, impossible,

that one of two contradictory Propositions, should not be true, and the other

false; and that for proof of the false one, any thing can be produced but

fallacies; but the true one being perswadeable by all kind of concluding and

demonstrative arguments, why should you think that he, of you two, who

shall be so fortunate as to maintain the true Proposition ought not to perswade

me? You must suppose me to be of a stupid wit, perverse judgment, dull

mind  and  intellect,  and  of  a  blind  reason,  that  I  should  not  be  able  to

distinguish light from darknesse, jewels from coals, or truth from falshood.


SIMPL.


I tell you now, and have told you upon other occasions, that the best Master

to teach us how to discern Sophismes, Paralogismes, and other fallacies, was

Aristotle, who in this particular can never be deceived.


SAGR.


You insist upon Aristotle, who cannot speak. Yet I tell you, Aristotle would

either refute his adversaries arguments, or would alter his opinion. that if

Aristotle were here, he would either yield himself to be perswaded by us, or

refuting our arguments, convince us by better of his own. And you your self,

when you heard the experiments of the Suns related, did you not acknowledgand admire them, and confesse them more concludent than those of Aristotle?

Yet neverthelesse I cannot perceive that Salviatus, who hath produced them,

examined them, and with exquisite care scan’d them, doth confesse himself

perswaded by them; no nor by others of greater force, which he intimated that

he was about to give us an account of. And I know not on what grounds you

should  censure  Nature,  as  one  that  for  many  Ages  hath  been  lazie,  and

forgetful to produce speculative wits; and that knoweth not how to make

more such, unlesse they be such kind of men as slavishly giving up their

judgments  to  Aristotle,  do  understand  with  his  brain,  and  resent  with  his

senses. But let us hear the residue of those reasons which favour his opinion,

that we may thereupon proceed to speak to them; comparing and weighing

them in the ballance of impartiality.


SALV.


Before  I  proceed  any  farther,  I  must  tell  Sagredus,  that  in  these  our

Disputations, I personate the Copernican, and imitate him, as if I were his

Zany; but what hath been effected in my private thoughts by these arguments

which I seem to alledg in his favour, I would not have you to judg by what I

say, whil’st I am in the heat of acting my part in the Fable; but after I have

laid by my disguise, for you may chance to find me different from what you

see me upon the Stage. Now let us go on.


Ptolomy and his followers produce another experiment like to that of the

Projections, An argument taken from the Clouds, and from Birds. and it is of

things that being separated  from the Earth, continue a good space of time in

the Air, such as are the Clouds, Birds of flight; and as of them it cannot be

said that they are rapt or transparted by the Earth, having no adhesion thereto,

it seems not possible, that they should be able to keep pace with the velocity

thereof; nay it should rather seem to us, that they all swiftly move towards the

West: And if being carried about by the Earth, passe our parallel in twenty

four hours, which yet is at least sixteen thousand miles, how can Birds follow

such a course or revolution? Whereas on the contrary, we see them fly as well

towards the East, as towards the West, An argument taken from the air which

we feel to beat upon us when we run a Horse at full speed. or any other part,

without any sensible difference. Moreover, if when we run a Horse at his

speed, we feel the air beat vehemently against our face, what an impetuousblast ought we perpetually to feel from the East, being carried with so rapid a

course against the wind? and yet no such effect is perceived. Take another

very  ingenious  argument  inferred  from  the  following  experiment.  An

argument taken from the whirling of circular motion, which hath a faculty to

extrude  and  dissipate.  The  circular  motion  hath  a  faculty  to  extrude  and

dissipate from its Centre the parts of the moving body, whensoever either the

motion is not very slow, or those parts are not very well fastened together;

and therefore, if v. g. we should turn one of those great wheels very fast

about, wherein one or more men walking, crane up very great weights, as the

huge  massie  stone,  used  by  the  Callander  for  pressing  of  Cloaths;  or  the

fraighted Barks which being haled on shore, are hoisted out of one river into

another; in case the parts of that same Wheel so swiftly turn’d round, be not

very well joyn’d and pin’d together, they would all be shattered to pieces;

and though many stones or other ponderous substances, should be very fast

bound to its outward Rimme, yet could they not resist the impetuosity, which

with  great  violence  would  hurl  them  every  way  far  from  the  Wheel,  and

consequently from its Centre. So that if the Earth did move with such and so

much greater velocity, what gravity, what tenacity of lime or plaister would

keep together Stones, Buildings, and whole Cities, that they should not be

tost into the Air by so precipitous a motion? And both men and beasts, which

are not fastened to the Earth, how could they resist so great an impetus?

Whereas, on the other side, we see both these, and far lesse resistances of

pebles, sands, leaves rest quietly on the Earth, and to return to it in falling,

though  with  a  very  slow  motion.  See  here,  Simplicius,  the  most  potent

arguments, taken, to so speak, from things Terrestrial; there remain those of

the other kind, namely, such as have relation to the appearances of Heaven,

which reasons, to confesse the truth, tend more to prove the Earth to be in the

centre of the Universe, and consequently, to deprive it of the annual motion

about the same, ascribed unto it  by Copernicus. Which arguments, as being

of somewhat a different nature, may be produced, after we have examined the

strength of these already propounded.


SAGR.


What  say  you  Simplicius?  do  you  think  that  Salviatus  is  Master  of,  and

knoweth how to unfold the Ptolomean and Aristotelian arguments? Or do you

think that any Peripatetick is equally verst in the Copernican demonstrations?SIMPL.


Were it not for the high esteem, that the past discourses have begot in me of

the learning of Salviatus, and of the acutenesse of Sagredus, I would by their

good leave have gone my way without staying for their answers; it seeming

to  me  a  thing  impossible,  that  so  palpable  experiments  should  be

contradicted; and would, without hearing them farther, confirm my self in my

old perswasion; for though I should be made to see that it was erroneous, its

being upheld by so many probable reasons, would render it excuseable. And

if these are fallacies, what true demonstrations were ever so fair?


SAGR.


Yet its good that we hear the responsions of Salviatus; which if they be true,

must of necessity be more fair, and that by infinite degrees; and those must be

deformed, yea most deformed, if the Metaphysical Axiome hold, True and

fair are one and the same, as also false and deformed. That true and fair are

one and the same thing; as also false and deformed. Therefore Salviatus let’s

no longer lose time.


SALV.


The first Argument alledged by Simplicius, if I well remember it, was this.

The Earth cannot move circularly, because such motion would be violent to

the  same,  and  therefore  not  perpetual:  that  it  is  violent,  the  reason  was:

Because, that had it been natural, its parts would likewise naturally move

round, which is impossible, for that it is natural for the parts thereof to move

with a right motion downwards. To this my reply is, that I could gladly wish,

The  answer  t    Aristotles  first  argument.  that  Aristotle  had  more  cleerly

exprest himself, where he said; That its parts would likewise move circularly;

for this moving circularly is to be understood two wayes, one is, that every

particle or atome separated from its Whole would move circularly about its

particular centre, describing its small Circulets; the other is, that the whole

Globe moving about its centre in twenty four hours, the parts also would turn

about the same centre in four and twenty hours. The first would be no lesse

an impertinency, than if one should say, that every part of the circumference

of a Circle ought to be a Circle; or because that the Earth is Spherical, that

therefore  every  part  thereof  be  a  Globe,  for  so  doth  the  Axiome  require:Eadem est ratio totius, & partium. But if he took it in the other sense, to wit,

that the parts in imitation of the Whole should move naturally round the

Centre of the whole Globe in twenty four hours, I say, that they do so; and it

concerns you,  instead of Aristotle, to prove that they do not.


SIMPL.


This is proved by Aristotle in the same place, when he saith, that the natural

motion  of  the  parts  is  the  right  motion  downwards  to  the  centre  of  the

Universe; so that the circular motion cannot naturally agree therewith.


SALV.


But do not you see, that those very words carry in them a confutation of this

solution?


SIMPL.


How? and where?


SALV.


Doth not he say that the circular motion of the Earth would be violent? and

therefore not eternal? and that this is absurd, for that the order of the World is

eternal?


SIMPL.


He saith so.


SALV.


But if that which is violent cannot be eternal, That which is violent, cannot be

eternal,  and  that  which  cannot  be  eternal,  cannot  be  natural.  then  by

conversion, that which cannot be eternal, cannot be natural: but the motion of

the Earth downwards cannot be otherwise eternal; therefore much lesse can it

be natural: nor can any other motion be natural to it, save onely that which is

eternal. But if we make the Earth move with a circular motion, this may be

eternal to it, and to its parts, and therefore natural.SIMPL.


The right motion is most natural to the parts of the Earth, and is to them

eternal; nor shall it ever happen that they move not with a right motion;

alwayes provided that the impediments be removed.


SALV.


You equivocate Simplicius; and I will try to free you from the equivoke. Tell

me, therefore, do you think that a Ship which should sail from the Strait of

Gibralter towards Palestina can eternally move towards that Coast? keeping

alwayes an equal course?


SIMPL.


No doubtlesse.


SALV.


And why not?


SIMPL.


Because  that  Voyage  is  bounded  and  terminated  between  the  Herculean

Pillars, and the shore of the Holy-land; and the distance being limited, it is

past in a finite time, unlesse one by returning back should with a contrary

motion begin the same Voyage anew; but this would be an interrupted and no

continued motion.


SALV.


Very true. But the Navigation from the Strait of Magalanes by the Pacifick

Ocean, the Moluccha’s, the Cape di buona Speranza, and from thence by the

same Strait, and then again by the Pacifick Ocean, &c. do you believe that it

may be perpetuated?


SIMPL.It may; for this being a circumgyration, which returneth about its self, with

infinite replications, it may be perpetuated without any interruption.


SALV.


A Ship then may in this Voyage continue sailing eternally.


SIMPL.


It  may,  in  case  the  Ship  were  incorruptible,  but  the  Ship  decaying,  the

Navigation must of necessity come to an end.


SALV.


But in the Mediterrane, though the Vessel were incorruptible, yet could she

not sail perpetually towards Palestina, that Voyage being determined. Two

things  requisite  to  the  end  a  motion  may  perpetuate  it  self;  an  unlimited

space, and an incorruptible moveable. Two things then are required, to the

end a moveable may without intermission move perpetually; the one is, that

the motion may of its own nature be indeterminate and infinite; the other, that

the moveable be likewise incorruptible and eternal.


SIMPL.


All this is necessary.


SALV.


Therefore  you  may  see  how  of  your  own  accord  you  have  confessed  it

impossible that any moveable should move eternally in a right line, Right

motion cannot be eternal, and consequently cannot be natural to the Earth. in

regard that right motion, whether it be upwards, or downwards, is by you

your self bounded by the circumference and centre; so that if a Moveable, as

suppose the Earth be eternal, yet forasmuch as the right motion is not of its

own nature eternall, but mostTerminatissimo. terminate, it cannot naturally

suit with the Earth. Nay, as was saidBy this expression he every where means

the  preceding  Dialogue,  or  Giornata.  yesterday,  Aristotle  himself  is

constrained to make the Terrestrial Globe eternally immoveable. When againyou  say,  that  the  parts  of  the  Earth  evermore  move  downwards,  all

impediments being removed, you egregiously equivocate; for then, on the

other side they must be impeded, contraried, and forced, if you would have

them  move;  for,  when  they  are  once  fallen  to  the  ground,  they  must  be

violently thrown upwards, that they may a second time fall; and as to the

impediments, these only hinder its arrival at the centre; but if there were a

Well, that did passe thorow and beyond the centre, yet would not a cold of

Earth passe beyond it, unlesse inasmuch as being transported by its impetus,

it should passe the same to return thither again, and in the end there to rest.

As therefore to the defending, that the motion by a right line doth or can

agree naturally neither to the Earth, nor to any other moveable, whil’st the

Universe retaineth its perfect order, I would have you take no further paines

about it, but (unlesse you will grant them the circular motion) your best way

will be to defend and maintain their immobility.


SIMPL.


As to their immoveablenesse, the arguments of Aristotle, and moreover those

alledged by your self seem in my opinion necessarily to conclude the same,

as yet; and I conceive it will be a hard matter to refute them.


SALV.


Come we therefore to the second Argument, which was, That those bodies,

The  answer  to  the  second  argument.  which  we  are  assured  do  move

circularly, have more than one motion, unlesse it be the Primum Mobile; and

therefore, if the Earth did move circularly, it ought to have two motions; from

which alterations would follow in the rising and setting of the Fixed Stars:

Which effect is not perceived to ensue.  Therefore, &c. The most proper and

genuine answer to this Allegation is contained in the Argument it self; and

even Aristotle puts it in our mouths, which it is impossible, Simplicius, that

you should not have seen.


SIMPL.


I neither have seen it, nor do I yet apprehend it.


SALV.This cannot be, sure, the thing is so very plain.


SIMPL.


I will with your leave, cast an eye upon the Text.


SAGR.


We will command the Text to be brought forthwith.


SIMPL.


I alwayes carry it about with me: See here it is, and I know the place perfectly

well, which is in lib. 2. De Coelo, ca. Here it is, Text 97. Preterea omnia,

quae feruntur latione circulari subdeficere videntur, ac moveri pluribus una

latione,  praeter  primam  Sphaeram;  quare  &  Terram  necessariam  est,  sive

circa  medium,  sive  in  medio  posita  feratur,  duabus  moveri  lationibus.  Si

autem  hoc  acciderit,  necessariam  est  fieri  mutationes,  ac  conversiones

fixorum  astrorum.  Hoc  autem  non  videtur  fieri,  sed  semper  eadem,  apud

eadem loca ipsius, & oriuntur, & occidunt. [In English thus: ] Furthermore all

that are carried with circular motion, seem toSubdeficere. foreslow, and to

move with more than one motion, except the first Sphere; wherefore it is

necessary that the Earth move with two motions, whether it be carried about

theOr Centre. middle, or placed in the middle. But if it be so, there would of

necessity be alterations and conversions made amongst the fixed Stars. But

no such thing is seen to be done, but the same Star doth alwayes rise and set

in  the  same  place.  In  all  this  I  find  not  any  falacy,  and  my  thinks  the

argument is very forcible.


SALV.


And this new reading of the place hath confirmed me in the fallacy of the

Sillogisme, and moreover, discovered another falsity. Therefore observe. The

Positions, or if you will, Conclusions, which Aristotle endeavours to oppose,

are two; one is that of those, who placing the Earth in the midst of the World,

do make it move in it self about its own centre. The other is of those, who

constituting it far from the middle, do make it revolve with a circular motion

about the middle of the Universe. And both these Positions he conjointlyimpugneth with one and the same argument. Now I affirm that he is out in

both the one and the other impugnation; and that his error against the first

Position  is  an  Equivoke  or  Paralogisme;  Aristotles  argument  against  the

Earth  motion, is defective in two things and his mistake touching the second

is  a  false  consequence.  Let  us  begin  with  the  first  Assertion,  which

constituteth the Earth in the midst of the World, and maketh it move in it self

about its own centre; and let us confront it with the objection of Aristotle;

saying, All moveables, that move circularly, seem toThe same word which a

little a ve I tendred stay behind, as a bowle when it meets with ul s. foreslow,

and  more  with  more  than  one  Byas,  except  the  first  Sphere  (that  is  the

primum    mobile)  therefore  the  Earth  moving  about  its  own  centre,  being

placed in the middle, must of necessity have two byasse, and foreslow. But if

this were so, it would follow, that there should be a variation in the rising and

setting of the fixed Stars, which we do not perceive to be done: Therefore the

Earth doth not move, &c. Here is the Paralogisme, and to discover it, I will

argue with Aristotle in this manner. Thou saist, oh Aristotle, that the Earth

placed in the middle of the World, cannot move in it self (i. e. upon its own

axis) for then it would be requisite to allow it two byasses; so that, if it should

not be necessary to allow it more than one Byas onely, thou wouldest not

then hold it impossible for it to move onely with that one; for thou would’st

unnecessarily have confined the impossibility to the plurality of byasses, if in

case it had no more but one, yet it could not move with that. And because that

of all the moveables in the World, thou makest but one alone to move with

one sole byas; and all the rest with more than one; and this same moveable

thou affirmest to be the first Sphere, namely, that by which all the fixed and

erratick Stars seem harmoniously to move from East to West, if in case the

Earth may be that first Sphere, that by moving with one byas onely, may

make the Stars appear to move from East to West, thou wilt not deny them it:

But he that affirmeth, that the Earth being placed in the midst of the World,

moveth about its own Axis, ascribes unto it no other motion, save that by

which all the Stars appear to move from East to West; and so it cometh to be

that first Sphere, which thou thy self acknowledgest to move with but one

byas onely. It is therefore necessary, oh Aristotle, if thou wilt conclude any

thing, that thou demonstrate, that the Earth being placed in the midst of the

World, cannot move with so much as one byas onely; or else, that much lesse

can the first Sphere have one sole motion; for otherwise thou doest in thy

very Sillogisme both commit the falacy, and detect it, denying, and at thatvery  time  proving  the  same  thing.  I  come  now  to  the  second  Position,

namely, of those who placing the Earth far from the midst of the Universe,

make it moveable about the same; that is, make it a Planet and erratick Star;

against which the argument is directed, and as to form is concludent, but

faileth in matter. For it being granted, that the Earth doth in that manner

move,  and  that  with  two  byasses,  yet  doth  it  not  necessarily  follow  that

though it were so, it should make alterations in the risings and settings of the

fixed Stars, as I shall in its proper place declare. And here I could gladly

excuse Aristotle; rather I could highly applaud him for having light upon the

most  subtil  argument  that  could  be  produced  against  the  Copernican

Hypothesis; and if the objection be ingenious,  and to outward appearance

most powerful, you may see how much more acute and ingenious the solution

must be, and not to be found by a wit lesse piercing than that of Copernicus;

and again from the difficulty in understanding it, you may argue the so much

greater difficulty in finding it. But let us for the present suspend our answer,

which you shall understand in due time and place, after we have repeated the

objection of Aristotle, and that in his favour, much strengthened. Now passe

we to Aristotles third Argument, The answer to the third argument. touching

which we need give no farther reply, it having been sufficiently answered

betwixt the discourses of yesterday and to day: In as much as he urgeth, that

the motion of grave bodies is naturally by a right line to the centre; and then

enquireth, whether to the centre of the Earth, or to that of the Universe, and

concludeth  that  they  tend  naturally  to  the  centre  of  the  Universe,  but

accidentally to that of the Earth. Therefore we may proceed to the fourth, The

answer to the fourth argument. upon which its requisite that we stay some

time, by reason it is founded upon that experiment, from whence the greater

part  of  the  remaining  arguments  derive  all  their  strength.  Aristotle  saith

therefore, that it is a most convincing argument of the Earths immobility, to

see  that  projections  thrown  or  shot  upright,  return  perpendicularly  by  the

same line unto the same place from whence they were shot or thrown. And

this holdeth true, although the motion be of a very great height; which could

never come to passe, did the Earth move: for in the time that the projected

body is moving upwards and downwards in a state of separation from the

Earth, the place from whence the motion of the projection began, would be

past, by means of the Earths revolution, a great way towards the East, and

look how great that space was, so far from that place would the projected

body in its descent come to the ground. So that hither may be referred theargument taken from a bullet shot from a Canon directly upwards; as also that

other used by Aristotle and Ptolomy, of the grave bodies that falling from on

high, are observed to descend by a direct and perpendicular line to the surface

of  the  Earth.  Now  that  I  may  begin  to  unite  these  knots,  I  demand  of

Simplicius that in case one should deny to Ptolomy and Aristotle that weights

in falling freely from on high, descend by a right and perpendicular line, that

is, directly to the centre, what means he would use to prove it?


SIMPL.


The means of the senses; the which assureth us, that that Tower or other

altitude, is upright and perpendicular, and sheweth us that that stone, or other

grave body, doth slide along the Wall, without inclining a hairs breadth to

one side or another, and light at the foot thereof just under the place from

whence it was let fall.


SALV.


But  if  it  should  happen  that  the  Terrestrial  Globe  did  move  round,  and

consequently carry the Tower also along with it, and that the stone did then

also grate and slide along the side of the Tower, what must its motion be

then?


SIMPL.


In this case we may rather say its motions: for it would have one wherewith

to descend from the top of the Tower to the bottom, and should necessarily

have another to follow the course of the said Tower.


SALV.


So that its motion should be compounded of two, to wit, of that wherewith it

measureth  the  Tower,  and  of  that  other  wherewith  it  followeth  the  same:

From  which  composition  would  follow,  that  the  stone  would  no  longer

describe  that  simple  right  and  perpendicular  line,  but  one  transverse,  and

perhaps not streight.


SIMPL.I can say nothing of its non-rectitude, but this I know very well, that it would

of necessity be transverse, and different from the other directly perpendicular,

which it doth describe, the Earth standing still.


SALV.


You see then, that upon the meer observing the falling stone to glide along

the  Tower,  you  cannot  certainly  affirm  that  it  describeth  a  line  which  is

streight and perpendicular, unless you first suppose that the Earth standeth

still.


SIMPL.


True; for if the Earth should move, the stones motion would be transverse,

and not perpendicular.


SALV.


Behold  then  the  Paralogism  of  Aristotle  and  Ptolomey  to  be  evident  and

manifest, Th  Paralogism of Aristotle and Ptolomey in supposing that for

known, which is in question. and discovered by you your self, wherein that is

supposed for known, which is intended to be demonstrated.


SIMPL.


How  can  that  be?  To  me  it  appeareth  that  the  Syllogism  is  rightly

demonstrated without petitionem principii.


SALV.


You  shall  see  how  it  is;  answer  me  a  little.  Doth  he  not  lay  down  the

conclusion as unknown?


SIMPL.


Unknown; why otherwise the demonstrating it would be superfluous.


SALV.But the middle term, ought not that to be known?


SIMPL.


Its necessary that it should; for otherwise it would be a proving ignotum per

aequè ignotum.


SALV.


Our conclusion which is to be proved, and which is unknown, is it not the

stability of the Earth?


SIMPL.


It is the same.


SALV.


The  middle  term,  which  ought  to  be  known,  is  it  not  the  streight  and

perpendicular descent of the stone?


SIMPL.


It is so.


SALV.


But was it not just now concluded, that we can have no certain knowledg

whether that same shall be direct and perpendicular,  unless we first know

that the Earth stands still? Therefore in your Syllogism the certainty of the

middle term is assumed from the uncertainty of the conclusion. You may see

then, what and how great the Paralogism is.


SAGR.


I would, in favour of Simplicius, defend Aristotle if it were possible, or at

least better satisfie my self concerning the strength of your illation. You say,

that the seeing the stone rake along the Tower, is not sufficient to assure us,

that its motion is perpendicular (which is the middle term of the Syllogism)unless it be presupposed, that the Earth standeth still, which is the conclusion

to be proved: For that if the Tower did move together with the Earth, and the

stone did slide along the same, the motion of the stone would be transverse,

and not perpendicular. But I shall answer, that should the Tower move, it

would be impossible that the stone should fail gliding along the side of it; and

therefore from its falling in that manner the stability of the Earth is inferred.


SIMPL.


It is so; for if you would have the stone in descending to grate upon the

Tower, though it were carried round by the Earth, you must allow the stone

two natural motions, to wit, the straight motion towards the Centre, and the

circular about the Centre, the which is impossible.


SALV.


Aristotles  defense  then  consisteth  in  the  impossibilitie,  or  at  least  in  his

esteeming it an impossibility, that the stone should move with a motion mixt

of right and circular: for if he did not hold it impossible that the stone could

move to the Centre, and about the Centre at once, he must have understood,

that it might come to pass that the cadent stone might in its descent, race the

Tower as well when it moved as when it stood still; and consequently he

must  have  perceived,  that  from  this  grating  nothing  could  be  inferred

touching the mobility or immobility of the Earth. But this doth not any way

excuse Aristotle; aswell because he ought to have exprest it, if he had had

such a conceit, it being so material a part of his Argument; as also because it

can neither be said that such an effect is impossible, nor that Aristotle did

esteem it so. The first cannot be affirmed, for that by and by I shall shew that

it  is  not  onely  possible,  but  necessary:  nor  much  less  can  the  second  be

averred, Aristotle admitteth that the Fire moveth directly upwards by nature,

and round abent by participation. for that Aristotle himself granteth fire to

move naturally upwards in a right line, and to move about with the diurnal

motion, imparted by Heaven to the whole Element of Fire, and the greater

part of the Air: If therefore he held it not impossible to mix the right motion

upwards,  with  the  circular  communicated  to  the  Fire  and  Air  from  the

concave of the Moon, much less ought he to account impossible the mixture

of the right motion downwards of the stone, with the  circular which wepresuppose natural to the whole Terrestrial Globe, of which the stone is a

part.


SIMPL.


I see no such thing: for if the element of Fire revolve round together with the

Air, it is a very easie, yea a necessary thing, that a spark of fire which from

the Earth mounts upwards, in passing thorow the moving air, should receive

the same motion, being a body so thin, light, and easie to be moved: but that a

very heavy stone, or a Canon bullet, that descendeth from on high, and that is

at liberty to move whither it will, should suffer it self to be transported either

by the air or any other thing, is altogether incredible. Besides that, we have

the Experiment, which is so proper to our purpose, of the stone let fall from

the round top of the Mast of a ship, which when the ship lyeth still, falleth at

the Partners of the Mast; but when the ship saileth, falls so far distant from

that  place,  by  how  far  the  ship  in  the  time  of  the  stones  falling  had  run

forward; which will not be a few fathoms, when the ships course is swift.


SALV.


There is a great disparity between the case of the Ship and that of the Earth,

The disparity between the fall of a stone from the round top of a ship, and

from the top of a tower. if the Terrestrial Globe be supposed to have a diurnal

motion. For it is a thing very manifest, that the motion of the Ship, as it is not

natural to it, so the motion of all those things that are in it is accidental,

whence it is no wonder that the stone which was retained in the round top,

being left at liberty, descendeth downwards without any obligation to follow

the  motion  of  the  Ship.  But  the  diurnal  conversion  is  ascribed  to  the

Terrestrial Globe for its proper and natural motion, and consequently, it is so

to  all  the  parts  of  the  said  Globe;  and,  as  being  impress’d  by  nature,  is

indelible in them; and therefore that stone that is on the top of the Tower hath

an intrinsick inclination of revolving about the Centre of its Whole in twenty

four hours, and this same natrual instinct it exerciseth eternally, be it placed

in any state whatsoever. And to be assured of the truth of this, you have no

more to do but to alter an antiquated impression made in your mind; and to

say, Like as in that I hitherto holding it to be the property of the Terrestrial

Globe to rest immoveable about its Centre, did never doubt or question but

that all whatsoever particles thereof do also naturally remain in the same stateof  rest:  So  it  is  reason,  in  case  the  Terrestrial  Globe  did  move  round  by

natural instinct in twenty four hours, that the intrinsick and natural inclination

of  all  its  parts  should  also  be,  not  to  stand  still,  but  to  follow  the  same

revolution.  And  thus  without  running  into  any  inconvenience,  one  may

conclude, that in regard the motion conferred by the force ofThat you may

not suspect my translation, or wonder what Oars have to do with a ship, you

are to know that the Author intends the Gallies used in the Mediterrane. Oars

on the Ship, and by it on all the things that are contained within her, is not

natural but forreign, it is very reasonable that that stone, it being separated

from  the  ship,    do  reduce  its  self  to  its  natural  disposure,  and  return  to

exercise  its  pure  simple  instinct  given  it  by  nature.  The  part  of  the  Air

inferiour to the higher mountains doth follow the motion of the Earth. To this

I add, that it’s necessary, that at least that part of the Air which is beneath the

greater heights of mountains, should be transported and carried round by the

roughness of the Earths surface; or that, as being mixt with many Vapours,

and  terrene  Exhalations,  it  do  naturally  follow  the  diurnal  motion,  which

occurreth not in the Air about the ship rowed by Oars: So that your arguing

from the ship to the Tower hath not the force of an illation; because that stone

which falls from the round top of the Mast, entereth into a medium, which is

unconcern’d in the motion of the ship: but that which departeth from the top

of the Tower, finds a medium that hath a motion in common with the whole

Terrestrial Globe; so that without being hindred, rather being assisted by the

motion of the air, it may follow the universal course of the Earth.


SIMPL.


I cannot conceive that the air can imprint in a very great stone, The motion of

the Air apt to carry with it light things but not heavy. or in a gross Globe of

Wood  or  Ball  of  Lead,  as  suppose  of  two  hundred  weight,  the  motion

wherewith  its  self  is  moved,  and  which  it  doth  perhaps  communicate  to

feathers, snow, and other very light things: nay, I see that a weight of that

nature,  being  exposed  to  any  the  most  impetuous  wind,  is  not  thereby

removed an inch from its place; now consider with your self whether the air

will carry it along therewith.


SALV.There  is  great  difference  between  your  experiment  and  our  case.  You

introduce the wind blowing against that stone, supposed in a state of rest, and

we expose to the air, which already moveth, the stone which doth also move

with the same velocity; so that the air is not to conferr a new motion upon it,

but onely to maintain, or to speak better, not to hinder the motion already

acquired: you would drive the stone with a strange and preternatural motion,

and we desire to conserve it in its natural. If you would produce a more

pertinent experiment, you should say, that it is observed, if not with the eye

of the forehead, yet with that of the mind, what would evene, if an eagle that

is carried by the course of the wind, should let a stone fall from its talons;

which, in regard that at its being let go, it went along with the wind, and after

it was let fall it entered into a medium that moved with equal velocity, I am

very confident that it would not be seen to descend in its fall perpendicularly,

but  that  following  the  course  of  the  wind,  and  adding  thereto  that  of  its

particular gravity, it would move with a transverse motion.


SIMPL.


But it would first be known how such an experiment may be made; and then

one might judg according to the event. In the mean time the effect of the ship

doth hitherto incline to favour our opinion.


SALV.


Well said you hitherto, for perhaps it may anon change countenance. And

that I may no longer hold you in suspense, tell me, Simplicius, do you really

believe,  that  the  Experiment  of  the  ship  squares  so  very  well  with  our

purpose, as that it ought to be believed, that that which we see happen in it,

ought also to evene in the Terrestrial Globe?


SIMPL.


As  yet  I  am  of  that  opinion;  and  though  you  have  alledged  some  small

disparities, I do not think them of so great moment, as that they should make

me change my judgment.


SALV.I rather desire that you would continue therein, and hold for certain, that the

effect of the Earth would exactly answer that of the ship: provided, that when

it shall appear prejudicial to your cause, you would not be humorous and alter

your thoughts. You may haply say, Forasmuch as when the ship stands still,

the stone falls at the foot of the Mast, and when she is under sail, it lights far

from thence, that therefore by conversion, from the stones falling at the foot

is  argued  the  ships  standing  still,  and  from  its  falling  far  from  thence  is

argued  her  moving;  and  because  that  which  occurreth  to  the  ship,  ought

likewise to befall the Earth: that therefore from the falling of the stone at the

foot of the Tower is necessarily inferred the immobility of the Terrestrial

Globe. Is not this your argumentation?


SIMPL.


It is, and reduced into that conciseness, as that it is become most easie to be

apprehended.


SALV.


Now tell me; if the stone let fall from the Round-top, when the ship is in a

swift course, should fall exactly in the same place of the ship, in which it

falleth when the ship is at anchor, what service would these experiments do

you, in order to the ascertaining whether the vessel doth stand still or move?


SIMPL.


Just none: Like as, for exemple, from the beating of the pulse one cannot

know whether a person be asleep or awake, seeing that the pulse beateth after

the same manner in sleeping as in waking.


SALV.


Very well. Have you ever tryed the experiment of the Ship?


SIMPL.


I have not; but yet I believe that those Authors which alledg the same, have

accurately observed it; besides that the cause of the disparity is so manifestlyknown, that it admits of no question.


SALV.


That it is possible that those Authors instance in it, without having made tryal

of it, you your self are a good testimony, that without having examined it,

alledg it as certain, and in a credulous way remit it to their authority; as it is

now not onely possible, but very probable that they likewise did; I mean, did

remit the same to their Predecessors, without ever arriving at one  that had

made the experiment: for whoever shall examine the same, shall find the

event succeed quite contrary to what hath been written of it: that is, he shall

see the stone fall at all times in the same place of the Ship, whether it stand

still, or move with any whatsoever velocity. The stone falling from the Mast

of a ship lights in the same place, whether the ship doth move or ly still. So

that the same holding true in the Earth, as in the Ship, one cannot from the

stones falling perpendicularly at the foot of the Tower, conclude any thing

touching the motion or rest of the Earth.


SIMPL.


If you should refer me to any other means than to experience, I verily believe

our Disputations would not come to an end in haste; for this seemeth to me a

thing so remote from all humane reason, as that it leaveth not the least place

for credulity or probability.


SALV.


And yet it hath left place in me for both.


SIMPL.


How is this? You have not made an hundred, no nor one proof thereof, and

do you so confidently affirm it for true? I for my part will return to my

incredulity, and to the confidence I had that the Experiment hath been tried

by the principal Authors who made use thereof, and that the event succeeded

as they affirm.


SALV.I am assured that the effect will ensue as I tell you; for so it is necessary that

it should: and I farther add, that you know your self that it cannot fall out

otherwise, however you feign or seem to feign that you know it not. Yet I am

so good at taming of wits, that I will make you confess the same whether you

will or no. But Sagredus stands very mute, and yet, if I mistake not, I saw

him make an offer to speak somewhat.


SAGR.


I had an intent to say something, but to tell you true, I know not what it was;

for the curiosity that you have moved in me, by promising that you would

force Simplicius to discover the knowledg which he would conceal from us,

hath made me to depose all other thoughts: therefore I pray you to make good

your vaunt.


SALV.


Provided that Simplicius do consent to reply to what I shall ask him, I will

not fail to do it.


SIMPL.


I will answer what I know, assured that I shall not be much put to it, for that

of those things which I hold to be false, I think nothing can be known, in

regard that Science respecteth truths and not falshoods.


SALV.


I desire not that you should say or reply, that you know any thing, save that

which you most assuredly know. Therefore tell me; If you had here a flat

superficies as polite as a Looking-glass, and of a substance as hard as steel,

and that it were not paralel to the Horizon, but somewhat inclining, and that

upon it you did put a Ball perfectly spherical, and of a substance grave and 

hard, as suppose of brass; what think you it would do being let go? do not

you believe (as for my part I do) that it would lie still?


SIMPL.If that superficies were inclining?


SALV.


Yes; for so I have already supposed.


SIMPL.


I cannot conceive how it should lie still: nay, I am confident that it would

move towards the declivity with much propensness.


SALV.


Take good heed what you say, Simplicius, for I am confident that it would lie

still in what ever place you should lay it.


SIMPL.


So long as you make use of such suppositions, Salvictus, I shall cease to

wonder if you inferr most absurd conclusions.


SALV.


Are you assured, then, that it would freely move towards the declivity?


SIMPL.


Who doubts it?


SALV.


And this you verily believe, not because I told you so, (for I endeavoured to

perswade you to think the contrary) but of your self, and upon your natural

judgment.


SIMPL.


Now I see what you would be at; you spoke not this as really believing the

same; but to try me, and to wrest matter out of my own mouth wherewith tocondemn me.


SALV.


You are in the right. And how long would that Ball move, and with what

velocity? But take notice that I instanced in a Ball exactly round, and a plain

exquisitely polished, that all external and accidental impediments might be

taken away. And so would I have you remove all obstructions caused by the

Airs resistance to division, and all other casual obstacles, if any other there

can be.


SIMPL.


I very well understand your meaning, and as to your demand, I answer, that

the Ball would continue to move in infinitum, if the inclination of the plain

should so long last, and continually with an accelerating motion; for such is

the  nature  of  ponderous  moveables,  that  vires  acquirant  eundo:  and  the

greater the declivity was, the greater the velocity would be.


SALV.


But if one should require that that Ball should move upwards on that same

superficies, do you believe that it would so do?


SIMPL.


Not spontaneously; but being drawn, or violently thrown, it may.


SALV.


And in case it were thrust forward by the impression of some violent impetus

from without, what and how great would its motion be?


SIMPL.


The motion would go continually decreasing and retarding,  as being contrary

to nature; and would be longer or shorter, according to the greater or less

impulse, and according to the greater or less acclivity.SALV.


It seems, then, that hitherto you have explained to me the accidents of a

moveable upon two different Planes; and that in the inclining plane, the grave

moveable doth spontaneously descend, and goeth continually accelerating,

and  that  to  retain  it  in  rest,  force  must  be  used  therein:  but  that  on  the

ascending plane, there is required a force to thrust it forward, and also to stay

it in rest, and that the motion impressed goeth continually diminishing, till

that in the end it cometh to nothing. You say yet farther, that in both the one

and the other case, there do arise differences from the planes having a greater

or less declivity or acclivity; so that the greater inclination is attended with

the greater velocity; and contrariwise, upon the ascending plane, the same

moveable thrown with the same force, moveth a greater distance, by how

much  the  elevation  is  less.  Now  tell  me,  what  would  befall  the  same

moveable upon a superficies that had neither acclivity nor declivity?


SIMPL.


Here you must give me a little time to consider of an answer. There being no

declivity, there can be no natural inclination to motion: and there being no

acclivity, there can be no resistance to being moved; so that there would arise

an  indifference  between  propension  and  resistance  of  motion;  therefore,

methinks it ought naturally to stand still. But I had forgot my self: it was but

even now that Sagredus gave me to understand that it would so do.


SALV.


So I think, provided one did lay it down gently: but if it had an impetus given

it towards any part, what would follow?


SIMP.


There would follow, that it should move towards that part.


SALV.


But  with  what  kind  of  motion?  with  the  continually  accelerated,  as  in

declining planes; or with the successively retarded, as in those ascending.SIMP.


I cannot tell how to discover any cause of acceleration, or retardation, there

being no declivity or acclivity.


SALV.


Well: but if there be no cause of retardation, much less ought there to be any

cause of rest. How long therefore would you have the moveable to move?


SIMP.


As long as that superficies, neither inclined nor declined shall last.


SALV.


Therefore if such a space were interminate, the motion upon the same would

likewise have no termination, that is, would be perpetual.


SIMP.


I think so, if so be the moveable be of a matter durable.


SALV.


That  hath  been  already  supposed,  when  it  was  said,  that  all  external  and

accidental impediments were removed, and the brittlenesse of the moveable

in this our case, is one of those impediments accidental. Tell me now, what

do you think is the cause that that same Ball moveth spontaneously upon the

inclining plane, and not without violence upon the erected?


SIMP.


Because the inclination of grave bodies is to move towards the centre of the

Earth, and onely by violence upwards towards the circumference; and the

inclining superficies is that which acquireth vicinity to the centre, and the

ascending one, remotenesse.


SALV.Therefore  a  superficies,  which  should  be  neither  declining  nor  ascending,

ought in all its parts to be equally distant from the centre. But is there any

such superficies in the World?


SIMP.


There is no want thereof: Such is our Terrestrial Globe, if it were more even,

and not as it is rough and montainous; but you have that of the Water, at such

time as it is calm and still.


SALV.


Then a ship which moveth in a calm at Sea, is one of those moveables, which

run along one of those superficies that are neither declining nor ascending,

and  therefore  disposed,  in  case  all  obstacles  external  and  accidental  were

removed, to move with the impulse once imparted incessantly and uniformly.


SIMPL.


It should seem to be so.


SALV.


And that stone which is on the round top, doth not it move, as being together

with the ship carried about by the circumference of a Circle about the Centre;

and therefore consequently by a motion in it indelible, if all extern obstacles

be removed? And is not this motion as swift as that of the ship.


SIMPL.


Hitherto all is well. But what followeth?


SALV.


Then in good time recant, I pray you, that your last conclusion, if you are

satisfied with the truth of all the premises.


SIMPL.By  my  last  conclusion,  you  mean,  That  that  same  stone  moving  with  a

motion indelibly impressed upon it, is not to leave, nay rather is to follow the

ship, and in the end to light in the self same place, where it falleth when the

ship lyeth still; and so I also grant it would do, in case there were no outward

impediments that might disturb the stones motion, after its being let go, the

which  impediments  are  two,  the  one  is  the  moveables  inability  to  break

through the air with its meer impetus onely, it being deprived of that of the

strength of Oars, of which it had  been partaker, as part of the ship, at the

time that it was upon the Mast; the other is the new motion of descent, which

also must needs be an hinderance of that other progressive motion.


SALV.


As to the impediment of the Air, I do not deny it you; and if the thing falling

were a light matter, as a feather, or a lock of wool, the retardation would be

very great, but in an heavy stone is very exceeding small. And you your self

but even now did say, that the force of the most impetuous wind sufficeth not

to stir a great stone from its place; now do but consider what the calmer air is

able to do, being encountred by a stone no more swift than the whole ship.

Neverthelesse, as I said before, I do allow you this small effect, that may

depend upon such an impediment; like as I know, that you will grant to me,

that if the air should move with the same velocity that the ship and stone

hath, then the impediment would be nothing at all. As to the other of the

additional motion downwards; in the first place it is manifest, that these two,

I mean the circular, about the centre, and the streight, towards the centre, are

not contraries, or destructive to one another, or incompatible. Because that as

to the moveable, it hath no repugnance at all to such motions, for you your

self  have  already  confest  the  repugnance  to  be  against  the  motion  which

removeth from the centre, and the inclination to be towards the motion which

approacheth  to  the  centre.  Whence  it  doth  of  necessity  follow,  that  the

moveable  hath  neither  repugnance,  nor  propension  to  the  motion  which

neither approacheth, nor goeth from the centre, nor consequently is there any

cause for the diminishing in it the faculty impressed. And forasmuch as the

moving cause is not one alone, which it hath attained by the new operation of

retardation; but that they are two, distinct from each other, of which, the

gravity attends only to the drawing of the moveable towards the centre, andthe vertue impress’t to the conducting it about the centre, there remaineth no

occasion of impediment.


SIMPL.


Your argumentation, to give you your due, is very probable; but in reality it is

invelloped with certain intricacies, that are not easie to be extricated. You

have all along built upon a supposition, The project according to Aristotle, is

not moved by vertue impressed, but by the medium. which the Peripatetick

Schools will not easily grant you, as being directly contrary to Aristotle, and

it is to take for known and manifest, That the project separated from the

projicient,  continueth  the  motion  by  vertue  impressed  on  it  by  the  said

projicient, which vertue impressed is a thing as much detested in Peripatetick

Philosophy, as the passage of any accident from one subject into another.

Which doctrine doth hold, as I believe it is well known unto you, that the

project is carried by the medium, which in our case happeneth to be the Air.

And  therefore if that stone let fall from the round top, ought to follow the

motion of the ship, that effect should be ascribed to the Air, and not to the

vertue impressed. But you presuppose that the Air doth not follow the motion

of the ship, but is tranquil. Moreover, he that letteth it fall, is not to throw it,

or to give it impetus with his arm, but ought barely to open his hand and let it

go; and by this means, the stone, neither through the vertue impressed by the

projicient, nor through the help of the Air, shall be able to follow the ships

motion, and therefore shall be left behind.


SALV.


I think then that you would say, that if the stone be not thrown by the arm of

that person, it is no longer a projection.


SIMPL.


It cannot be properly called a motion of projection.


SALV.


So then that which Aristotle speaks of the motion, the moveable, and the

mover of the projects, hath nothing to do with the businesse in hand; and if itconcern not our purpose, why do you alledg the same?


SIMP.


I produce it on the oceasion of that impressed vertue, named and introduced

by you, which having no being in the World, can be of no force; for non-

entium nullae sunt operationes; and therefore not onely of projected, but of

all other preternatural motions, the moving cause ought to be ascribed to the

medium, of which there hath been no due consideration had; and therefore all

that hath been said hitherto is to no purpose.


SALV.


Go to now, in good time. But tell me, seeing that your instance is wholly

grounded upon the nullity of the vertue impressed, if I shall demonstrate to

you, that the medium hath nothing to do in the continuation of projects, after

they are separated from the projicient, will you admit of the impressed vertue,

or will you make another attempt to overthrow it?


SIMP.


The operation of the medium being removed, I see not how one can have

recourse to any thing else save the faculty impressed by the mover.


SALV.


It would be well, for the removing, as much as is possible, the occasions of

multiplying contentions, that you would explain with as much distinctnesse

as may be, what is that operation of the medium in continuing the motion of

the project. Operation of the medium in continuing the motion of the project.


SIMP.


The projicient hath the stone in his hand, and with force and violence throws

his  arm,  with  which  jactation  the  stone  doth  not  move  so  much  as  the

circumambient Air; so that when the stone at its being forsaken by the hand,

findeth it self in the Air, which at the same time moveth with impetousity, itis thereby born away; for, if the air did not operate, the stone would fall at the

foot of the projicient or thrower.


SALV.


And was you so credulous, Many experiments, and reasons against the cause

of the motion of projects, assigned by Aristotle. as to suffer your self to be

perswaded to believe these fopperies, so long as you had your senses about

you to confute them, and to understand the truth thereof? Therefore tell me,

that great stone, and that Canon bullet, which but onely laid upon a table, did

continue immoveable against the most impetuous winds, according as you a

little before did affirm, if it had been a ball of cork or other light stuffe, think

you that the wind would have removed it from its place?


SIMP.


Yes, and I am assured that it would have blown it quite away, and with so

much  more  velocity,  by  how  much  the  matter  was  lighter,  for  upon  this

reason we see the clouds to be transported with a velocity equal to that of the

wind that drives them.


SALV.


And what is the Wind?


SIMP.


The Wind is defined to be nothing else but air moved.


SALV.


Then the moved air doth carry light things more swiftly, and to a greater

distance, then it doth heavy.


SIMP.


Yes certainly.


SALV.But if you were to throw with your arm a stone, and a lock of cotton wool,

which would move swiftest and farthest?


SIMP.


The stone by much; nay the wool would fall at my feet.


SALV.


But, if that which moveth the projected substance, after it is delivered from

the hand, be no other than the air moved by the arm, and the moved air do

more easily bear away light than grave matters, how cometh it that the project

of wool flieth not farther, and swifter than that of stone? Certainly it argueth

that  the  stone  hath  some  other  impulse  besides  the  motion  of  the  air.

Furthermore, if two strings of equal length did hang at yonder beam, and at

the end of one there was fastened a bullet of lead, and a ball of cotton wool at

the other, and both were carried to an equal distance from the perpendicular,

and then let go; it is not to be doubted, but that both the one and the other

would move towards the perpendicular, and that being carried by their own

impetus,  they  would  go  a  certain  space  beyond  it,  and  afterwards  return

thither again. But which of these two pendent Globes do you think, would

continue  longest  in  motion,  before  that  it  would  come  to  rest  in  its

perpendicularity?


SIMP.


The ball of lead would swing to and again many times, and that of wool but

two or three at the most.


SALV.


So that the impetus and that mobility whatsoever is the cause thereof, would

conserve its self longer in grave substances, than light; I proceed now to

another particular, and demand of you, why the air doth not carry away that

Lemon which is upon that same Table?


SIMP.Because that the air it self is not moved


SALV.


It is requisite then, that the projicient do confer motion on the Air, with which

it afterward moveth the project. But if such a motion cannot be impressed [i.

e. imparted] it being impossible to make an accident passe out of one subject

into another, how can it passe from the arm into the Air? Will you say that

the Air is not a subject different from the arm?


SIMP.


To this it is answered that the Air, in regard it is neither heavy nor light in its

own Region, is disposed with facility to receive every impulse, and also to

retain the same.


SALV.


But if those penduli even now named, did prove unto us, that the moveable,

the lesse it had of gravity, the lesse apt it was to conserve its motion, how can

it be that the Air which in the Air hath no gravity at all, doth of it self alone

retain the motion acquired? I believe, and know that you by this time are of

the same opinion, that the arm doth not sooner return to rest, than doth the

circumambient Air. Let’s go into the Chamber, and with a towel let us agitate

the Air as much as we can, and then holding the cloth still, let a little candle

be brought, that was lighted in the next room, or in the same place let a leaf

of beaten Gold be left at liberty to flie any way, and you shall by the calm

vagation of them be assured that the Air is immediately reduced to tranquilty.

I could alledg many other experiments to the same purpose, but if one of

these should not suffice, I should think your folly altogether incurable.


SAGR.


When an arrow is shot against the Wind, how incredible a thing is it, that that

same small filament of air, impelled by the bow-string, should in despite of

fate go along with the arrow? But I would willingly know another particular

of Aristotle, to which I intreat Simplicius would vouchsafe me an answer.

Supposing that with the same Bow there were shot two arrows, one just afterthe usual manner, and the other side-wayes, placing it long-wayes upon the

Bow-string, and then letting it flie, I would know which of them would go

farthest. Favour me, I pray you with an answer, though the question may

seem to you rather ridiculous than otherwise; and excuse me, for that I, who

am,  as  you  see,  rather  blockish,  than  not,  can  reach  no  higher  with  my

speculative faculty.


SIMPL.


I have never seen an arrow shot in that manner, yet neverthelesse I believe,

that it would not flie side-long, the twentieth part of the space that it goeth

end-wayes.


SAGR.


And for that I am of the same opinion, hence it is, that I have a doubt risen in

me, whether Aristotle doth not contradict experience. For as to experience, if

I lay two arrows upon this Table, in a time vvhen a strong Wind blovveth,

one tovvards  the course of the wind, and the other sidelong, the wind will

quickly carry away this later, and leave the other where it was; and the same

to my seeming, ought to happen, if the Doctrine of Aristotle were true, of

those two shot out of a Bow: forasmuch as the arrow shot sideways is driven

by a great quantity of Air, moved by the bowstring, to wit by as much as the

said string is long, whereas the other arrow receiveth no greater a quantity of

air, than the small circle of the strings thickness. And I cannot imagine what

may be the reason of such a difference, but would fain know the same.


SIMP.


The cause seemeth to me sufficiently manifest; and it is, because the arrow

shot endways, hath but a little quantity of air to penetrate, and the other is to

make its way through a quantity as great as its whole length.


SALV.


Then it seems the arrows shot, are to penetrate the air? but if the air goeth

along with them, yea, is that which carrieth them, what penetration can they

make therein? Do you not see that, in this case, the arrow would of necessitymove with greater velocity than the air? and this greater velocity, what doth

confer it on the arrow? Will you say the air giveth them a velocity greater

than  its  own?  Know  then,  Simplicius,  that  the  business  proceeds  quite

contrary  to  that  which  Aristotle  saith,  The  medium  doth  impede  and  not

confer the motion of projects. and that the medium conferreth the motion on

the project, is as false, as it is true, that it is the onely thing which procureth

its obstruction; and having known this, you shall understand without finding

any thing whereof to make question, that if the air be really moved, it doth

much better carry the dart along with it longways, than endways, for that the

air which impelleth it in that posture, is much, and in this very little. But

shooting with the Bow, forasmuch as the air stands still, the transverse arrow,

being to force its passage through much air, comes to be much impeded, and

the  other  that  was  nock’t  easily  overcometh  the  obstruction  of  the  small

quantity of air, which opposeth it self thereto.


SALV.


How  many  Propositions  have  I  observed  in  Aristotle,  (meaning  still  in

Natural Philosophy) that are not onely false, but false in such sort, that its

diametrical contrary is true, as it happens in this case. But pursuing the point

in hand, I think that Simplicius is perswaded, that, from seeing the stone

always to fall in the same place, he cannot conjecture either the motion or

stability  of  the  Ship:  and  if  what  hath  been  hitherto  spoken,  should  not

suffice, there is the Experiment of the medium which may thorowly assure us

thereof; in which experiment, the most that could be seen would be, that the

cadent moveable might be left behind, if it were light, and that the air did not

follow the motion of the ship: but in case the air should move with equal 

velocity, no imaginable diversity could be found either in this, or any other

experiment whatsoever, as I am anon to tell you. Now if in this case there

appeareth no difference at all, what can be pretended to be seen in the stone

falling  from  the  top  of  the  Tower,  where  the  motion  in  gyration  is  not

adventitious, and accidental, but natural and eternal; and where the air exactly

followeth the motion of the Tower, and the Tower that of the Terrestrial

Globe? have you any thing else to say, Simplicius, upon this particular?


SIMP.


No more but this, that I see not the mobility of the Earth as yet proved.SALV.


Nor have I any intention at this time, but onely to shew, that nothing can be

concluded from the experiments alledged by our adversaries for convincing

Arguments: as I think I shall prove the others to be.


SAGR.


I beseech you, Salviatus, before you proceed any farther, to permit me to start

certain questions, which have been rouling in my fancy all the while that you

with  so  much  patience  and  equanimity,  was  minutely  explaining  to

Simplicius the experiment of the Ship.


SALV.


We are here met with a purpose to dispute, and it’s fit that every one should

move the difficulties that he mets withall; for this is the way to come to the

knowledg of the truth. Therefore speak freely.


SAGR.


If it be true, that the impetus wherewith the ship moves, doth remain indelibly

impress’d in the stone, after it is let fall from the Mast; and if it be farther

true,  that  this  motion  brings  no  impediment  or  retardment  to  the  motion

directly  downwards,  natural  to  the  stone:  An  admirable  accident  in  the

motion of projects. it’s necessary, that there do an effect ensue of a very

wonderful nature. Let a Ship be supposed to stand still, and let the time of the

falling of a stone from the Masts Round-top to the ground, be two beats of

the pulse; let the Ship afterwards be under sail, and let the same stone depart

from the same place, and it, according to what hath been premised, shall still

take up the time of two pulses in its fall, in which time the ship will have run,

suppose,  twenty  yards;  so  that  the  true  motion  of  the  stone  will  be  a

transverse line, considerably longer than the first straight and perpendicular

line,  which  is  the  length  of  theBy  the  length  of  the  mast  he  means  the

distance between the upperdeck and Roundtop. Mast, and yet nevertheless

theLa  palla.  stone  will  have  past  it  in  the  same  time.  Let  it  be  farther

supposed, that the Ships motion is much more accelerated, so that the stone in

falling shall be to pass a transverse line much longer than the other; and insum, increasing the Ships velocity as much as you will, the falling stone shall

describe its transverse lines still longer and longer, and yet shall pass them all

in those self same two pulses. And in this fashion, if a Canon were  level’d on

the top of a Tower, and shots were made therewith point blank, that is, paralel

to the Horizon, let the Piece have a greater or less charge, so as that the ball

may  fall  sometimes  a  thousand  yards  distant,  sometimes  four  thousand,

sometimes six, sometimes ten, &c. and all these shots shall curry or finish

their ranges in times equal to each other, and every one equal to the time

which the ball would take to pass from the mouth of the Piece to the ground,

being  left,  without  other  impulse,  to  fall  simply  downwards  in  a

perpendicular line. Now it seems a very admirable thing, that in the same

short time of its falling perpendicularly down to the ground, from the height

of, suppose, an hundred yards, the same ball, being thrust violently out of the

Piece by the Fire, should be able to pass one while four hundred, another

while a thousand, another while four, another while ten thousand yards, so as

that the said ball in all shots made point blank, always continueth an equal

time in the air.


SALV.


The consideration for its novelty is very pretty, and if the effect be true, very

admirable: and of the truth thereof, I make no question: and were it not for

the accidental impediment of the air, I verily believe, that, if at the time of the

balls  going  out  of  the  Piece,  another  were  let  fall  from  the  same  height

directly downwards, they would both come to the ground at the same instant,

though that should have curried ten thousand miles in its range, and this but

an hundred onely: presupposing the surface of the Earth to be equal, which to

be  assured  of,  the  experiment  may  be  made  upon  some  lake.  As  for  the

impediment which might come from the air, it would consist in retarding the

extreme swift motion of the shot. Now, if you think fit, we will proceed to the

solution of the other Objections, seeing that Simplicius (as far as I can see) is

convinc’d of the nullity of this first, taken from things falling from on high

downwards.


SIMP.


I find not all my scruples removed, but it may be the fault is my own, as not

being of so easie and quick an apprehension as Sagredus. And it seems to me,that if this motion, of which the stone did partake whilst it was on the Round-

top of the Ships Mast, be, as you say, to conserve it self indelibly in the said

stone, even after it is separated from the Ship, it would follow, that likewise

in case any one, riding a horse that was upon his speed, should let a bowl

drop out of his hand, that bowl being fallen to the ground would continue its

motion and follow the horses steps, without tarrying behind him: the which

effect, I believe, is not to be seen, unless when he that is upon the horse

should  throw  it  with  violence  that  way  towards  which  he  runneth;  but

otherwise, I believe it will stay on the ground in the same place where it fell.


SALV.


I  believe  that  you  very  much  deceive  your  self,  and  am  certain,  that

experience will shew you the contrary, and that the ball being once arrived at

the ground, will run together with the horse, not staying behind him, unless

so far as the asperity and unevenness of the Earth shall hinder it. And the

reason seems to me very manifest: for if you, standing still, throw the said

ball along the ground, do you think it would not continue its motion even

after you had delivered it out of your hand? and that for so much a greater

space, by how much the superficies were more smooth, so that v. g. upon ice

it would run a great way?


SIMP.


There is no doubt of it, if I give it impetus with my arm; but in the other case

it is supposed, that he who is upon the horse, onely drops it out of his hand.


SALV.


So I desire that it should be: but when you throw it with your arm, what other

remaineth to the ball being once gone out of your hand, than the motion

received from your arm, which motion being conserved in the boul, it doth

continue to carry it forward? Now, what doth it import, that that impetus be

conferred on the ball rather from the arm than from the horse? Whilst you

were on horseback, did not your hand, and consequently the ball run as fast

as the horse it self? Doubtless it did: therefore in onely opening of the hand,

the ball departs with the motion already coceived, not from your arm, by your

particular motion, but from the motion dependant on the said horse, whichcometh to be communicated to you, to your arm, to your hand, and lastly to

the ball. Nay, I will tell you farther, that if the rider upon his speed fling the

ball with his arm to the part contrary to the course, it shall, after it is fallen to

the ground, sometimes (albeit thrown to the contrary part) follow the course

of the horse, and sometimes lie still on the ground; and shall onely move

contrary to the said course, when the motion received from the arm, shall

exceed that of the carrier in velocity. And it is a vanity, that of some, who say

that a horseman is able to cast a javelin thorow the air, that way which the

horse runs, and with the horse to follow and overtake the same; and lastly, to

catch it again. It is, I say, a vanity, for that to make the project return into the

hand, it is requisite to cast it upwards, in the same manner as if you stood

still. For, let the carrier be never so swift, provided it be uniform, and the

project not over-light, it shall always fall back again into the hand of the

projicient, though never so high thrown.


SAGR.


By  this  Doctrine  I  come  to  know  some  Problems  very  curious  upon  this

subject  of  projections;  Sundry  curious  Problems,  touching  the  motions  of

projects. the first of which must seem very strange to Simplicius. And the

Problem is this; I affirm it to be possible, that the ball being barely dropt or

let fall, by one that any way runneth very swiftly, being arrived at the  Earth,

doth not onely follow the course of that person, but doth much out go him.

Which Problem is connexed with this, that the moveable being thrown by the

projicient above the plane of the Horizon, may acquire new velocity, greater

by far than that confer’d upon it by the projicient. The which effect I have

with admiration observed, in looking upon those who use the sport of tops,

which, so soon as they are set out of the hand, are seen to move in the air

with a certain velocity, the which they afterwards much encrease at their

coming to the ground; and if whipping them, they rub at any uneven place

that makes them skip on high, they are seen to move very slowly through the

air, and falling again to the Earth, they still come to move with a greater

velocity: But that which is yet more strange, I have farther observed, that they

not onely turn always more swiftly on the ground, than in the air, but of two

spaces both upon the Earth, sometimes a motion in the second space is more

swift than in the first. Now what would Simplicius say to this?SIMP.


He would say in the first place, that he had never made such an observation.

Secondly, he would say, that he did not believe the same. He would say

again,  in  the  third  place,  that  if  you  could  assure  him  thereof,  and

demonstratively convince him of the same, he would account you a great

Daemon.


SAGR.


I hope then that it is one of the Socratick, not infernal ones. But that I may

make  you  understand  this  particular,  you  must  know,  that  if  a  person

apprehend not a truth of himself, it is impossible that others should make him

understand it: I may indeed instruct you in those things which are neither true

nor false; but the true, that is, the necessary, namely, such as it is impossible

should be otherwise, every common capacity either comprehendeth them of

himself,  or  else  it  is  impossible  he  should  ever  know  them.  And  of  this

opinion I am confident is Salviatus also: and therefore I tell you, that the

reasons  of  the  present  Problems  are  known  by  you,  but  it  may  be,  not

apprehended.


SIMP.


Let us, for the present, pass by that controversie, and permit me to plead

ignorance of these things you speak of, and try whether you can make me

capable of understanding these Problems.


SAGR.


This first dependeth upon another, which is, Whence cometh it, that setting a

top with the lash, it runneth farther, and consequently with greater force, than

when its set with the fingers?


SIMP.


Aristotle also makes certain Problems about these kinds of projects.


SALV.He doth so; and very ingenious they are: particularly, That, Whence it cometh

to pass that round tops run better than the square?


SAGR.


And cannot you, Simplicius, give a reason for this, without others prompting

you?


SIMP.


Very good, I can so; but leave your jeering.


SAGR.


In like manner you do know the reason of this other  Tell me therefore; know

you that a thing which moveth, being impeded stands still?


SIMP.


I know it doth, if the impediment be so great as to suffice.


SAGR.


Do you know, that moving upon the Earth is a greater impediment to the

moveable, than moving in the air, the Earth being rough and hard, and the air

soft and yielding?


SIMP.


And knowing this, I know that the top will turn faster in the air, than on the

ground, so that my knowledg is quite contrary to what you think it.


SAGR.


Fair and softly, Simplicius. You know that in the parts of a moveable, that

turneth about its centre, there are found motions towards all sides; so that

some ascend, others descend; some go forwards, others backwards?


SIMP.I know it, and Aristotle taught me the same.


SAGR.


And with what demonstration, I pray you?


SIMP.


With that of sense.


SAGR.


Aristotle, then, hath made you see that which without him you would not

have seen? Did he ever lend you his eyes? You would say, that Aristotle hath

told, advertised, remembered you of the same; and not taught you it. When

then a top, without changing place, turns round, (or in the childrens phrase,

sleepeth) not paralel, but erect to the Horizon, some of its parts ascend, and

the opposite descend; the superiour go one way, the inferiour another. Fancie

now to your self, a top, that without changing place, swiftly turns round in

that manner, and stands suspended in the air, and that in that manner turning,

it be let fall to the Earth perpendicularly, do you believe, that when it is

arrived at the ground, it will continue to turn round in the same manner,

without changing place, as before?


SIMP.


No, Sir.


SAGR.


What will it do then?


SIMP.


It will run along the ground very fast.


SAGR.


And towards what part?SIMP.


Towards that, whither itsVert gine. reeling carrieth it.


SAGR.


In its reeling there are parts, that is the uppermost, which do move contrary to

the inferiour; therefore you must instance which it shall obey: for as to the

parts ascending and descending, the one kind will not yield to the other; nor

will they all go downwards, being hindered by the Earth, nor upwards as

being heavy.


SIMP.


The top will run reeling along the floor towards that part whither its upper

parts encline it.


SAGR.


And why not whither the contrary parts tend, namely, those which touch the

ground?


SIMP.


Because those upon the ground happen to be impeded by the roughness of the

touch, that is, by the floors unevenness; but the superiour, which are in the

tenuous and flexible air, are hindred very little, if at all; and therefore the top

will obey their inclination.


SAGR.


So that that taction, if I may so say, of the neither parts on the floor, is the

cause that they stay, and onely the upper parts spring the top forward.


SALV.


And  therefore,  if  the  top  should  fall  upon  the  ice,  or  other  very  smooth

superficies,  it  would  not  so  well  run  forward,  but  might  peradventurecontinue to revolve in it self, (or sleep) without acquiring any progressive

motion.


SAGR.


It  is  an  easie  thing  for  it  so  to  do;  but  yet  nevertheless,  it  would  not  so

speedily come to sleep, as when it falleth on a superficies somewhat rugged.

But  tell  me,  Simplicius,  when  the  top-turning  round  about  it  self,  in  that

manner,  is  let  fall,  why  doth  it  not  move  forwards  in  the  air,  as  it  doth

afterwards when it is upon the ground?


SIMP.


Because having air above it, and beneath, neither those parts, nor these have

any  where  to  touch,  and  not  having  more  occasion  to  go  forward  than

backward, it falls perpendicularly.


SAGR.


So then the onely reeling about its self, without other impetus, can drive the

top forward, being arrived at the ground, very nimbly. Now proceed we to

what remains. That lash, which the driver tyeth to his Top-stick, and with

which, winding it about the top, he sets it (i. e. makes it go) what effect hath

it on the said top?


SIMP.


It constrains it to turn round upon its toe, that so it may free it self from the

Top-lash.


SAGR.


So then, when the top arriveth at the ground, it cometh all the way turning

about its self, by means of the lash. Hath it not reason then to move in it self

more swiftly upon the ground, than it did whilst it was in the air?


SIMP.Yes doubtless; for in the air it had no other impulse than that of the arm of the

projicient; and if it had also the reeling, this (as hath been said) in the air

drives it not forward at all▪ but arriving at the floor, to the motion of the arm

is added the progression of the reeling, whereby the velocity is redoubled.

And I know already very well, that the top skipping from the ground, its

velocity will deminish, because the help of its circulation is wanting; and

returning to the Earth will get it again, and by that  means move again faster,

than in the air. It onely rests for me to understand, whether in this second

motion on the Earth it move more swiftly, than in the first; for then it would

move in infinitum, alwayes accelerating.


SAGR.


I did not absolutely affirm, that this second motion is more swift than the

first; but that it may happen so to be sometimes.


SIMP.


This is that, which I apprehend not, and which I desire to know.


SAGR.


And this also you know of your self. Therefore tell me: When you let the top

fall out of your hand, without making it turn round (i. e. setting it) what will it

do at its coming to the ground?


SIMP.


Nothing, but there lie still.


SAGR.


May it not chance, that in its fall to the ground it may acquire a motion?

Think better on it.


SIMP.


Unlesse we let it fall upon some inclining stone, as children do playing atA

Game in Italy, which is, to glide bullets down an inclining stone, &c. Chiosa,and that falling side-wayes upon the same, it do acquire the motion of turning

round upon its toe, wherewith it afterwards continueth to move progressively

on the floor, I know not in what other manner it can do any thing but lie still

where it falleth.


SAGR.


You see then that in some case it may acquire a new revolution. When then

the  top  jerked  up  from  the  ground,  falleth  down  again,  why  may  it  not

casually hit upon the declivity of some stone fixed in the floor, and that hath

an inclination that way towards which it moveth, and acquiring by that slip a

new  whirle  over  and  above  that  conferred  by  the  lash,  why  may  it  not

redouble its motion, and make it swifter than it was at its first lighting upon

the ground?


SIMP.


Now I see that the same may easily happen. And I am thinking that if the top

should  turn  the  contrary  way,  in  arriving  at  the  ground,  it  would  work  a

contrary effect, that is, the motion of the accidental whirl would retard that of

the projicient.


SAGR.


And it would sometimes wholly retard and stop it, in case the revolution of

the top were very swift. And from hence ariseth the resolution of that slight,

which the more skilful Tennis Players use to their advantage; that is, to gull

their adversary by cutting (for so is their Phrase) the Ball; which is, to return

it with a side Rachet, in such a manner, that it doth thereby acquire a motion

by it self contrary to the projected motion, and so by that means, at its coming

to the ground, the rebound, which if the ball did not turn in that manner,

would be towards the adversary, giving him the usual time to tosse it back

again, doth  fail, and the ball runs tripping along the ground, or rebounds

lesse than usual, and breaketh the time of the return. Hence it is that you see,

those who play atA Game in Italy, wherein they strive who shall trundle or

throw a wooden bowle neerest to an assigned mark. Stool-ball, when they

play in a stony way, or a place full of holes and rubs that make the ball trip an

hundred several wayes, never suffering it to come neer the mark, to avoidthem all, they do not trundle the ball upon the ground, but throw it, as if they

were to pitch a quait. But because in throwing the ball, it issueth out of the

hand with some roling conferred by the fingers, when ever the hand is under

the ball, as it is most commonly held; whereupon the ball in its lighting on

the ground neer to the mark, between the motion of the projicient and that of

the roling, would run a great way from the same: To make the ball stay, they

hold it artificially, with their hand uppermost, and it undermost, which in its

delivery hath a contrary twirl or roling conferred upon it by the fingers, by

means whereof in its coming to the ground neer the mark it stays there, or

runs very very little forwards. But to return to our principal problem which

gave  occasion  for  starting  these  others;  I  say  it  is  possible  that  a  person

carried very swiftly, may let a ball drop out of his hand, that being come to

the Earth, shall not onely follow his motion, but also out-go it, moving with a

greater velocity. And to see such an effect, I desire that the course may be

that of a Chariot, to which on the out-side let a declining board be fastened;

so as that the neither part may be towards the horses, and the upper towards

the hind Wheel. Now, if in the Chariots full career, a man within it, let a ball

fall gliding along the declivity of that board, it shall in roling downward

acquire  a  particular  vertigo  or  turning,  the  which  added  to  the  motion

impressed by the Chariot, will carrie the ball along the ground much faster

than  the  Chariot.  And  if  one  accommodate  another  declining  board  over

against it, the motion of the Chariot may be qualified so, that the ball, gliding

downwards  along  the  board,  in  its  coming  to  the  ground  shall  rest

immoveable, and also shall sometimes run the contrary way to the Chariot.

But  we  are  strayed  too  far  from  the  purpose,  therefore  if  Simplicius  be

satisfied with the resolution of the first arg ment against the Earths mobility,

taken from things falling perpendicularly, we may passe to the rest.


SALV.


The digressions made hitherto, are not so alienated from the matter in hand,

as  that  one  can  say  they  are  wholly  strangers  to  it.  Besides  these

argumentations depend on those things that start up in the fancy not of one

person,  but  of  three,  that  we  are:  And  moreover  we  discourse  for  our

pleasure,  nor  are  we  obliged  to  that  strictnesse  of  one  who  ex  professo

treateth methodically of an argument, with an intent to publish the same.  I

will not consent that our Poem should be so confined to that unity, as not toleave  us  fields  open  for  Epsody’s,  which  every  smalll  connection  should

suffice to introduce; but with almost as much liberry as if we were met to tell

stories, it shall be lawful for me to speak, what ever your discourse brings

into mymind.


SAGR.


I like this motion very well; and since we are at this liberty, let me take leave,

before we passe any farther to ask of you Salviatus, whether you did ever

consider  what  that  line  may  be  that  is  described  by  the  grave  moveable

naturally falling down from the top of a Tower; and if you have reflected on

it, be pleased to tell me what you think thereof.


SALV.


I have sometimes considered of it, and make no question, that if one could be

certain of the nature of that motion wherewith the grave body descendeth to

approach the centre of the Terrestrial Globe, mixing it self afterwards with

the common circular motion of the diurnal conversion; it might be exactly

found what kind of line that is, that the centre of gravity of the moveable

describeth in those two motions.


SAGR.


Touching the simple motion towards the centre dependent on the gravity, I

think that one may confidently, without error, believe that it is by a right line,

as it would be, were the Earth immoveable.


SALV.


As to this particular, we may not onely believe it, but experience rendereth us

certain of the same.


SAGR.


But how doth experience assure us thereof, if we never see any motions but

such as are composed of the two, circular and descending.


SALV.Nay rather Sagredus we onely see the simple motion of descent; since that

other circular one common to the Earth, the Tower and our selves remains

imperceptible, and as if it never were, and there remaineth perceptible to us

that  of  the  stone,  onely  not  participated  by  us,  and  for  this,  sense

demonstrateth that it is by a right line, ever parallel to the said Tower, which

is built upright and perpendicular upon the Terrestrial surface.


SAGR.


You are in the right; and this was but too plainly demonstrated to me even

now, seeing that I could not remember so easie a thing; but this being so

manifest, what more is it that you say you desire, for understanding the nature

of this motion downwards?


SALV.


It sufficeth not to know that it is streight, but its requisite to know whether it

be uniform, or irregular; that is, whether it maintain alwayes one and the

same velocity, or else goeth retarding or accelerating.


SAGR.


It is already clear, that it goeth continually accellerating.


SALV.


Neither  doth  this  suffice,  but  its  requisite  to  know  according  to  what

proportion such accelleration is made; a Problem, that I believe was never

hitherto  understood  by  any  Philosopher  or  Mathematician;  although

Philosophers, and particularly the Peripateticks, have writ great and entire

Volumes, touching motion.


SIMP.


Philosophers  principally  busie  themselves  about  universals;  they  find  the

definitions  and  more  common  symptomes,  omitting  certain  subtilties  and

niceties, which are rather curiosities to the Mathematicians. And Aristotle did

content himself to define excellently what motion was in general; and of thelocal,  to  shew  the  principal  qualities,  to  wit,  that  one  is  natural,  another

violent; one is simple, another compound; one is equal, another accellerate;

and  concerning  the  accelerate,  contents  himself  to  give  the  reason  of

acceleration, remitting the finding out of the proportion of such acceleration,

and other particular accidents to the Mechanitian, or other inferiour Artist.


SAGR.


Very well Simplicius. But you Salviatus, when you descend sometimes from

the Throne of Peripatetick Majesty, have you ever thrown away any of your

hours in studying to find this proportion of the acceleration of the motion of

descending grave bodies?


SALV.


There was no need that I should study for it, in regard that the Academick our

common friend, heretofore shewed me a Treatise of hisThis is that excellent

tract which we give the first place in our second Volume. De Motu, where

this, and many other accidents were demonstrated. But it would be too great a

digression, if for this particular, we should interrupt our present discourse,

(which yet it self is also no better than a digression) and make as the Saying

is, a Comedy within a Comedy.


SAGR.


I am content to excuse you from this narration for the present, provided that

this may be one of the Propositions reserved to be examined amongst the rest

in another particular meeting, for that the knowledg thereof is by me very

much desired; and in the mean time let us return to the line described by the

grave body in its fall from the top of the Tower to its base.


SALV.


If the right motion towards the centre of the Earth was uniforme, the circular

towards the East being also uniforme, you would see composed of them both

a motion by a spiral line, of that kind with those defined by Archimedes in

his Book De Spiralibus; which are, when a point moveth uniformly upon a

right line, whilest that line in the mean time turneth uniformly about one ofits extreme points fixed, as the centre of his gyration. But because the right

motion of grave bodies falling, is continually accelerated, it is necessary, that

the  line  resulting  of  the    composition  of  the  two  motions  do  go  alwayes

receding with greater and greater proportion from the circumference of that

circle, which the centre of the stones gravity would have designed, if it had

alwayes staid upon the Tower; it followeth of necessity that this recession at

the first be but little, yea very small, yea, more, as small as can be imagined,

seeing that the descending grave body departing from rest, that is, from the

privation of motion, towards the bottom and entring into the right motion

downwards, it must needs passe through all the degrees of tardity, that are

betwixt rest, and any assigned velocity; the which degrees are infinite; as

already hath been at large discoursed and proved.


It being supposed therefore, that the progresse of the acceleration being after

this  manner,  and  it  being  moreover  true,  that  the  descending  grave  body

goeth  to  terminate  in  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  The  line  described  by  a

moveable in its natural descent, the motion of the Earth about its own centre

being presupposed, would probably be the circumference of a circle. it is

necessary  that  the  line  of  its  mixt  motion  be  such,  that  it  go  continually

receding with greater and greater proportion from the top of the Tower, or to

speak more properly, from the circumference of the circle described by the

top of the Tower, by means of the Earths conversion; but that such recessions

be lesser and lesser in infinitum; by how much the moveable finds it self to

be lesse and lesse removed from the first term where it rested. Moreover it is

necessary, that this line of the compounded motion do go to terminate in the

centre of the Earth. Now having presupposed these two things, I come to

describe about the centre A [in Fig. 1. of this second Dialogue; ] with the

semidiameter AB, the circle BI, representing to me the Terrestrial Globe, and

prolonging the semidiameter AB to C, I have described the height of the

Tower  BC;  the  which  being  carried  about  by  the  Earth  along  the

circumference BI, describeth with its top the arch CD: Dividing, in the next

place, the line CA in the middle at E; upon the centre E, at the distance EC, I

describe the semicircle CIA: In which, I now affirm, that it is very probable

that a stone falling from the top of the Tower C, doth move, with a motion

mixt of the circular, which is in common, and of its peculiar right motion. If

therefore in the circumference CD, certain equal parts CF, FG, GH, HL, be

marked, and from the points F, G, H, L, right lines be drawn towards thecentre A, the parts of them intercepted between the two circumferences CD

and  BI,  shall  represent  unto  us  the  same  Tower  CB,  transported  by  the

Terrestrial Globe towards DI; in which lines the points where they come to be

intersected by the arch of the semicircle CI, are the places by which from

time to time the falling stone doth passe; which points go continually with

greater and greater proportion receding from the top of the  Tower. And this

is the cause vvhy the right motion made along the side of the Tower apeareth

to  us  more  and  more  accelerate.  It  appeareth  also,  how  by  reason  of  the

infinite acutenesse of the contact of those two circles DC, CI, the recession of

the cadent moveable from the circumference CFD; namely, from the top of

the Tower, is towards the beginning extream small, which is as much as if

one said its motion downwards is very slow, and more and more slow in

infinitum, according to its vicinity to the term C, that is to the state of rest.

And lastly it is seen how in the end this same motion goeth to terminate in the

centre of the Earth A.


SAGR.


I understand all this very well, nor can I perswade my self that the falling

moveable doth describe with the centre of its gravity any other line, but such

an one as this.


SALV.


But  stay  a  little  Sagredus,  for  I  am  to  acquaint  you  also  with  three

Observations of mine, that its possible will not displease you. A moveable

falling from the top of the Tower, moveth in the circumference of a circle.

The first of which is, that if we do well consider, the moveable moveth not

really with any more than onely one motion simply circular, as when being

placed upon the Tower, it moved with one single and circular motion. The

second is yet more pleasant; for, It moveth neither more nor lesse, than if it

had staid alwayes there. it moveth neither more nor lesse then if it had staid

continually upon the Tower, being that to the arches CF, FG, GH, &c. that it

would have passed continuing alwayes upon the Tower, the arches of the

circumference CI are exactly equal, answering under the same CF, FG, GH,

&c. Whence followeth the third wonder, It moveth with an uniform, not an

accelerate  motion.  That  the  true  and  real  motion  of  the  stone  is  never

accelerated, but alwayes even and uniforme, since that all the equal archesnoted  in  the  circumference  CD,  and  their  respondent  ones  marked  in  the

circumference CI, are past in equal times; so that we are left at liberty to seek

new causes of acceleration, or of other motions, seeing that the moveable, as

well standing upon the Tower, as descending thence, alwayes moveth in the

same fashion, that is, circularly, with the same velocity, and with the same

uniformity. Now tell me what you think of this my fantastical conjecture.


SAGR.


I must tell you, that I cannot with words sufficiently expresse how admirable

it seemeth to me; and for vvhat at present offereth it self to my understanding,

I cannot think that the business happeneth otherwise; and vvould to God that

all  the  demonstrations  of  Philosophers  were  but  half  so  probable  as  this.

However for my perfect satisfaction I would gladly hear how you prove those

arches to be equal.


SALV.


The demonstration is most easie. Suppose to your self a line drawn from I to

E. And the Semidiameter of the circle CD, that is, the line CA, being double

the Semidiameter CE of the  circle CI, the circumference shall be double to

the circumference, and every arch of the greater circle double to every like

arch of the lesser; and consequently, the half of the arch of the greater circle,

equal to the whole arch of the lesse. And because the angle CEI made in the

centre E of the lesser circle, and which insisteth upon the arch CI, is double

the angle CAD, made in the centre A of the greater circle, to which the arch

CD subtendeth; therefore the arch CD is half of the arch of the greater circle

like to the arch CI, and therefore the two arches CD and CI are equal; and in

the same manner we may demonstrate of all their parts. But that the business,

as to the motion of descending grave bodies, proceedeth exactly thus, I will

not at this time affirm; but this I will say, that if the line described by the

cadent moveable be not exactly the same with this, it doth extream neerly

resemble the same.


SAGR.


But I, Right motion seemeth wholly excluded in nature. Salviatus, am just

now  considering  another  particular  very  admirable;  and  this  it  is;  That