  This result would be all the more marked if, as in the second figure, the

arc BIC were less than a quadrant. For the perpendicular DB would then cut

the circle CIB; and so also would DI which is equal to BD; the angle DIA

would be obtuse and therefore the line AIN would cut the circle BIE. Since

the angle ABC is less than the angle AIC, which is equal to SIN, and still less

than the angle which the tangent at I would make with the line SI, it follows

that the arc SEI is far greater than the arc BO; whence, etc.

  q. e. d.

                        Theorem XXII, Proposition XXXVI


If from the lowest point of a vertical circle, a chord is drawn subtending an

arc not greater than a quadrant, and if from the two ends of this chord two

other chords be drawn to any point on the arc, the time of descent along thetwo latter chords will be shorter than along the first, and shorter also, by the

same amount, than along the lower of these two latter chords.


                                        Scholium


From the preceding it is possible to infer that the path of quickest descent

[lationem omnium velocissimam] from one point to another is not the shortest
                                                            36
path, namely, a straight line, but the arc of a circle. In the quadrant BAEC,

having the side BC vertical, divide the arc AC into any number of equal

parts, AD, DE, EF, FG, GC, and from C draw straight lines to the points A,

D, E, F, G; draw also the straight lines AD, DE, EF, FG, GC. Evidently

descent along the path ADC is quicker than along AC alone or along DC

from rest at D. But a body, starting from rest at A, will traverse DC more

quickly than the path ADC; while, if it starts from rest at A, it will traverse

the path DEC in a shorter time than DC alone. Hence descent along the three

chords, ADEC, will take less time than along the two chords ADC. Similarly,

following descent along ADE, the time required to traverse EFC is less than

that needed for EC alone. Therefore descent is more rapid along the four

chords ADEFC than along the three ADEC. And finally a body, after descent

along ADEF, will traverse the two chords, FGC, more quickly than FC alone.

Therefore, along the five chords, ADEFGC, descent will be more rapid than

along  the  four,  ADEFC.  Consequently  the  nearer  the  inscribed  polygon

approaches a circle the shorter is the time required for descent from A to C.

36
  It  is  well  known  that  the  first  correct  solution  for  the  problem  of  quickest  descent,  under  the
condition of a constant force was given by John Bernoulli (1667-1748). [Trans.]  What has been proven for the quadrant holds true also for smaller arcs; the

reasoning is the same.


                        Problem XV, Proposition XXXVII


Given a limited vertical line and an inclined plane of equal altitude; it is

required to find a distance on the inclined plane which is equal to the vertical

line and which is traversed in an interval equal to the time of fall along the

vertical line.                                        Corollary


From  this  it  is  clear  that  the  distance  sought  is  bounded  at  each  end  by

portions of the inclined plane which are traversed in equal times.


                      Problem XVI, Proposition XXXVIII


Given two horizontal planes cut by a vertical line, it is required to find a point

on  the  upper  part  of  the  vertical  line  from  which  bodies  may  fall  to  the

horizontal planes and there, having their motion deflected into a horizontal

direction, will, during an interval equal to the time of fall, traverse distances

which bear to each other any assigned ratio of a smaller quantity to a larger.

  Let CD and BE be the horizontal planes cut by the vertical ACB, and let

the ratio of the smaller quantity to the larger be that of N to FG. It is required

to find in the upper part of the vertical line, AB, a point from which a body

falling to the plane CD and there having its motion deflected along this plane,

will traverse, during an interval equal to its time of fall a distance such that if

another body, falling from this same point to the plane BE, there have its

motion deflected along this plane and continued during an interval equal to

its time of fall, will traverse a distance which bears to the former distance theratio of FG to N. Lay off GH equal to N, and select the point L so that

FH:HG=BC:CL. Then, I say, L is the point sought. For, if we lay off CM

equal to twice CL, and draw the line LM cutting the plane BE at O, then BO

will be equal to twice BL. And since FH:HG=BC:CL, we have, componendo

et convertendo, HG:GF=N:GF=CL:LB=CM:BO. It is clear that, since CM is

double the distance LC, the space CM is that which a body falling from L

through LC will traverse in the plane CD; and, for the same reason, since BO

is twice the distance BL, it is clear that BO is the distance which a body, after

fall through LB, will traverse during an interval equal to the time of its fall

through LB.

  q. e. f.






























Sagr. Indeed, I think we may concede to our Academician, without flattery,

his claim that in the principle [principio, i. e., accelerated motion] laid downin  this  treatise  he  has  established  a  new  science  dealing  with  a  very  old

subject. Observing with what ease and clearness he deduces from a single

principle the proofs of so many theorems, I wonder not a little how such a

question  escaped  the  attention  of  Archimedes,  Apollonius,  Euclid  and  so

many other mathematicians and illustrious philosophers, especially since so

many ponderous tomes have been devoted to the subject of motion.

  There is a fragment of Euclid which treats of motion, but in it there is no

indication that he ever began to investigate the property of acceleration and

the manner in which it varies with slope. So that we may say the door is now

opened,  for  the  first  time,  to  a  new  method  fraught  with  numerous  and

wonderful results which in future years will command the attention of other

minds.


Sagr. I really believe that just as, for instance, the few properties of the circle

proven by Euclid in the Third Book of his Elements lead to many others more

recondite, so the principles which are set forth in this little treatise will, when

taken up by speculative minds, lead to many another more remarkable result;

and it is to be believed that it will be so on account of the nobility of the

subject, which is superior to any other in nature.

  During this long and laborious day, I have enjoyed these simple theorems

more than their proofs, many of which, for their complete comprehension,

would require more than an hour each; this study, if you will be good enough

to leave the book in my hands, is one which I mean to take up at my leisure

after we have read the remaining portion which deals with the motion of

projectiles; and this if agreeable to you we shall take up tomorrow.


Salv. I shall not fail to be with you.

  End of the third day.                                    Fourth Day


SALVIATI. Once more, Simplicio is here on time; so let us without delay

take up the question of motion. The text of our Author is as follows:


                              The Motion of Projectiles


In the preceding pages we have discussed the properties of uniform motion

and of motion naturally accelerated along planes of all inclinations. I now

propose to set forth those properties which belong to a body whose motion is

compounded of two other motions, namely, one uniform and one naturally

accelerated; these properties, well worth knowing, I propose to demonstrate

in a rigid manner. This is the kind of motion seen in a moving projectile; its

origin I conceive to be as follows:

  Imagine any particle projected along a horizontal plane without friction;

then we know, from what has been more fully explained in the preceding

pages, that this particle will move along this same plane with a motion which

is uniform and perpetual, provided the plane has no limits. But if the plane is

limited and elevated, then the moving particle, which we imagine to be a

heavy one, will on passing over the edge of the plane acquire, in addition to

its previous uniform and perpetual motion, a downward propensity due to its

own weight; so that the resulting motion which I call projection [projectio], is

compounded of one which is uniform and horizontal and of another which is

vertical and naturally accelerated. We now proceed to demonstrate some of

its properties, the first of which is as follows:


                              Theorem I, Proposition I


A projectile which is carried by a uniform horizontal motion compounded

with a naturally accelerated vertical motion describes a path which is a semi-

parabola.


Sagr. Here, Salviati, it will be necessary to stop a little while for my sake and,

I believe, also for the benefit of Simplicio; for it so happens that I have not

gone very far in my study of Apollonius and am merely aware of the fact that

he treats of the parabola and other conic sections, without an understanding

of  which  I  hardly  think  one  will  be  able  to  follow  the  proof  of  otherpropositions depending upon them. Since even in this first beautiful theorem

the  author  finds  it  necessary  to  prove  that  the  path  of  a  projectile  is  a

parabola, and since, as I imagine, we shall have to deal with only this kind of

curves, it will be absolutely necessary to have a thorough acquaintance, if not

with all the properties which Apollonius has demonstrated for these figures,

at least with those which are needed for the present treatment.


Salv. You are quite too modest, pretending ignorance of facts which not long

ago you acknowledged as well known — I mean at the time when we were

discussing the strength of materials and needed to use a certain theorem of

Apollonius which gave you no trouble.


Sagr. I may have chanced to know it or may possibly have assumed it, so

long as needed, for that discussion; but now when we have to follow all these

demonstrations about such curves we ought not, as they say, to swallow it

whole, and thus waste time and energy.

Simp. Now even though Sagredo is, as I believe, well equipped for all his

needs,  I  do  not  understand  even  the  elementary  terms;  for  although  our

philosophers  have  treated  the  motion  of  projectiles,  I  do  not  recall  their

having described the path of a projectile except to state in a general way that

it is always a curved line, unless the projection be vertically upwards. But if

the little Euclid which I have learned since our previous discussion does not

enable me to understand the demonstrations which are to follow, then I shall

be obliged to accept the theorems on faith without fully comprehending them.


Salv. On the contrary, I desire that you should understand them from the

Author himself, who, when he allowed me to see this work of his, was good

enough  to  prove  for  me  two  of  the  principal  properties  of  the  parabola

because I did not happen to have at hand the books of Apollonius. These

properties, which are the only ones we shall need in the present discussion, he

proved in such a way that no prerequisite knowledge was required. These

theorems are, indeed, given by Apollonius, but after many preceding ones, to

follow which would take a long while. I wish to shorten our task by deriving

the  first  property  purely  and  simply  from  the  mode  of  generation  of  the

parabola and proving the second immediately from the first.

  Beginning  now  with  the  first,  imagine  a  right  cone,  erected  upon  the

circular base ibkc with apex at l. The section of this cone made by a planedrawn parallel to the side lk is the curve which is called a parabola. The base

of this parabola bc cuts at right angles the diameter ik of the circle ibkc, and

the axis ad is parallel to the side lk; now having taken any point f in the curve

bfa draw the straight line fe parallel to bd; then, I say, the square of bd is to

the square of fe in the same ratio as the axis ad is to the portion ae. Through

the point e pass a plane parallel to the circle ibkc, producing in the cone a

circular section whose diameter is the line geh. Since bd is at right angles to

ik in the circle ibk, the square of bd is equal to the rectangle formed by id and

dk; so also in the upper circle which passes through the points gfh the square

of fe is equal to the rectangle formed by ge and eh; hence the square of bd is

to the square of fe as the rectangle id.dk is to the rectangle ge.eh. And since

the line ed is parallel to hk, the line eh, being parallel to dk, is equal to it;

therefore the rectangle id.dk is to the rectangle ge.eh as id is to ge, that is, as

da is to ae; whence also the rectangle id.dk is to the rectangle ge.eh, that is,

the square of bd is to the square of fe, as the axis da is to the portion ae.

  q. e. d.  The  other  proposition  necessary  for  this  discussion  we  demonstrate  as

follows. Let us draw a parabola whose axis ca is prolonged upwards to a

point d; from any point b draw the line bc parallel to the base of the parabola;

if now the point d is chosen so that da = ca, then, I say, the straight line

drawn through the points b and d will be tangent to the parabola at b. For

imagine,  if  possible,  that  this  line  cuts  the  parabola  above  or  that  its

prolongation cuts it below, and through any point g in it draw the straight line

fge. And since the square of fe is greater than the square of ge, the square of

fe will bear a greater ratio to the square of bc than the square of ge to that of

bc; and since, by the preceding proposition, the square of fe is to that of bc as

the line ea is to ca, it follows that the line ea will bear to the line ca a greater

ratio than the square of ge to that of bc, or, than the square of ed to that of cd

(the sides of the triangles deg and dcb being proportional). But the line ea is

to ca, or da, in the same ratio as four times the rectangle ea.ad is to fourtimes the square of ad, or, what is the same, the square of cd, since this is

four times the square of ad; hence four times the rectangle ea.ad bears to the

square of cd a greater ratio than the square of ed to the square of cd; but that

would make four times the rectangle ea.ad greater than the square of ed;

which is false, the fact being just the opposite, because the two portions ea

and ad of the line ed are not equal. Therefore the line db touches the parabola

without cutting it.

  q. e. d.






























Simp. Your demonstration proceeds too rapidly and, it seems to me, you keep

on assuming that all of Euclid’s theorems are as familiar and available to me

as his first axioms, which is far from true. And now this fact which you

spring upon us, that four times the rectangle ea.ad is less than the square ofde because the two portions ea and ad of the line de are not equal brings me

little composure of mind, but rather leaves me in suspense.


Salv. Indeed, all real mathematicians assume on the part of the reader perfect

familiarity with at least the elements of Euclid; and here it is necessary in

your case only to recall a proposition of the Second Book in which he proves

that  when  a  line  is  cut  into  equal  and  also  into  two  unequal  parts,  the

rectangle formed on the unequal parts is less than that formed on the equal (i.

e., less than the square on half the line), by an amount which is the square of

the difference between the equal and unequal segments. From this it is clear

that the square of the whole line which is equal to four times the square of the

half is greater than four times the rectangle of the unequal parts. In order to

understand the following portions of this treatise it will be necessary to keep

in mind the two elemental theorems from conic sections which we have just

demonstrated; and these two theorems are indeed the only ones which the

Author uses. We can now resume the text and see how he demonstrates his

first  proposition  in  which  he  shows  that  a  body  falling  with  a  motion

compounded of a uniform horizontal and a naturally accelerated [naturale

descendente] one describes a semi-parabola.

  Let us imagine an elevated horizontal line or plane ab along which a body

moves with uniform speed from a to b. Suppose this plane to end abruptly at

b; then at this point the body will, on account of its weight, acquire also a

natural  motion  downwards  along  the  perpendicular bn.  Draw  the  line be

along the plane ba to represent the flow, or measure, of time; divide this line

into a number of segments, bc, cd, de, representing equal intervals of time;

from the points b, c, d, e, let fall lines which are parallel to the perpendicular

bn. On the first of these lay off any distance ci, on the second a distance four

times as long, df; on the third, one nine times as long, eh; and so on, in

proportion to the squares of cb, db, eb, or, we may say, in the squared ratio of

these same lines. Accordingly we see that while the body moves from b to c

with uniform speed, it also falls perpendicularly through the distance ci, and

at the end of the time-interval bc finds itself at the point i. In like manner at

the end of the time-interval bd, which is the double of bc, the vertical fall will

be  four  times  the  first  distance ci;  for  it  has  been  shown  in  a  previous

discussion that the distance traversed by a freely falling body varies as the

square of the time; in like manner the space eh traversed during the time bewill be nine times ci; thus it is evident that the distances eh, df, ci will be to

one another as the squares of the lines be, bd, bc. Now from the points i, f, h

draw the straight lines io, fg, hl parallel to be; these lines hl, fg, io are equal to

eb, db and cb, respectively; so also are the lines bo, bg, bl respectively equal

to ci, df, and eh. The square of hl is to that of fg as the line lb is to bg; and the

square of fg is to that of io as gb is to bo; therefore the points i, f, h, lie on one

and the same parabola. In like manner it may be shown that, if we take equal

time-intervals  of  any  size  whatever,  and  if  we  imagine  the  particle  to  be

carried by a similar compound motion, the positions of this particle, at the

ends of these time-intervals, will lie on one and the same parabola.

  q. e. d.
























Salv. This  conclusion  follows  from  the  converse  of  the  first  of  the  two

propositions given above. For, having drawn a parabola through the points b

and h, any other two points, f and i, not falling on the parabola must lie either

within or without; consequently the line fg is either longer or shorter than the

line which terminates on the parabola. Therefore the square of hl will not bear

to the square of fg the same ratio as the line lb to bg, but a greater or smaller;the fact is, however, that the square of hl does bear this same ratio to the

square of fg. Hence the point f does lie on the parabola, and so do all the

others.


Sagr. One  cannot  deny  that  the  argument  is  new,  subtle  and  conclusive,

resting as it does upon this hypothesis, namely, that the horizontal motion

remains  uniform,  that  the  vertical  motion  continues  to  be  accelerated

downwards in proportion to the square of the time, and that such motions and

velocities as these combine without altering, disturbing, or hindering each
    37
other, so that as the motion proceeds the path of the projectile does not

change into a different curve: but this, in my opinion, is impossible. For the

axis of the parabola along which we imagine the natural motion of a falling

body to take place stands perpendicular to a horizontal surface and ends at the

center of the earth; and since the parabola deviates more and more from its

axis no projectile can ever reach the center of the earth or, if it does, as seems

necessary, then the path of the projectile must transform itself into some other

curve very different from the parabola.

37
 A very near approach to Newton’s Second Law of Motion. [Trans.]


Simp. To these difficulties, I may add others. One of these is that we suppose

the horizontal plane, which slopes neither up nor down, to be represented by

a straight line as if each point on this line were equally distant from the

center, which is not the case; for as one starts from the middle [of the line]

and goes toward either end, he departs farther and farther from the center [of

the earth] and is therefore constantly going uphill. Whence it follows that the

motion  cannot  remain  uniform  through  any  distance  whatever,  but  must

continually diminish. Besides, I do not see how it is possible to avoid the

resistance of the medium which must destroy the uniformity of the horizontal

motion and change the law of acceleration of falling bodies. These various

difficulties  render  it  highly  improbable  that  a  result  derived  from  such

unreliable hypotheses should hold true in practice.


Salv. All these difficulties and objections which you urge are so well founded

that it is impossible to remove them; and, as for me, I am ready to admit them

all,  which  indeed  I  think  our  Author  would  also  do.  I  grant  that  these

conclusions  proved  in  the  abstract  will  be  different  when  applied  in  theconcrete and will be fallacious to this extent, that neither will the horizontal

motion be uniform nor the natural acceleration be in the ratio assumed, nor

the path of the projectile a parabola, etc. But, on the other hand, I ask you not

to begrudge our Author that which other eminent men have assumed even if

not strictly true. The authority of Archimedes alone will satisfy everybody. In

his Mechanics and in his first quadrature of the parabola he takes for granted

that the beam of a balance or steelyard is a straight line, every point of which

is equidistant from the common center of all heavy bodies, and that the cords

by which heavy bodies are suspended are parallel to each other.

  Some  consider  this  assumption  permissible  because,  in  practice,  our

instruments and the distances involved are so small in comparison with the

enormous distance from the center of the earth that we may consider a minute

of arc on a great circle as a straight line, and may regard the perpendiculars

let fall from its two extremities as parallel. For if in actual practice one had to

consider such small quantities, it would be necessary first of all to criticise

the architects who presume, by use of a plumbline, to erect high towers with

parallel sides. I may add that, in all their discussions, Archimedes and the

others considered themselves as located at an infinite distance from the center

of the earth, in which case their assumptions were not false, and therefore

their conclusions were absolutely correct. When we wish to apply our proven

conclusions to distances which, though finite, are very large, it is necessary

for us to infer, on the basis of demonstrated truth, what correction is to be

made for the fact that our distance from the center of the earth is not really

infinite, but merely very great in comparison with the small dimensions of

our apparatus. The largest of these will be the range of our projectiles — and

even here we need consider only the artillery — which, however great, will

never exceed four of those miles of which as many thousand separate us from

the center of the earth; and since these paths terminate upon the surface of the

earth only very slight changes can take place in their parabolic figure which,

it is conceded, would be greatly altered if they terminated at the center of the

earth.

  As to the perturbation arising from the resistance of the medium this is

more considerable and does not, on account of its manifold forms, submit to

fixed laws and exact description. Thus if we consider only the resistance

which the air offers to the motions studied by us, we shall see that it disturbs

them all and disturbs them in an infinite variety of ways corresponding to the

infinite variety in the form, weight, and velocity of the projectiles. For as tovelocity, the greater this is, the greater will be the resistance offered by the

air; a resistance which will be greater as the moving bodies become less

dense [men gravi]. So that although the falling body ought to be displaced

[andare accelerandosi]  in  proportion  to  the  square  of  the  duration  of  its

motion, yet no matter how heavy the body, if it falls from a very considerable

height, the resistance of the air will be such as to prevent any increase in

speed and will render the motion uniform; and in proportion as the moving

body is less dense [men grave] this uniformity will be so much the more

quickly attained and after a shorter fall. Even horizontal motion which, if no

impediment were offered, would be uniform and constant is altered by the

resistance of the air and finally ceases; and here again the less dense [più

leggiero] the body the quicker the process. Of these properties [accidenti] of

weight, of velocity, and also of form [figura], infinite in number, it is not

possible to give any exact description; hence, in order to handle this matter in

a  scientific  way,  it  is  necessary  to  cut  loose  from  these  difficulties;  and

having  discovered  and  demonstrated  the  theorems,  in  the  case  of  no

resistance, to use them and apply them with such limitations as experience

will  teach.  And  the  advantage  of  this  method  will  not  be  small;  for  the

material and shape of the projectile may be chosen, as dense and round as

possible, so that it will encounter the least resistance in the medium. Nor will

the spaces and velocities in general be so great but that we shall be easily able

to correct them with precision.

  In  the  case  of  those  projectiles  which  we  use,  made  of  dense  [grave]

material and round in shape, or of lighter material and cylindrical in shape,

such as arrows, thrown from a sling or crossbow, the deviation from an exact

parabolic path is quite insensible. Indeed, if you will allow me a little greater

liberty,  I  can  show  you,  by  two  experiments,  that  the  dimensions  of  our

apparatus are so small that these external and incidental resistances, among

which that of the medium is the most considerable, are scarcely observable.

  I now proceed to the consideration of motions through the air, since it is

with these that we are now especially concerned; the resistance of the air

exhibits itself in two ways: first by offering greater impedance to less dense

than to very dense bodies, and secondly by offering greater resistance to a

body in rapid motion than to the same body in slow motion.

  Regarding the first of these, consider the case of two balls having the same

dimensions, but one weighing ten or twelve times as much as the other; one,say, of lead, the other of oak, both allowed to fall from an elevation of 150 or

200 cubits.

  Experiment shows that they will reach the earth with slight difference in

speed, showing us that in both cases the retardation caused by the air is small;

for if both balls start at the same moment and at the same elevation, and if the

leaden one be slightly retarded and the wooden one greatly retarded, then the

former ought to reach the earth a considerable distance in advance of the

latter, since it is ten times as heavy. But this does not happen; indeed, the

gain in distance of one over the other does not amount to the hundredth part

of the entire fall. And in the case of a ball of stone weighing only a third or

half as much as one of lead, the difference in their times of reaching the earth

will  be  scarcely  noticeable.  Now  since  the  speed  [impeto]  acquired  by  a

leaden ball in falling from a height of 200 cubits is so great that if the motion

remained uniform the ball would, in an interval of time equal to that of the

fall, traverse 400 cubits, and since this speed is so considerable in comparison

with those which, by use of bows or other machines except fire arms, we are

able to give to our projectiles, it follows that we may, without sensible error,

regard as absolutely true those propositions which we are about to prove

without considering the resistance of the medium.

  Passing now to the second case, where we have to show that the resistance

of the air for a rapidly moving body is not very much greater than for one

moving slowly, ample proof is given by the following experiment. Attach to

two threads of equal length — say four or five yards — two equal leaden

balls  and  suspend  them  from  the  ceiling;  now  pull  them  aside  from  the

perpendicular, the one through 80 or more degrees, the other through not

more than four or five degrees; so that, when set free, the one falls, passes

through the perpendicular, and describes large but slowly decreasing arcs of

160, 150, 140 degrees, etc.; the other swinging through small and also slowly

diminishing arcs of 10, 8, 6, degrees, etc.

  In the first place it must be remarked that one pendulum passes through its

arcs of 180°, 160°, etc., in the same time that the other swings through its

10°, 8°, etc., from which it follows that the speed of the first ball is 16 and 18

times greater than that of the second. Accordingly, if the air offers more

resistance to the high speed than to the low, the frequency of vibration in the

large arcs of 180° or 160°, etc., ought to be less than in the small arcs of 10°,

8°, 4°, etc., and even less than in arcs of 2°, or 1°; but this prediction is not

verified by experiment; because if two persons start to count the vibrations,the one the large, the other the small, they will discover that after counting

tens and even hundreds they will not differ by a single vibration, not even by

a fraction of one.


Sagr. On the contrary, since we cannot deny that the air hinders both of these

motions, both becoming slower and finally vanishing, we have to admit that

the retardation occurs in the same proportion in each case. But how? How,

indeed,  could  the  resistance  offered  to  the  one  body  be  greater  than  that

offered to the other except by the impartation of more momentum and speed

[impeto e velocità] to the fast body than to the slow? And if this is so the

speed with which a body moves is at once the cause and measure [cagione e

misura] of the resistance which it meets. Therefore, all motions, fast or slow,

are hindered and diminished in the same proportion; a result, it seems to me,

of no small importance.


Salv. We  are  able,  therefore,  in  this  second  case  to  say  that  the  errors,

neglecting those which are accidental, in the results which we are about to

demonstrate  are  small  in  the  case  of  our  machines  where  the  velocities

employed are mostly very great and the distances negligible in comparison

with the semidiameter of the earth or one of its great circles.


Simp. I would like to hear your reason for putting the projectiles of fire arms,

i. e., those using powder, in a different class from the projectiles employed in

bows, slings, and crossbows, on the ground of their not being equally subject

to change and resistance from the air.


Salv. I am led to this view by the excessive and, so to speak, supernatural

violence with which such projectiles are launched; for, indeed, it appears to

me that without exaggeration one might say that the speed of a ball fired

either from a musket or from a piece of ordnance is supernatural. For if such

a ball be allowed to fall from some great elevation its speed will, owing to the

resistance of the air, not go on increasing indefinitely; that which happens to

bodies  of  small  density  in  falling  through  short  distances  —  I  mean  the

reduction of their motion to uniformity — will also happen to a ball of iron or

lead after it has fallen a few thousand cubits; this terminal or final speed

[terminata velocità] is the maximum which such a heavy body can naturallyacquire in falling through the air. This speed I estimate to be much smaller

than that impressed upon the ball by the burning powder.

  An  appropriate  experiment  will  serve  to  demonstrate  this  fact.  From  a

height of one hundred or more cubits fire a gun [archibuso] loaded with a

lead bullet, vertically downwards upon a stone pavement; with the same gun

shoot  against  a  similar  stone  from  a  distance  of  one  or  two  cubits,  and

observe which of the two balls is the more flattened. Now if the ball which

has come from the greater elevation is found to be the less flattened of the

two,  this  will  show  that  the  air  has  hindered  and  diminished  the  speed

initially imparted to the bullet by the powder, and that the air will not permit

a bullet to acquire so great a speed, no matter from what height it falls; for if

the speed impressed upon the ball by the fire does not exceed that acquired

by it in falling freely [naturalmente] then its downward blow ought to be

greater rather than less.

  This  experiment  I  have  not  performed,  but  I  am  of  the  opinion  that  a

musket-ball or cannon-shot, falling from a height as great as you please, will

not deliver so strong a blow as it would if fired into a wall only a few cubits

distant, i. e., at such a short range that the splitting or rending of the air will

not be sufficient to rob the shot of that excess of supernatural violence given

it by the powder.

  The enormous momentum [impeto] of these violent shots may cause some

deformation of the trajectory, making the beginning of the parabola flatter

and less curved than the end; but, so far as our Author is concerned, this is a

matter of small consequence in practical operations, the main one of which is

the preparation of a table of ranges for shots of high elevation, giving the

distance attained by the ball as a function of the angle of elevation; and since

shots of this kind are fired from mortars [mortari] using small charges and

imparting  no  supernatural  momentum  [impeto sopranaturale]  they  follow

their prescribed paths very exactly.

  But now let us proceed with the discussion in which the Author invites us

to the study and investigation of the motion of a body [impeto del mobile]

when that motion is compounded of two others; and first the case in which

the two are uniform, the one horizontal, the other vertical.


                              Theorem II, Proposition IIWhen the motion of a body is the resultant of two uniform motions, one

horizontal, the other perpendicular, the square of the resultant momentum is
                                                                          38
equal to the sum of the squares of the two component momenta.

38
 In the original this theorem reads as follows:


“Si  aliquod  mobile  duplici  motu  æquabili  moveatur,  nempe  orizontali  et

perpendiculari, impetus seu momentum lationis ex utroque motu compositæ

erit potentia æqualis ambobus momentis priorum motuum.”


For the justification of this translation of the word “potentia” and of the use

of the adjective “resultant” see p. 266 below. [Trans.]


  Let  us  imagine  any  body  urged  by  two  uniform  motions  and  let ab

represent  the  vertical  displacement,  while bc  represents  the  displacement

which, in the same interval of time, takes place in a horizontal direction. If

then the distances ab and bc are traversed, during the same time-interval, with

uniform motions the corresponding momenta will be to each other as the

distances ab and bc are to each other; but the body which is urged by these

two motions describes the diagonal ac; its momentum is proportional to ac.

Also the square of ac is equal to the sum of the squares of ab and bc. Hence

the square of the resultant momentum is equal to the sum of the squares of

the two momenta ab and bc.

  q. e. d.Simp. At this point there is just one slight difficulty which needs to be cleared

up; for it seems to me that the conclusion just reached contradicts a previous
            39
proposition in which it is claimed that the speed [impeto] of a body coming

from a to b is equal to that in coming from a to c; while now you conclude

that the speed [impeto] at c is greater than that at b.

39
 See p. 169 above. [Trans.]


Salv. Both propositions, Simplicio, are true, yet there is a great difference

between them. Here we are speaking of a body urged by a single motion

which is the resultant of two uniform motions, while there we were speaking

of two bodies each urged with naturally accelerated motions, one along the

vertical ab the other along the inclined plane ac. Besides the time-intervals

were there not supposed to be equal, that along the incline ac being greater

than that along the vertical ab; but the motions of which we now speak, those

along ab, bc, ac, are uniform and simultaneous.


Simp. Pardon me; I am satisfied; pray go on.

  Our Author next undertakes to explain what happens when a body is urged

by a motion compounded of one which is horizontal and uniform and of

another  which  is  vertical  but  naturally  accelerated;  from  these  two

components results the path of a projectile, which is a parabola. The problem

is to determine the speed [impeto] of the projectile at each point. With this

purpose in view our Author sets forth as follows the manner, or rather the

method, of measuring such speed [impeto] along the path which is taken by a

heavy body starting from rest and falling with a naturally accelerated motion.

                            Theorem III, Proposition III


Let the motion take place along the line ab, starting from rest at a, and in this

line choose any point c. Let ac represent the time, or the measure of the time,

required for the body to fall through the space ac; let ac also represent the

velocity [impetus seu momentum] at c acquired by a fall through the distance

ac. In the line ab select any other point b. The problem now is to determine

the velocity at b acquired by a body in falling through the distance ab and to

express this in terms of the velocity at c, the measure of which is the length

ac. Take as a mean proportional between ac and ab. We shall prove that the

velocity at b is to that at c as the length as is to the length ac. Draw thehorizontal line cd, having twice the length of ac, and be, having twice the

length of ba. It then follows, from the preceding theorems, that a body falling

through the distance ac, and turned so as to move along the horizontal cd

with a uniform speed equal to that acquired on reaching c will traverse the

distance cd  in  the  same  interval  of  time  as  that  required  to  fall  with

accelerated motion from a to c. Likewise be will be traversed in the same

time as ba. But the time of descent through ab is as; hence the horizontal

distance be is also traversed in the time as. Take a point l such that the time

as is to the time ac as be is to bl; since the motion along be is uniform, the

distance bl, if traversed with the speed [momentum celeritatis] acquired at b,

will occupy the time ac; but in this same time-interval, ac, the distance cd is

traversed with the speed acquired in c. Now two speeds are to each other as

the distances traversed in equal intervals of time. Hence the speed at c is to

the speed at b as cd is to bl. But since dc is to be as their halves, namely, as

ca is to ba, and since be is to bl as ba is to sa; it follows that dc is to bl as ca

is to sa. In other words, the speed at c is to that at b as ca is to sa, that is, as

the time of fall through ab.





















  The method of measuring the speed of a body along the direction of its fall

is thus clear; the speed is assumed to increase directly as the time.  But before we proceed further, since this discussion is to deal with the

motion  compounded  of  a  uniform  horizontal  one  and  one  accelerated

vertically downwards — the path of a projectile, namely, a parabola — it is

necessary that we define some common standard by which we may estimate

the velocity, or momentum [velocitatem, impetum seu momentum] of both

motions; and since from the innumerable uniform velocities one only, and

that not selected at random, is to be compounded with a velocity acquired by

naturally accelerated motion, I can think of no simpler way of selecting and
                                                                    40
measuring this than to assume another of the same kind. For the sake of

clearness, draw the vertical line ac to meet the horizontal line bc. Ac is the

height and bc the amplitude of the semi-parabola ab, which is the resultant of

the  two  motions,  one  that  of  a  body  falling  from  rest  at a,  through  the

distance ac, with naturally accelerated motion, the other a uniform motion

along the horizontal ad. The speed acquired at c by a fall through the distance

ac is determined by the height ac; for the speed of a body falling from the

same elevation is always one and the same; but along the horizontal one may

give a body an infinite number of uniform speeds. However, in order that I

may  select  one  out  of  this  multitude  and  separate  it  from  the  rest  in  a

perfectly definite manner, I will extend the height ca upwards to e just as far

as is necessary and will call this distance ae the “sublimity.” Imagine a body

to fall from rest at e; it is clear that we may make its terminal speed at a the

same as that with which the same body travels along the horizontal line ad;

this speed will be such that, in the time of descent along ea, it will describe a

horizontal distance twice the length of ea. This preliminary remark seems

necessary.

40
 Galileo here proposes to employ as a standard of velocity the terminal speed of a body falling freely
from a given height. [Trans.]  The reader is reminded that above I have called the horizontal line cb the

“amplitude” of the semi-parabola ab; the axis ac of this parabola, I have

called  its  “altitude”;  but  the  line ea  the  fall  along  which  determines  the

horizontal speed I have called the “sublimity.” These matters having been

explained, I proceed with the demonstration.


Sagr. Allow me, please, to interrupt in order that I may point out the beautiful

agreement  between  this  thought  of  the  Author  and  the  views  of  Plato

concerning the origin of the various uniform speeds with which the heavenly

bodies revolve. The latter chanced upon the idea that a body could not pass

from rest to any given speed and maintain it uniformly except by passing

through all the degrees of speed intermediate between the given speed and

rest.  Plato  thought  that  God,  after  having  created  the  heavenly  bodies,

assigned them the proper and uniform speeds with which they were forever torevolve;  and  that  He  made  them  start  from  rest  and  move  over  definite

distances  under  a  natural  and  rectilinear  acceleration  such  as  governs  the

motion of terrestrial bodies. He added that once these bodies had gained their

proper and permanent speed, their rectilinear motion was converted into a

circular one, the only motion capable of maintaining uniformity, a motion in

which  the  body  revolves  without  either  receding  from  or  approaching  its

desired goal. This conception is truly worthy of Plato; and it is to be all the

more  highly  prized  since  its  underlying  principles  remained  hidden  until

discovered by our Author who removed from them the mask and poetical

dress and set forth the idea in correct historical perspective. In view of the

fact  that  astronomical  science  furnishes  us  such  complete  information

concerning the size of the planetary orbits, the distances of these bodies from

their centers of revolution, and their velocities, I cannot help thinking that our

Author (to whom this idea of Plato was not unknown) had some curiosity to

discover whether or not a definite “sublimity” might be assigned to each

planet, such that, if it were to start from rest at this particular height and to

fall with naturally accelerated motion along a straight line, and were later to

change the speed thus acquired into uniform motion, the size of its orbit and

its period of revolution would be those actually observed.


Salv. I  think  I  remember  his  having  told  me  that  he  once  made  the

computation and found a satisfactory correspondence with observation. But

he did not wish to speak of it, lest in view of the odium which his many new

discoveries had already brought upon him, this might be adding fuel to the

fire. But if any one desires such information he can obtain it for himself from

the theory set forth in the present treatment.

  We now proceed with the matter in hand, which is to prove:


                              Problem I, Proposition IV


To determine the momentum of a projectile at each particular point in its

given parabolic path.

  Let bec be the semi-parabola whose amplitude is cd and whose height is

db, which latter extended upwards cuts the tangent of the parabola ca in a.

Through the vertex draw the horizontal line bi parallel to cd. Now if the

amplitude cd is equal to the entire height da, then bi will be equal to ba and

also to bd; and if we take ab as the measure of the time required for fallthrough  the  distance ab  and  also  of  the  momentum  acquired  at b  in

consequence  of  its  fall  from  rest  at a,  then  if.  we  turn  into  a  horizontal

direction the momentum acquired by fall through ab [impetum ab] the space

traversed in the same interval of time will be represented by dc which is twice

bi. But a body which falls from rest at b along the line bd will during the

same time-interval fall through the height of the parabola bd. Hence a body

falling from rest at a, turned into a horizontal direction with the speed ab will

traverse a space equal to dc. Now if one superposes upon this motion a fall

along bd, traversing the height bd while the parabola bc is described, then the

momentum of the body at the terminal point c is the resultant of a uniform

horizontal  momentum,  whose  value  is  represented  by ab,  and  of  another

momentum acquired by fall from b to the terminal point d or c; these two

momenta are equal. If, therefore, we take ab to be the measure of one of these

momenta, say, the uniform horizontal one, then bi, which is equal to bd, will

represent the momentum acquired at d or c; and ia will represent the resultant

of these two momenta, that is, the total momentum with which the projectile,

travelling along the parabola, strikes at c.

  With  this  in  mind  let  us  take  any  point  on  the  parabola,  say e,  and

determine the momentum with which the projectile passes that point. Draw

the horizontal ef and take bg a mean proportional between bd and bf. Now

since ab,  or bd,  is  assumed  to  be  the  measure  of  the  time  and  of  the

momentum [momentum velocitatis] acquired by falling from rest at b through

the  distance bd,  it  follows  that bg  will  measure  the  time  and  also  the

momentum [impetus] acquired at f by fall from b. If therefore we lay off bo,

equal to bg, the diagonal line joining a and o will represent the momentum at

the  point e;  because  the  length ab  has  been  assumed  to  represent  the

momentum at b which, after diversion into a horizontal direction, remains

constant; and because bo measures the momentum at f or e, acquired by fall,

from rest at b, through the height bf. But the square of ao equals the sum of

the squares of ab and bo. Hence the theorem sought.Sagr. The manner in which you compound these different momenta to obtain

their  resultant  strikes  me  as  so  novel  that  my  mind  is  left  in  no  small

confusion. I do not refer to the composition of two uniform motions, even

when unequal, and when one takes place along a horizontal, the other along a

vertical direction; because in this case I am thoroughly convinced that the

resultant is a motion whose square is equal to the sum of the squares of the

two components. The confusion arises when one undertakes to compound a

uniform horizontal motion with a vertical one which is naturally accelerated.

I trust, therefore, we may pursue this discussion more at length.

  And I need this even more than you since I am not yet as clear in my mind

as I ought to be concerning those fundamental propositions upon which the

others rest. Even in the case of the two uniform motions, one horizontal, the

other perpendicular, I wish to understand better the manner in which youobtain  the  resultant  from  the  components.  Now,  Salviati,  you  understand

what we need and what we desire.

Salv. Your request is altogether reasonable and I will see whether my long

consideration of these matters will enable me to make them clear to you. But

you must excuse me if in the explanation I repeat many things already said by

the Author.

  Concerning  motions  and  their  velocities  or  momenta  [movimenti  e  lor

velocità o impeti] whether uniform or naturally accelerated, one cannot speak

definitely until he has established a measure for such velocities and also for

time. As for time we have the already widely adopted hours, first minutes and

second minutes. So for velocities, just as for intervals of time, there is need of

a common standard which shall be understood and accepted by everyone, and

which  shall  be  the  same  for  all.  As  has  already  been  stated,  the  Author

considers the velocity of a freely falling body adapted to this purpose, since

this velocity increases according to the same law in all parts of the world;

thus  for  instance  the  speed  acquired  by  a  leaden  ball  of  a  pound  weight

starting from rest and falling vertically through the height of, say, a spear’s

length  is  the  same  in  all  places;  it  is  therefore  excellently  adapted  for

representing the momentum [impeto] acquired in the case of natural fall.

  It still remains for us to discover a method of measuring momentum in the

case of uniform motion in such a way that all who discuss the subject will

form the same conception of its size and velocity [grandezza e velocità]. This

will prevent one person from imagining it larger, another smaller, than it

really is; so that in the composition of a given uniform motion with one

which is accelerated different men may not obtain different values for the

resultant.  In  order  to  determine  and  represent  such  a  momentum  and

particular  speed  [impeto  e  velocità  particolare]  our  Author  has  found  no

better method than to use the momentum acquired by a body in naturally

accelerated motion. The speed of a body which has in this manner acquired

any momentum whatever will, when converted into uniform motion, retain

precisely such a speed as, during a time-interval equal to that of the fall, will

carry the body through a distance equal to twice that of the fall. But since this

matter is one which is fundamental in our discussion it is well that we make it

perfectly clear by means of some particular example.

  Let  us  consider  the  speed  and  momentum  acquired  by  a  body  falling

through the height, say, of a spear [picca] as a standard which we may use in

the measurement of other speeds and momenta as occasion demands; assumefor instance that the time of such a fall is four seconds [minuti secondi d’ora];

now in order to measure the speed acquired from a fall through any other

height, whether greater or less, one must not conclude that these speeds bear

to one another the same ratio as the heights of fall; for instance, it is not true

that a fall through four times a given height confers a speed four times as

great as that acquired by descent through the given height; because the speed

of a naturally accelerated motion does not vary in proportion to the time. As

has been shown above, the ratio of the spaces is equal to the square of the

ratio of the times.

  If, then, as is often done for the sake of brevity, we take the same limited

straight line as the measure of the speed, and of the time, and also of the

space traversed during that time, it follows that the duration of fall and the

speed acquired by the same body in passing over any other distance, is not

represented by this second distance, but by a mean proportional between the

two distances. This I can better illustrate by an example. In the vertical line

ac, lay off the portion ab to represent the distance traversed by a body falling

freely with accelerated motion: the time of fall may be represented by any

limited straight line, but for the sake of brevity, we shall represent it by the

same  length ab;  this  length  may  also  be  employed  as  a  measure  of  the

momentum  and  speed  acquired  during  the  motion;  in  short,  let ab  be  a

measure of the various physical quantities which enter this discussion.  Having agreed arbitrarily upon ab as a measure of these three different

quantities, namely, space, time, and momentum, our next task is to find the

time  required  for  fall  through  a  given  vertical  distance ac,  also  the

momentum  acquired  at  the  terminal  point c,  both  of  which  are  to  be

expressed in terms of the time and momentum represented by ab. These two

required  quantities  are  obtained  by  laying  off ad,  a  mean  proportional

between ab and ac; in other words, the time of fall from a to c is represented

by ad on the same scale on which we agreed that the time of fall from a to b

should be represented by ab. In like manner we may say that the momentum

[impeto o grado di velocità] acquired at c is related to that acquired at b, in

the same manner that the line ad is related to ab, since the velocity varies

directly as the time, a conclusion, which although employed as a postulate in

Proposition III, is here amplified by the Author.  This point being clear and well-established we pass to the consideration of

the momentum [impeto] in the case of two compound motions, one of which

is compounded of a uniform horizontal and a uniform vertical motion, while

the other is compounded of a uniform horizontal and a naturally accelerated

vertical motion. If both components are uniform, and one at right angles to

the other, we have already seen that the square of the resultant is obtained by

adding  the  squares  of  the  components  [p.  257]  as  will  be  clear  from  the

following illustration.

  Let  us  imagine  a  body  to  move  along  the  vertical ab  with  a  uniform

momentum  [impeto]  of  3,  and  on  reaching b  to  move  toward c  with  a

momentum [velocità ed impeto] of 4, so that during the same time-interval it

will traverse 3 cubits along the vertical and 4 along the horizontal. But a

particle which moves with the resultant velocity [velocità] will, in the same

time, traverse the diagonal ac, whose length is not 7 cubits — the sum of ab

(3) and bc (4) — but 5, which is in potenza equal to the sum of 3 and 4, that

is, the squares of 3 and 4 when added make 25, which is the square of ac, and

is equal to the sum of the squares of ab and bc. Hence ac is represented by

the side — or we may say the root — of a square whose area is 25, namely 5.




















  As a fixed and certain rule for obtaining the momentum which results

from  two  uniform  momenta,  one  vertical,  the  other  horizontal,  we  have

therefore  the  following:  take  the  square  of  each,  add  these  together,  andextract the square root of the sum, which will be the momentum resulting

from the two. Thus, in the above example, the body which in virtue of its

vertical motion would strike the horizontal plane with a momentum [forza] of

3, would owing to its horizontal motion alone strike at c with a momentum of

4; but if the body strikes with a momentum which is the resultant of these

two, its blow will be that of a body moving with a momentum [velocità e

forza] of 5; and such a blow will be the same at all points of the diagonal ac,

since its components are always the same and never increase or diminish.

  Let  us  now  pass  to  the  consideration  of  a  uniform  horizontal  motion

compounded with the vertical motion of a freely falling body starting from

rest.  It  is  at  once  clear  that  the  diagonal  which  represents  the  motion

compounded of these two is not a straight line, but, as has been demonstrated,

a  semi-parabola,  in  which  the  momentum  [impeto]  is  always  increasing

because the speed [velocità] of the vertical component is always increasing.

Wherefore, to determine the momentum [impeto] at any given point in the

parabolic diagonal, it is necessary first to fix upon the uniform horizontal

momentum [impeto] and then, treating the body as one falling freely, to find

the vertical momentum at the given point; this latter can be determined only

by taking into account the duration of fall, a consideration which does not

enter into the composition of two uniform motions where the velocities and

momenta are always the same; but here where one of the component motions

has  an  initial  value  of  zero  and  increases  its  speed  [velocità]  in  direct

proportion  to  the  time,  it  follows  that  the  time  must  determine  the  speed

[velocità]  at  the  assigned  point.  It  only  remains  to  obtain  the  momentum

resulting from these two components (as in the case of uniform motions) by

placing the square of the resultant equal to the sum of the squares of the two

components. But here again it is better to illustrate by means of an example.

  On the vertical ac lay off any portion ab which we shall employ as a

measure  of  the  space  traversed  by  a  body  falling  freely  along  the

perpendicular, likewise as a measure of the time and also of the speed [grado

di velocità] or, we may say, of the momenta [impeti]. It is at once clear that if

the momentum of a body at b, after having fallen from rest at a, be diverted

along the horizontal direction bd, with uniform motion, its speed will be such

that,  during  the  time-interval ab,  it  will  traverse  a  distance  which  is

represented by the line bd and which is twice as great as ab. Now choose a

point c, such that bc shall be equal to ab, and through c draw the line ce equaland parallel to bd; through the points b and e draw the parabola bei. And

since, during the time-interval ab, the horizontal distance bd or ce, double the

length ab, is traversed with the momentum ab, and since during an equal

time-interval the vertical distance bc is traversed, the body acquiring at c a

momentum represented by the same horizontal, bd, it follows that during the

time ab the body will pass from b to e along the parabola be, and will reach e

with a momentum compounded of two momenta each equal to ab. And since

one of these is horizontal and the other vertical, the square of the resultant

momentum is equal to the sum of the squares of these two components, i. e.,

equal to twice either one of them.





























  Therefore, if we lay off the distance bf, equal to ba, and draw the diagonal

af, it follows that the momentum [impeto e percossa] at e will exceed that of

a body at b after having fallen from a, or what is the same thing, will exceedthe horizontal momentum [percossa dell’impeto] along bd, in the ratio of af

to ab.

  Suppose now we choose for the height of fall a distance bo which is not

equal  to  but  greater  than ab,  and  suppose  that bg  represents  a  mean

proportional between ba and bo; then, still retaining ba as a measure of the

distance fallen through, from rest at a, to b, also as a measure of the time and

of the momentum which the falling body acquires at b, it follows that bg will

be  the  measure  of  the  time  and  also  of  the  momentum  which  the  body

acquires in falling from b to o. Likewise just as the momentum ab during the

time ab carried the body a distance along the horizontal equal to twice ab, so

now, during the time-interval bg, the body will be carried in a horizontal

direction through a distance which is greater in the ratio of bg to ba. Lay off

lb equal to bg and draw the diagonal al, from which we have a quantity

compounded  of  two  velocities  [impeti]  one  horizontal,  the  other  vertical;

these  determine  the  parabola.  The  horizontal  and  uniform  velocity  is  that

acquired at b in falling from a; the other is that acquired at o, or, we may say,

at i, by a body falling through the distance bo, during a time measured by the

line bg, which line bg also represents the momentum of the body. And in like

manner we may, by taking a mean proportional between the two heights,

determine the momentum [impeto] at the extreme end of the parabola where

the height is less than the sublimity ab; this mean proportional is to be drawn

along the horizontal in place of bf, and also another diagonal in place of af,

which  diagonal  will  represent  the  momentum  at  the  extreme  end  of  the

parabola.

  To what has hitherto been said concerning the momenta, blows or shocks

of  projectiles,  we  must  add  another  very  important  consideration;  to

determine the force and energy of the shock [forza ed energia della percossa]

it is not sufficient to consider only the speed of the projectiles, but we must

also take into account the nature and condition of the target which, in no

small degree, determines the efficiency of the blow. First of all it is well

known  that  the  target  suffers  violence  from  the  speed  [velocità]  of  the

projectile in proportion as it partly or entirely stops the motion; because if the

blow  falls  upon  an  object  which  yields  to  the  impulse  [velocità  del

percuziente] without resistance such a blow will be of no effect; likewise

when one attacks his enemy with a spear and overtakes him at an instant

when  he  is  fleeing  with  equal  speed  there  will  be  no  blow  but  merely  aharmless touch. But if the shock falls upon an object which yields only in part

then  the  blow  will  not  have  its  full  effect,  but  the  damage  will  be  in

proportion  to  the  excess  of  the  speed  of  the  projectile  over  that  of  the

receding body; thus, for example, if the shot reaches the target with a speed

of 10 while the latter recedes with a speed of 4, the momentum and shock

[impeto e percossa]  will  be  represented  by  6.  Finally  the  blow  will  be  a

maximum, in so far as the projectile is concerned, when the target does not

recede at all but if possible completely resists and stops the motion of the

projectile. I have said in so far as the projectile is concerned because if the

target  should  approach  the  projectile  the  shock  of  collision  [colpo  e

l’incontro] would be greater in proportion as the sum of the two speeds is

greater than that of the projectile alone.

  Moreover it is to be observed that the amount of yielding in the target

depends  not  only  upon  the  quality  of  the  material,  as  regards  hardness,

whether  it  be  of  iron,  lead,  wool,  etc.,  but  also  upon  its  position.  If  the

position  is  such  that  the  shot  strikes  it  at  right  angles,  the  momentum

imparted  by  the  blow  [impeto  del  colpo]  will  be  a  maximum;  but  if  the

motion be oblique, that is to say slanting, the blow will be weaker; and more

and  more  so  in  proportion  to  the  obliquity;  for,  no  matter  how  hard  the

material of the target thus situated, the entire momentum [impeto e moto] of

the shot will not be spent and stopped; the projectile will slide by and will, to

some extent, continue its motion along the surface of the opposing body.

  All that has been said above concerning the amount of momentum in the

projectile at the extremity of the parabola must be understood to refer to a

blow received on a line at right angles to this parabola or along the tangent to

the  parabola  at  the  given  point;  for,  even  though  the  motion  has  two

components, one horizontal, the other vertical, neither will the momentum

along the horizontal nor that upon a plane perpendicular to the horizontal be a

maximum, since each of these will be received obliquely.


Sagr. Your having mentioned these blows and shocks recalls to my mind a

problem, or rather a question, in mechanics of which no author has given a

solution or said anything which diminishes my astonishment or even partly

relieves my mind.

  My difficulty and surprise consist in not being able to see whence and

upon what principle is derived the energy and immense force [energia e forza

immensa] which makes its appearance in a blow; for instance we see thesimple blow of a hammer, weighing not more than 8 or 10 lbs., overcoming

resistances which, without a blow, would not yield to the weight of a body

producing impetus by pressure alone, even though that body weighed many

hundreds of pounds. I would like to discover a method of measuring the force

[forza] of such a percussion. I can hardly think it infinite, but incline rather to

the view that it has its limit and can be counterbalanced and measured by

other forces, such as weights, or by levers or screws or other mechanical

instruments  which  are  used  to  multiply  forces  in  a  manner  which  I

satisfactorily understand.


Salv. You are not alone in your surprise at this effect or in obscurity as to the

cause of this remarkable property. I studied this matter myself for a while in

vain;  but  my  confusion  merely  increased  until  finally  meeting  our

Academician I received from him great consolation. First he told me that he

also had for a long time been groping in the dark; but later he said that, after

having  spent  some  thousands  of  hours  in  speculating  and  contemplating

thereon, he had arrived at some notions which are far removed from our

earlier ideas and which are remarkable for their novelty. And since now I

know that you would gladly hear what these novel ideas are I shall not wait

for you to ask but promise that, as soon as our discussion of projectiles is

completed, I will explain all these fantasies, or if you please, vagaries, as far

as I can recall them from the words of our Academician. In the meantime we

proceed with the propositions of the author.


                              Proposition V, Problem


Having given a parabola, find the point, in its axis extended upwards, from

which a particle must fall in order to describe this same parabola.                                        Corollary


Hence it follows that half the base, or amplitude, of the semi-parabola (which

is one-quarter of the entire amplitude) is a mean proportional between its

altitude and the sublimity from which a falling body will describe this same

parabola.


                              Proposition VI, Problem


Given the sublimity and the altitude of a parabola, to find its amplitude.

  Let the line ac, in which lie the given altitude cb and sublimity ab, be

perpendicular to the horizontal line cd. The problem is to find the amplitude,

along the horizontal cd, of the semi-parabola which is described with the

sublimity ba and altitude bc. Lay off cd equal to twice the mean proportionalbetween cb and ba. Then cd will be the amplitude sought, as is evident from

the preceding proposition.






























                                Theoremposition. Pro VII


If projectiles describe semi-parabolas of the same amplitude, the momentum

required to describe that one whose amplitude is double its altitude is less

than that required for any other.

  Let gm be a mean proportional between ab and gl; then gm will [Prop. IV]

represent the time and momentum acquired at g by a fall from l; for ab has

been assumed as a measure of both time and momentum. Again let gn be a

mean proportional between bc and cg; it will then represent the time and

momentum which the body acquires at c in falling from g. If now we join m

and n,  this  line mn  will  represent  the  momentum  at d  of  the  projectiletraversing the parabola dg; which momentum is, I say, greater than that of the

projectile travelling along the parabola bd whose measure was given by ae.

For since gn has been taken as a mean proportional between bc and gc; and

since bc is equal to be and also to kg (each of them being the half of dc) it

follows that cg:gn=gn:gk,  and  as cg or (hg)  is  to gk  so  is  to to:  but  by

construction hg:gk=gk:gl. Hence :=gk:gl. But gk:gl=:, since gm is a mean

proportional between kg and gl. Therefore the three squares ng, kg, mg form

a continued proportion, :=: And the sum of the two extremes which is equal

to the square of mn is greater than twice the square of gk; but the square of

ae is double the square of gk. Hence the square of mn is greater than the

square of ae and the length mn is greater than the length ae.

  q. e. d.


                                        Corollary


The force of rigid demonstrations such as occur only in mathematics fills me

with wonder and delight. From accounts given by gunners, I was already

aware of the fact that in the use of cannon and mortars, the maximum range,

that is the one in which the shot goes farthest, is obtained when the elevation

is 45° or, as they say, at the sixth point of the quadrant; but to understand

why  this  happens  far  outweighs  the  mere  information  obtained  by  the

testimony of others or even by repeated experiment.


Salv. What you say is very true. The knowledge of a single fact acquired

through  a  discovery  of  its  causes  prepares  the  mind  to  understand  and

ascertain other facts without need of recourse to experiment, precisely as in

the  present  case,  where  by  argumentation  alone  the  Author  proves  with

certainty that the maximum range occurs when the elevation is 45°. He thus

demonstrates what has perhaps never been observed in experience, namely,

that of other shots those which exceed or fall short of 45° by equal amounts

have equal ranges; so that if the balls have been fired one at an elevation of 7

points, the other at 5, they will strike the level at the same distance: the same

is true if the shots are fired at 8 and at 4 points, at 9 and at 3, etc. Now let us

hear the demonstration of this.


                              Theorem. Proposition VIIIThe amplitudes of two parabolas described by projectiles fired with the same

speed, but at angles of elevation which exceed and fall short of 45° by equal

amounts, are equal to each other.

  In the triangle mcb let the horizontal side bc and the vertical cm, which

form a right angle at c, be equal to each other; then the angle mbc will be a

semi-right angle; let the line cm be prolonged to d, such a point that the two

angles  at  b,  namely  mbe  and  mbd,  one  above  and  the  other  below  the

diagonal mb, shall be equal. It is now to be proved that in the case of two

parabolas described by two projectiles fired from b with the same speed, one

at the angle of ebc, the other at the angle of dbc, their amplitudes will be

equal. Now since the external angle bmc is equal to the sum of the internal

angles mdb and dbm we may also equate to them the angle mbc; but if we

replace the angle dbm by mbe, then this same angle mbc is equal to the two

mbe and bdc: and if we subtract from each side of this equation the angle

mbe, we have the remainder bdc equal to the remainder ebc. Hence the two

triangles dcb and bce are similar. Bisect the straight lines dc and ec in the

points h and f: and draw the lines hi and fg parallel to the horizontal cb, and

choose l such that dh:hi=ih:hl. Then the triangle ihl will be similar to ihd, and

also to the triangle egf; and since ih and gf are equal, each being half of bc, it

follows that hl is equal to fe and also to fc; and if we add to each of these the

common part fh, it will be seen that ch is equal to fl.  Let us now imagine a parabola described through the points h and b whose

altitude is hc and sublimity hl. Its amplitude will be cb which is double the

length hi since hi is a mean proportional between dh (or ch) and hl. The line

db is tangent to the parabola at b, since ch is equal to hd. If again we imagine

a  parabola  described  through  the  points f  and b,  with  a  sublimity fl and

altitude fc, of which the mean proportional is fg, or one-half of cb, then, as

before, will cb be the amplitude and the line eb a tangent at b; for ef and fc

are equal.

  The  amplitudes  of  two  parabolas  are  equal  when  their  altitudes  and

sublimities are inversely proportional.


                      Lemma for the following PropositionIf a straight line be cut at any point whatever and mean proportionals between

this line and each of its parts be taken, the sum of the squares of these mean

proportionals is equal to the square of the entire line.

  Let  the  line ab  be  cut  at c.  Then  I  say  that  the  square  of  the  mean

proportional between ab and ac plus the square of the mean proportional

between ab and cb is equal to the square of the whole line ab. This is evident

as  soon  as  we  describe  a  semicircle  upon  the  entire  line ab,  erect  a

perpendicular cd at c, and draw da and db. For da is a mean proportional

between ab and ac while db is a mean proportional between ab and bc: and

since the angle adb, inscribed in a semicircle, is a right angle the sum of the

squares of the lines da and db is equal to the square of the entire line ab.

Hence follows the proposition.




















                              Theorem. Proposition X


The  momentum  [impetus  seu  momentum]  acquired  by  a  particle  at  the

terminal point of any semi-parabola is equal to that which it would acquire in

falling through a vertical distance equal to the sum of the sublimity and the
                                41
altitude of the semi-parabola.

41
  In  modern  mechanics  this  well-known  theorem  assumes  the  following  form: The  speed  of  a
projectile at any point is that produced by a fall from the directrix. [Trans.]  And since dc has been cut at some point a and since cf and ce are mean

proportionals between the whole of cd and its parts, da and ac, it follows,

from  the  preceding  lemma,  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  these  mean

proportionals is equal to the square of the whole: but the square of ef is also

equal to the sum of these same squares; whence it follows that the line ef is

equal to dc.

  Accordingly the momentum acquired at c by a particle in falling from d is

the same as that acquired at b by a particle traversing the parabola ab.

  q. e. d.


                                        Corollary


Hence  it  follows  that,  in  the  case  of  all  parabolas  where  the  sum  of  the

sublimity and altitude is a constant, the momentum at the terminal point is a

constant.


                              Problem. Proposition XI


Given the amplitude and the speed [impetus] at the terminal point of a semi-

parabola, to find its altitude.

  Let  the  given  speed  be  represented  by  the  vertical  line ab,  and  the

amplitude by the horizontal line bc; it is required to find the sublimity of the

semi-parabola  whose  terminal  speed  is ab  and  amplitude bc.  From  what

precedes  [Cor.  Prop.  V]  it  is  clear  that  half  the  amplitude bc  is  a  mean

proportional between the altitude and sublimity of the parabola of which the

terminal speed is equal, in accordance with the preceding proposition, to the

speed acquired by a body in falling from rest at a through the distance ab.

Therefore the line ba must be cut at a point such that the rectangle formed by

its two parts will be equal to the square of half bc, namely bd. Necessarily,

therefore, bd must not exceed the half of ba; for of all the rectangles formed

by parts of a straight line the one of greatest area is obtained when the line is

divided into two equal parts. Let e be the middle point of the line ab; and

now if bd be equal to be the problem is solved; for be will be the altitude and

ea the sublimity of the parabola. (Incidentally we may observe a consequence

already  demonstrated,  namely:  of  all  parabolas  described  with  any  given

terminal speed that for which the elevation is 45° will have the maximum

amplitude.)  But suppose that bd is less than half of ba which is to be divided in such a

way that the rectangle upon its parts may be equal to the square of bd. Upon

ea as diameter describe a semicircle efa, in which draw the chord af, equal to

bd: join fe and lay off the distance eg equal to fe. Then the rectangle bg.ga

plus the square of eg will be equal to the square of ea, and hence also to the

sum of the squares of af and fe. If now we subtract the equal squares of fe and

ge there remains the rectangle bg.ga equal to the square of af, that is, of bd, a

line  which  is  a  mean  proportional  between bg  and ga;  from  which  it  is

evident that the semi-parabola whose amplitude is bc and whose terminal

speed [impetus] is represented by ba has an altitude bg and a sublimity ga.

  If however we lay off bi equal to ga, then bi will be the altitude of the

semi-parabola ic,  and ia  will  be  its  sublimity.  From  the  preceding

demonstration we are able to solve the following problem.                              Problem. Proposition XII


To  compute  and  tabulate  the  amplitudes  of  all  semi-parabolas  which  are

described by projectiles fired with the same initial speed [impetus].

  From the foregoing it follows that, whenever the sum of the altitude and

sublimity  is  a  constant  vertical  height  for  any  set  of  parabolas,  these

parabolas  are  described  by  projectiles  having  the  same  initial  speed;  all

vertical  heights  thus  obtained  are  therefore  included  between  two  parallel

horizontal lines. Let cb represent a horizontal line and ab a vertical line of

equal length; draw the diagonal ac; the angle acb will be one of 45°; let d be

the middle point of the vertical line ab. Then the semi-parabola dc is the one

which  is  determined  by  the  sublimity ad  and  the  altitude db,  while  its

terminal speed at c is that which would be acquired at b by a particle falling

from rest at a. If now ag be drawn parallel to bc, the sum of the altitude and

sublimity for any other semi-parabola having the same terminal speed will, in

the manner explained, be equal to the distance between the parallel lines ag

and bc. Moreover, since it has already been shown that the amplitudes of two

semi-parabolas are the same when their angles of elevation differ from 45° by

like amounts, it follows that the same computation which is employed for the

larger elevation will serve also for the smaller. Let us also assume 10000 as

the greatest amplitude for a parabola whose angle of elevation is 45°; this

then will be the length of the line ba and the amplitude of the semi-parabola

bc. This number, 10000, is selected because in these calculations we employ

a table of tangents in which this is the value of the tangent of 45°. And now,

coming down to business, draw the straight line ce making an acute angle ecb

greater than acb: the problem now is to draw the semi-parabola to which the

line ec is a tangent and for which the sum of the sublimity and the altitude is
                                                      42
the distance ba. Take the length of the tangentbe from the table of tangents,

using the angle bce as an argument: let f be the middle point of be; next find a

third proportional to bf and bi (the half of bc), which is of necessity greater
        43
than fa.  Call  this fo.  We  have  now  discovered  that,  for  the  parabola

inscribed in the triangle ecb having the tangent ce and the amplitude cb, the

altitude is bf and the sublimity fo. But the total length of bo exceeds the

distance between the parallels ag and cb, while our problem was to keep it

equal to this distance: for both the parabola sought and the parabola dc are

described by projectiles fired from c with the same speed. Now since aninfinite number of greater and smaller parabolas, similar to each other, may

be described within the angle bce we must find another parabola which like

cd has for the sum of its altitude and sublimity the height ba, equal to bc.

42
 The reader will observe that the word “tangent” is here used in a sense somewhat different from that
of the preceding sentence. The “tangent ec” is a line which touches the parabola at c; but the “tangent
eb” is the side of the right-angled triangle which lies opposite the angle ecb, a line whose length is
proportional to the numerical value of the tangent of this angle. [Trans.]

43
 This fact is demonstrated in the third paragraph below. [Trans.]






























  Therefore lay off cr so that, ob:ba=bc:cr; then cr will be the amplitude of

a semi-parabola for which bce is the angle of elevation and for which the sum

of the altitude and sublimity is the distance between the parallels ga and cb,

as desired. The process is therefore as follows: One draws the tangent of thegiven angle bce; takes half of this tangent, and adds to it the quantity, fo,

which is a third proportional to the half of this tangent and the half of bc; the

desired  amplitude cr  is  then  found  from  the  following  proportion

ob:ba=bc:cr. For example let the angle ecb be one of 50°; its tangent is

11918,  half  of  which,  namely bf,  is  5959;  half  of bc  is  5000;  the  third

proportional of these halves is 4195, which added to bf gives the value 10154

for bo. Further, as ob is to ab, that is, as 10154 is to 10000, so is bc, or 10000

(each being the tangent of 45°) to cr, which is the amplitude sought and

which has the value 9848, the maximum amplitude being bc, or 10000. The

amplitudes  of  the  entire  parabolas  are  double  these,  namely,  19696  and

20000. This is also the amplitude of a parabola whose angle of elevation is

40°, since it deviates by an equal amount from one of 45°.

  In order to thoroughly understand this demonstration I need to be shown

how the third proportional of bf and bi is, as the Author indicates, necessarily

greater than fa.


Salv. This result can, I think, be obtained as follows. The square of the mean

proportional between two lines is equal to the rectangle formed by these two

lines. Therefore the square of bi (or of bd which is equal to bi) must be equal

to the rectangle formed by fb and the desired third proportional. This third

proportional is necessarily greater than fa because the rectangle formed by bf

and fa is less than the square of bd by an amount equal to the square of df, as

shown in Euclid, II. 1. Besides it is to be observed that the point f, which is

the middle point of the tangent eb, falls in general above a and only once at

a; in which cases it is self-evident that the third proportional to the half of the

tangent and to the sublimity bi lies wholly above a. But the Author has taken

a case where it is not evident that the third proportional is always greater than

fa, so that when laid off above the point f it extends beyond the parallel ag.

  Now let us proceed. It will be worth while, by the use of this table, to

compute another giving the altitudes of these semi-parabolas described by

projectiles having the same initial speed. The construction is as follows:

      70°642820°26°192271°8940

      71615719272061729045

      72587818282204739144

      73559217292351749240      74530016302499759330

      75500015312653769415

      76469414322810779493

      77438313332967789567

      78406712343128799636

      79374611353289809698

      80342010363456819755

      8130909373621829806

      8227568383793839851

      8324197393962849890

      8420796404132859924

      8517365414302869951

      8613914424477879972

      8710443434654889987

    886982444827899998

      8934914550009010000


                              Problem. Proposition XIII


From the amplitudes of semi-parabolas given in the preceding table to find

the altitudes of each of the parabolas described with the same initial speed.

  It  will  be  worth  while  to  add  a  third  table  giving  the  altitudes  and

sublimities for parabolas in which the amplitude is a constant.


Sagr. I shall be very glad to see this; for from it I shall learn the difference of

speed and force [degl’ impeti e delle forze] required to fire projectiles over

the same range with what we call mortar shots. This difference will, I believe,

vary greatly with the elevation so that if, for example, one wished to employ

an elevation of 3° or 4°, or 87° or 88° and yet give the ball the same rangewhich it had with an elevation of 45° (where we have shown the initial speed

to be a minimum) the excess of force required will, I think, be very great.

Salv. You are quite right, sir; and you will find that in order to perform this

operation completely, at all angles of elevation, you will have to make great

strides toward an infinite speed. We pass now to the consideration of the

table.

    39°4049617484°47572525

      40419659598557150437

      41434657528671503349

      42450255538795405262

      434662536288143181174

      44482851778928649987

    455000500090infinita 


                                    Proposition XIV


To find for each degree of elevation the altitudes and sublimities of parabolas

of constant amplitude.

  Here we see, first of all, how very true is the statement made above, that,

for different angles of elevation, the greater the deviation from the mean,

whether  above  or  below,  the  greater  the  initial  speed  [impeto e violenza]

required to carry the projectile over the same range. For since the speed is the

resultant  of  two  motions,  namely,  one  horizontal  and  uniform,  the  other

vertical  and  naturally  accelerated;  and  since  the  sum  of  the  altitude  and

sublimity represents this speed, it is seen from the preceding table that this

sum is a minimum for an elevation of 45° where the altitude and sublimity

are  equal,  namely,  each  5000;  and  their  sum  10000.  But  if  we  choose  a

greater elevation, say 50°, we shall find the altitude 5959, and the sublimity

4196,  giving  a  sum  of  10155;  in  like  manner  we  shall  find  that  this  is

precisely  the  value  of  the  speed  at  40°  elevation,  both  angles  deviating

equally from the mean.

  Secondly it is to be noted that, while equal speeds are required for each of

two  elevations  that  are  equidistant  from  the  mean,  there  is  this  curious

alternation, namely, that the altitude and sublimity at the greater elevationcorrespond  inversely  to  the  sublimity  and  altitude  at  the  lower  elevation.

Thus in the preceding example an elevation of 50° gives an altitude of 5959

and a sublimity of 4196; while an elevation of 40° corresponds to an altitude

of 4196 and a sublimity of 5959. And this holds true in general; but it is to be

remembered that, in order to escape tedious calculations, no account has been

taken of fractions which are of little moment in comparison with such large

numbers.


Sagr. I note also in regard to the two components of the initial speed [impeto]

that the higher the shot the less is the horizontal and the greater the vertical

component; on the other hand, at lower elevations where the shot reaches

only a small height the horizontal component of the initial speed must be

great.  In  the  case  of  a  projectile  fired  at  an  elevation  of  90°,  I  quite

understand that all the force [forza] in the world would not be sufficient to

make it deviate a single finger’s breadth from the perpendicular and that it

would necessarily fall back into its initial position; but in the case of zero

elevation, when the shot is fired horizontally, I am not so certain that some

force, less than infinite, would not carry the projectile some distance; thus not

even a cannon can fire a shot in a perfectly horizontal direction, or as we say,

point blank, that is, with no elevation at all. Here I admit there is some room

for doubt. The fact I do not deny outright, because of another phenomenon

apparently  no  less  remarkable,  but  yet  one  for  which  I  have  conclusive

evidence. This phenomenon is the impossibility of stretching a rope in such a

way that it shall be at once straight and parallel to the horizon; the fact is that

the cord always sags and bends and that no force is sufficient to stretch it

perfectly straight.


Salv. In  this  case  of  the  rope  then,  Sagredo,  you  cease  to  wonder  at  the

phenomenon because you have its demonstration; but if we consider it with

more care we may possibly discover some correspondence between the case

of the gun and that of the string. The curvature of the path of the shot fired

horizontally  appears  to  result  from  two  forces,  one  (that  of  the  weapon)

drives  it  horizontally  and  the  other  (its  own  weight)  draws  it  vertically

downward.  So  in  stretching  the  rope  you  have  the  force  which  pulls  it

horizontally and its own weight which acts downwards. The circumstances in

these two cases are, therefore, very similar. If then you attribute to the weight

of the rope a power and energy [possanza ed energia] sufficient to opposeand  overcome  any  stretching  force,  no  matter  how  great,  why  deny  this

power to the bullet?

  Besides I must tell you something which will both surprise and please you,

namely, that a cord stretched more or less tightly assumes a curve which

closely approximates the parabola. This similarity is clearly seen if you draw

a parabolic curve on a vertical plane and then invert it so that the apex will lie

at the bottom and the base remain horizontal; for, on hanging a chain below

the base, one end attached to each extremity of the base, you will observe

that,  on  slackening  the  chain  more  or  less,  it  bends  and  fits  itself  to  the

parabola; and the coincidence is more exact in proportion as the parabola is

drawn  with  less  curvature  or,  so  to  speak,  more  stretched;  so  that  using

parabolas described with elevations less than 45° the chain fits its parabola

almost perfectly.


Sagr. Then  with  a  fine  chain  one  would  be  able  to  quickly  draw  many

parabolic lines upon a plane surface.


Salv. Certainly and with no small advantage as I shall show you later.


Simp. But before going further, I am anxious to be convinced at least of that

proposition of which you say that there is a rigid demonstration; I refer to the

statement that it is impossible by any force whatever to stretch a cord so that

it will lie perfectly straight and horizontal.


Sagr. I will see if I can recall the demonstration; but in order to understand it,

Simplicio,  it  will  be  necessary  for  you  to  take  for  granted  concerning

machines what is evident not alone from experiment but also from theoretical

considerations,  namely,  that  the  velocity  of  a  moving  body  [velocità  del

movente], even when its force [forza] is small, can overcome a very great

resistance exerted by a slowly moving body, whenever the velocity of the

moving  body  bears  to  that  of  the  resisting  body  a  greater  ratio  than  the

resistance [resistenza] of the resisting body to the force [forza] of the moving

body.


Simp. This I know very well for it has been demonstrated by Aristotle in his

Questions in Mechanics; it is also clearly seen in the lever and the steelyard

where a counterpoise weighing not more than 4 pounds will lift a weight of400 provided that the distance of the counterpoise from the axis about which

the steelyard rotates be more than one hundred times as great as the distance

between this axis and the point of support for the large weight. This is true

because  the  counterpoise  in  its  descent  traverses  a  space  more  than  one

hundred times as great as that moved over by the large weight in the same

time; in other words the small counterpoise moves with a velocity which is

more than one hundred times as great as that of the large weight.


Sagr. You are quite right; you do not hesitate to admit that however small the

force [forza] of the moving body it will overcome any resistance, however

great, provided it gains more in velocity than it loses in force and weight

[vigore  e  gravità].  Now  let  us  return  to  the  case  of  the  cord.  In  the

accompanying figure ab represents a line passing through two fixed points a

and b; at the extremities of this line hang, as you see, two large weights c and

d, which stretch it with great force and keep it truly straight, seeing that it is

merely a line without weight. Now I wish to remark that if from the middle

point of this line, which we may call e, you suspend any small weight, say h,

the line ab will yield toward the point f and on account of its elongation will

compel the two heavy weights c and d to rise. This I shall demonstrate as

follows: with the points a and b as centers describe the two quadrants, eig and

elm; now since the two semidiameters ai and bl are equal to ae and eb, the

remainders fi and fl are the excesses of the lines af and fb over ae and eb;

they therefore determine the rise of the weights c and d, assuming of course

that the weight h has taken the position f. But the weight h will take the

position f, whenever the line ef which represents the descent of h bears to the

line fi — that is, to the rise of the weights c and d — a ratio which is greater

than the ratio of the weight of the two large bodies to that of the body h. Even

when the weights of c and d are very great and that of h very small this will

happen; for the excess of the weights c and d over the weight of h can never

be so great but that the excess of the tangent ef over the segment fi may be

proportionally  greater.  This  may  be  proved  as  follows:  Draw  a  circle  of

diameter gai; draw the line bo such that the ratio of its length to another

length c, c>d, is the same as the ratio of the weights c and d to the weight h.

Since c>d, the ratio of bo to d is greater than that of bo to c. Take be a third

proportional  to ob  and d;  prolong  the  diameter gi  to  a  point f  such  that

gi:if=oe:eb; and from the point f draw the tangent fn; then since we alreadyhave oe:eb=gi:if, we shall obtain, by compounding ratios, ob:eb=gf:if. But d

is a mean proportional between ob and be; while nf is a mean proportional

between gf and fi. Hence nf bears to fi the same ratio as that of cb to d, which

is greater than that of the weights c and d to the weight h. Since then the

descent, or velocity, of the weight h bears to the rise, or velocity, of the

weights c and d a greater ratio than the weight of the bodies c and d bears to

the weight of h, it is clear that the weight h will descend and the line ab will

cease to be straight and horizontal.





























  And now this which happens in the case of a weightless cord ab when any

small weight h is attached at the point e, happens also when the cord is made

of ponderable matter but without any attached weight; because in this case

the material of which the cord is composed functions as a suspended weight.Simp. I am fully satisfied. So now Salviati can explain, as he promised, the

advantage of such a chain and, afterwards, present the speculations of our

Academician on the subject of impulsive forces [forza della percossa].


Salv. Let the preceding discussions suffice for to-day; the hour is already late

and the time remaining will not permit us to clear up the subjects proposed;

we may therefore postpone our meeting until another and more opportune

occasion.


Sagr. I  concur  in  your  opinion,  because  after  various  conversations  with

intimate friends of our Academician I have concluded that this question of

impulsive forces is very obscure, and I think that, up to the present, none of

those who have treated this subject have been able to clear up its dark corners

which lie almost beyond the reach of human imagination; among the various

views which I have heard expressed one, strangely fantastic, remains in my

memory, namely, that impulsive forces are indeterminate, if not infinite. Let

us, therefore, await the convenience of Salviati. Meanwhile tell me what is

this which follows the discussion of projectiles.

Salv. These are some theorems pertaining to the centers of gravity of solids,

discovered by our Academician in his youth, and undertaken by him because

he  considered  the  treatment  of  Federigo  Comandino  to  be  somewhat

incomplete. The propositions which you have before you would, he thought,

meet  the  deficiencies  of  Comandino’s  book.  The  investigation  was

undertaken  at  the  instance  of  the  Illustrious  Marquis  Guid’  Ubaldo  Dal

Monte, a very distinguished mathematician of his day, as is evidenced by his

various publications. To this gentleman our Academician gave a copy of this

work,  hoping  to  extend  the  investigation  to  other  solids  not  treated  by

Comandino. But a little later there chanced to fall into his hands the book of

the great geometrician, Luca Valerio, where he found the subject treated so

completely  that  he  left  off  his  own  investigations,  although  the  methods

which he employed were quite different from those of Valerio.


Sagr. Please be good enough to leave this volume with me until our next

meeting so that I may be able to read and study these propositions in the

order in which they are written.Salv. It is a pleasure to comply with your request and I only hope that the

propositions will be of deep interest to you.


                                End of the fourth day.                                      Appendix


Containing some theorems, and their proofs, dealing with centers of gravity
                                                                        44
of solid bodies, written by the same Author at an earlier date.

44
 Following the example of the National Edition, this Appendix which covers 18 pages of the Leyden
Edition of 1638 is here omitted as being of minor interest. [Trans.]                            The Biographies
































                    Portrait of Galileo Galilei by an unknown artist, c. 1607    LIFE OF GALILEO by Sir David Brewster                                    CONTENTS


CHAPTER I.

CHAPTER II.

CHAPTER III.

CHAPTER IV.

CHAPTER V.

CHAPTER VI.

                                     CHAPTER I.


Peculiar interest attached to his Life — His Birth — His early studies — His

    passion for Mathematics — His work on the Hydrostatic Balance —

      Appointed Lecturer on Mathematics at Pisa — His antipathy to the

Philosophy of Aristotle — His contentions with the Aristotelians — Chosen

professor of Mathematics in Padua — Adopts the Copernican system, but still

teaches the Ptolemaic doctrine — His alarming illness — He observes the

                new Star in 1604 — His magnetical experiments.


  The history of the life and labours of Galileo is pregnant with a peculiar

interest  to  the  general  reader,  as  well  as  to  the  philosopher.  His  brilliant

discoveries, the man of science regards as his peculiar property; the means by

which they were made, and the development of his intellectual character,

belong  to  the  logician  and  to  the  philosopher;  but  the  triumphs  and  the

reverses of his eventful life must be claimed for our common nature, as a

source of more than ordinary instruction.

  The lengthened career which Providence assigned to Galileo was filled up

throughout  its  rugged  outline  with  events  even  of  dramatic  interest.  But

though it was emblazoned with achievements of transcendent magnitude, yet

his noblest discoveries were the derision of his contemporaries, and were

even denounced as crimes which merited the vengeance of Heaven. Though

he was the idol of his friends, and the favoured companion of princes, yet he

afterwards became the victim of persecution, and spent some of his last hours

within the walls of a prison; and though the Almighty granted him, as it were,

a new sight to descry unknown worlds in the obscurity of space, yet the eyes

which were allowed to witness such wonders, were themselves doomed to be

closed in darkness.

  Such were the lights and shadows in which history delineates

  “The starry Galileo with his woes.”

  But, however powerful be their contrasts, they are not unusual in their

proportions. The balance which has been struck between his days of good and

evil,  is  that  which  regulates  the  lot  of  man,  whether  we  study  it  in  the

despotic sway of the autocrat, in the peaceful inquiries of the philosopher, or

in the humbler toils of ordinary life.  Galileo Galilei was born at Pisa, on the 15th of February, 1564, and was

the eldest of a family of three sons and three daughters. Under the name of

Bonajuti, his noble ancestors had filled high offices at Florence; but about the

middle of the 14th century they seem to have abandoned this surname for that

of Galileo. Vincenzo Galilei, our author’s father, was himself a philosopher

of no mean powers; and though his talents seem to have been exercised only

in the composition of treatises on the theory and practice of music, yet he

appears to have anticipated even his son in a just estimate of the philosophy

of the age, and in a distinct perception of the true method of investigating

truth.

  The early years of Galileo were, like those of almost all great experimental

philosophers,  spent  in  the  construction  of  instruments  and  pieces  of

machinery,  which  were  calculated  chiefly  to  amuse  himself  and  his

schoolfellows. This employment of his hands, however, did not interfere with

his  regular  studies;  and  though,  from  the  straitened  circumstances  of  his

father, he was educated under considerable disadvantages, yet he acquired the

elements of classical literature, and was initiated into all the learning of the

times.  Music,  drawing,  and  painting  were  the  occupations  of  his  leisure

hours; and such was his proficiency in these arts, that he was reckoned a

skilful performer on several musical instruments, especially the lute; and his

knowledge of pictures was held in great esteem by some of the best artists of

his day.

  Galileo  seems  to  have  been  desirous  of  following  the  profession  of  a

painter: but his father had observed decided indications of early genius; and,

though  by  no  means  able  to  afford  it,  he  resolved  to  send  him  to  the

university to pursue the study of medicine. He accordingly enrolled himself

as a scholar in arts at the university of Pisa, on the 5th of November, 1581,

and  pursued  his  medical  studies  under  the  celebrated  botanist  Andrew

Cæsalpinus, who filled the chair of medicine from 1567 to 1592.

  In order to study the principles of music and drawing, Galileo found it

necessary to acquire some knowledge of geometry. His father seems to have

foreseen the consequences of following this new pursuit, and though he did

not  prohibit  him  from  reading  Euclid  under  Ostilio  Ricci,  one  of  the

professors at Pisa, yet he watched his progress with the utmost jealousy, and

had  resolved  that  it  should  not  interfere  with  his  medical  studies.  The

demonstrations, however, of the Greek mathematician had too many charms

for the ardent mind of Galileo. His whole attention was engrossed with thenew  truths  which  burst  upon  his  understanding;  and  after  many  fruitless

attempts to check his ardour and direct his thoughts to professional objects,

his father was obliged to surrender his parental control, and allow the fullest

scope to the genius of his son.

  From the elementary works of geometry, Galileo passed to the writings of

Archimedes;  and  while  he  was  studying  the  hydrostatical  treatise  of  the

Syracusan philosopher, he wrote his essay on the hydrostatical balance, in

which he describes the construction of the instrument, and the method by

which  Archimedes  detected  the  fraud  committed  by  the  jeweller  in  the

composition of Hiero’s crown. This work gained for its author the esteem of

Guido  Ubaldi,  who  had  distinguished  himself  by  his  mechanical  and

mathematical acquirements, and who engaged his young friend to investigate

the  subject  of  the  centre  of  gravity  in  solid  bodies.  The  treatise  on  this

subject, which Galileo presented to his patron, proved the source of his future

success in life.

  Through  the  Cardinal  del  Monte,  the  brother-in-law  of  Ubaldi,  the

reigning Duke of Tuscany, Ferdinand de Medici was made acquainted with

the merits of our young philosopher; and, in 1589, he was appointed lecturer

on mathematics at Pisa. As the salary, however, attached to this office was

only sixty crowns, he was compelled to enlarge this inadequate income by the

additional occupation of private teaching,  and thus to encroach upon the

leisure which he was anxious to devote to science.

  With  this  moderate  competency,  Galileo  commenced  his  philosophical

career. At the early age of eighteen, when he had entered the university, his

innate antipathy to the Aristotelian philosophy began to display itself. This

feeling was strengthened by his earliest inquiries; and upon his establishment

at Pisa he seems to have regarded the doctrines of Aristotle as the intellectual

prey which, in his chace of glory, he was destined to pursue. Nizzoli, who

flourished near the beginning of the sixteenth century, and Giordano Bruno,

who was burned at Rome in 1600, led the way in this daring pursuit; but it

was  reserved  for  Galileo  to  track  the  Thracian  boar  through  its  native

thickets, and, at the risk of his own life, to strangle it in its den.

  With the resolution of submitting every opinion to the test of experiment,

Galileo’s first inquiries at Pisa were directed to the mechanical doctrines of

Aristotle. Their incorrectness and absurdity soon became apparent; and with a

zeal, perhaps, bordering on indiscretion, he denounced them to his pupils

with  an  ardour  of  manner  and  of  expression  proportioned  to  his  ownconviction  of  the  truth.  The  detection  of  long-established  errors  is  apt  to

inspire the young philosopher with an exultation which reason condemns.

The feeling of triumph is apt to clothe itself in the language of asperity; and

the abettor of erroneous opinions is treated as a species of enemy to science.

Like the soldier who fleshes his first spear in battle, the philosopher is apt to

leave the stain of cruelty on his early achievements. It is only from age and

experience, indeed, that we can expect the discretion of valour, whether it is

called forth in controversy or in battle. Galileo seems to have waged this

stern  warfare  against  the  followers  of  Aristotle;  and  such  was  the

exasperation which was excited by his reiterated and successful attacks, that

he was assailed, during the rest of his life, with a degree of rancour which

seldom  originates  in  a  mere  difference  of  opinion.  Forgetting  that  all

knowledge is progressive, and that the errors of one generation call forth the

comments, and are replaced by the discoveries, of the next, Galileo did not

anticipate that his own speculations and incompleted labours might one day

provoke unmitigated censure; and he therefore failed in making allowance for

the prejudices and ignorance of his opponents. He who enjoys the proud lot

of taking a position in advance of his age, need not wonder that his less gifted

contemporaries are left behind. Men are not necessarily obstinate because

they cleave to deeply rooted and venerable errors, nor are they absolutely dull

when they are long in understanding and slow in embracing newly discovered

truths.

  It was one of the axioms of the Aristotelian mechanics, that the heavier of

two falling bodies would reach the ground sooner than the other, and that

their velocities would be proportional to their weights. Galileo attacked the

arguments  by  which  this  opinion  was  supported;  and  when  he  found  his

reasoning ineffectual, he appealed to direct experiment. He maintained, that

all bodies would fall through the same height in the same time, if they were

not unequally retarded by the resistance of the air: and though he performed

the experiment with the most satisfactory results, by letting heavy bodies fall

from the leaning tower of Pisa, yet the Aristotelians, who with their own eyes

saw the unequal weights strike the ground at the same instant, ascribed the

effect to some unknown cause, and preferred the decision of their master to

that of nature herself.

  Galileo could not brook this opposition to his discoveries; nor could the

Aristotelians tolerate the rebukes of their young instructor. The two parties

were, consequently, marshalled in hostile array; when, fortunately for both,an  event  occurred,  which  placed  them  beyond  the  reach  of  danger.  Don

Giovanni  de  Medici,  a  natural  son  of  Cosmo,  had  proposed  a  method  of

clearing out the harbour of Leghorn. Galileo, whose opinion was requested,

gave  such  an  unfavourable  report  upon  it,  that  the  disappointed  inventor

directed  against  him  all  the  force  of  his  malice.  It  was  an  easy  task  to

concentrate the malignity of his enemies at Pisa; and so effectually was this

accomplished, that Galileo resolved to accept another professorship, to which

he had been previously invited.

  The chair of mathematics in the university of Padua having been vacant

for five years, the republic of Venice had resolved to fill it up; and, on the

recommendation of Guido Ubaldi, Galileo was appointed to it, in 1592, for a

period of six years.

  Previous to this event, Galileo had lost his father, who died, in 1591, at an

advanced age. As he was the eldest son, the support of the family naturally

devolved  upon  him;  and  this  sacred  obligation  must  have  increased  his

anxiety  to  better  his  circumstances,  and  therefore  added  to  his  other

inducements to quit Pisa. In September 1592, he removed to Padua, where he

had a salary of only 180 florins, and where he was again obliged to add to his

income by the labours of tuition. Notwithstanding this fruitless occupation of

his time, he appears to have found leisure for composing several of his works,

and completing various inventions, which will be afterwards described. His

manuscripts were circulated privately among his friends and pupils; but some

of them strayed beyond this sacred limit, and found their way into the hands

of  persons,  who  did  not  scruple  to  claim  and  publish,  as  their  own,  the

discoveries and inventions which they contained.

  It is not easy to ascertain the exact time when Galileo became a convert to

the doctrines of Copernicus, or the particular circumstances under which he

was led to adopt them. It is stated by Gerard Voss, that a public lecture of

Mœstlin,  the  instructor  of  Kepler,  was  the  means  of  making  Galileo

acquainted with the true system of the universe. This assertion, however, is

by no means probable; and it has been ably shown, by the latest biographer of

Galileo, that, in his dialogues on the Copernican system, our author gives the

true account of his own conversion. This passage is so interesting, that we

shall give it entire.

  “I cannot omit this opportunity of relating to you what happened to myself

at the time when this opinion (the Copernican system) began to be discussed.

I  was  then  a  very  young  man,  and  had  scarcely  finished  my  course  ofphilosophy,  which  other  occupations  obliged  me  to  leave  off,  when  there

arrived in this country, from Rostoch, a foreigner, whose name, I believe, was

Christian  Vurstisius  (Wurteisen),  a  follower  of  Copernicus.  This  person

delivered, on this subject, two or three lectures in a certain academy, and to a

crowded audience. Believing that several were attracted more by the novelty

of the subject than by any other cause, and being firmly persuaded that this

opinion was a piece of solemn folly, I was unwilling to be present. Upon

interrogating, however, some of those who were there, I found that they all

made it a subject of merriment, with the exception of one, who assured me

that it was not a thing wholly ridiculous. As I considered this individual to be

both prudent and circumspect, I repented that I had not attended the lectures;

and, whenever I met any of the followers of Copernicus, I began to inquire if

they had always been of the same opinion. I found that there was not one of

them  who  did  not  declare  that  he  had  long  maintained  the  very  opposite

opinions, and had not gone over to the new doctrines till he was driven by the

force of argument. I next examined them one by one, to see if they were

masters of the arguments on the opposite side; and such was the readiness of

their answers, that I was satisfied they had not taken up this opinion from

ignorance  or  vanity.  On  the  other  hand,  whenever  I  interrogated  the

Peripatetics and the Ptolemeans — and, out of curiosity, I have interrogated

not a few — respecting their perusal of Copernicus’s work, I perceived that

there were few who had seen the book, and not one who understood it. Nor

have I omitted to inquire among the followers of the Peripatetic doctrines, if

any of them had ever stood on the opposite side; and the result was, that there

was  not  one.  Considering,  then,  that  nobody  followed  the  Copernican

doctrine, who had not previously held the contrary opinion, and who was not

well acquainted with the arguments of Aristotle and Ptolemy; while, on the

other hand, nobody followed Ptolemy and Aristotle, who had before adhered

to Copernicus, and had gone over from him into the camp of Aristotle; —

weighing, I say, these things, I began to believe that, if any one who rejects

an  opinion  which  he  has  imbibed  with  his  milk,  and  which  has  been

embraced by an infinite number, shall take up an opinion held only by a few,

condemned  by  all  the  schools,  and  really  regarded  as  a  great  paradox,  it

cannot be doubted that he must have been induced, not to say driven, to

embrace it by the most cogent arguments. On this account I have become

very curious to penetrate to the very bottom of the subject.”  It  appears,  on  the  testimony  of  Galileo  himself,  that  he  taught  the

Ptolemaic  system,  in  compliance  with  the  popular  feeling,  after  he  had

convinced himself of the truth of the Copernican doctrines. In the treatise on

the sphere, indeed, which bears his name, and which must have been written

soon after he went to Padua, and subsequently to 1592, the stability of the

earth, and the motion of the sun, are supported by the very arguments which

Galileo afterwards ridiculed; but we have no means of determining whether

or not he had then adopted the true system of the universe. Although he might

have  taught  the  Ptolemaic  system  in  his  lectures  after  he  had  convinced

himself of its falsehood, yet it is not likely that he would go so far as to

publish to the world, as true, the very doctrines which he despised. In a letter

to Kepler, dated in 1597, he distinctly states that he had, many years ago,

adopted the opinions of Copernicus; but that he had not yet dared to publish

his arguments in favour of them, and his refutation of the opposite opinions.

These facts would leave us to place Galileo’s conversion somewhere between

1593 and 1597, although many years cannot be said to have elapsed between

these two dates.

  At this early period of Galileo’s life, in the year 1593, he met with an

accident which had nearly proved fatal. A party at Padua, of which he was

one,  were  enjoying,  at  an  open  window,  a  current  of  air,  which  was

artificially cooled by a fall of water. Galileo unfortunately fell asleep under

its influence; and so powerful was its effect upon his robust constitution, that

he contracted a severe chronic disorder, accompanied with acute pains in his

body, and loss of sleep and appetite, which attacked him at intervals during

the  rest  of  his  life.  Others  of  the  party  suffered  still  more  severely,  and

perished by their own rashness.

  Galileo’s reputation was now widely extended over Europe. The Archduke

Ferdinand (afterwards Emperor of Germany), the Landgrave of Hesse, and

the Princes of Alsace and Mantua, honoured his lectures with their presence;

and Prince Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden also received instructions from

him in mathematics, during his sojourn in Italy.

  When Galileo had completed the first period of his engagement at Padua,

he was re-elected for other six years, with an increased salary of 320 florins.

This liberal addition to his income is ascribed by Fabbroni to the malice of

one of his enemies, who informed the Senate that Galileo was living in illicit

intercourse  with  Marina  Gamba.  Without  inquiring  into  the  truth  of  the

accusation, the Senate is said to have replied, that if “he had a family tosupport, he had the more need of an increased salary.” It is more likely that

the liberality of the republic had been called forth by the high reputation of

their professor, and that the terms of their reply were intended only to rebuke

the  malignity  of  the  informer.  The  mode  of  expression  would  seem  to

indicate that one or more of Galileo’s children had been born previous to his

re-election in 1598; but as this is scarcely consistent with other facts, we are

disposed to doubt the authenticity of Fabbroni’s anecdote.

  The new star which attracted the notice of astronomers in 1604, excited

the particular attention of Galileo. The observations which he made upon it,

and  the  speculations  which  they  suggested,  formed  the  subject  of  three

lectures, the beginning of the first of which only has reached our times. From

the absence of parallax, he proved that the common hypothesis of its being a

meteor was erroneous, and that, like the fixed stars, it was situated far beyond

the bounds of our own system. The popularity of the subject attracted crowds

to his lecture-room; and Galileo had the boldness to reproach his hearers for

taking so deep an interest in a temporary phenomenon, while they overlooked

the wonders of creation which were daily presented to their view.

  In  the  year  1606,  Galileo  was  again  appointed  to  the  professorship  at

Padua, with an augmented stipend of 520 florins. His popularity had now

risen so high, that his audience could not be accommodated in his lecture-

room; and even when he had assembled them in the school of medicine,

which contained 1000 persons, he was frequently obliged to adjourn to the

open air.

  Among  the  variety  of  pursuits  which  occupied  his  attention,  was  the

examination of the properties of the loadstone. In 1607, he commenced his

experiments;  but,  with  the  exception  of  a  method  of  arming  loadstones,

which, according to the report of Sir Kenelm Digby, enabled them to carry

twice as much weight as before, he does not seem to have made any additions

to our knowledge of magnetism. He appears to have studied with care the

admirable work of our countryman, Dr Gilbert, “De Magnete,” which was

published in 1600; and he recognised in the experiments and reasonings of

the English philosopher the principles of that method of investigating truth

which he had himself adopted. Gilbert died in 1603, in the 63d year of his

age, and probably never read the fine compliment which was paid to him by

the Italian philosopher— “I extremely praise, admire, and envy this author.”                                    CHAPTER II.


  Cosmo, Grand Duke of Tuscany, invites Galileo to Pisa — Galileo visits

  Venice in 1609, where he first hears of the Telescope — He invents and

  constructs one, which excites a great sensation — Discovers Mountains in

the Moon, and Forty Stars in the Pleiades — Discovers Jupiter’s Satellites in

    1610 — Effect of this discovery on Kepler — Manner in which these

discoveries were received — Galileo appointed Mathematician to Cosmo —

Mayer claims the discovery of the Satellites of Jupiter — Harriot observes

                        them in England in October 1610.


  In the preceding chapter we have brought down the history of Galileo’s

labours to that auspicious year in which he first directed the telescope to the

heavens.  No  sooner  was  that  noble  instrument  placed  in  his  hands,  than

Providence released him from his professional toils, and supplied him with

the fullest leisure and the amplest means for pursuing and completing the

grandest discoveries.

  Although he had quitted the service and the domains of his munificent

patron, the Grand Duke of Tuscany, yet he maintained his connection with

the family, by visiting Florence during his academic vacations, and giving

mathematical instruction to the younger branches of that distinguished house.

Cosmo, who had been one of his pupils, now succeeded his father Ferdinand;

and  having  his  mind  early  imbued  with  a  love  of  knowledge,  which  had

become hereditary in his family, he felt that the residence of Galileo within

his dominions, and still more his introduction into his household, would do

honour to their common country, and reflect a lustre upon his own name. In

the year 1609, accordingly, Cosmo made proposals to Galileo to return to his

original situation at Pisa. These overtures were gratefully received; and in the

arrangements which Galileo on this occasion suggested, as well as in the

manner in which they were urged, we obtain some insight into his temper and

character. He informs the correspondent through whom Cosmo’s offer was

conveyed, that his salary of 520 florins at Padua would be increased to as

many crowns at his re-election, and that he could enlarge his income to any

extent he pleased, by giving private lectures and receiving pupils. His public

duties,  he  stated,  occupied  him  only  sixty  half-hours  in  the  year;  but  his

studies  suffered  such  interruptions  from  his  domestic  pupils  and  privatelectures, that his most ardent wish was to be relieved from them, in order that

he might have sufficient rest and leisure, before the close of his life, to finish

and publish those great works which he had projected. In the event, therefore,

of his returning to Pisa, he hoped that it would be the first object of his serene

highness to give him leisure to complete his works without the drudgery of

lecturing. He expresses his anxiety to gain his bread by his writings, and he

promises to dedicate them to his serene master. He enumerates, among these

books, two on the system of the universe, three on local motion, three books

of mechanics, two on the demonstration of principles, and one of problems;

besides treatises on sound and speech, on light and colours, on the tides, on

the composition of continuous quantity, on the motions of animals, and on

the military art. On the subject of his salary, he makes the following curious

observations: —

  “I say nothing,” says he, “on the amount of my salary; being convinced

that,  as  I  am  to  live  upon  it,  the  graciousness  of  his  highness  would  not

deprive me of any of those comforts, of which, however, I feel the want of

less than many others; and, therefore, I say nothing more on the subject.

Finally, on the title and profession of my service, I should wish that, to the

title  of  mathematician,  his  highness  would  add  that  of  philosopher,  as  I

profess to have studied a greater number of years in philosophy, than months

in pure mathematics; and how I have profited by it, and if I can or ought to

deserve this title, I may let their highnesses see, as often as it shall please

them to give me an opportunity of discussing such subjects in their presence

with those who are most esteemed in this knowledge.”

  During the progress of this negotiation, Galileo went to Venice, on a visit

to  a  friend,  in  the  month  of  April  or  May  1609.  Here  he  learned,  from

common rumour, that a Dutchman had presented to prince Maurice of Nassau

an  optical  instrument,  which  possessed  the  singular  property  of  causing

distant objects to appear nearer the observer. This Dutchman was Hans or

John Lippershey, who, as has been clearly proved by the late Professor Moll

of Utrecht, was in the possession of a telescope made by himself so early as

2d  October  1608.  A  few  days  afterwards,  the  truth  of  this  report  was

confirmed by a letter which Galileo received from James Badorere at Paris,

and he immediately applied himself to the consideration of the subject. On

the  first  night  after  his  return  to  Padua,  he  found,  in  the  doctrines  of

refraction, the principle which he sought. He placed at the ends of a leaden

tube two spectacle glasses, both of which were plain on one side, while oneof them had its other side convex, and the other its second side concave, and

having applied his eye to the concave glass, he saw objects pretty large and

pretty near him. This little instrument, which magnified only three times, he

carried  in  triumph  to  Venice,  where  it  excited  the  most  intense  interest.

Crowds of the principal citizens flocked to his house to see the magical toy;

and  after  nearly  a  month  had  been  spent  in  gratifying  this  epidemical

curiosity, Galileo was led to understand from Leonardo Deodati, the Doge of

Venice, that the senate would be highly gratified by obtaining possession of

so extraordinary an instrument. Galileo instantly complied with the wishes of

his patrons, who acknowledged the present by a mandate conferring upon

him for life his professorship at Padua, and generously raising his salary from

520 to 1000 florins.

  Although we cannot doubt the veracity of Galileo, when he affirms that he

had  never  seen  any  of  the  Dutch  telescopes,  yet  it  is  expressly  stated  by

Fuccarius, that one of these instruments had at this time been brought to

Florence; and Sirturus assures us that a Frenchman, calling himself a partner

of the Dutch inventor, came to Milan in May 1609, and offered a telescope to

the Count de Fuentes. In a letter from Lorenzo Pignoria to Paolo Gualdo,

dated from Padua, on the 31st of August 1609, it is expressly said, that, at the

re-election of the professors, Galileo had contrived to obtain 1000 florins for

life, which was alleged to be on account of an eye-glass like the one which

was sent from Flanders to the Cardinal Borghese.

  In a memoir so brief and general as the present, it would be out of place to

discuss the history of this extraordinary invention. We have no hesitation in

asserting that a method of magnifying distant objects was known to Baptista

Porta and others; but it seems to be equally certain that an instrument for

producing these effects was first constructed in Holland, and that it was from

that  kingdom  that  Galileo  derived  the  knowledge  of  its  existence.  In

considering the contending claims, which have been urged with all the ardour

and partiality of national feeling, it has been generally overlooked, that a

single convex lens,  whose  focal  length  exceeds  the  distance  at  which  we

examine  minute  objects,  performs  the  part  of  a  telescope,  when  an  eye,

placed behind it, sees distinctly the inverted image which it forms. A lens,

twenty feet in focal length, will in this manner magnify twenty times; and it

was  by  the  same  principle  that  Sir  William  Herschel  discovered  a  new

satellite of Saturn, by using only the mirror of his forty-feet telescope. The

instrument  presented  to  Prince  Maurice,  and  which  the  Marquis  Spinolafound in the shop of John Lippershey, the spectacle maker of Middleburg,

must have been an astronomical telescope consisting of two convex lenses.

Upon this supposition, it differed from that which Galileo constructed; and

the Italian philosopher will be justly entitled to the honour of having invented

that form of the telescope which still bears his name, while we must accord to

the Dutch optician the honour of having previously invented the astronomical

telescope.

  The interest which the exhibition of the telescope excited at Venice did not

soon subside: Sirturi describes it as amounting almost to phrensy. When he

himself had succeeded in making one of these instruments, he ascended the

tower  of  St  Mark,  where  he  might  use  it  without  molestation.  He  was

recognised, however, by a crowd in the street; and such was the eagerness of

their curiosity, that they took possession of the wondrous tube, and detained

the  impatient  philosopher  for  several  hours,  till  they  had  successively

witnessed its effects. Desirous of obtaining the same gratification for their

friends, they endeavoured to learn the name of the inn at which he lodged;

but Sirturi fortunately overheard their inquiries, and quitted Venice early next

morning,  in  order  to  avoid  a  second  visitation  of  this  new  school  of

philosophers.  The  opticians  speedily  availed  themselves  of  the  new

instrument. Galileo’s tube, — or the double eye-glass, or the cylinder, or the

trunk, as it was then called, for Demisiano had not yet given it the appellation

of telescope, — was manufactured in great quantities, and in a very superior

manner. The instruments were purchased merely as philosophical toys, and

were carried by travellers into every corner of Europe.

  The art of grinding and polishing lenses was at this time very imperfect.

Galileo,  and  those  whom  he  instructed,  were  alone  capable  of  making

tolerable  instruments.  It  appears,  from  the  testimony  of  Gassendi  and

Gærtner,  that,  in  1634,  a  good  telescope  could  not  be  procured  in  Paris,

Venice, or Amsterdam; and that, even in 1637, there was not one in Holland

which could shew Jupiter’s disc well defined.

  After Galileo had completed his first instrument, which magnified only

three times, he executed a larger and a better one, with a power of about

eight.  “At  length,”  as  he  himself  remarks,  “sparing  neither  labour  nor

expense,” he constructed an instrument so excellent, that it bore a magnifying

power of more than thirty times.

  The first celestial object to which Galileo applied his telescope was the

moon, which, to use his own words, appeared as near as if it had been distantonly two semidiameters of the earth. He then directed it to the planets and the

fixed stars, which he frequently observed with “incredible delight.”

  The observations which he made upon the moon possessed a high degree

of interest. The general resemblance of its surface to that of our own globe

naturally fixed his attention; and he was soon able to trace, in almost every

part  of  the  lunar  disc,  ranges  of  mountains,  deep  hollows,  and  other

inequalities, which reverberated from their summits and margins the rays of

the rising sun, while the intervening hollows were still buried in darkness.

The dark and luminous spaces he regarded as indicating seas and continents,

which reflected, in different degrees, the incidental light of the sun; and he

ascribed  the  phosphorescence,  as  it  has  been  improperly  called,  or  the

secondary light, which is seen on the dark limb of the moon in her first and

last quarters, to the reflection of the sun’s light from the earth.

  These  discoveries  were  ill  received  by  the  followers  of  Aristotle.

According to their preconceived opinions, the moon was perfectly spherical,

and absolutely smooth; and to cover it with mountains, and scoop it out into

valleys, was an act of impiety which defaced the regular forms which Nature

herself had imprinted. It was in vain that Galileo appealed to the evidence of

observation,  and  to  the  actual  surface  of  our  own  globe.  The  very

irregularities on the moon were, in his opinion, the proof of divine wisdom;

and had its surface been absolutely smooth, it would have been “but a vast

unblessed desert, void of animals, of plants, of cities, and of men — the

abode of silence and inaction — senseless, lifeless, soulless, and stripped of

all those ornaments which now render it so varied and so beautiful.”

  In examining the fixed stars, and comparing them with the planets, Galileo

observed a remarkable difference in the appearance of their discs. All the

planets appeared with round globular discs like the moon; whereas the fixed

stars never exhibited any disc at all, but resembled lucid points sending forth

twinkling rays. Stars of all magnitudes he found to have the same appearance;

those of the fifth and sixth magnitude having the same character, when seen

through a telescope, as Sirius, the largest of the stars, when seen by the naked

eye. Upon directing his telescope to nebulæ and clusters of stars, he was

delighted to find that they consisted of great numbers of stars which could not

be recognised by unassisted vision. He counted no fewer than forty in the

cluster called the Pleiades, or Seven Stars; and he has given us drawings of

this constellation, as well as of the belt and sword of Orion, and of the nebula

of Præsepe. In the great nebula of the Milky Way, he descried crowds ofminute  stars;  and  he  concluded  that  this  singular  portion  of  the  heavens

derived its whiteness from still smaller stars, which his telescope was unable

to separate.

  Important and interesting as these discoveries were, they were thrown into

the shade by those to which he was led during an accurate examination of the

planets with a more powerful telescope. On the 7th of January 1610, at one

o’clock in the morning, when he directed his telescope to Jupiter, he observed

three stars near the body of the planet, two being to the east and one to the

west of him. They were  all in a straight line, and parallel to the ecliptic, and

appeared brighter than other stars of the same magnitude. Believing them to

be fixed stars, he paid no great attention to their distances from Jupiter and

from one another. On the 8th of January, however, when, from some cause or

other, he had been led to observe the stars again, he found a very different

arrangement of them: all the three were on the west side of Jupiter, nearer

one another than before, and almost at equal distances. Though he had not

turned his attention to the extraordinary fact of the mutual approach of the

stars, yet he began to consider how Jupiter could be found to the east of the

three stars, when but the day before he had been to the west of two of them.

The only explanation which he could give of this fact was, that the motion of

Jupiter was direct, contrary to astronomical calculations, and that he had got

before these two stars by his own motion.

  In this dilemma between the testimony of his senses and the results of

calculation, he waited for the following night with the utmost  anxiety; but

his hopes were disappointed, for the heavens were wholly veiled in clouds.

On the 10th, two only of the stars appeared, and both on the east of the

planet. As it was obviously impossible that Jupiter could have advanced from

west to east on the 8th of January, and from east to west on the 10th, Galileo

was forced to conclude that the phenomenon which he had observed arose

from the motion of the stars, and he set himself to observe diligently their

change of place. On the 11th, there were still only two stars, and both to the

east of Jupiter; but the more eastern star was now twice as large as the other

one, though on the preceding night they had been perfectly equal. This fact

threw a new light upon Galileo’s difficulties, and he immediately drew the

conclusion, which he considered to be indubitable, “that there were in the

heavens three stars which revolved round Jupiter, in the same manner as

Venus and Mercury revolve round the sun.” On the 12th of January, he again

observed them in new positions, and of different magnitudes; and, on the13th, he discovered a fourth star, which completed the four secondary planets

with which Jupiter is surrounded.

  Galileo continued his observations on these bodies every clear night till

the 22d of March, and studied their motions in reference to fixed stars that

were at the same time within the field of his telescope. Having thus clearly

established that the four new stars were satellites or moons, which revolved

round Jupiter in the same manner as the moon revolves round our own globe,

he drew up an account of his discovery, in which he gave to the four new

bodies the names of the Medicean Stars, in honour of his patron, Cosmo de

Medici,  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany.  This  work,  under  the  title  of  “Nuncius

Sidereus,” or the “Sidereal Messenger,” was dedicated to the same prince;

and the dedication bears the date of the 24th of March, only two days after he

concluded his observations.

  The importance of this great discovery was instantly felt by the enemies as

well as by the friends of the Copernican system. The planets had hitherto

been distinguished from the fixed stars only by their relative change of place,

but the telescope proved them to be bodies so near to our own globe as to

exhibit  well-defined  discs,  while  the  fixed  stars  retained,  even  when

magnified, the minuteness of remote and lucid points. The system of Jupiter,

illuminated  by  four  moons  performing  their  revolutions  in  different  and

regular  periods,  exhibited  to  the  proud  reason  of  man  the  comparative

insignificance  of  the  globe  he  inhabits,  and  proclaimed  in  impressive

language that that globe was not the centre of the universe.

  The  reception  which  these  discoveries  met  with  from  Kepler  is  highly

interesting, and characteristic of the genius of that great man. He was one day

sitting idle, and thinking of Galileo, when his friend Wachenfels stopped his

carriage at his door, to communicate to him the intelligence. “Such a fit of

wonder,” says he, “seized me at a report which seemed to be so very absurd,

and I was thrown into such agitation at seeing an old dispute between us

decided in this way, that between his joy, my colouring, and the laughter of

both, confounded as we were by such a novelty, we were hardly capable, he

of speaking, or I of listening. On our parting, I immediately began to think

how  there  could  be  any  addition  to  the  number  of  the  planets  without

overturning my ‘Cosmographic Mystery,’ according to which Euclid’s five

regular solids do not allow more than six planets round the sun.... I am so far

from disbelieving the existence of the four circumjovial planets, that I long

for a telescope, to anticipate you, if possible, in discovering two round Mars,as the proportion seems to require, six or eight round Saturn, and perhaps one

each round Mercury and Venus.”

  In  a  very  different  spirit  did  the  Aristotelians  receive  the  “Sidereal

Messenger”  of  Galileo.  The  principal  professor  of  philosophy  at  Padua

resisted  Galileo’s  repeated  and  urgent  entreaties  to  look  at  the  moon  and

planets through his telescope; and he even laboured to convince the Grand

Duke  that  the  satellites  of  Jupiter  could  not  possibly  exist.  Sizzi,  an

astronomer of Florence, maintained that as there were only seven apertures in

the head — two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, and one mouth — and as there

were only seven metals, and seven days in the week, so there could be only

seven planets. He seems, however, to have admitted the visibility of the four

satellites through the telescope; but he argues, that as they are invisible to the

naked eye, they can exercise no influence on the earth; and being useless,

they do not therefore exist.

  A protegé of Kepler’s, of the name of Horky, wrote a volume against

Galileo’s discovery, after having declared, “that he would never concede his

four new planets to that Italian from Padua, even if he should die for it.” This

resolute Aristotelian was at no loss for arguments. He asserted that he had

examined the heavens through Galileo’s own glass, and that no such thing as

a satellite existed round Jupiter. He affirmed, that he did not more surely

know that he had a soul in his body, than that reflected rays are the sole cause

of Galileo’s erroneous observations; and that the only use of the new planets

was to gratify Galileo’s thirst for gold, and afford to himself a subject of

discussion.

  When Horky first presented himself to Kepler, after the publication of this

work,  the  opinion  of  his  patron  was  announced  to  him  by  a  burst  of

indignation  which  overwhelmed  the  astonished  author.  Horky  supplicated

mercy for his offence; and, as Kepler himself informed Galileo, he took him

again into favour, on the condition that Kepler was to show him Jupiter’s

satellites,  and  that  Horky  was  not  only  to  see  them,  but  to  admit  their

existence.

  When the spirit of philosophy had thus left the individuals who bore so

unworthily her sacred name, it was fortunate for science that it found a refuge

among  princes.  Notwithstanding  the  reiterated  logic  of  his  philosophical

professor at Padua, Cosmo de Medici preferred the testimony of his senses to

the syllogisms of his instructor. He observed the new planets several times,

along with Galileo, at Pisa; and when he parted with him, he gave him apresent worth more than 1000 florins, and concluded that liberal arrangement

to which we have already referred.

  As  philosopher  and  principal  mathematician  to  the  Grand  Duke  of

Tuscany, Galileo now took up his residence at Florence, with a salary of 1000

florins.  No  official  duties,  excepting  that  of  lecturing  occasionally  to

sovereign princes, were attached to this appointment; and it was expressly

stipulated  that  he  should  enjoy  the  most  perfect  leisure  to  complete  his

treatises  on  the  constitution  of  the  universe,  on  mechanics,  and  on  local

motion. The resignation of his professorship in the university of Padua, which

was  the  necessary  consequence  of  his  new  appointment,  created  much

dissatisfaction: but though many of his former friends refused at first to hold

any communication with him, this excitement gradually subsided; and the

Venetian senate at last appreciated the feelings, as well as the motives, which

induced a stranger to accept of promotion in his native land.

  While  Galileo  was  enjoying  the  reward  and  the  fame  of  his  great

discovery, a new species of enmity was roused against him. Simon Mayer, an

astronomer of no character, pretended that he had discovered the satellites of

Jupiter before Galileo, and that his first observation was made on the 29th of

December,  1609.  Other  astronomers  announced  the  discovery  of  new

satellites:  Scheiner  reckoned  five,  Rheita  nine,  and  others  found  even  so

many as twelve: these satellites, however, were found to be only fixed stars.

The names of Vladislavian, Agrippine, Uranodavian, and Ferdinandotertian,

which were hastily given to these common telescopic stars, soon disappeared

from the page of science, and even the splendid telescopes of modern times

have not been able to add another gem to the diadem of Jupiter.

  A modern astronomer of no mean celebrity has, even in the present day,

endeavoured to rob Galileo of this staple article of his reputation. From a

careless examination of the papers of our celebrated countryman, Thomas

Harriot, which Baron Zach had made in 1784, at Petworth, the seat of Lord

Egremont,  this  astronomer  has  asserted  that  Harriot  first  observed  the

satellites  of  Jupiter  on  the  16th  of  January,  1610;  and  continued  his

observations till the 25th of February, 1612. Baron Zach adds the following

extraordinary conclusion:— “Galileo pretends to have discovered them on

the 7th of January, 1610; so that it is not improbable that Harriot was likewise

the first discoverer of these attendants of Jupiter.” In a communication which

I received from Dr Robertson, of Oxford, in 1822, he informed me that he

had  examined  a  portion  of  Harriot’s  papers,  entitled,  “De  JovialibusPlanetis;” and that it appears, from two pages of these papers, that Harriot

first  observed  Jupiter’s  satellites  on  the  17th  of  October,  1610.  These

observations are accompanied with rough drawings of the positions of the

satellites, and rough calculations of their periodical revolutions. My friend,

Professor Rigaud, who has very recently examined the Harriot MSS., has

confirmed the accuracy of Dr Robertson’s observations, and has thus restored

to  Galileo  the  honour  of  being  the  first  and  the  sole  discoverer  of  these

secondary planets.                                    CHAPTER III.


Galileo announces his discoveries in Enigmas — Discovers the Crescent of

Venus — the Ring of Saturn — the Spots on the Sun — Similar Observations

  made in England by Harriot — Claims of Fabricius and Scheiner to the

discovery of the Solar Spots — Galileo’s Letters to Velser on the claims of

Scheiner — His residence at the Villa of Salviati — Composes his work on

          Floating Bodies, which involves him in new controversies.


  The  great  success  which  attended  the  first  telescopic  observations  of

Galileo, induced him to apply his best instruments to the other planets of our

system. The attempts which had been made to deprive him of the honour of

some  of  his  discoveries,  combined,  probably,  with  a  desire  to  repeat  his

observations  with  better  telescopes,  led  him  to  announce  his  discoveries

under the veil of an enigma, and to invite astronomers to declare, within a

given time, if they had observed any new phenomena in the heavens.

  Before the close of 1610, Galileo excited the curiosity of astronomers by

the publication of his first enigma. Kepler and others tried in vain to decipher

it; but in consequence of the Emperor Rodolph requesting a solution of the

puzzle, Galileo sent him the following clue: —

  “Altissimam planetam tergeminam observavi.”

  I have observed that the most remote planet is triple.

  In explaining more fully the nature of his observation, Galileo remarked

that  Saturn  was  not  a  single  star,  but  three  together,  nearly  touching  one

another. He described them as having no relative motion, and as having the

form of three o’s, namely, oOo, the central one being larger than those on

each side of it.

  Although Galileo had announced that nothing new appeared in the other

planets,  yet  he  soon  communicated  to  the  world  another  discovery  of  no

slight interest. The enigmatical letters in which it was concealed formed the

following sentence: —

  “Cynthiæ figuras æmulatur mater Amorum.”

  Venus rivals the phases of the moon.

  Hitherto,  Galileo  had  observed  Venus  when  her  disc  was  largely

illuminated; but having directed his telescope to her when she was not far

removed  from  the  sun,  he  saw  her  in  the  form  of  a  crescent,  resemblingexactly the moon at the same elongation. He continued to observe her night

after night, during the whole time that she could be seen in the course of her

revolution  round  the  sun,  and  he  found  that  she  exhibited  the  very  same

phases which resulted from her motion round that luminary.

  Galileo had long contemplated a visit to the metropolis of Italy, and he

accordingly carried his intentions into effect in the early part of the year

1611. Here he was received with that distinction which was due to his great

talents and his extended reputation. Princes, Cardinals, and Prelates hastened

to  do  him  honour;  and  even  those  who  discredited  his  discoveries,  and

dreaded their results, vied with the true friends of science in their anxiety to

see the intellectual wonder of the age.

  In order to show the new celestial phenomena to his friends at Rome,

Galileo took with him his best telescope; and as he had discovered the spots

on the sun’s surface in October or November 1610, or even earlier, he had the

gratification  of  exhibiting  them  to  his  admiring  disciples.  He  accordingly

erected his telescope in the Quirinal garden, belonging to Cardinal Bandini;

and  in  April  1611  he  shewed  them  to  his  friends  in  many  of  their  most

interesting variations. From their change of position on the sun’s disc, Galileo

at  first  inferred,  either  that  the  sun  revolved  about  an  axis,  or  that  other

planets, like Venus and Mercury, revolved so near the sun as to appear like

black  spots  when  they  were  opposite  to  his  disc.  Upon  continuing  his

observations,  however,  he  saw  reason  to  abandon  this  hasty  opinion.  He

found that the spots must be in contact with the surface of the sun, — that

their figures were irregular, — that they had different degrees of darkness, —

that one spot would often divide itself into three or four, — that three or four

spots  would  often  unite  themselves  into  one,  —  and  that  all  the  spots

revolved regularly with the sun, which appeared to complete its revolution in

about twenty-eight days.

  Previous to the invention of the telescope, spots had been more than once

seen on the sun’s disc with the unassisted eye. But even if these were of the

same  character  as  those  which  Galileo  and  others  observed,  we  cannot

consider them as anticipations of their discovery by the telescope. As the

telescope was now in the possession of several astronomers, Galileo began to

have many rivals in discovery; but notwithstanding the claims of Harriot,

Fabricius, and Scheiner, it is now placed beyond the reach of doubt that he

was the first discoverer of the solar spots. From the communication which I

received in 1822 from the late Dr Robertson, of Oxford, it appeared thatThomas Harriot had observed the solar spots on the 8th of December 1610;

but his manuscripts, in Lord Egremont’s possession, incontestably prove that

his  regular  observations  on  the  spots  did  not  commence  till  December  1,

1611, although he had seen the spots at the date above mentioned, and that

they were continued till the 18th of January 1613. The observations which he

has recorded are 199 in number, and the accounts of them are accompanied

with rough drawings representing the number, position, and magnitude of the

spots. In the observation of Harriot, made on the 8th December 1610, before

he knew of Galileo’s discovery, he saw three spots on the sun, which he has

represented in a diagram. The sun was then 7° or 8° high, and there was a

frost and a mist, which no doubt acted as a darkening glass. Harriot does not

apply the name of spots to what he noticed in this observation, and he does

not enumerate it among the 199 observations above mentioned. Professor

Rigaud considers it “a misapplication of terms to call such an observation a

discovery;” but, with all the respect which we feel for the candour of this

remark,  we  are  disposed  to  confer  on  Harriot  the  merit  of  an  original

discoverer of the spots on the sun.

  Another candidate for the honour of discovering the spots of the sun, was

John  Fabricius,  who  undoubtedly  saw  them  previous  to  June  1611.  The

dedication of the work in which he has recorded his observation, bears the

date of the 13th of June 1611; and it is obvious, from the work itself, that he

had seen the spots about the end of the year 1610; but as there is no proof that

he saw them before October, we are compelled to assign the priority of the

discovery to the Italian astronomer.

  The claim of Scheiner, professor of mathematics at Ingolstadt, is more

intimately connected with the history of Galileo. This learned astronomer

having, early in 1611, turned his telescope to the sun, necessarily discovered

the spots which at that time covered his disc. Light flying clouds happened, at

the time, to weaken the intensity of his light, so that he was able to show the

spots to his pupils. These observations were not published till January 1612;

and they appeared in the form of three letters, addressed to Mark Velser, one

of  the  magistrates  of  Augsburg,  under  the  signature  of Appelles  post

Tabulam. Scheiner, who, many years afterwards, published an elaborate work

on the subject, adopted the same idea which had at first occurred to Galileo

— that the spots were the dark sides of planets revolving round and near the

sun.  On the publication of Scheiner’s letters, Velser transmitted a copy of them

to his friend Galileo, with the request that he would favour him with his

opinion of the new phenomena. After some delay, Galileo addressed three

letters to Velser, in which he combated the opinions of Scheiner on the cause

of the spots. The first of these letters was dated the 4th of May 1612; but

though the controversy was carried on in the language of mutual respect and

esteem, it put an end to the friendship which had existed between the two

astronomers. In these letters Galileo showed that the spots often dispersed

like vapours or clouds; that they sometimes had a duration of only one or two

days, and at other times of thirty or forty days; that they contracted in their

breadth  when  they  approached  the  sun’s  limb,  without  any  diminution  of

their length; that they describe circles parallel to each other; that the monthly

rotation of the sun again brings the same spots into view; and that they are

seldom seen at a greater distance than 30° from the sun’s equator. Galileo

likewise discovered on the sun’s disc faculæ, or luculi, as they were called,

which differ in no respect from the common ones but in their being brighter

than the rest of the sun’s surface.

  In the last of the letters which our author addressed to Velser, and which

was  written  in  December  1612,  he  recurs  to  his  former  discovery  of  the

elongated shape, or rather the triple structure, of Saturn. The singular figure

which  he  had  observed  in  this  planet  had  entirely  disappeared;  and  he

evidently announces the fact to Velser, lest it should be used by his enemies

to discredit the accuracy of his observations. “Looking on Saturn,” says he,

“within  these  few  days,  I  found  it  solitary,  without  the  assistance  of  its

accustomed stars, and, in short, perfectly round and defined like Jupiter; and

such it still remains. Now, what can be said of so strange a metamorphosis?

Are the two smaller stars consumed like the spots on the sun? Have they

suddenly vanished and fled? or has Saturn devoured his own children? or was

the appearance indeed fraud and illusion, with which the glasses have for so

long a time mocked me, and so many others who have often observed with

me? Now, perhaps, the time is come to revive the withering hopes of those

who,  guided  by  more  profound  contemplations,  have  followed  all  the

fallacies  of  the  new  observations,  and  recognised  their  impossibilities.  I

cannot resolve what to say in a chance so strange, so new, and so unexpected;

the shortness of the time, the unexampled occurrence, the weakness of my

intellect,  and  the  terror  of  being  mistaken,  have  greatly  confounded  me.”

Although Galileo struggled to obtain a solution of this mystery, yet he hadnot  the  good  fortune  to  succeed.  He  imagined  that  the  two  smaller  stars

would  reappear,  in  consequence  of  the  supposed  revolution  of  the  planet

round its axis; but the discovery of the ring of Saturn, and of the obliquity of

its plane to the ecliptic, was necessary to explain the phenomena which were

so perplexing to our author.

  The ill health to which Galileo was occasionally subject, and the belief

that the air of Florence was prejudicial to his complaints, induced him to

spend much of his time at Selve, the villa of his friend Salviati. This eminent

individual had ever been the warmest friend of Galileo, and seems to have

delighted in drawing round him the scientific genius of the age. He was a

member  of  the  celebrated  Lyncæan  Society,  founded  by  Prince  Frederigo

Cesi; and though he is not known as the author of any important discovery,

yet he has earned, by his liberality to science, a glorious name, which will be

indissolubly united with the immortal destiny of Galileo.

  The  subject  of  floating  bridges  having  been  discussed  at  one  of  the

scientific parties which had assembled at the house of Salviati, a difference of

opinion  arose  respecting  the  influence  of  the  shape  of  bodies  on  their

disposition to float or to sink in a fluid. Contrary to the general opinion,

Galileo undertook to prove that it depended on other causes; and he was thus

led to compose his discourse on floating bodies,  which was published in

1612, and dedicated to Cosmo de Medici. This work contains many ingenious

experiments, and much acute reasoning in support of the true principles of

hydrostatics; and it is now chiefly remarkable as a specimen of the sagacity

and intellectual power of its author. Like all his other works, it encountered

the most violent opposition; and Galileo was more than once summoned into

the  field  to  repel  the  aggressions  of  his  ignorant  and  presumptuous

opponents. The first attack upon it was made by Ptolemy Nozzolini, in a

letter to Marzemedici, Archbishop of Florence; and to this Galileo replied in

a letter addressed to his antagonist. A more elaborate examination of it was

published  by  Lodovico  delle  Colombe,  and  another  by  M.  Vincenzo  di

Grazia. To these attacks, a minute and overwhelming answer was printed in

the name of Benedetti Castelli, the friend and pupil of Galileo; but it was

discovered, some years after Galileo’s death, that he was himself the author

of this work.                                    CHAPTER IV.


Galileo treats his opponents with severity and sarcasm — He is aided by the

    sceptics of the day — The Church party the most powerful — Galileo

commences the attack, and is answered by Caccini, a Dominican — Galileo’s

Letter to the Grand Duchess of Tuscany, in support of the motion of the Earth

and the stability of the Sun — Galileo visits Rome — Is summoned before the

    Inquisition, and renounces his opinions as heretical — The Inquisition

denounces the Copernican System — Galileo has an audience of the Pope,

but still maintains his opinions in private society — Proposes to find out the

Longitude at Sea by means of Jupiter’s Satellites — His negociation on this

subject with the Court of Spain — Its failure — He is unable to observe the

three Comets of 1618, but is involved in the controversy to which they gave

                                          rise.


  The  current  of  Galileo’s  life  had  hitherto  flowed  in  a  smooth  and

unobstructed  channel.  He  had  now  attained  the  highest  objects  of  earthly

ambition. His discoveries had placed him at the head of the great men of the

age;  he  possessed  a  professional  income  far  beyond  his  wants,  and  even

beyond his anticipations; and, what is still dearer to a philosopher, he enjoyed

the most perfect leisure for carrying on and completing his discoveries. The

opposition which these discoveries encountered, was to him more a subject

for triumph than for sorrow. Prejudice and ignorance were his only enemies;

and if they succeeded for a while in harassing his march, it was only to lay a

foundation for fresh achievements. He who contends for truths which he has

himself been permitted to discover, may well sustain the conflict in which

presumption and error are destined to fall. The public tribunal may neither be

sufficiently pure nor enlightened to decide upon the issue; but he can appeal

to posterity, and reckon with confidence on “its sure decree.”

  The  ardour  of  Galileo’s  mind,  the  keenness  of  his  temper,  his  clear

perception  of  truth,  and  his  inextinguishable  love  of  it,  combined  to

exasperate and prolong the hostility of his enemies. When argument failed to

enlighten their judgment, and reason to dispel their prejudices, he wielded

against  them  his  powerful  weapons  of  ridicule  and  sarcasm;  and  in  this

unrelenting warfare, he seems to have forgotten that Providence had withheld

from his enemies those very gifts which he had so liberally received. He whois allowed to take the start of his species, and to penetrate the veil which

conceals from common minds the mysteries of nature, must not expect that

the world will be patiently dragged at the chariot wheels of his philosophy.

Mind has its inertia as well as matter; and its progress to truth can only be

insured  by  the  gradual  and  patient  removal  of  the  obstructions  which

surround it.

  The boldness — may we not say the recklessness — with which Galileo

insisted upon making proselytes of his enemies, served but to alienate them

from the truth. Errors thus assailed speedily entrench themselves in general

feelings, and become embalmed in the virulence of the passions. The various

classes of his opponents marshalled themselves for their mutual defence. The

Aristotelian professors, the temporising Jesuits, the political churchmen, and

that timid but respectable body who at all times dread innovation, whether it

be in religion or in science, entered into an alliance against the philosophical

tyrant who threatened them with the penalties of knowledge.

  The party of Galileo, though weak in numbers, was not without power and

influence. He had trained around him a devoted band, who idolised his genius

and cherished his doctrines. His pupils had been appointed to several of the

principal  professorships  in  Italy.  The  enemies  of  religion  were  on  this

occasion united with the Christian philosopher; and there were, even in these

days,  many  princes  and  nobles  who  had  felt  the  inconvenience  of

ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and who secretly abetted Galileo in his crusade

against established errors.

  Although these two parties had been long dreading each others power, and

reconnoitring each others position, yet we cannot exactly determine which of

them hoisted the first signal for war. The church party, particularly its highest

dignitaries, were certainly disposed to rest on the defensive. Flanked on one

side by the logic of the schools, and on the other by the popular interpretation

of Scripture, and backed by the strong arm of the civil power, they were not

disposed to interfere with the prosecution of science, however much they

may have dreaded its influence. The philosophers, on the contrary, united the

zeal  of  innovators  with  that  firmness  of  purpose  which  truth  alone  can

inspire. Victorious in every contest, they were flushed with success, and they

panted for a struggle in which they knew they must triumph.

  In this state of warlike preparation Galileo addressed a letter, in 1613, to

his friend and pupil, the Abbé Castelli, the object of which was to prove that

the Scriptures were not intended to teach us science and philosophy. Hencehe inferred, that the language employed in the sacred volume in reference to

such subjects should be interpreted only in its common acceptation; and that

it was in reality as difficult to reconcile the Ptolemaic as the Copernican

system to the expressions which occur in the Bible.

  A demonstration was about this time made by the opposite party, in the

person  of  Caccini,  a  Dominican  friar,  who  made  a  personal  attack  upon

Galileo from the pulpit. This violent ecclesiastic ridiculed the astronomer and

his  followers,  by  addressing  them  sarcastically  in  the  sacred  language  of

Scripture— “Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye here looking up into heaven?”

But this species of warfare was disapproved of even by the church; and Luigi

Maraffi, the general of the Dominicans, not only apologised to Galileo, who

had transmitted to him a formal complaint against Caccini, but expressed the

acuteness of his own feelings on being implicated in the “brutal conduct of

thirty or forty thousand monks.”

  From the character of Caccini, and the part which he afterwards played in

the persecution of Galileo, we can scarcely avoid the opinion that his attack

from the pulpit was intended as a snare for the unwary philosopher. It roused

Galileo from his wonted caution; and stimulated, no doubt, by the nature of

the answer which he received from Maraffi, he published a long letter of

seventy  pages,  defending  and  illustrating  his  former  views  respecting  the

influence of scriptural language on the two contending systems. As if to give

the impress of royal authority to this new appeal, he addressed it to Christian,

Grand Duchess of Tuscany, the mother of Cosmo; and in this form it seems

to have excited a new interest, as if it had expressed the opinion of the grand

ducal  family.  These  external  circumstances  gave  additional  weight  to  the

powerful and unanswerable reasoning which this letter contains; and it was

scarcely possible that any man, possessed of a sound mind, and willing to

learn the truth, should refuse his assent to the judicious views of our author.

He expresses his belief that the Scriptures were designed to instruct mankind

respecting their salvation, and that the faculties of our minds were given us

for  the  purpose  of  investigating  the  phenomena  of  nature.  He  considers

Scripture  and  nature  as  proceeding  from  the  same  divine  author,  and,

therefore, incapable of speaking a different language; and he points out the

absurdity of supposing that professors of astronomy will shut their eyes to the

phenomena  which  they  discover  in  the  heavens,  or  will  refuse  to  believe

those deductions of reason which appeal to their judgment with all the power

of demonstration. He supports these views by quotations from the ancientfathers;  and  he  refers  to  the  dedication  of  Copernicus’s  own  work  to  the

Roman Pontiff, Paul III., as a proof that the Pope himself did not regard the

new system of the world as hostile to the sacred writings. Copernicus, on the

contrary,  tells  his  Holiness,  that  the  reason  of  inscribing  to  him  his  new

system  was,  that  the  authority  of  the  Pontiff  might  put  to  silence  the

calumnies of some individuals, who attacked it by arguments drawn from

passages of Scripture twisted for their own purpose.

  It was in vain to meet such reasoning by any other weapons than those of

the civil power. The enemies of Galileo saw that they must either crush the

dangerous innovation, or allow it the fullest scope; and they determined upon

an appeal to the inquisition. Lorini, a monk of the Dominican order, had

already  denounced  to  this  body  Galileo’s  letter  to  Castelli;  and  Caccini,

bribed by the mastership of the convent of St Mary of Minerva, was invited

to settle at Rome for the purpose of embodying the evidence against Galileo.

  Though these plans had been carried on in secret, yet Galileo’s suspicions

were excited; and he obtained leave from Cosmo to go to Rome about the end

of 1615. Here he was lodged in the palace of the Grand Duke’s ambassador,

and  kept  up  a  constant  correspondence  with  the  family  of  his  patron  at

Florence;  but,  in  the  midst  of  this  external  splendour,  he  was  summoned

before  the  inquisition  to  answer  for  the  heretical  doctrines  which  he  had

published. He was charged with maintaining the motion of the earth, and the

stability  of  the  sun  —  with  teaching  this  doctrine  to  his  pupils  —  with

corresponding on the subject with several German mathematicians — and

with having published it, and attempted to reconcile it to Scripture, in his

letters to Mark Velser in 1612. The inquisition assembled to consider these

charges on the 25th of February 1615; and it was decreed that Galileo should

be enjoined by Cardinal Bellarmine to renounce the obnoxious doctrines, and

to pledge himself that he would neither teach, defend, nor publish them in

future.  In  the  event  of  his  refusing  to  acquiesce  in  this  sentence,  it  was

decreed that he should be thrown into prison. Galileo did not hesitate to yield

to this injunction. On the day following, the 26th of February, he appeared

before Cardinal Bellarmine, to renounce his heretical opinions; and, having

declared that he abandoned the doctrine of the earth’s motion, and would

neither defend nor teach it, in his conversation or in his writings, he was

dismissed from the bar of the inquisition.

  Having thus disposed of Galileo, the inquisition conceived the design of

condemning the whole system of Copernicus as heretical. Galileo, with morehardihood than prudence, remained at Rome for the purpose of giving his

assistance in frustrating this plan; but there is reason to think that he injured

by his presence the very cause which he meant to support. The inquisitors

had determined to put down the new opinions; and they now inserted among

the  prohibited  books  Galileo’s  letters  to  Castelli  and  the  Grand  Duchess,

Kepler’s epitome of the Copernican theory, and Copernicus’s own work on

the revolutions of the heavenly bodies.

    Notwithstanding these proceedings, Galileo had an audience of the Pope,

Paul V., in March 1616. He was received very graciously, and spent nearly an

hour  with  his  Holiness.  When  they  were  about  to  part,  the  Pope  assured

Galileo,  that  the  congregation  were  not  disposed  to  receive  upon  light

grounds any calumnies which might be propagated by his enemies, and that,

as long as he occupied the papal chair, he might consider himself as safe.

  These assurances were no doubt founded on the belief that Galileo would

adhere to his pledges; but so bold and inconsiderate was he in the expression

of  his  opinions,  that  even  in  Rome  he  was  continually  engaged  in

controversial  discussions.  The  following  very  interesting  account  of  these

disputes is given by Querenghi, in a letter to the Cardinal D’Este: —

  “Your eminence would be delighted with Galileo if you heard him holding

forth,  as  he  often  does,  in  the  midst  of  fifteen  or  twenty,  all  violently

attacking  him,  sometimes  in  one  house,  sometimes  in  another.  But  he  is

armed after such fashion that he laughs all of them to scorn; and even if the

novelty of his opinions prevents entire persuasion, he at least convicts of

emptiness most of the arguments with which his adversaries endeavour to

overwhelm him. He was particularly admirable on Monday last in the house

of  Signor  Frederico  Ghisilieri;  and  what  especially  pleased  me  was,  that

before replying to the contrary arguments, he amplified and enforced them

with new grounds of great plausibility, so as to leave his adversaries in a

more ridiculous plight, when he afterwards overturned them all.”

  The discovery of Jupiter’s satellites suggested to Galileo a new method of

finding the longitude at sea. Philip III. had encouraged astronomers to direct

their attention to this problem, by offering a reward for its solution; and in

those  days,  when  new  discoveries  in  science  were  sometimes  rejected  as

injurious to mankind, it was no common event to see a powerful sovereign

courting the assistance of astronomers in promoting the commercial interests

of his empire. Galileo seems to have regarded the solution of this problem as

an object worthy of his ambition; and he no doubt anticipated the triumphwhich he would obtain over his enemies, if the Medicean stars, which they

had  treated  with  such  contempt,  could  be  made  subservient  to  the  great

interests  of  mankind.  During  his  residence  at  Rome  in  1615  and  1616,

Galileo had communicated his views on this subject to the Comte di Lemos,

the Viceroy of Naples, who had presided over the council of the Spanish

Indies. This nobleman advised him to apply to the Spanish minister the Duke

of  Lerma;  and,  through  the  influence  of  the  Grand  Duke  Cosmo,  his

ambassador at the court of Madrid was engaged to manage the affair. The

anxiety of Galileo on this subject was singularly great. He assured the Tuscan

ambassador that, in order to accomplish this object, “he was ready to leave all

his comforts, his country, his friends, and his family, to cross over into Spain,

and to stay as long as he might be wanted at Seville or at Lisbon, or wherever

it might be convenient to communicate a knowledge of his method.” The

lethargy of the Spanish court seems to have increased with the enthusiasm of

Galileo; and though the negotiations were occasionally revived for ten or

twelve years, yet no steps were taken to bring them to a close. This strange

procrastination has been generally ascribed to jealousy or indifference on the

part  of  Spain;  but  Nelli,  one  of  Galileo’s  biographers,  declares,  on  the

authority of Florentine records, that Cosmo had privately requested from the

government  the  privilege  of  sending  annually  to  the  Spanish  Indies  two

Leghorn merchantmen free of duty, as a compensation for the loss of Galileo!

  The  failure  of  this  negotiation  must  have  been  a  source  of  extreme

mortification to the high spirit and sanguine temperament of Galileo. He had

calculated, however, too securely on his means of putting the new method to

a successful trial. The great imperfection of the time-keepers of that day, and

the want of proper telescopes, would have baffled him in all his efforts, and

he would have been subject to a more serious mortification from the failure

and rejection of his plan, than that which he actually experienced from the

avarice of his patron, or the indifference of Spain. Even in the present day, no

telescope has been invented which is capable of observing at sea the eclipses

of Jupiter’s satellites; and though this method of finding the longitude has

great advantages on shore, yet it has been completely abandoned at sea, and

superseded by easier and more correct methods.

  In the year 1618, when no fewer than three comets visited our system, and

attracted  the  attention  of  all  the  astronomers  of  Europe,  Galileo  was

unfortunately confined to his bed by a severe illness; but, though he was

unable  to  make  a  single  observation  upon  these  remarkable  bodies,  hecontrived  to  involve  himself  in  the  controversies  which  they  occasioned.

Marco Guiducci, an astronomer of Florence, and a friend of Galileo, had

delivered a discourse on comets before the Florentine Academy. The heads of

this discourse, which was published in 1619, were supposed to have been

communicated to him by Galileo, and this seems to have been universally

admitted  during  the  controversy  to  which  it  gave  rise.  The  opinion

maintained  in  this  treatise,  that  comets  are  nothing  but  meteors  which

occasionally appear in our atmosphere, like halos and rainbows, savours so

little of the sagacity of Galileo that we should be disposed to question its

paternity. His inability to partake in the general interest which these three

comets  excited,  and  to  employ  his  powerful  telescope  in  observing  their

phenomena, and their movements, might have had some slight share in the

formation of an opinion which deprived them of their importance as celestial

bodies. But, however this may have been, the treatise of Guiducci afforded a

favourable point of attack to Galileo’s enemies, and the dangerous task was

entrusted to Horatio Grassi, a learned Jesuit, who, in a work entitled The

Astronomical and Philosophical Balance, criticised the discourse on comets,

under the feigned name of Lotario Sarsi.

  Galileo replied to this attack in a volume entitled Il Saggiatore, or The

Assayer, which, owing to the state of his health, was not published till the

autumn of 1623. This work was written in the form of a letter to Virginio

Cesarini, a member of the Lyncæan Academy, and master of the chamber to

Urban VIII., who had just ascended the papal throne. It was dedicated to the

Pontiff himself, and has been long celebrated among literary men for the

beauty of its language, though it is doubtless one of the least important of

Galileo’s writings.                                    CHAPTER V.


  Urban VIII., Galileo’s friend, raised to the Pontificate — Galileo goes to

Rome to offer his congratulations — The Pope loads Galileo with presents,

and promises a Pension to his Son — Galileo in pecuniary difficulties, owing

to the death of his patron, Cosmo — Galileo again rashly attacks the Church,

    notwithstanding the Pope’s kindness — He composes his System of the

World, to demonstrate the Copernican System — Artfully obtains a license to

print it — Nature of the work — Its influence on the public mind — The Pope

resolves on suppressing it — Galileo summoned before the Inquisition — His

      Trial — His Defence — His formal abjuration of his opinions —

Observations on his conduct — The Pope shews great indulgence to Galileo,

  who is allowed to return to his own house at Arcetri, as the place of his

                                      confinement.


  The  succession  of  the  Cardinal  Maffeo  Barberini  to  the  papal  throne,

under the name of Urban VIII., was hailed by Galileo and his friends as an

event favourable to the promotion of science. Urban had not only been the

personal friend of Galileo and of Prince Cesi, the founder of the Lyncæan

Academy,  but  had  been  intimately  connected  with  that  able  and  liberal

association; and it was therefore deemed prudent to secure his favour and

attachment. If Paul III. had, nearly a century before, patronised Copernicus,

and accepted of the dedication of his great work, it was not unreasonable to

expect that, in more enlightened times, another Pontiff might exhibit the same

liberality to science.

  The plan of securing to Galileo the patronage of Urban VIII. seems to

have been devised by Prince Cesi. Although Galileo had not been able for

some years to travel, excepting in a litter, yet he was urged by the Prince to

perform a journey to Rome, for the express purpose of congratulating his

friend  upon  his  elevation  to  the  papal  chair.  This  request  was  made  in

October 1623; and though Galileo’s health was not such as to authorise him

to undergo so much fatigue, yet he felt the importance of the advice, and,

after visiting Cesi at Acqua Sparta, he arrived at Rome in the spring of 1624.

The reception which he here  experienced far exceeded his most sanguine

expectations. During the two months which he spent in the capital he was

permitted to have no fewer than six long and gratifying audiences of thePope. The kindness of his Holiness was of the most marked description. He

not only loaded Galileo with presents, and promised him a pension for his

son Vincenzo, but he wrote a letter to Ferdinand, who had just succeeded

Cosmo as Grand Duke of Tuscany, recommending Galileo to his particular

patronage. “For we find in him,” says he, “not only literary distinction, but

the love of piety; and he is strong in those qualities by which Pontifical good-

will is easily obtained. And now, when he has been brought to this city to

congratulate us on our elevation, we have very lovingly embraced him; nor

can we suffer him to return to the country whither your liberality recalls him,

without an ample provision of Pontifical love. And that you may know how

dear he is to us, we have willed to give him this honourable testimonial of

virtue and piety. And we further signify, that every benefit which you shall

confer upon him, imitating or even surpassing your father’s liberality, will

conduce to our gratification.”

  Not  content  with  thus  securing  the  friendship  of  the  Pope,  Galileo

endeavoured  to  bespeak  the  good-will  of  the  Cardinals  towards  the

Copernican system. He had, accordingly, many interviews with several of

these  dignitaries;  and  he  was  assured,  by  Cardinal  Hohenzoller,  that  in  a

representation which he had made to the Pope on the subject of Copernicus,

he stated to his Holiness, “that as all the heretics considered that system as

undoubted, it would be necessary to be very circumspect in coming to any

resolution on the subject.” To this remark his Holiness replied— “that the

church had not condemned this system; and that it should not be condemned

as heretical, but only as rash;” and he added, “that there was no fear of any

person undertaking to prove that it must necessarily be true.”

  The  recent  appointment  of  the  Abbé  Castelli,  the  friend  and  pupil  of

Galileo, to be mathematician to the Pope, was an event of a most gratifying

nature; and when we recollect that it was to Castelli that he addressed the

famous letter which was pronounced heretical by the Inquisition, we must

regard it also as an event indicative of a new and favourable feeling towards

the  friends  of  science.  The  opinions  of  Urban,  indeed,  had  suffered  no

change. He was one of the few Cardinals who had opposed the inquisitorial

decree  of  1616,  and  his  subsequent  demeanour  was  in  every  respect

conformable to the liberality of his early views. The sincerity of his conduct

was still further evinced by the grant of a pension of one hundred crowns to

Galileo, a few years after his visit to Rome; though there is reason to think

that this allowance was not regularly paid.  The death of Cosmo, whose liberality had given him both affluence and

leisure, threatened Galileo with pecuniary difficulties. He had been involved

in a “great load of debt,” owing to the circumstances of his brother’s family;

and, in order to relieve himself, he had requested Castelli to dispose of the

pension of his son Vincenzo. In addition to this calamity he was now alarmed

at the prospect of losing his salary as an extraordinary professor at Pisa. The

great  youth  of  Ferdinand,  who  was  scarcely  of  age,  induced  Galileo’s

enemies, in 1629, to raise doubts respecting the payment of a salary to a

professor who neither resided nor lectured in the university; but the question

was  decided  in  his  favour,  and  we  have  no  doubt  that  the  decision  was

facilitated by the friendly recommendation of the Pope, to which we have

already referred.

  Although  Galileo  had  made  a  narrow  escape  from  the  grasp  of  the

Inquisition,  yet  he  was  never  sufficiently  sensible  of  the  lenity  which  he

experienced. When he left Rome in 1616, under the solemn pledge of never

again  teaching  the  obnoxious  doctrine,  it  was  with  a  hostility  against  the

church, suppressed but deeply cherished; and his resolution to propagate the

heresy seems to have been coeval with the vow by which he renounced it. In

the year 1618, when he communicated his theory of the tides to the Archduke

Leopold, he alludes in the most sarcastic manner to the conduct of the church.

The same hostile tone, more or less, pervaded all his writings, and, while he

laboured to sharpen the edge of his satire, he endeavoured to guard himself

against  its  effects,  by  an  affectation  of  the  humblest  deference  to  the

decisions of theology. Had Galileo stood alone, his devotion to science might

have withdrawn him from so hopeless a contest; but he was spurred on by the

violence of a party. The Lyncæan Academy never scrupled to summon him

from his researches. They placed him in the forlorn hope of their combat, and

he at last fell a victim to the rashness of his friends.

  But whatever allowance we may make for the ardour of Galileo’s temper,

and the peculiarity of his position; and however we may justify and even

approve of his past conduct, his visit to Urban VIII., in 1624, placed him in a

new  relation  to  the  church,  which  demanded  on  his  part  a  new  and

corresponding demeanour. The noble and generous reception which he met

with from Urban, and the liberal declaration of Cardinal Hohenzoller on the

subject of the Copernican system, should have been regarded as expressions

of regret for the past, and offers of conciliation for the future. Thus honoured

by the head of the church, and befriended by its dignitaries, Galileo musthave felt himself secure against the indignities of its lesser functionaries, and

in the possession of the fullest license to prosecute his researches and publish

his discoveries, provided he avoided that dogma of the church which, even in

the present day, it has not ventured to renounce. But Galileo was bound to the

Romish hierarchy by even stronger ties. His son and himself were pensioners

of the church, and, having accepted of its alms, they owed to it, at least, a

decent and respectful allegiance. The pension thus given by Urban was not a

remuneration  which  sovereigns  sometimes  award  to  the  services  of  their

subjects. Galileo was a foreigner at Rome. The sovereign of the papal state

owed him no obligation; and hence we must regard the pension of Galileo as

a donation from the Roman Pontiff to science itself, and as a declaration to

the Christian world that religion was not jealous of philosophy, and that the

church  of  Rome  was  willing  to  respect  and  foster  even  the  genius  of  its

enemies.

  Galileo viewed all these circumstances in a different light. He resolved to

compose a work in which the Copernican system should be demonstrated; but

he had not the courage to do this in a direct and open manner. He adopted the

plan of discussing the subject in a dialogue between three speakers, in the

hope of eluding by this artifice the censure of the church. This work was

completed in 1630, but, owing to some difficulties in obtaining a license to

print it, it was not published till 1632.

  In obtaining this license, Galileo exhibited considerable address, and his

memory has not escaped from the imputation of having acted unfairly, and of

having involved his personal friends in the consequences of his imprudence.

  The  situation  of  master  of  the  palace  was,  fortunately  for  Galileo’s

designs, filled by Nicolo Riccardi, a friend and pupil of his own. This officer

was a sort of censor of new publications, and when he was applied to on the

subject of printing his work, Galileo soon found that attempts had previously

been made to thwart his views. He instantly set off for Rome, and had an

interview with his friend, who was in every respect anxious to oblige him.

Riccardi examined the manuscript, pointed out some incautious expressions

which he considered it necessary to erase, and returned it with his written

approbation, on the understanding that the alterations he suggested would be

made. Dreading to remain in Rome during the unhealthy season, which was

fast  approaching,  Galileo  returned  to  Florence,  with  the  intention  of

completing the index and dedication, and of sending the MS. to Rome, to be

printed  under  the  care  of  Prince  Cesi.  The  death  of  that  distinguishedindividual, in August 1630, frustrated Galileo’s plan, and he applied for leave

to  have  the  book  printed  in  Florence.  Riccardi  was  at  first  desirous  to

examine the MS. again, but, after inspecting only the beginning and the end

of it, he gave Galileo leave to print it wherever he chose, providing it bore the

license of the Inquisitor-General of Florence, and one or two other persons

whom he named.

  Having overcome all these difficulties, Galileo’s work was published in

1632, under the title of “The System of the World of Galileo Galilei, &c., in

which, in four dialogues concerning the two principal systems of the world

— the Ptolemaic and the Copernican — he discusses, indeterminately and

firmly, the arguments proposed on both sides.” It is dedicated to Ferdinand,

Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,  and  is  prefaced  by  an  “Address  to  the  prudent

reader,” which is itself characterised by the utmost imprudence. He refers to

the decree of the Inquisition in the most insulting and ironical language. He

attributes  it  to  passion  and  to  ignorance,  not  by  direct  assertion,  but  by

insinuations ascribed to others; and he announces his intention to defend the

Copernican system, as a pure mathematical hypothesis, and not as an opinion

having an advantage over that of the stability of the earth absolutely. The

dialogue  is  conducted  by  three  persons,  Salviati,  Sagredo,  and  Simplicio.

Salviati, who is the true philosopher in the dialogue, was the real name of a

nobleman  whom  we  have  already  had  occasion  to  mention.  Sagredo,  the

name of another noble friend of Galileo’s, performs a secondary part under

Salviati. He proposes doubts, suggests difficulties, and enlivens the gravity of

the dialogue with his wit and pleasantry. Simplicio is a resolute follower of

Ptolemy and Aristotle, and, with a proper degree of candour and modesty, he

brings forward all the common arguments in favour of the Ptolemaic system.

Between the wit of Sagredo, and the powerful philosophy of Salviati, the

peripatetic sage is baffled in every discussion; and there can be no doubt that

Galileo aimed a more fatal blow at the Ptolemaic system by this mode of

discussing it, than if he had endeavoured to overturn it by direct arguments.

  The influence of this work on the public mind was such as might have

been  anticipated.  The  obnoxious  doctrines  which  it  upheld  were  eagerly

received, and widely disseminated; and the church of Rome became sensible

of the shock which was thus given to its intellectual supremacy. Pope Urban

VIII., attached though he had been to Galileo, never once hesitated respecting

the line of conduct which he felt himself bound to pursue. His mind was,

nevertheless, agitated with conflicting sentiments. He entertained a sincereaffection for science and literature, and yet he was placed in the position of

their enemy. He had been the personal friend of Galileo, and yet his duty

compelled him to become his accuser. Embarrassing as these feelings were,

other considerations contributed to soothe him. He had, in his capacity of a

Cardinal, opposed the first persecution of Galileo. He had, since his elevation

to the pontificate, traced an open path for the march of Galileo’s discoveries;

and he had finally endeavoured to bind the recusant philosopher by the chains

of kindness and gratitude. All these means, however, had proved abortive,

and he was now called upon to support the doctrine which he had subscribed,

and administer the law of which he was the guardian.

  It has been supposed, without any satisfactory evidence, that Urban may

have been influenced by less creditable motives. Salviati and Sagredo being

well-known  personages,  it  was  inferred  that  Simplicio  must  also  have  a

representative.  The  enemies  of  Galileo  are  said  to  have  convinced  his

Holiness that Simplicio was intended as a portraiture of himself; and this

opinion received some probability from the fact, that the peripatetic disputant

had employed many of the arguments which Urban had himself used in his

discussions with Galileo. The latest biographer of Galileo regards this motive

as necessary to account for “the otherwise inexplicable change which took

place in the conduct of Urban to his old friend;” — but we cannot admit the

truth  of  this  supposition.  The  church  had  been  placed  in  hostility  to  a

powerful and liberal party, which was adverse to its interests. The dogmas of

the Catholic faith had been brought into direct collision with the deductions

of science. The leader of the philosophic band had broken the most solemn

armistice with the Inquisition: he had renounced the ties of gratitude which

bound him to the Pontiff; and Urban was thus compelled to entrench himself

in a position to which he had been driven by his opponents.

  The design of summoning Galileo before the Inquisition, seems to have

been formed almost immediately after the publication of his book; for even in

August 1632, the preliminary proceedings had reached the ears of the Grand

Duke Ferdinand. The Tuscan ambassador at Rome was speedily acquainted

with the dissatisfaction which his Sovereign felt at these proceedings; and he

was  instructed  to  forward  to  Florence  a  written  statement  of  the  charges

against Galileo, in order to enable him to prepare for his defence. Although

this request was denied, Ferdinand again interposed, and transmitted a letter

to his ambassador, recommending the admission of Campanella and Castelli

into the congregation of ecclesiastics by whom Galileo was to be judged.Circumstances, however, rendered it prudent to withhold this letter. Castelli

was sent away from Rome, and Scipio Chiaramonte, a bigotted ecclesiastic,

was summoned from Pisa to complete the number of the judges.

  It appears from a despatch of the Tuscan minister, that Ferdinand was

enraged at the transaction; and he instructed his ambassador, Niccolini, to

make  the  strongest  representations  to  the  Pope.  Niccolini  had  several

interviews with his Holiness; but all his expostulations were fruitless. He

found  Urban  highly  incensed  against  Galileo;  and  his  Holiness  begged

Niccolini to advise the Archduke not to interfere any farther, as he would not

“get through it with honour.” On the 15th of September the Pope caused it to

be intimated to Niccolini, as a mark of his especial esteem for the Grand

Duke, that he was obliged to refer the work to the Inquisition; but both the

prince and his ambassador were declared liable to the usual censures if they

divulged the secret.

  From the measures which this tribunal had formerly pursued, it was not

difficult to foresee the result of their present deliberations. They summoned

Galileo to appear before them at Rome, to answer in person the charges under

which he lay. The Tuscan ambassador expostulated warmly with the court of

Rome on the inhumanity of this proceeding. He urged his advanced age, his

infirm  health,  the  discomforts  of  the  journey,  and  the  miseries  of  the

quarantine, as motives for reconsidering their decision: But the Pope was

inexorable,  and  though  it  was  agreed  to  relax  the  quarantine  as  much  as

possible in his favour, yet it was declared indispensable that he should appear

in person before the Inquisition.

  Worn out with age and infirmities, and exhausted with the fatigues of his

journey, Galileo arrived at Rome on the 14th of February, 1633. The Tuscan

ambassador announced his arrival in an official form to the commissary of

the holy office, and Galileo awaited in calm dignity the approach of his trial.

Among those who proffered their advice in this distressing emergency, we

must enumerate the Cardinal Barberino, the Pope’s nephew, who, though he

may have felt the necessity of an interference on the part of the church, was

yet desirous that it should be effected with the least injury to Galileo and to

science. He accordingly visited Galileo, and advised him to remain as much

at home as possible, to keep aloof from general society, and to see only his

most intimate friends. The same advice was given from different quarters;

and Galileo, feeling its propriety, remained in strict seclusion in the palace of

the Tuscan ambassador.  During the whole of the trial which had now commenced, Galileo was

treated  with  the  most  marked  indulgence.  Abhorring,  as  we  must  do,  the

principles and practice of this odious tribunal, and reprobating its interference

with  the  cautious  deductions  of  science,  we  must  yet  admit  that,  on  this

occasion,  its  deliberations  were  not  dictated  by  passion,  nor  its  power

directed by vengeance. Though placed at their judgment-seat as a heretic,

Galileo stood there with the recognised attributes of a sage; and though an

offender against the laws of which they were the guardian, yet the highest

respect  was  yielded  to  his  genius,  and  the  kindest  commiseration  to  his

infirmities.

  In  the  beginning  of  April,  when  his  examination  in  person  was  to

commence, it became necessary that he should be removed to the holy office;

but instead of committing him, as was the practice, to solitary confinement,

he was provided with apartments in the house of the fiscal of the Inquisition.

His  table  was  provided  by  the  Tuscan  ambassador,  and  his  servant  was

allowed to attend him at his pleasure, and to sleep in an adjoining apartment.

Even this nominal confinement, however, Galileo’s high spirit was unable to

brook.  An  attack  of  the  disease  to  which  he  was  constitutionally  subject

contributed to fret and irritate him, and he became impatient for a release

from his anxiety as well as from his bondage. Cardinal Barberino seems to

have  received  notice  of  the  state  of  Galileo’s  feelings,  and,  with  a

magnanimity which posterity will ever honour, he liberated the philosopher

on his own responsibility; and in ten days after his first examination, and on

the last day of April, he was restored to the hospitable roof of the Tuscan

ambassador.

  Though this favour was granted on the condition of his remaining in strict

seclusion,  Galileo  recovered  his  health,  and  to  a  certain  degree  his  usual

hilarity, amid the kind attentions of Niccolini and his family; and when the

want of exercise had begun to produce symptoms of indisposition, the Tuscan

minister obtained for him leave to go into the public gardens in a half-closed

carriage.

  After the Inquisition had examined Galileo personally, they allowed him a

reasonable time for preparing his defence. He felt the difficulty of adducing

any thing like a plausible justification of his conduct; and he resorted to an

ingenious, though a shallow artifice, which was regarded by the court as an

aggravation of the crime. After his first appearance before the Inquisition in

1616, he was publicly and falsely charged by his enemies with having thenabjured his opinions; and he was taunted as a criminal who had been actually

punished  for  his  offences.  As  a  refutation  of  these  calumnies,  Cardinal

Bellarmine had given him a certificate in his own handwriting, declaring that

he neither abjured his opinions, nor suffered punishment for them; and that

the  doctrine  of  the  earth’s  motion,  and  the  sun’s  stability,  was  only

denounced to him as contrary to Scripture, and as one which could not be

defended. To this certificate the Cardinal did not add, because he was not

called upon to do it, that Galileo was enjoined not to teach in any manner the

doctrine  thus  denounced;  and  Galileo  ingeniously  avails  himself  of  this

supposed omission, to account for his having, in the lapse of fourteen or

sixteen years, forgotten the injunction. He assigned the same excuse for his

having omitted to mention this injunction to Riccardi, and to the Inquisitor-

General at Florence, when he obtained the licence to print his Dialogues. The

court held the production of this certificate to be at once a proof and an

aggravation  of  his  offence,  because  the  certificate  itself  declared  that  the

obnoxious doctrines had been pronounced contrary to the Holy Scriptures.

  Having duly weighed the confessions and excuses of their prisoner, and

considered  the  general  merits  of  the  case,  the  Inquisition  came  to  an

agreement upon the sentence which they were to pronounce, and appointed

the  22d  of  June  as  the  day  on  which  it  was  to  be  delivered.  Two  days

previous to this, Galileo was summoned to appear at the holy office; and on

the morning of the 21st, he obeyed the summons. On the 22d of June he was

clothed  in  a  penitential  dress,  and  conducted  to  the  convent  of  Minerva,

where the Inquisition was assembled to give judgment. A long and elaborate

sentence was pronounced, detailing the former proceedings of the Inquisition,

and specifying the offences which he had committed in teaching heretical

doctrines,  in  violating  his  former  pledges,  and  in  obtaining  by  improper

means a license for the printing of his Dialogues. After an invocation of the

name of our Saviour, and of the Holy Virgin, Galileo is declared to have

brought himself under strong suspicions of heresy, and to have incurred all

the  censures  and  penalties  which  are  enjoined  against  delinquents  of  this

kind; but from all these consequences he is to be held absolved, provided that

with a sincere heart, and a faith unfeigned, he abjures and curses the heresies

he has cherished, as well as every other heresy against the Catholic church. In

order that his offence might not go altogether unpunished, that he might be

more cautious in future, and be a warning to others to abstain from similar

delinquencies, it was also decreed that his Dialogues should be prohibited bypublic  edict;  that  he  himself  should  be  condemned  to  the  prison  of  the

Inquisition during their pleasure, and that, in the course of the next three

years, he should recite once a week the seven penitential psalms.

  The ceremony of Galileo’s abjuration was one of exciting interest, and of

awful  formality.  Clothed  in  the  sackcloth  of  a  repentant  criminal,  the

venerable sage fell upon his knees before the assembled Cardinals; and laying

his hands upon the Holy Evangelists, he invoked the Divine aid in abjuring

and detesting, and vowing never again to teach, the doctrine of the earth’s

motion, and of the sun’s stability. He pledged himself that he would never

again, either in words or in writing, propagate such heresies; and he swore

that he would fulfil and observe the penances which had been inflicted upon

him. At the conclusion of this ceremony, in which he recited his abjuration

word for word, and then signed it, he was conveyed, in conformity with his

sentence, to the prison of the Inquisition.

  The account which we have now given of the trial and the sentence of

Galileo, is pregnant with the deepest interest and instruction. Human nature is

here drawn in its darkest colouring; and in surveying the melancholy picture,

it  is  difficult  to  decide  whether  religion  or  philosophy  has  been  most

degraded. While we witness the presumptuous priest pronouncing infallible

the decrees of his own erring judgment, we see the high-minded philosopher

abjuring the eternal and immutable truths which he had himself the glory of

establishing. In the ignorance and prejudices of the age — in a too literal

interpretation of the language of Scripture — in a mistaken respect for the

errors that had become venerable from their antiquity — and in the peculiar

position which Galileo had taken among the avowed enemies of the church,

we may find the elements of an apology, poor though it be, for the conduct of

the Inquisition. But what excuse can we devise for the humiliating confession

and abjuration of Galileo? Why did this master-spirit of the age — this high-

priest of the stars — this representative of science — this hoary sage, whose

career of glory was near its consummation — why did he reject the crown of

martyrdom which he had himself coveted, and which, plaited with immortal

laurels, was about to descend upon his head? If, in place of disavowing the

laws of Nature, and surrendering in his own person the intellectual dignity of

his species, he had boldly asserted the truth of his opinions, and confided his

character to posterity, and his cause to an all-ruling Providence, he would

have strung up the hair-suspended sabre, and disarmed for ever the hostility

which  threatened  to  overwhelm  him.  The  philosopher,  however,  wassupported only by philosophy; and in the love of truth he found a miserable

substitute for the hopes of the martyr. Galileo cowered under the fear of man,

and  his  submission  was  the  salvation  of  the  church.  The  sword  of  the

Inquisition descended on his prostrate neck; and though its stroke was not

physical, yet it fell with a moral influence fatal to the character of its victim,

and to the dignity of science.

  In studying with attention this portion of scientific history, the reader will

not fail to perceive that the Church of Rome was driven into a dilemma, from

which the submission and abjuration of Galileo could alone extricate it. He

who confesses a crime and denounces its atrocity, not only sanctions but

inflicts  the  punishment  which  is  annexed  to  it.  Had  Galileo  declared  his

innocence,  and  avowed  his  sentiments,  and  had  he  appealed  to  the  past

conduct of the Church itself, to the acknowledged opinions of its dignitaries,

and even to the acts of its pontiffs, he would have at once confounded his

accusers, and escaped from their toils. After Copernicus, himself a catholic

priest, had openly maintained the motion of the earth, and the stability of the

sun: — after he had dedicated the work which advocated these opinions to

Pope Paul III., on the express ground that the authority of the pontiff might

silence the calumnies of those who attacked these opinions by arguments

drawn from Scripture: — after the Cardinal Schonberg and the Bishop of

Culm had urged Copernicus to publish the new doctrines; — and after the

Bishop  of  Ermeland  had  erected  a  monument  to  commemorate  his  great

discoveries; — how could the Church of Rome have appealed to its pontifical

decrees as the ground of persecuting and punishing Galileo? Even in later

times, the same doctrines had been propagated with entire toleration: Nay, in

the  very  year  of  Galileo’s  first  persecution,  Paul  Anthony  Foscarinus,  a

learned  Carmelite  monk,  wrote  a  pamphlet,  in  which  he  illustrates  and

defends the mobility of the earth, and endeavours to reconcile to this new

doctrine the passages of Scripture which had been employed to subvert it.

This  very  singular  production  was  dated  from  the  Carmelite  convent  at

Naples; was dedicated to the very reverend Sebastian Fantoni, general of the

Carmelite  order;  and,  sanctioned  by  the  ecclesiastical  authorities,  it  was

published at Naples in 1615, the very year of the first persecution of Galileo.

  Nor was this the only defence of the Copernican system which issued from

the bosom of the Church. Thomas Campanella, a Calabrian monk, published,

in 1622, “An Apology for Galileo,” and he even dedicates it to D. Boniface,

Cardinal of Cajeta. Nay, it appears from the dedication, that he undertook thework  at  the  command  of  the  Cardinal,  and  that  the  examination  of  the

question had been entrusted to the Cardinal by the Holy Senate. After an able

defence of his friend, Campanella refers, at the conclusion of his apology, to

the suppression of Galileo’s writings, and justly observes, that the effect of

such a measure would be to make them more generally read, and more highly

esteemed. The boldness of the apologist, however, is wisely tempered with

the  humility  of  the  ecclesiastic,  and  he  concludes  his  work  with  the

declaration,  that  in  all  his  opinions,  whether  written  or  to  be  written,  he

submits himself to the opinions of the Holy Mother Church of Rome and to

the judgment of his superiors.

  By these proceedings of the dignitaries, as well as the clergy of the Church

of Rome, which had been tolerated for more than a century, the decrees of the

pontiffs against the doctrine of the earth’s motion were virtually repealed;

and Galileo might have pleaded them with success in arrest of judgment.

Unfortunately, however, for himself and for science, he acted otherwise. By

admitting  their  authority,  he  revived  in  fresh  force  these  obsolete  and

obnoxious enactments; and, by yielding to their power, he riveted for another

century the almost broken chains of spiritual despotism.

  It  is  a  curious  fact  in  the  annals  of  heresy  and  sedition,  that  opinions

maintained with impunity by one individual, have, in the same age, brought

others  to  the  stake  or  to  the  scaffold.  The  results  of  deep  research  or

extravagant speculation seldom provoke hostility, when meekly announced as

the deductions of reason or the convictions of conscience. As the dreams of a

recluse or of an enthusiast, they may excite pity or call forth contempt; but,

like seed quietly cast into the earth, they will rot and germinate according to

the vitality with which they are endowed. But, if new and startling opinions

are thrown in the face of the community — if they are uttered in triumph or

in insult — in contempt of public opinion, or in derision of cherished errors,

they lose the comeliness of truth in the rancour of their propagation; and they

are  like  seed  scattered  in  a  hurricane,  which  only  irritates  and  blinds  the

husbandman. Had Galileo concluded his System of the World with the quiet

peroration of his apologist Campanella, and dedicated it to the Pope, it might

have stood in the library of the Vatican, beside the cherished though equally

heretical volume of Copernicus.

  In the abjuration of his opinions by Galileo, Pope Urban VII. did not fail

to observe the full extent of his triumph; and he exhibited the utmost sagacity

in  the  means  which  he  employed  to  secure  it.  While  he  endeavoured  tooverawe the enemies of the church by the formal promulgation of Galileo’s

sentence and abjuration, and by punishing the officials who had assisted in

obtaining the license to print his work, he treated Galileo with the utmost

lenity, and yielded to every request that was made to diminish, and almost

suspend, the constraint under which he lay. The sentence of abjuration was

ordered to be publicly read at several universities. At Florence the ceremonial

was performed in the church of Santa Croce, and the friends and disciples of

Galileo were especially summoned to witness the public degradation of their

master. The inquisitor at Florence was ordered to be reprimanded for his

conduct; and Riccardi, the master of the sacred palace, and Ciampoli, the

secretary of Pope Urban himself, were dismissed from their situations.

  Galileo had remained only four days in the prison of the Inquisition, when,

on the application of Niccolini, the Tuscan ambassador, he was allowed to

reside with him in his palace. As Florence still suffered under the contagious

disease  which  we  have  already  mentioned,  it  was  proposed  that  Sienna

should be the place of Galileo’s confinement, and that his residence should be

in one of the convents of that city. Niccolini, however, recommended the

palace  of  the  Archbishop  Piccolomoni  as  a  more  suitable  residence;  and

though the Archbishop was one of Galileo’s best friends, the Pope agreed to

the  arrangement,  and  in  the  beginning  of  July  Galileo  quitted  Rome  for

Sienna.

  After  having  spent  nearly  six  months  under  the  hospitable  roof  of  his

friend, with no other restraint than that of being confined to the limits of the

palace, Galileo was permitted to return to his villa near Florence under the

same restrictions; and as the contagious disease had disappeared in Tuscany,

he was able in the month of December to re-enter his own house at Arcetri,

where he spent the remainder of his days.                                    CHAPTER VI.


Galileo loses his favourite Daughter — He falls into a state of melancholy

and ill health — Is allowed to go to Florence for its recovery in 1638 — But

is prevented from leaving his House or receiving his Friends — His friend

Castelli permitted to visit him in the presence of an Officer of the Inquisition

— He composes his celebrated Dialogues on Local Motion — Discovers the

Moon’s Libration — Loses the sight of one Eye — The other Eye attacked by

      the same Disease — Is struck blind — Negociates with the Dutch

Government respecting his Method of finding the Longitude — He is allowed

free intercourse with his Friends — His Illness and Death in 1642 — His

            Epitaph — His Social, Moral, and Scientific Character.


  Although Galileo had now the happiness of rejoining his family under

their  paternal  roof,  yet,  like  all  sublunary  blessings,  it  was  but  of  short

duration. His favourite daughter Maria, who along with her sister had joined

the  convent  of  St  Matthew  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Arcetri,  had  looked

forward to the arrival of her father with the most affectionate anticipations.

She hoped that her filial devotion might form some compensation for the

malignity  of  his  enemies,  and  she  eagerly  assumed  the  labour  of  reciting

weekly  the  seven  penitentiary  psalms  which  formed  part  of  her  father’s

sentence. These sacred duties, however, were destined to terminate almost at

the moment they were begun. She was seized with a fatal illness in the same

month in which she rejoined her parent, and before the month of April she

was no more. This heavy blow, so suddenly struck, overwhelmed Galileo in

the deepest agony. Owing to the decline of his health, and the recurrence of

his  old  complaints,  he  was  unable  to  oppose  to  this  mental  suffering  the

constitutional energy of his mind. The bulwarks of his heart broke down, and

a  flood  of  grief  desolated  his  manly  and  powerful  mind.  He  felt,  as  he

expressed  it,  that  he  was  incessantly  called  by  his  daughter  —  his  pulse

intermitted  —  his  heart  was  agitated  with  unceasing  palpitations  —  his

appetite entirely left him, and he considered his dissolution so near at hand,

that he would not permit his son Vicenzo to set out upon a journey which he

had contemplated.

  From this state of melancholy and indisposition, Galileo slowly, though

partially, recovered, and, with the view of obtaining medical assistance, herequested  leave  to  go  to  Florence.  His  enemies,  however,  refused  this

application, and he was given to understand that any additional importunities

would be visited with a more vigilant surveillance. He remained, therefore,

five  years  at  Arcetri,  from  1634  to  1638,  without  any  remission  of  his

confinement, and pursuing his studies under the influence of a continued and

general indisposition.

  There  is  no  reason  to  think  that  Galileo  or  his  friends  renewed  their

application  to  the  Church  of  Rome;  but,  in  1638,  the  Pope  transmitted,

through  the  Inquisitor  Fariano,  his  permission  that  he  might  remove  to

Florence  for  the  recovery  of  his  health,  on  the  condition  that  he  should

present himself at the office of the Inquisitor to learn the terms upon which

this  indulgence  was  granted.  Galileo  accepted  of  the  kindness  thus

unexpectedly proffered. But the conditions upon which it was given were

more severe than he expected. He was prohibited from leaving his house or

admitting his friends; and so sternly was this system pursued, that he required

a special order for attending mass during passion week.

  The severity of this order was keenly felt by Galileo. While he remained at

Arcetri, his seclusion from the world would have been an object of choice, if

it  had  not  been  the  decree  of  a  tribunal;  but  to  be  debarred  from  the

conversation of his friends in Florence — in that city where his genius had

been idolised, and where his fame had become immortal, was an aggravation

of punishment which he was unable to bear. With his accustomed kindness,

the  Grand  Duke  made  a  strong  representation  on  the  subject  to  his

ambassador at the Court of Rome. He stated that, from his great age and

infirmities,  Galileo’s  career  was  near  its  close;  that  he  possessed  many

valuable ideas, which the world might lose if they were not matured and

conveyed  to  his  friends;  and  that  Galileo  was  anxious  to  make  these

communications to Father Castelli, who was then a stipendiary of the Court

of Rome. The Grand Duke commanded his ambassador to see Castelli on the

subject — to urge him to obtain leave from the Pope to spend a few months

in  Florence  —  and  to  supply  him  with  money  and  every  thing  that  was

necessary  for  his  journey.  Influenced  by  this  kind  and  liberal  message,

Castelli obtained an audience of the Pope, and requested leave to pay a visit

to Florence. Urban instantly suspected the object of his journey; and, upon

Castelli’s  acknowledging  that  he  could  not  possibly  refrain  from  seeing

Galileo, he received permission to visit him in the company of an officer ofthe  Inquisition.  Castelli  accordingly  went  to  Florence,  and,  a  few  months

afterwards, Galileo was ordered to return to Arcetri.

  During Galileo’s confinement at Sienna and Arcetri, between 1633 and

1638, his time was principally occupied in the composition of his “Dialogues

on Local Motion,” in which he treats of the strength and cohesion of solid

bodies, of the laws of uniform and accelerated motions, of the motion of

projectiles,  and  of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  solids.  This  remarkable  work,

which was considered by its author as the best of his productions, was printed

by Louis Elzevir, at Amsterdam, and dedicated to the Count de Noailles, the

French ambassador at Rome. Various attempts to have it printed in Germany

had failed; and, in order to save himself from the malignity of his enemies, he

was obliged to pretend that the edition published in Holland had been printed

from a MS. entrusted to the French ambassador.

  Although Galileo had for a long time abandoned his astronomical studies,

yet his attention was directed, about the year 1636, to a curious appearance in

the lunar disc, which is known by the name of the moon’s libration. When we

examine with a telescope the outline of the moon, we observe that certain

parts of her disc, which are seen at one time, are invisible at another. This

change or libration is of four different kinds, viz. the diurnal libration, the

libration in longitude, the libration in latitude, and the spheroidal libration.

Galileo discovered the first of these kinds of libration, and appears to have

had some knowledge of the second; but the third was discovered by Hevelius,

and the fourth by Lagrange.

  This curious discovery was the result of the last telescopic observations of

Galileo. Although his right eye had for some years lost its power, yet his

general vision was sufficiently perfect to enable him to carry on his usual

researches. In 1636, however, this affection of his eye became more serious;

and, in 1637, his left eye was attacked with the same disease. His medical

friends at first supposed that cataracts were formed in the crystalline lens, and

anticipated  a  cure  from  the  operation  of  couching.  These  hopes  were

fallacious. The disease turned out to be in the cornea, and every attempt to

restore  its  transparency  was  fruitless.  In  a  few  months  the  white  cloud

covered the whole aperture of the pupil, and Galileo became totally blind.

This sudden and unexpected calamity had almost overwhelmed Galileo and

his friends. In writing to a correspondent he exclaims, “Alas! your dear friend

and servant has become totally and irreparably blind. These heavens, this

earth,  this  universe,  which  by  wonderful  observation  I  had  enlarged  athousand times beyond the belief of past ages, are henceforth shrunk into the

narrow space which I myself occupy. So it pleases God; it shall, therefore,

please me also.” His friend, Father Castelli, deplores the calamity in the same

tone of pathetic sublimity:— “The noblest eye,” says he, “which nature ever

made, is darkened; an eye so privileged, and gifted with such rare powers,

that it may truly be said to have seen more than the eyes of all that are gone,

and to have opened the eyes of all that are to come.”

  Although Galileo had been thwarted in his attempt to introduce into the

Spanish marine his new method of finding the longitude at sea, yet he never

lost sight of an object to which he attached the highest importance. As the

formation  of  correct  tables  of  the  motion  of  Jupiter’s  satellites  was  a

necessary preliminary to its introduction, he had occupied himself for twenty-

four years in observations for this purpose, and he had made considerable

progress in this laborious task. After the publication of his “Dialogues on

Motion,” in 1636, he renewed his attempts to bring his method into actual

use. For this purpose he addressed himself to Lorenzo Real, who had been the

Dutch Governor-General in India, and offered the free use of his method to

the States-General of Holland. The Dutch government received this proposal

with an anxious desire to have it carried into effect. At the instigation of

Constantine Huygens, the father of the illustrious Huygens, and the secretary

to the Prince of Orange, they appointed commissioners to communicate with

Galileo;  and  while  they  transmitted  him  a  gold  chain  as  a  mark  of  their

esteem,  they  at  the  same  time  assured  him,  that  if  his  plan  should  prove

successful it should not pass unrewarded. The commissioners entered into an

active  correspondence  with  Galileo,  and  had  even  appointed  one  of  their

number to communicate personally with him in Italy. Lest this, however,

should  excite  the  jealousy  of  the  court  of  Rome,  Galileo  objected  to  the

arrangement,  so  that  the  negociation  was  carried  on  solely  by

correspondence.

  It was at this time that Galileo was struck with blindness. His friend and

pupil,  Renieri,  undertook  in  this  emergency  to  arrange  and  complete  his

observations and calculations; but before he had made much progress in the

arduous task, each of the four commissioners died in succession, and it was

with great difficulty that Constantine Huygens succeeded in renewing the

scheme. It was again obstructed, however, by the death of Galileo; and when

Renieri  was  about  to  publish,  by  the  order  of  the  Grand  Duke,  the

“Ephemeris,” and “Tables of the Jovian Planets,” he was attacked with amortal disease, and the manuscripts of Galileo, which he was on the eve of

publishing, were never more heard of. By such a series of misfortunes were

the plans of Galileo and of the States-General completely overthrown. It is

some  consolation,  however,  to  know  that  neither  science  nor  navigation

suffered any severe loss. Notwithstanding the perfection of our present tables

of  Jupiter’s  satellites,  and  of  the  astronomical  instruments  by  which  their

eclipses may be observed, the method of Galileo is still impracticable at sea.

  In consequence of the strict seclusion to which Galileo had been subjected,

he was in the practice of dating his letters from his prison at Arcetri; but after

he had lost the use of his eyes, the Inquisition seems to have relaxed its

severity, and to have allowed him the freest intercourse with his friends. The

Grand Duke of Tuscany paid him frequent visits; and among the celebrated

strangers who came from distant lands to see the ornament of Italy, were

Gassendi, Deodati, and our illustrious countryman Milton. During the last

three years of his life, his eminent pupil Viviani formed one of his family;

and in October 1641, the celebrated Torricelli, another of his pupils, was

admitted to the same distinction.

  Though  the  powerful  mind  of  Galileo  still  retained  its  vigour,  yet  his

debilitated frame was exhausted with mental labour. He often complained

that his head was too busy for his body; and the continuity of his studies was

frequently  broken  with  attacks  of  hypochondria,  want  of  sleep,  and  acute

rheumatic pains. Along with these calamities, he was afflicted with another

still  more  severe  —  with  deafness  almost  total;  but  though  he  was  now

excluded from all communication with the external world, yet his mind still

grappled with the material universe, and while he was studying the force of

percussion, and preparing for a continuation of his “Dialogues on Motion,”

he  was  attacked    with  fever  and  palpitation  of  the  heart,  which,  after

continuing two months, terminated fatally on the 8th of January 1642, in the

78th year of his age.

  Having died in the character of a prisoner of the Inquisition, this odious

tribunal  disputed  his  right  of  making  a  will,  and  of  being  buried  in

consecrated ground. These objections, however, were withdrawn; but though

a large sum was subscribed for erecting a monument to him in the church of

Santa Croce, in Florence, the Pope would not permit the design to be carried

into execution. His sacred remains were, therefore, deposited in an obscure

corner of the church, and remained for more than thirty years unmarked with

any monumental tablet. The following epitaph, given without any remark inthe  Leyden  edition  of  his  Dialogues,  is,  we  presume,  the  one  which  was

inscribed on a tablet in the church of Santa Croce: —


Galilæo Galilæi Florentino,

Philosopho et Geometræ vere lynceo,

Naturæ Œdipo,

Mirabilium semper inventorum machinatori,

Qui inconcessa adhuc mortalibus gloria

Cælorum provincias auxit

Et universo dedit incrementum:

Non enim vitreos spherarum orbes

Fragilesque stellas conflavit:

Sed æterna mundi corpore

Mediceæ beneficentiæ dedicavit,

Cujus inextincta gloriæ cupiditas

Ut oculos nationum

Sæculorumque omnium

Videre doceret,

Proprios impendit oculos.

Cum jam nil amplius haberet natura

Quod ipse videret.

Cujus inventa vix intra rerum limites comprehensa

Firmamentum ipsum non solum continet,

Sed etiam recipit.

Qui relictis tot scientiarum monumentis

Plura secum tulit, quam reliquit.

Gravi enim

Sed nondum affecta senectute,

Novis contemplationibus

Majorem gloriam affectans

Inexplebilem sapientiæ animam

Immaturo nobis obitu

Exhalavit

Anno Domini

MCXLII.

Ætatis suæ                                        LXXVIII.


At his death, in 1703, Viviani purchased his property, with the charge of

erecting a monument over Galileo’s remains and his own.  This design was

not carried into effect till 1737, at the expense of the family of Nelli, when

both their bodies were disinterred, and removed to the site of the splendid

monument  which  now  covers  them.  This  monument  contains  the  bust  of

Galileo, with figures of Geometry and Astronomy. It was designed by Giulio

Foggini. Galileo’s bust was executed by Giovanni Battista Foggini; the figure

of  Astronomy  by  Vincenzio  Foggini,  his  son;  and  that  of  Geometry  by

Girolamo Ticciati.

  Galileo’s house at Arcetri still remains. In 1821 it belonged to one Signor

Alimari, having been preserved in the state in which it was left by Galileo; it

stands very near the convent of St Matthew, and about a mile to the S. E. of

Florence. An inscription by Nelli, over the door of the house, still remains.

  The character of Galileo, whether we view him as a member of the social

circle, or as a man of science, presents many interesting and instructive points

of  contemplation.  Unfortunate,  and  to  a  certain  extent  immoral,  in  his

domestic  relations,  he  did  not  derive  from  that  hallowed  source  all  the

enjoyments which it generally yields; and it was owing to this cause, perhaps,

that he was more fond of society than might have been expected from his

studious habits. His habitual cheerfulness and gaiety, and his affability and

frankness of manner, rendered him an universal favourite among his friends.

Without  any  of  the  pedantry  of  exclusive  talent,  and  without  any  of  that

ostentation  which  often  marks  the  man  of  limited  though  profound

acquirements,  Galileo  never  conversed  upon  scientific  or  philosophical

subjects except among those who were capable of understanding them. The

extent of his general information, indeed, his great literary knowledge, but,

above all, his retentive memory, stored with the legends and the poetry of

ancient times, saved him from the necessity of drawing upon his own peculiar

studies for the topics of his conversation.

  Galileo was not less distinguished for his hospitality and benevolence; he

was liberal to the poor, and generous in the aid which he administered to men

of genius and talent, who often found a comfortable asylum under his roof. In

his  domestic  economy  he  was  frugal  without  being  parsimonious.  His

hospitable board was ever ready for the reception of his friends; and, though

he was himself abstemious in his diet, he seems to have been a lover of goodwines, of which he received always the choicest varieties out of the Grand

Duke’s cellar. This peculiar taste, together with his attachment to a country

life, rendered him fond of agricultural pursuits, and induced him to devote his

leisure hours to the cultivation of his vineyards.

  In his personal appearance Galileo was about the middle size, and of a

square-built, but well-proportioned, frame. His complexion was fair, his eyes

penetrating, and his hair of a reddish hue. His expression was cheerful and

animated, and though his temper was easily ruffled, yet the excitement was

transient, and the cause of it speedily forgotten.

  One  of  the  most  prominent  traits  in  the  character  of  Galileo  was  his

invincible love of truth, and his abhorrence of that spiritual despotism which

had so long brooded over Europe. His views, however, were too liberal, and

too far in advance of the age which he adorned; and however much we may

admire the noble spirit which he evinced, and the personal sacrifices which

he made, in his struggle for truth, we must yet lament the hotness of his zeal

and the temerity of his onset. In his contest with the Church of Rome, he fell

under her victorious banner; and though his cause was that of truth, and hers

that  of  superstition,  yet  the  sympathy  of  Europe  was  not  roused  by  his

misfortunes.  Under  the  sagacious  and  peaceful  sway  of  Copernicus,

astronomy had effected a glorious triumph over the dogmas of the Church;

but under the bold and uncompromising sceptre of Galileo all her conquests

were irrecoverably lost.

  The scientific character of Galileo, and his method of investigating truth,

demand  our  warmest  admiration.  The  number  and  ingenuity  of  his

inventions, the brilliant discoveries which he made in the heavens, and the

depth and beauty of his researches respecting the laws of motion, have gained

him the admiration of every succeeding age, and have placed him next to

Newton in the lists of original and inventive genius. To this high rank he was

doubtless elevated by the inductive processes which he followed in all his

inquiries.  Under  the  sure  guidance  of  observation  and  experiment,  he

advanced to general laws; and if Bacon had never lived, the student of nature

Would  have  found,  in  the  writings  and  labours  of  Galileo,  not  only  the

boasted  principles  of  the  inductive  philosophy,  but  also  their  practical

application to the highest efforts of invention and discovery.      THE TRIAL OF GALILEO by A. Mézières




            From ‘The Popular Science Monthly’, February, 1877


MANY points have been left obscure in the history of the double trial of

Galileo,  the  details  of  which  till  lately  were  but  imperfectly  known.  The

important work published by Domenico Berti fills up some of these gaps, by

placing before our eyes a collection of authentic documents taken from the

secret  archives  of  the  Vatican.  We  have  here  no  work  of  partisanship,

undertaken in the interest of religious controversy, but an historical work

executed  with  all  the  scrupulous  care  that  is  nowadays  exacted  in  all

historical researches. In France the question had already been handled by

Libri, Biot, Joseph Bertrand, Trouessart, and Th. Henri Martin, the first two

approaching  it  with  preconceived  opinions  that  aided  but  little  in  the

discovery of the truth, while the others brought to the discussion a remarkable

spirit  of  impartiality.  But  all  of  these  writers  lacked  the  indispensable

elements of information which now, thanks to the labors of Domenico Berti,

are at the disposal of the future biographers of Galileo. If we have suffered

ourselves to be anticipated by an Italian in the publication of the documents

relating to this famous case, we must attribute the fact either to the negligence

or to the prudence of the French Government, for we were in possession, for

nearly half a century, of the valuable manuscript the full text of which is now

published by Berti. Having been taken out of the Vatican archives during the

first empire and carried to Paris, this original collection was there seen by the

historian  Denina,  but  he  thought  it  to  be  of  no  importance.  Nevertheless

Napoleon I. ordered it to be published, with a translation facing the text; but

the publication, though begun, was not continued: only the beginning of the

work was then known, and of this Delambre, the astronomer, gave an account

to the Italian Venturi.

  In December, 1814, according to the Duke de Blacas, the private library of

Louis XVIII. received the entire MS. in the same condition in which it had

been found by the imperial government in Italy, and thence carried to France.

During the early years of the Restoration, active negotiations were carried on

by the court of Rome with the French Government, to secure the return of

these important documents. The Government, though it did not positivelyrefuse to comply, nevertheless delayed and procrastinated. It was not until

1846, after thirty-two years of negotiation, that the MS. was sent back to

Rome, at the instance, no doubt, of Rossi, who himself presented it to Pius

IX., in behalf of Louis Philippe. By the pope it was restored in December,

1848, to the secret archives of the Vatican, and there it still remains.

  All that was known of this MS. before the publication of Berti’s work

rested upon a selection of documents published at Rome in 1850, with many

precautions, by Monsignore Marino Marini, sometime Prefect of the Secret

Archives of the Holy See, and upon a larger work, in some respects inexact,

and in others imperfect, published in Paris in 1867, by Henri de l’Épinois.

Both of these writers take special points of view: they appear to be more

intent upon justifying the judges that condemned Galileo than upon laying

bare the whole truth with the boldness and freedom of an historian. Hence we

can appreciate the motives which led them to publish only a portion of the

MS. though the whole of it was in their hands. Did the court of Rome really

suppose that these two publications contained all the documents pertaining to

the double trial of Galileo, or did it think that the time had come for no longer

hiding  anything  from  the  public?  However  that  may  be,  at  all  events

Domenico Berti, in February, 1870, was permitted to examine the MS., and

even to copy it at his leisure in the room of Father Theiner, who had been

officially authorized to intrust it to him. The present publication, therefore,

was not procured by fraud, and, if the Holy See should have any occasion to

regret it, at least it could neither dispute its authenticity, nor complain that the

work was done without its consent.


                                            I.


The interesting history of the travels and of the final destiny of the Vatican

MS. is merely the preface of a far more important history, whose events we

will endeavor to record impartially, with the sole purpose of unveiling and

bringing to light the truth. Galileo, celebrated from his early years for the

value of his discoveries and the brilliancy of his lectures at the University of

Padua, loaded with honors at Venice and at Florence, and admired throughout

all Italy, was pursuing the course of his great researches with the boldness of

a  man  confident  of  his  strength  and  of  his  fame,  when  certain  slight

indications no doubt warned him that it would not be disadvantageous, if he

would  carry  on  his  researches  in  safety,  to  win  the  favor  of  the  SacredCollege.  Accordingly  he  set  out  in  1611  for  the  Eternal  City,  without

confessed misgiving, but with the ambition and expectation of interesting the

most influential personages of the Roman court in his discoveries. He was

nearing the decisive moment of his career. He had not as yet been disquieted

by the objections of the theologians, though in prosecuting his studies of the

constitution of the universe he was touching upon delicate questions which he

could not expect to be permitted to discuss freely, without having first gained

the sympathy, or at least the neutrality, of the Church. The court of Rome at

that time exercised such moral authority in Italy, and especially at Florence,

where  Galileo  resided,  that  people  in  some  sense  waited  for  her  decision

before they would accept the best-established conclusions in astronomy. The

Grand-duke of Tuscany could not but be pleased at the discovery of Jupiter’s

satellites, announced in the “Sidereus Nuncius;” and he was all the more

ready to believe, because these new heavenly bodies had received his family

name: yet his own secretary had to admit that the discovery would never

receive the unanimous assent of the learned world until it was approved and

verified at Rome. There sat the Roman College, a regular tribunal, scientific

as well as theological, whose decrees were law in Catholic countries.

  Galileo, who was a man of rare good sense, and perfectly conversant with

the ways of the world, had in advance formed at Rome the best and the most

powerful of relations. Besides, he came there in a sort of official capacity, at

the  grand-duke’s  charges,  and  he  was  entertained  there  by  the  Tuscan

embassador. Prelates, cardinals, princes, vied with one another for the honor

of offering fétes and banquets to the most illustrious representative of Italian

science. At the palace of Cardinal Bandini, in the beautiful gardens of the

Quirinal, in the villa of the Marquis Cesi on the summit of the Janiculan,

Galileo delighted a society of élite by having them contemplate, during the

serene nights of April, the vault of heaven through the telescope which he

had recently invented, and which bears his name. He awakened a genuine

enthusiasm one day when, after dinner, he pointed his telescope toward St.

John  of  Lateran,  three  miles  distant,  and  enabled  the  guests  to  read  the

inscription upon the façade of that basilica.

  His arguments did not equally convince all of those who were present at

his astronomical observations, and who listened to the explanation he gave of

the  movement  of  Jupiter’s  four  satellites,  the  inequalities  of  the  moon’s

surface, and the phases of Venus and Saturn, and to the discussions he carried

on with those who opposed his views. His doctrine implied the confirmationof the system of Copernicus and the demonstration of the earth’s motion,

which were no longer reserved for mathematicians only, but made intelligible

to all by a series of experiments. Here was an innovation calculated to alarm

the theologians. A system that might be regarded as inoffensive so long as it

was  only  a  mathematical  hypothesis,  useful  to  men  of  science  in  their

researches,  became  a  very  different  thing  on  being  transformed  into  a

physical  truth  accessible  to  the  senses  and  pregnant  with  consequences

touching the plurality of worlds and the aim of creation. Hence the apparent

triumph  of  Galileo  hid  from  view  perils  the  magnitude  of  which  at  first

eluded his penetrating mind. While he was giving himself up, with perhaps

over-much confidence, to the pleasure of success, and was yielding too easily

to  his  habitual  temptation  to  answer  objections  with  sarcasm,  the

ecclesiastical authority quietly set on foot an inquiry into the orthodoxy of his

opinions. Cardinal Bellarmin, probably in the name of his colleagues of the

Inquisition, asked of the members of the Roman College (without mentioning

Galileo’s name) what was to be thought of the astronomical observations that

had recently been promulgated by a distinguished mathematician.

  This  is  the  first  symptom  that  we  have  been  able  to  discover  of  the

intervention of theology in the examination of Galileo’s scientific opinions.

The response of the Roman College was favorable to him; but, from that

moment forward, the alarm was sounded, and the Inquisition never lost sight

of  him.  Though  the  sovereign  pontiff,  to  whom  he  was  presented  by  the

Tuscan embassador, received him with great courtesy, not allowing him to

utter even a word on bended knees, yet the Holy Office, even before he had

quitted Rome, inquired of the tribunal at Padua whether, in the action brought

against Cesare Cremonini for certain philosophical indiscretions, there might

not be something to compromise Galileo. A direct personal attack, inspired

by an over-weening zeal, quickly followed these early suspicions. On his

return to Florence, Galileo took up his labors afresh in the pleasant solitudes

of the Belvedere, placed at his service by the kind hospitality of the grand-

duke; there he received his friends and pupils, who, on departing from these

conversaziones, propagated his doctrines. At this a Dominican friar, Thomas

Caccini, took umbrage, and, in a sermon delivered at Santa Maria Nuova on

the  miracle  of  Joshua,  he  suddenly  exclaimed,  “Viri  Galilæi,  quid  statis

aspicientes in cœlum?” The friar doubtless had heard of a conversation held

at the court in presence of the grand-duchess dowager Christine of Lorraine,

and the Archduchess Madeleine of Austria, in the course of which FatherCastelli, a pupil of Galileo, had endeavored to prove, to the great satisfaction

of  his  hearers,  that  one  might  believe  in  the  earth’s  motion  without

questioning the authenticity of Joshua’s miracle. Upon this subject Galileo

addressed to his pupil a famous letter, in which he precisely set forth the

rights  of  science,  at  the  same  time  asserting  for  religion  its  own.  Here,

according  to  him,  are  two  separate  domains,  which  are  not  rashly  to  be

confounded.

  “The Holy Scripture,” said he, “can neither lie nor err, but it needs to be

interpreted; for, were we to insist upon the literal sense of the words, we

should find not only contradictions, but heresies and blasphemies; we should

have to give to God hands, feet, ears, to suppose him subject to like passions

with men — to anger, remorse, hatred; and, again, to hold that he forgets the

past  and  is  ignorant  of  the  future.  .  .  .  Inasmuch  as  the  Bible  constantly

requires interpretation to explain how very different the true sense of the

words is from their apparent signification, it appears to me that it should be

quoted in scientific discussions only as the last resort. In truth, Holy Scripture

and Nature both come from the Divine Word, the one being the dictation of

the Holy Ghost, while the other is the executor of God’s decrees; but it was

fitting that, in the Scriptures, the language should be adapted to the people’s

understanding in many things where the appearance differs widely from the

reality. Nature, on the other hand, is inexorable and immutable; she is not at

all  concerned  whether  the  hidden  reasons  and  means  through  which  she

works are or are not intelligible to man, because she never oversteps the limit

of the laws imposed upon her. Hence it appears that when we have to do with

natural effects brought under our eyes by the experience of our senses, or

deduced  from  absolute  demonstrations,  these  can  in  no  wise  be  called  in

question on the strength of Scripture texts that are susceptible of a thousand

different interpretations, for the words of Scripture are not so strictly limited

in their significance as the phenomena of Nature. . . . I therefore think it

would be wise to forbid persons from using texts of Holy Scripture, and from

forcing them, as it were, to support as true certain propositions in natural

science, whereof the contrary may to-morrow be demonstrated by the senses

or by mathematical reasoning.”

  This noble letter, the moderation of which would nowadays be admitted

by every theologian, but which then gave out a dangerous odor of novelty, no

doubt passed from hand to hand, was read by ill-disposed persons, perhaps

fomented  the  agitation  produced  by  Caccini’s  vehement  assault,  andfurnished  to  another  Dominican,  Niccola  Lorini,  an  opportunity  of

denouncing Galileo to the Congregation of the Holy Office. “Here,” said the

informer, “are propositions that seem to be suspect and rash, opinions that

contradict the text of the Holy Scripture. Besides,” he added, “Galileo and his

disciples speak with little respect of the fathers of the Church, of St. Thomas

of Aquino, and of Aristotle, whose philosophy has rendered so much service

to the scholastic theology.” The Inquisition, though search was made, was

unable to procure the original of the letter, for Castelli had given it back to his

master, and he prudently refused to part with it. The inquisitors contented

themselves with an examination of the copy sent by Lorini, in which they

discovered  a  few  ill-sounding  phrases,  but,  on  the  whole,  nothing  clearly

contradictory of the language of Scripture. Still they continued to note the

words  of  Galileo;  they  questioned  two  Tuscan  ecclesiastics  about  the

speeches that he might have uttered in their hearing; they scrutinized the

letters he had published on the subject of observing sun-spots.

  Galileo,  though  quite  ignorant  of  the  strict  watch  kept  on  him  by  the

Inquisition, had a vague apprehension of imminent danger. To ward it off, he

adopted the expedient of going again to Rome in 1615, and of pleading his

cause in person in the quarter where a successful defense was most to be

desired. It has been asserted that Galileo was summoned before the bar of the

Holy Office, but they who so assert are in error as to the date; it was not till a

much later period, viz., the beginning of his second trial, that he was ordered

to appear in Rome. On the present occasion he went of his own accord, no

longer  possessed  of  the  fearless  assurance  with  which  he  made  his  first

journey, yet confidently hoping that he would disarm his opponents by the

clearness  of  his  explanations.  Perchance  he  rested  his  expectation  of

convincing them as much upon the graces and charms of his wit, and the

personal attractiveness which won for him all hearts, as upon the strength of

his arguments.

  Besides, he had taken more pains than even he did in 1611 to prepare the

ground: he had, in urgent letters, rekindled the zeal of his friends, and had

again obtained for himself all the external tokens of the official protection of

the grand-duke. As before, he went down to the embassador’s palace, the

villa of the Trinità, de’ Monti, where now the Academy of France has its seat,

and,  the  day  after  his  arrival,  went  into  the  country.  What  with  detailed

explanations  made  in  the  presence  of  numerous  auditors,  keen  and  lively

disputations  in  which  he  plainly  showed  the  weakness  of  his  opponents,frequent  visits  to  distinguished  personages,  brief  tractates  in  which  he

demonstrated the truth of the Copernican system, he omitted nothing that

could  influence  in  his  own  favor  those  currents  of  opinion  which  judges

themselves cannot withstand.

    Unfortunately  for  Galileo,  the  tribunal  of  the  Inquisition  was  but  little

affected  by  external  influences;  it  imposed  laws  on  opinion,  and  took  no

advice from it. The members of the Holy Office, heedless of the steps taken

by the illustrious astronomer, and of the ardor with which his ideas were

espoused by a portion of Roman society, went on quietly with their work. In

examining the letters on the sun-spots, they found therein two propositions

worthy  of  censure.  On  the  24th  of  February,  1616,  they  unanimously

pronounced it absurd and heretical to assert that the sun is motionless, and

that the earth revolves. The sovereign pontiff immediately ordered Cardinal

Bellarmin to summon Galileo, and to have him promise that he would no

longer  uphold  a  proposition  condemned  by  the  Church.  “If  he  refuses  to

obey,” said the pontifical letter, “the Father Commissary, in the presence of a

notary and witnesses, shall enjoin him absolutely to abstain from teaching

that doctrine and that opinion, from upholding it or even speaking of it; in

case he does not comply, he shall be cast into jail.” Accordingly, on the 26th

of February, 1616, Cardinal Bellarmin, in the presence of the commissary-

general of the Holy Office and two witnesses, invited Galileo to renounce the

two condemned propositions. After Bellarmin, the commissary-general again

intimated to him, on behalf of the pope and the entire Congregation of the

Holy Office, the formal order no longer to uphold, teach, and defend this

opinion,  whether  by  writing,  by  word  of  mouth,  or  in  any  manner

whatsoever; if he failed to comply, he was to be prosecuted by the Holy

Office.  Galileo  promised  to  obey.  On  the  5th  of  March  following,  the

Congregation of the Index condemned the work of Copernicus until it should

be corrected.

  From  these  authentic  facts  it  results  that  a  certain  number  of  modern

historians are deceived themselves, or would deceive us, when they insinuate

that the Holy Office meant to condemn, not the system of Copernicus, but

Galileo’s theological interpretations of it. There was no question whatever

about theological interpretations. In neither Copernicus’s book, nor in the

letters on the sun-spots, is there a word, a single phrase, in which the Holy

Scriptures are interpreted. If here and there in his correspondence Galileo, out

of respect to religion, endeavored to reconcile the data of science with thetext of the Bible, he never published these explanations. It was not upon these

private manuscript documents that he was tried, and the only document that

furnished  a  basis  for  the  charge  was  a  printed  work,  purely  scientific  in

character, and having nothing whatever to do with theology. By no manner of

argumentation  can  the  fact  be  negatived  that  a  tribunal  of  theologians

constituted  itself  a  judge  in  a  question  of  science,  and  decided  it  as  an

authority decides. The Holy Office did not forbid receiving and teaching the

doctrine of Copernicus, on the ground that it was not yet demonstrated, as

some of the apologists of the Holy See would have us believe; they would not

permit it to be demonstrated; they pronounced it in advance to be “absurd,

heretical, contrary to the text of the Scripture.” Such is the whole truth about

Galileo’s  first  trial,  and  Domenico  Berti  sets  it  forth  with  much  dialectic

vigor.


                                            II.


Galileo once reduced to silence by the act of submission to which he had

subscribed,  the  object  of  the  Inquisition  was  attained.  No  useless  rigor

followed the first procedure. Provided that the culprit spoke no more about

the motion of the earth, the court of Rome would like nothing better than to

make the most of a great mind that for a moment had gone astray, but whose

genius  and  whose  scientific  fame  were  intact.  After  the  trial,  Galileo

remained three months in Rome, and was kindly received by the sovereign

pontiff. In fact, the rumor having spread that he had been punished by the

Holy  Office  and  obliged  to  retract  and  to  do  penance,  he  obtained  from

Cardinal Bellarmin a certificate to the contrary effect. All that was done, said

the  cardinal,  was  to  forbid  him  defending  or  upholding  the  system  of

Copernicus. What advantage could it have been to drag Galileo down from

the high position he occupied in the world’s opinion? It was enough, for the

purposes of his judges, if they could shut his mouth.

  In this they supposed they had succeeded, but here they failed to take

account of the overmastering impulse to propagate truth, which is the very

essence  of  scientific  genius.  Galileo  could  neither  erase  from  his  mind  a

belief that rested on a demonstration, nor refuse to employ it in advancing to

fresh discoveries, nor abstain from speaking of it with those who consulted

him with regard to their own astronomical labors, or took an interest in his. In

his retirement at the Belvedere, where, since his return from Rome, he led amore  secluded  life  than  ever,  he  received,  as  in  former  times,  numerous

visits, nearly all prompted by the love of science. He was still the recognized

and admired head of the scientific movement in Italy. Why should he not

converse about the cardinal proposition of the earth’s motion with the young

savants  who  came  to  ask  his  advice  and  to  receive  his  instruction?  A

distinguished Italian narrates how, having spent a few days with him, after

the close of his first trial, he heard from Galileo’s mouth the exposition of the

Copernican system, was converted to his ideas, and himself then converted

Campanella to that doctrine.

  Hence the submission of Galileo was only apparent. Later he was justly

charged  with  having  broken  his  promise.  Still,  he  avoided  compromising

himself publicly, and in his first work, “Il Saggiatore,” which is a model of

keen,  clever  irony,  he  hardly  ventured  to  write  anything  touching  on  the

system of Copernicus. Presently the election of a new pontiff inspired him

with the hope that the court of Rome might relax its rigor. Urban VIII., of the

family of Barberini, was a Florentine, a lover of letters, well disposed toward

the Academy of the Lincei, and especially friendly to Galileo, to whom he

had  addressed,  while  yet  a  cardinal,  some  verses  conceived  in  a  vein  of

eulogy. Galileo went to Rome to see him, had six long audiences with him,

was presented by him with a picture, medals, agnus deis, and a pension for

his son, and doubtless talked with him about the great subject which filled his

mind. We can only guess at what was said by the two friends: some authors

assert that Urban VIII. then inclined toward the Copernican system; others,

on  the  contrary,  say  that  he  demonstrated  to  Galileo  the  impossibility  of

maintaining  the  theory  of  the  earth’s  motion.  The  truth  is,  that  we  know

nothing about the matter; neither the pope nor the astronomer has given out

anything about the nature of their conversations. Perhaps even, as we shall

shortly see, they believed that they could agree, while differing from one

another widely.

  At all events, it seems that, dating from the accession of Urban VIII. to the

pontifical throne, Galileo felt more free to touch anew upon the forbidden

subject,  under  a  different  form.  Was  this  the  result  of  an  overweening

confidence  in  the  friendship  of  the  sovereign  pontiff,  of  a  too  favorable

interpretation  of  some  friendly  speeches,  or  of  the  impossibility  of  being

silent while Kepler was speaking boldly outside of Italy, while on Italian soil

one was constantly harassed by ignorant opponents, and, though one’s hand

were full of truths, one durst not open it and rout them. The “Dialogues onthe  Two  Great  Systems  of  the  Universe,”  which  were  destined  to  bring

Galileo into so much trouble, show that, in writing them, he stood between

the  conflicting  influences  of  a  strong  desire  to  speak  and  the  fear  of

compromising himself. He rather insinuates his ideas with true Italian finesse

than puts them forth boldly. He does not defend the Copernican system, but

expounds it. He even takes the precaution of stating, in a preface, the rough

draft of which had been sent to him from Rome, that the true aim of his work

is to show that in Italy ideas are not condemned unknown, and that nowhere

is this delicate matter better understood than in Italy. He carefully avoids

drawing conclusions: the personage whom he introduces as the representative

of the doctrine of Ptolemy and as the defender of the belief in the earth’s

immobility, though clad in the strongest dialectical coat of mail, and though

driven  to  his  last  ditch  by  the  keen  raillery  and  the  copious  logic  of  his

interlocutors,  replies  to  them  unmoved:  “Your  arguments  are  the  most

ingenious that can be conceived, but I consider them to be neither true nor

conclusive.” Father Riccardi, Master of the Sacred Palace, whose business it

was to examine Galileo’s manuscript, suffered himself to be half-way won by

these exhibitions of innocence, and gave a permit for the work to be printed,

though  not  without  resistance.  He  afterward  protested  that  he  had  been

deceived by the author, and that some of the conditions on which he had

granted the imprimatur  were  not  fulfilled.  At  first  it  was  agreed  that  the

“Dialogues” should be printed at Rome; but at the earnest entreaty of Galileo

leave was granted to have the work done at Florence, where it would involve

less trouble and cost to him, and where, above all, he could more easily evade

the surveillance of the Sacred Palace. In this negotiation Galileo displayed a

fecundity  of  resource  and  a  force  of  will  that  show  how  important  be

considered the publication of his work to be. The chief fruit of his address

was that he escaped a second revision of the text, which would have been

made at Rome had the work been printed there. Galileo chose rather to deal

with the inquisitor at Florence, to whom Father Riccardi had delegated his

powers, but who, doubtless at the solicitation of the grand-duke, exercised

these powers with less rigor than would have been used at the Sacred Palace.

We can imagine the wrath manifested by the court of Rome; in fact, despite

all its finesse, it had been outwitted by an Italian shrewder even than itself, by

a fellow-countryman of Macchiavelli.

  Would Galileo have been so eager for the publication of his work, if he

had foreseen the dangers to which he exposed himself by publishing it? Thesovereign pontiff, immediately upon receipt of the book, in the beginning of

August, 1632, was highly incensed, charged Galileo with having made an

unhandsome return for his kindness, and would on the spot have referred the

author  and  the  book  to  the  tribunal  of  the  Holy  Office,  had  he  not  been

restrained by the importunities of the embassador Niccolini, and his fear of

offending the Grand-duke of Tuscany. “Galileo,” said Urban, “has not acted

with out deliberation, has not sinned through ignorance; he was perfectly well

aware of the difficulties of the case, for I myself have made them clear to

him.” These expressions of dissatisfaction on the part of the sovereign pontiff

would seem to show that, in the interviews of which we have spoken, the two

friends had touched on the delicate question of the earth’s motion, and that,

by a process of self-illusion quite natural under the circumstances, each had

supposed he had convinced the other. The pope was angry at Galileo, as at

one in whom he had for a long time mistakenly reposed confidence — as

though a fraud had been practised upon him; this feeling, which had broken

the bond of their old friendship, explains the harshness with which Urban

treated  the  friend  of  his  youth.  Nor  had  Galileo  been  less  mistaken  with

regard to the disposition of the pope’s mind. He flattered himself that he

should find in him an indulgent judge of his astronomical theories, while in

point of fact he was wounding Urban in his most sacred convictions. Had he

known that the pope was so opposed to the system of Copernicus, doubtless

he never would have braved the wrath of one whose power was unlimited, or

affronted a tribunal from which there was no appeal.

  On receipt of the “Dialogues,” Urban instructed a commission to examine

the book and report to him. As soon as the report came into his hands, he

commanded the inquisitor at Florence to communicate to Galileo a formal

summons to appear in October before the commissary-general of the Holy

Office  in  Rome.  Galileo,  then  seventy  years  of  age,  and  suffering  from

hernia,  asked  the  authorities  to  take  into  consideration  his  age  and  his

malady, and to dispense him from the journey. The Grand-duke of Tuscany

interceded for him. But Urban would listen to nothing; fearing lest he should

be deceived, as he believed he had been before, he would permit no delay. He

would not even believe the testimony of three physicians who attested the

reality  of  Galileo’s  malady;  he  sent  the  inquisitor  in  person  to  him,  with

orders to arrest and bring him in irons to Rome, if he was found to be in a

condition to bear the journey. Poor Galileo had taken to his bed, and, as was

said by one of his friends, “he was more in danger of going to the other worldthan to Rome.” He was not in a condition to be removed until January, 1633.

The good offices of the Grand-duke of Tuscany attended him to the presence

of his judges, and there the friendship of Niccolini accompanied him — weak

succors  these  in  the  face  of  such  powerful  adversaries.  At  first  the

embassador’s palace was appointed as his place of confinement, and he was

commanded  not  to  leave  it;  he  went  out  only  in  order  to  submit  to  the

interrogatories proposed to him by the Holy Office.

  On the 12th of April he was interrogated for the first time. To begin with,

he was asked if he remembered what took place in 1616, when he had to

appear before Cardinal Bellarmin and the commissary-general of the Holy

Office. Galileo admitted having heard it declared on that day that the system

of Copernicus could not be maintained or defended, as being contrary to the

Holy Scriptures. “It may be,” he added, “that at the same time I myself was

forbidden to maintain or defend that opinion, but I do not recollect, it is now

so long ago.” Whatever may be the interest now taken in a case so bound up

with the question of the freedom of thought, it is not easy to believe with

Berti that Galileo replied to this first interrogatory with entirely good faith.

When a prohibition is issued in terms so formal as those we have given, upon

so  definite  a  point,  neither  the  form  nor  the  substance  is  ever  forgotten.

Ambiguity was out of the question after Bellarmin’s warning, and still more

after the solemn injunction of the commissary-general. Domenico Berti is in

error with regard to the psychological conditions of memory where he says

that it must have been easier for Galileo to recollect the conciliatory words of

Cardinal  Bellarmin  than  the  threats  of  the  commissary-general.  On  the

contrary, what strikes one most under such circumstances, what impresses

itself deepest in the memory, is the threats. How could any one forget words

so simple, so clear, so menacing, as these: “You are forbidden to maintain

this opinion, to teach or to defend it, whether by writing or by word of mouth,

or in any other manner whatsoever, else the Holy Office will take information

against you!” These last words in particular must have buried themselves like

an arrow in the memory of Galileo, nevermore to come out. He knew all too

well  what  he  had  to  fear  from  the  Inquisition  ever  to  forget  on  what

conditions that tribunal agreed to take no further cognizance of him. The

silence he kept in public for sixteen years upon the forbidden subject, and

even  the  care  he  took  in  his  “Dialogues”  to  give  to  his  thoughts  an

inoffensive turn, might serve as evidence of the faithfulness of his memory.  The fact is, that the reason of Galileo’s taking up his pen again to treat a

forbidden subject was not that he had forgotten the formal prohibition. He

might  have  made  answer,  with  great  frankness,  that,  though  he  had  been

ordered to hold his peace, yet he had not been convinced, and that, after so

many years of silence, the need of proclaiming the truth had more power over

him than the fear of disobeying. But it was not for a mind so subtile, nor for a

character  so  wary  as  that  of  Galileo,  to  be  tied  down  to  a  categorical

declaration, and so to shut every portal of escape. He chose rather to use

evasions with his judges, to plead extenuating circumstances, to produce the

impression that he might have misunderstood, but that he had not acted with

evil  intent  and  with  his  eyes  open.  Even  while  undergoing  the  first

interrogatory, he was still in hopes of finding in the sovereign pontiff some

remnant of friendship, or, at least, of good-will; and this was another reason

why  he  made  an  evasive  reply,  and  did  not  compromise  himself  by  an

explicit admission of his offenses. He appears to have believed, at this first

session, that it would be possible for him to have a private interview with the

holy father. Being questioned as to what had been said to him by Cardinal

Bellarmin in 1616, he replied that some of the details of their conversation he

could  intrust  only  to  the  ear  of  the  sovereign  pontiff.  This  plainly  was  a

request for an interview with Urban. His judges seemed not to understand

him, or, if they carried his words to the holy father, they obtained from him

no favorable answer; but, in the course of the trial, it became evident that

Galileo  could  expect  neither  indulgence  nor  commiseration  from  his  old

friend.

  All  of  Galileo’s  answers  at  the  first  interrogatory  present  the  same

character of ambiguity. On being asked whether, before he begged of Father

Riccardi license to print his “Dialogues,” he had informed the master of the

Sacred  Palace  of  his  having  previously  been  forbidden  to  treat  certain

subjects, his reply was that he had not mentioned that to Father Riccardi, “for

he  did  not  think  it  necessary  to  do  so,  having  no  scruples,  nor  having

supported or defended in his book the opinion of the earth’s motion and the

stability of the sun.” It is not altogether certain that, by thus altering the truth,

Galileo chose the best line of defense; probably a little more of frankness

would have served him better. He was simply trifling with his judges and

taking  them  for  fools,  when  he  tried  to  make  them  believe  that,  in  his

“Dialogues,”  his  purpose  had  been  to  demonstrate  the  “weakness  and

insufficiency” of Copernicus’s arguments. The disguises in which the authorclothes his thoughts fail to deceive the thoughtful reader. Throughout the

work,  the  defender  of  Ptolemy’s  theory,  Simplicio  (in  whom  it  has  been

wrongfully supposed that some of the traits of Urban VIII. may be found), is

overthrown by his opponents’ arguments, and made an object of ridicule by

their  irony.  Surely,  it  was  imprudent  on  the  part  of  Galileo  to  deny  the

evidence, thus giving to his defense the appearance of double-dealing.

  Nor did the resort to this course deceive any one. The three judges who

had  questioned  him  unanimously  declared  that  in  his  book  he  had

contravened  the  injunctions  of  Cardinal  Bellarmin,  and  the  decree  of  the

Congregation of the Index. Two of them added that he was gravely suspect of

adhering  to  the  doctrine  of  Copernicus.  After  the  close  of  his  first

interrogatory, he was removed to the palace of the Holy Office, and there he

occupied  a  chamber  in  the  sleeping-apartments  of  the  wardens,  with  an

express prohibition of going out without leave. Here he had long and frequent

interviews with Father Vincenzo Macolano, commissary of the Holy Office,

an educated man of kindly disposition, and a friend of the grand-duke and of

the  Tuscan  embassador;  Father  Macolano  took  it  upon  himself  to  warn

Galileo of the dangers of the situation, and to aid him with his counsels. First

of all, he induced Galileo to submit without reserve, to admit his offenses,

and to repent. “I made his error patent to him,” wrote the father commissary,

at the close of one of their interviews; “he clearly saw that he had made a

mistake, that in his book he had gone too far, and he expressed to me his

regret  in  words  full  of  feeling,  as  though  he  drew  comfort  from  the

knowledge of his error, and was thinking of confessing it judicially; he only

asked of me a little time to consider how he might best word his confession.”

Father Macolano then looked for a speedy ending of the trial, and a less

severe sentence. “When once we have Galileo’s confession,” said he, “the

reputation of the tribunal will be safe, and the accused can be treated with

indulgence.” Evidently he expected that the case would not be carried beyond

the first stage of inquisition, and that it would terminate by a special form of

interrogatory, known as the “interrogatory with regard to the intention.”

  If  things  were  pushed  further  than  the  commissary  of  the  Holy  Office

either wished or expected, the blame does not rest with the accused, who,

once warned, immediately resolved to submit. On being interrogated again on

the  30th  of  April,  Galileo  confessed  that,  without  meaning  it,  he  had

presented too forcibly the arguments in favor of the system of Copernicus, his

intention all the while being to refute them, and that thus he might have ledthe public into error. He declared that he was “ready to refute the opinion of

Copernicus by all the most efficacious methods that God might place within

his power.” These words, no doubt dictated to him by the humanity of the

father  commissary,  had  the  effect  of  procuring  for  him  some  measure  of

liberty.  That  very  evening  he  was  sent  back  to  the  palace  of  the  Tuscan

embassador, so that there he might receive such care as the state of his health

required.

  We  must  not  forget  that  to  the  humiliation  of  repudiating  his  most

cherished  opinions,  of  belying  his  own  thoughts,  and  of  seeing  himself

treated as a criminal after he had, by his labors, done honor to his country and

to mankind, were added physical sufferings of the most grievous kind. It is

impossible to read without emotion the appeal he addressed to his judges at

the  end  of  his  written  defense:  “It  remains  for  me  to  urge  one  final

consideration, viz., the pitiable state of bodily indisposition to which I have

been reduced by incessant mental agony during ten whole months, together

with the hardships of a long and toilsome journey, in the most inclement

weather, at the age of threescore years and nine. . . . I confide in the mercy

and goodness of the most eminent seigniors who are my judges, and I hope

that if, in the integrity of their justice, they think that so great sufferings lack

anything to make them equal to the punishment that my offenses deserve,

they will be pleased, at my entreaty, to remit the difference in consideration

of the failing strength of my old age, which I humbly commend to them.”

  Among  the  hitherto  unpublished  documents  contained  in  Berti’s  work

there is one that is of the highest importance. This is a summary of the case,

giving an enumeration not only of what was decreed but also of what was

done. After reading a text so clear and so unambiguous on all points save

one, while on that one it agrees perfectly with other authentic documents, we

no longer find ground for supposing it was only on paper that Galileo was

threatened with the torture, and forced to make abjuration. A decree of the

pope, dated June 16th, ordains that instead of a simple “examination as to

intention,”  such  as  the  commissary  of  the  Holy  Office  had  expected,  an

interrogatory should be had with the threat of torture, if the accused could

stand it; he is ordered to make abjuration, and condemned to imprisonment

according to the good pleasure of the congregation. This decree was not, as

has been supposed, a simple declaration designed to sustain the reputation of

the  tribunal  for  severity,  while  the  culprit  was  treated  leniently;  on  thecontrary,  it  was  executed  literally,  as  is  shown  by  the  agreement  of  the

documents concerning this portion of the trial.

  On being interrogated for the last time on the 21st of June, Galileo was

ordered to state whether he then held or ever had held the opinion that the sun

is the centre of the world and that the earth moves. He humbly replied that

ever  since  the  decree  of  the  Congregation  of  the  Index,  in  1616,  he  had

always held and still did hold the opinion of Ptolemy to be “most true and

unquestionable.”  This  reply  not  appearing  to  be  satisfactory,  the  father

commissary insisted on knowing the truth, and wound up by declaring that, if

the whole truth were not stated, recourse would be had to torture. “I am here

in order to obey,” replied Galileo, with some show of terror. The text of the

sentence  shows  that  he  was  treated  more  rigorously  yet.  “Inasmuch  as  it

appears  to  us  that  you  have  not  told  the  whole  truth  as  touching  your

intention, we have deemed it necessary to resort to the examen rigorosum.”

Now, in the language of the Inquisition, examen rigorosum means just the

torture and that alone: it is the law-term approved by jurists and regularly

employed in sentences which condemn the accused to the cruel punishment

of the strappado. “In case the accused,” say the treatises on inquisitorial law,

“does not clear himself of the charges, recourse is to be had to the examen

rigorosum, torture having been devised to supply the want of witnesses.” In

two manuscripts of the first half of the seventeenth century, both of them

relating to the forms of procedure of the Holy Office, the expression examen

rigorosum is pointed out as the formula to be employed by judges in ordering

the application of torture.

  From the text of the sentence, from the pontifical decree already quoted,

and from the summary of the acts of the trial, we might infer that Galileo was

actually subjected to torture, if among the documents we found the official

record  (procès-verbal)  of  the examen  rigorosum,  as  we  find  the  official

record of the previous examinations. The rule of the Inquisition was ever the

same:  the  notary  or  registrar  of  the  Holy  Office  was  present  at  all

interrogatories, and took down carefully the words of the sufferer; all the

details of the examen rigorosum were recorded in a register, from the first

intimation to the accused that he was to be taken to the place of punishment,

down to the moment when he was released from the torture. On looking over

the  records  of  these  dread  sessions,  we  find  all  the  words  spoken  by  the

sufferer while his clothes are being taken off and while he is being tied to the

instrument of torture; all the replies he makes to his judges, all his pleas;every movement he makes is noted with cold precision, nay, even his sighs,

his groans, while under the torture. “He was hoisted by the rope,” calmly

writes the notary, “and while suspended he would cry out in a loud voice, ‘O

Lord God, have pity! O Our Lady, help me!’ repeating these words again and

again. Then he was silent, and having for a little while thus held his peace, he

began again to cry out, ‘O God, O God!’”

  If Galileo had been subjected to this mode of trial, the procès-verbal of the

proceedings  would  certainly  have  been  preserved  along  with  the  other

records of the case. But, then, might not the examen rigorosum have taken

place in the absence of the registrar; or might not the registrar, though he was

present, have omitted to make a record? Both of these suppositions appear to

be equally inadmissible, for they are in flat contradiction to all the precedents

and all the rules of the tribunal. Neither can we suppose that the agent of the

Holy Office suppressed the procès-verbal of the torture in order that both he

and  his  principals  might  escape  the  indignation  of  posterity.  This  were

gratuitously  to  transform  an  obscure,  an  irresponsible  personage  into  an

humanitarian philosopher who is ages ahead of the thought of his time and

who  purposely  destroys  a  sorrowful  page  of  history.  The  most  probable

account of what took place would be this: According to all the treatises on

inquisitorial law, the commissary was authorized not to inflict torture on aged

men,  or  on  persons  suffering  from  disease,  who  might  die  under  the

punishment. The advanced age of Galileo, and his infirmities, aggravated as

they were by so much mental suffering, naturally placed him in the category

of culprits who were not subjected to torture. If he was spared that dreadful

infliction, Berti gives all the credit to the humanity of the father commissary;

he  even  appears  to  think  that,  but  for  the  kindly  intervention  of  Father

Macolano, the sovereign pontiff and the Congregation of the Holy Office

would have given over Galileo to the executioner.

  Let us be more fair. It would be a libel on Urban VIII. to represent him as

thirsting for the blood and pleased with the sufferings of his old friend. The

pontifical  decree  of  June  16th  has  this  important  proviso  regarding  the

employment of torture, that it should not be used unless the accused could

endure  it.  When  he  expressed  himself  thus,  the  sovereign  pontiff  was

perfectly  well  aware  that  Galileo  could  not  stand  such  a  trial,  and  he

consented beforehand, without needing to be entreated by the commissary, to

the omission of the torture. What, indeed, would have been the use of such

extreme rigor? Urban did not desire the death of the culprit; he wanted tomake certain that Galileo would never more speak or write about the question

of the earth’s motion; and it was in order to so strike him with terror as to

insure his silence that of all the agonies of the trial he saved him only from

the last — the only one that would have been of no use. The pope was not so

cruel as Berti thinks, but neither did he give any sign of that compassion and

indulgence toward the accused with which he is too often credited. This point

is worth repeating, inasmuch as it is the clearest result of Berti’s publication:

the various phases of the trial of Galileo were not arranged with a view to

theatrical effect, and to make an outward show of great severity, so as to

intimidate the adherents of Galileo’s doctrine, while, behind the scenes, the

culprit was treated with kindness. The threat of torture, the abjuration, the

sequestration, were realities, and not, as has been supposed, simply monitions

addressed to overbold men of science. At first, the court of Rome did not

concern itself so much about impressing the imagination of the public as

about striking Galileo. Here was a rebellious subject who had once before

been treated with the greatest lenience, but who repaid the indulgence of the

Holy Office with the transparent irony of his “Dialogues;” who had set snares

for  the  person  appointed  to  examine  his  manuscript;  who,  at  his  first

interrogatory, had made sport of his judges, nay, perhaps of the sovereign

pontiff  himself:  he  must  now  be  reduced  to  silence  for  good  and  all,  by

conducting him, through a series of moral tortures, to the uttermost limits of

terror.

  At  the  same  time  the  solemn  form  of  his  abjuration  was  calculated  to

prevent him from ever again inclining toward the Copernican doctrine. How

could  he  embrace  that  doctrine  again  after  he  had  openly  pronounced  it

heretical,  and  promised,  as  he  was  compelled  to  do,  to  inform  upon  all

persons suspected of this heresy? His judges, however, were not yet satisfied;

he was feared even after his abjuration. He was confined at first in the palace

of the Archbishop Piccolomini, at Siena, then at his own villa of Arcetri, near

Florence, with leave to receive a few visits of relatives and friends, but on

condition that several persons should never meet there to hold conversation.

It  was  particularly  feared  that  he  would  communicate  with  learned  men

abroad and in Italy. Father Castelli, his old pupil, in vain begged leave to see

him, though he promised not to talk with him about the earth’s motion. In

order to protect all other Catholic countries against the contagion of his ideas,

the pope dispatched to all apostolic nuncios and to all inquisitors copies of

the sentence pronounced on Galileo, and of his act of abjuration. At Florencehis chief disciples and friends, especially the professors of mathematics, were

summoned by name to listen to the reading of these two documents.

  In shutting the mouth of a writer so gifted, so full of resources, so admired

by  the  public,  it  was  hoped  that  an  end  was  made  of  the  doctrine  of

Copernicus  —  that  dangerous  doctrine  which  alarmed  the  theologians  by

displacing the centre of the universe, ousting the earth from its primacy and

substituting the sun, and opening the way for hypotheses of the plurality of

worlds and the end of creation. But the effort was vain. The theory of the

earth’s  motion  has  survived  all  condemnations.  It  was  not  Galileo,  as

tradition would have it, that uttered the famous saying, “Eppur si muove” but

the  general  voice  of  mankind  who,  after  his  death,  thus  proclaimed  the

undying truth of his belief.

  Here we will stop. We would not weaken, by any comments of ours, the

importance of the documents we have been examining. It is a fixed historical

fact  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century  the  Roman

congregations, assuming to represent the Church, and not disavowed by her,

made themselves the judges of a scientific question, and decided it in a way

contrary to the conclusions of science. The splendor of Galileo’s genius and

the commiseration inspired by his sufferings impress upon this discussion a

tragical and popular character; but the emotion produced by his cruel fate

must  not  blind  us  to  the  gravity  of  the  problem.  The  great  question  was

whether,  in  countries  that  were  then  Catholic  and  destined  so  to  remain,

Science could free herself from the dominion of Faith. The trial of Galileo, so

far from retarding this conclusion, as is commonly supposed, on the contrary

made  it  inevitable  and  urgent.  So  soon  as  the  court  of  Rome  saw  how

unwisely she had acted in deciding a question beyond her competence, thus

laying herself open to the danger of being the next day convicted of error, it

became her interest, no less than the interest of Science, to distinguish clearly

between  the  two  domains,  Science  and  Faith.  If,  nowadays,  she  avoids

entering into scientific controversies, it is because she has been taught by

experience that a decision might compromise her. Her authority could hardly

stand after a second edition of the sentence in which she once forbade the sun

to stand still and the earth to revolve.                  GALILEO by Robert S. Ball




                        From ‘Great Astronomers’, 1895


Among the ranks of the great astronomers it would be difficult to find one

whose life presents more interesting features and remarkable vicissitudes than

does that of Galileo. We may consider him as the patient investigator and

brilliant discoverer. We may consider him in his private relations, especially

to his daughter, Sister Maria Celeste, a woman of very remarkable character;

and we have also the pathetic drama at the close of Galileo’s life, when the

philosopher drew down upon himself the thunders of the Inquisition.

  The  materials  for  the  sketch  of  this  astonishing  man  are  sufficiently

abundant. We make special use in this place of those charming letters which

his daughter wrote to him from her convent home. More than a hundred of

these have been preserved, and it may well be doubted whether any more

beautiful and touching series of letters addressed to a parent by a dearly loved

child have ever been written. An admirable account of this correspondence is

contained in a little book entitled “The Private Life of Galileo,” published

anonymously by Messrs. Macmillan in 1870, and I have been much indebted

to the author of that volume for many of the facts contained in this chapter.

  Galileo was born at Pisa, on 18th February, 1564. He was the eldest son of

Vincenzo de’ Bonajuti de’ Galilei, a Florentine noble. Notwithstanding his

illustrious birth and descent, it would seem that the home in which the great

philosopher’s childhood was spent was an impoverished one. It was obvious

at  least  that  the  young  Galileo  would  have  to  be  provided  with  some

profession by which he might earn a livelihood. From his father he derived

both by inheritance and by precept a keen taste for music, and it appears that

he became an excellent performer on the lute. He was also endowed with

considerable artistic power, which he cultivated diligently. Indeed, it would

seem  that  for  some  time  the  future  astronomer  entertained  the  idea  of

devoting himself to painting as a profession. His father, however, decided

that he should study medicine. Accordingly, we find that when Galileo was

seventeen years of age, and had added a knowledge of Greek and Latin to his

acquaintance with the fine arts, he was duly entered at the University of Pisa.  Here  the  young  philosopher  obtained  some  inkling  of  mathematics,

whereupon he became so much interested in this branch of science, that he

begged to be allowed to study geometry. In compliance with his request, his

father permitted a tutor to be engaged for this purpose; but he did so with

reluctance,  fearing  that  the  attention  of  the  young  student  might  thus  be

withdrawn  from  that  medical  work  which  was  regarded  as  his  primary

occupation. The event speedily proved that these anxieties were not without

some  justification.  The  propositions  of  Euclid  proved  so  engrossing  to

Galileo that it was thought wise to avoid further distraction by terminating

the mathematical tutor’s engagement. But it was too late for the desired end

to  be  attained.  Galileo  had  now  made  such  progress  that  he  was  able  to

continue his geometrical studies by himself. Presently he advanced to that

famous 47th proposition which won his lively admiration, and on he went

until he had mastered the six books of Euclid, which was a considerable

achievement for those days.

  The diligence and brilliance of the young student at Pisa did not, however,

bring  him  much  credit  with  the  University  authorities.  In  those  days  the

doctrines of Aristotle were regarded as the embodiment of all human wisdom

in natural science as well as in everything else. It was regarded as the duty of

every student to learn Aristotle off by heart, and any disposition to doubt or

even  to  question  the  doctrines  of  the  venerated  teacher  was  regarded  as

intolerable  presumption.  But  young  Galileo  had  the  audacity  to  think  for

himself about the laws of nature. He would not take any assertion of fact on

the  authority  of  Aristotle  when  he  had  the  means  of  questioning  nature

directly as to its truth or falsehood. His teachers thus came to regard him as a

somewhat misguided youth, though they could not but respect the unflagging

industry with which he amassed all the knowledge he could acquire.  GALILEO’S PENDULUM.

  We are so accustomed to the use of pendulums in our clocks that perhaps

we do not often realise that the introduction of this method of regulating

time-pieces  was  really  a  notable  invention  worthy  the  fame  of  the  great

astronomer  to  whom  it  was  due.  It  appears  that  sitting  one  day  in  the

Cathedral of Pisa, Galileo’s attention became concentrated on the swinging of

a chandelier which hung from the ceiling. It struck him as a significant point,

that whether the arc through which the pendulum oscillated was a long one or

a short one, the time occupied in each vibration was sensibly the same. This

suggested to the thoughtful observer that a pendulum would afford the means

by  which  a  time-keeper  might  be  controlled,  and  accordingly  Galileo

constructed for the first time a clock on this principle. The immediate object

sought  in  this  apparatus  was  to  provide  a  means  of  aiding  physicians  in

counting the pulses of their patients.  The talents of Galileo having at length extorted due recognition from the

authorities,  he  was  appointed,  at  the  age  of  twenty-five,  Professor  of

Mathematics  at  the  University  of  Pisa.  Then  came  the  time  when  he  felt

himself strong enough to throw down the gauntlet to the adherents of the old

philosophy. As a necessary part of his doctrine on the movement of bodies

Aristotle had asserted that the time occupied by a stone in falling depends

upon its weight, so that the heavier the stone the less time would it require to

fall from a certain  height to the earth. It might have been thought that a

statement so easily confuted by the simplest experiments could never have

maintained its position in any accepted scheme of philosophy. But Aristotle

had said it, and to anyone who ventured to express a doubt the ready sneer

was forthcoming, “Do you think yourself a cleverer man than Aristotle?”

Galileo determined to demonstrate in the most emphatic manner the absurdity

of a doctrine which had for centuries received the sanction of the learned. The

summit of the Leaning Tower of Pisa offered a highly dramatic site for the

great experiment. The youthful professor let fall from the overhanging top a

large  heavy  body  and  a  small  light  body  simultaneously.  According  to

Aristotle the large body ought to have reached the ground much sooner than

the small one, but such was found not to be the case. In the sight of a large

concourse of people the simple fact was demonstrated that the two bodies fell

side by side, and reached the ground at the same time. Thus the first great

step was taken in the overthrow of that preposterous system of unquestioning

adhesion to dogma, which had impeded the development of the knowledge of

nature for nearly two thousand years.

  This revolutionary attitude towards the ancient beliefs was not calculated

to render Galileo’s relations with the University authorities harmonious. He

had also the misfortune to make enemies in other quarters. Don Giovanni de

Medici, who was then the Governor of the Port of Leghorn, had designed

some contrivance by which he proposed to pump out a dock. But Galileo

showed up the absurdity of this enterprise in such an aggressive manner that

Don Giovanni took mortal offence, nor was he mollified when the truths of

Galileo’s  criticisms  were  abundantly  verified  by  the  total  failure  of  his

ridiculous invention. In various ways Galileo was made to feel his position at

Pisa so unpleasant that he was at length compelled to abandon his chair in the

University.  The  active  exertions  of  his  friends,  of  whom  Galileo  was  so

fortunate as to have had throughout his life an abundant supply, then securedhis election to the Professorship of Mathematics at Padua, whither he went in

1592.





























  PORTRAIT OF GALILEO.

  It was in this new position that Galileo entered on that marvellous career

of investigation which was destined to revolutionize science. The zeal with

which  he  discharged  his  professorial  duties  was  indeed  of  the  most

unremitting  character.  He  speedily  drew  such  crowds  to  listen  to  his

discourses  on  Natural  Philosophy  that  his  lecture-room  was  filled  to

overflowing. He also received many private pupils in his house for special

instruction.  Every  moment  that  could  be  spared  from  these  labours  was

devoted to his private study and to his incessant experiments.

  Like many another philosopher who has greatly extended our knowledge

of nature, Galileo had a remarkable aptitude for the invention of instruments

designed for philosophical research. To facilitate his practical work, we findthat in 1599 he had engaged a skilled workman who was to live in his house,

and thus be constantly at hand to try the devices for ever springing from

Galileo’s fertile brain. Among the earliest of his inventions appears to have

been the thermometer, which he constructed in 1602. No doubt this apparatus

in its primitive form differed in some respects from the contrivance we call

by  the  same  name.  Galileo  at  first  employed  water  as  the  agent,  by  the

expansion of which the temperature was to be measured. He afterwards saw

the advantage of using spirits for the same purpose. It was not until about half

a  century  later  that  mercury  came  to  be  recognised  as  the  liquid  most

generally suitable for the thermometer.

  The time was now approaching when Galileo was to make that mighty

step  in  the  advancement  of  human  knowledge  which  followed  on  the

application of the telescope to astronomy. As to how his idea of such an

instrument originated, we had best let him tell us in his own words. The

passage is given in a letter which he writes to his brother-in-law, Landucci.

  “I write now because I have a piece of news for you, though whether you

will be glad or sorry to hear it I cannot say; for I have now no hope of

returning to my own country, though the occurrence which has destroyed that

hope has had results both useful and honourable. You must know, then, that

two months ago there was a report spread here that in Flanders some one had

presented to Count Maurice of Nassau a glass manufactured in such a way as

to make distant objects appear very near, so that a man at the distance of two

miles could be clearly seen. This seemed to me so marvellous that I began to

think about it. As it appeared to me to have a foundation in the Theory of

Perspective, I set about contriving how to make it, and at length I found out,

and have succeeded so well that the one I have made is far superior to the

Dutch telescope. It was reported in Venice that I had made one, and a week

since I was commanded to show it to his Serenity and to all the members of

the senate, to their infinite amazement. Many gentlemen and senators, even

the oldest, have ascended at various times the highest bell-towers in Venice

to spy out ships at sea making sail for the mouth of the harbour, and have

seen  them  clearly,  though  without  my  telescope  they  would  have  been

invisible for more than two hours. The effect of this instrument is to show an

object at a distance of say fifty miles, as if it were but five miles.”

  The remarkable properties of the telescope at once commanded universal

attention among intellectual men. Galileo received applications from severalquarters for his new instrument, of which it would seem that he manufactured

a large number to be distributed as gifts to various illustrious personages.

  But it was reserved for Galileo himself to make that application of the

instrument  to  the  celestial  bodies  by  which  its  peculiar  powers  were  to

inaugurate the new era in astronomy. The first discovery that was made in

this direction appears to have been connected with the number of the stars.

Galileo saw to his amazement that through his little tube he could count ten

times as many stars in the sky as his unaided eye could detect. Here was,

indeed,  a  surprise.  We  are  now  so  familiar  with  the  elementary  facts  of

astronomy  that  it  is  not  always  easy  to  realise  how  the  heavens  were

interpreted  by  the  observers  in  those  ages  prior  to  the  invention  of  the

telescope. We can hardly, indeed, suppose that Galileo, like the majority of

those who ever thought of such matters, entertained the erroneous belief that

the stars were on the surface of a sphere at equal distances from the observer.

No one would be likely to have retained his belief in such a doctrine when he

saw how the number of visible stars could be increased tenfold by means of

Galileo’s telescope. It would have been almost impossible to refuse to draw

the inference that the stars thus brought into view were still more remote

objects which the telescope was able to reveal, just in the same way as it

showed certain ships to the astonished Venetians, when at the time these

ships were beyond the reach of unaided vision.

  Galileo’s  celestial  discoveries  now  succeeded  each  other  rapidly.  That

beautiful Milky Way, which has for ages been the object of admiration to all

lovers of nature, never disclosed its true nature to the eye of man till the

astronomer of Padua turned on it his magic tube. The splendid zone of silvery

light was then displayed as star-dust scattered over the black background of

the sky. It was observed that though the individual stars were too small to be

seen severally without optical aid, yet such was their incredible number that

the celestial radiance produced that luminosity with which every stargazer

was so familiar.

  But  the  greatest  discovery  made  by  the  telescope  in  these  early  days,

perhaps,  indeed,  the  greatest  discovery  that  the  telescope  has  ever

accomplished, was the detection of the system of four satellites revolving

around the great planet Jupiter. This phenomenon was so wholly unexpected

by Galileo that, at first, he could hardly believe his eyes. However, the reality

of the existence of a system of four moons attending the great planet was

soon established beyond all question. Numbers of great personages crowdedto Galileo to see for themselves this beautiful miniature representing the sun

with its system of revolving planets.

  Of course there were, as usual, a few incredulous people who refused to

believe the assertion that four more moving bodies had to be added to the

planetary system. They scoffed at the notion; they said the satellites may have

been  in  the  telescope,  but  that  they  were  not  in  the  sky.  One  sceptical

philosopher is reported to have affirmed, that even if he saw the moons of

Jupiter himself he would not believe in them, as their existence was contrary

to the principles of common-sense!

  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  a  special  significance  attached  to  the  new

discovery  at  this  particular  epoch  in  the  history  of  science.  It  must  be

remembered that in those days the doctrine of Copernicus, declaring that the

sun, and not the earth, was the centre of the system, that the earth revolved on

its axis once a day, and that it described a mighty circle round the sun once a

year, had only recently been promulgated. This new view of the scheme of

nature  had  been  encountered  with  the  most  furious  opposition.  It  may

possibly have been that Galileo himself had not felt quite confident in the

soundness of the Copernican theory, prior to the discovery of the satellites of

Jupiter.  But  when  a  picture  was  there  exhibited  in  which  a  number  of

relatively small globes were shown to be revolving around a single large

globe  in  the  centre,  it  seemed  impossible  not  to  feel  that  the  beautiful

spectacle so displayed was an emblem of the relations of the planets to the

sun. It was thus made manifest to Galileo that the Copernican theory of the

planetary system must be the true one. The momentous import of this opinion

upon the future welfare of the great philosopher will presently appear.

  It would seem that Galileo regarded his residence at Padua as a state of

undesirable exile from his beloved Tuscany. He had always a yearning to go

back to his own country and at last the desired opportunity presented itself.

For  now  that  Galileo’s  fame  had  become  so  great,  the  Grand  Duke  of

Tuscany desired to have the philosopher resident at Florence, in the belief

that  he  would  shed  lustre  on  the  Duke’s  dominions.  Overtures  were

accordingly made to Galileo, and the consequence was that in 1616 we find

him residing at Florence, bearing the title of Mathematician and Philosopher

to the Grand Duke.

  Two daughters, Polissena and Virginia, and one son, Vincenzo, had been

born to Galileo in Padua. It was the custom in those days that as soon as the

daughter  of  an  Italian  gentleman  had  grown  up,  her  future  career  wassomewhat summarily decided. Either a husband was to be forthwith sought

out, or she was to enter the convent with the object of taking the veil as a

professed nun. It was arranged that the two daughters of Galileo, while still

scarcely more than children, should both enter the Franciscan convent of St.

Matthew, at Arcetri. The elder daughter Polissena, took the name of Sister

Maria Celeste, while Virginia became Sister Arcangela. The latter seems to

have been always delicate and subject to prolonged melancholy, and she is of

but  little  account  in  the  narrative  of  the  life  of  Galileo.  But  Sister  Maria

Celeste,  though  never  leaving  the  convent,  managed  to  preserve  a  close

intimacy  with  her  beloved  father.  This  was  maintained  only  partly  by

Galileo’s visits, which were very irregular and were, indeed, often suspended

for long intervals. But his letters to this daughter were evidently frequent and

affectionate,  especially  in  the  latter  part  of  his  life.  Most  unfortunately,

however, all his letters have been lost. There are grounds for believing that

they were deliberately destroyed when Galileo was seized by the Inquisition,

lest they should have been used as evidence against him, or lest they should

have compromised the convent where they were received. But Sister Maria

Celeste’s letters to her father have happily been preserved, and most touching

these letters are. We can hardly read them without thinking how the sweet

and gentle nun would have shrunk from the idea of their publication.

  Her  loving  little  notes  to  her  “dearest  lord  and  father,”  as  she  used

affectionately to call Galileo, were almost invariably accompanied by some

gift, trifling it may be, but always the best the poor nun had to bestow. The

tender grace of these endearing communications was all the more precious to

him from the fact that the rest of Galileo’s relatives were of quite a worthless

description.  He  always  acknowledged  the  ties  of  his  kindred  in  the  most

generous  way,  but  their  follies  and  their  vices,  their  selfishness  and  their

importunities, were an incessant source of annoyance to him, almost to the

last day of his life.

  On 19th December, 1625, Sister Maria Celeste writes: —

  “I send two baked pears for these days of vigil. But as the greatest treat of

all, I send you a rose, which ought to please you extremely, seeing what a

rarity it is at this season; and with the rose you must accept its thorns, which

represent the bitter passion of our Lord, whilst the green leaves represent the

hope  we  may  entertain  that  through  the  same  sacred  passion  we,  having

passed through the darkness of the short winter of our mortal life, may attain

to the brightness and felicity of an eternal spring in heaven.”  When the wife and children of Galileo’s shiftless brother came to take up

their abode in the philosopher’s home, Sister Maria Celeste feels glad to think

that her father has now some one who, however imperfectly, may fulfil the

duty of looking after him. A graceful note on Christmas Eve accompanies her

little gifts. She hopes that —

  “In these holy days the peace of God may rest on him and all the house.

The largest collar and sleeves I mean for Albertino, the other two for the two

younger boys, the little dog for baby, and the cakes for everybody, except the

spice-cakes, which are for you. Accept the good-will which would readily do

much more.”

  The extraordinary forbearance with which Galileo continually placed his

time, his purse, and his influence at the service of those who had repeatedly

proved themselves utterly unworthy of his countenance, is thus commented

on by the good nun. —

  “Now it seems to me, dearest lord and father, that your lordship is walking

in the right path, since you take hold of every occasion that presents itself to

shower continual benefits on those who only repay you with ingratitude. This

is  an  action  which  is  all  the  more  virtuous  and  perfect  as  it  is  the  more

difficult.”

  When the plague was raging in the neighbourhood, the loving daughter’s

solicitude is thus shown: —

  “I send you two pots of electuary as a preventive against the plague. The

one without the label consists of dried figs, walnuts, rue, and salt, mixed

together  with  honey.  A  piece  of  the  size  of  a  walnut  to  be  taken  in  the

morning, fasting, with a little Greek wine.”

  The plague increasing still more, Sister Maria Celeste obtained with much

difficulty, a small quantity of a renowned liqueur, made by Abbess Ursula, an

exceptionally saintly nun. This she sends to her father with the words: —

  “I pray your lordship to have faith in this remedy. For if you have so much

faith in my poor miserable prayers, much more may you have in those of

such a holy person; indeed, through her merits you may feel sure of escaping

all danger from the plague.”

  Whether Galileo took the remedy we do not know, but at all events he

escaped the plague.  THE VILLA ARCETRI. Galileo’s residence, where Milton visited him.

  From Galileo’s new home in Florence the telescope was again directed to

the  skies,  and  again  did  astounding  discoveries  reward  the  astronomer’s

labours.  The  great  success  which  he  had  met  with  in  studying  Jupiter

naturally led Galileo to look at Saturn. Here he saw a spectacle which was

sufficiently amazing, though he failed to interpret it accurately. It was quite

manifest that Saturn did not exhibit a simple circular disc like Jupiter, or like

Mars. It seemed to Galileo as if the planet consisted of three bodies, a large

globe in the centre, and a smaller one on each side. The enigmatical nature of

the  discovery  led  Galileo  to  announce  it  in  an  enigmatical  manner.  He

published a string of letters which, when duly transposed, made up a sentence

which affirmed that the planet Saturn was threefold. Of course we now know

that this remarkable appearance of the planet was due to the two projecting

portions  of  the  ring.  With  the  feeble  power  of  Galileo’s  telescope,  these

seemed merely like small globes or appendages to the large central body.

  The last of Galileo’s great astronomical discoveries related to the libration

of  the  moon.  I  think  that  the  detection  of  this  phenomenon  shows  his

acuteness of observation more remarkably than does any one of his otherachievements with the telescope. It is well known that the moon constantly

keeps  the  same  face  turned  towards  the  earth.  When,  however,  careful

measurements have been made with regard to the spots and marks on the

lunar surface, it is found that there is a slight periodic variation which permits

us to see now a little to the east or to the west, now a little to the north or to

the south of the average lunar disc.

  But  the  circumstances  which  make  the  career  of  Galileo  so  especially

interesting  from  the  biographer’s  point  of  view,  are  hardly  so  much  the

triumphs that he won as the sufferings that he endured. The sufferings and the

triumphs were, however, closely connected, and it is fitting that we should

give due consideration to what was perhaps the greatest drama in the history

of science.

  On the appearance of the immortal work of Copernicus, in which it was

taught that the earth rotated on its axis, and that the earth, like the other

planets, revolved round the sun, orthodoxy stood aghast. The Holy Roman

Church  submitted  this  treatise,  which  bore  the  name  “De  Revolutionibus

Orbium  Coelestium,”  to  the  Congregation  of  the  Index.  After  due

examination it was condemned as heretical in 1615. Galileo was suspected,

on no doubt excellent grounds, of entertaining the objectionable views of

Copernicus.  He  was  accordingly  privately  summoned  before  Cardinal

Bellarmine on 26th February 1616, and duly admonished that he was on no

account to teach or to defend the obnoxious doctrines. Galileo was much

distressed by this intimation. He felt it a serious matter to be deprived of the

privilege of discoursing with his friends about the Copernican system, and of

instructing his disciples in the principles of the great theory of whose truth he

was perfectly convinced. It pained him, however, still more to think, devout

Catholic  as  he  was,  that  such  suspicions  of  his  fervent  allegiance  to  his

Church  should  ever  have  existed,  as  were  implied  by  the  words  and

monitions of Cardinal Bellarmine.

  In 1616, Galileo had an interview with Pope Paul V., who received the

great  astronomer  very  graciously,  and  walked  up  and  down  with  him  in

conversation  for  three-quarters  of  an  hour.  Galileo  complained  to  his

Holiness of the attempts made by his enemies to embarrass him with the

authorities of the Church, but the Pope bade him be comforted. His Holiness

had himself no doubts of Galileo’s orthodoxy, and he assured him that the

Congregation of the Index should give Galileo no further trouble so long as

Paul V. was in the chair of St. Peter.  On the death of Paul V. in 1623, Maffeo Barberini was elected Pope, as

Urban VIII. This new Pope, while a cardinal, had been an intimate friend of

Galileo’s,  and  had  indeed  written  Latin  verses  in  praise  of  the  great

astronomer and his discoveries. It was therefore not unnatural for Galileo to

think that the time had arrived when, with the use of due circumspection, he

might  continue  his  studies  and  his  writings,  without  fear  of  incurring  the

displeasure of the Church. Indeed, in 1624, one of Galileo’s friends writing

from Rome, urges Galileo to visit the city again, and added that —

  “Under the auspices of this most excellent, learned, and benignant Pontiff,

science must flourish. Your arrival will be welcome to his Holiness. He asked

me if you were coming, and when, and in short, he seems to love and esteem

you more than ever.”

  The visit was duly paid, and when Galileo returned to Florence, the Pope

wrote  a  letter  from  which  the  following  is  an  extract,  commanding  the

philosopher to the good offices of the young Ferdinand, who had shortly

before succeeded his father in the Grand Duchy of Tuscany.

  “We find in Galileo not only literary distinction, but also the love of piety,

and he is also strong in those qualities by which the pontifical good-will is

easily  obtained.  And  now,  when  he  has  been  brought  to  this  city  to

congratulate us on our elevation, we have very lovingly embraced him; nor

can we suffer him to return to the country whither your liberality calls him,

without an ample provision of pontifical love. And that you may know how

dear he is to us, we have willed to give him this honourable testimonial of

virtue and piety. And we further signify that every benefit which you shall

confer upon him, imitating or even surpassing your father’s liberality, will

conduce to our gratification.”

  The favourable reception which had been accorded to him by Pope Urban

VIII.  seems  to  have  led  Galileo  to  expect  that  there  might  be  some

corresponding change in the attitude of the Papal authorities on the great

question  of  the  stability  of  the  earth.  He  accordingly  proceeded  with  the

preparation of the chief work of his life, “The Dialogue of the two Systems.”

It  was  submitted  for  inspection  by  the  constituted  authorities.  The  Pope

himself  thought  that,  if  a  few  conditions  which  he  laid  down  were  duly

complied with, there could be no objection to the publication of the work. In

the first place, the title of the book was to be so carefully worded as to show

plainly  that  the  Copernican  doctrine  was  merely  to  be  regarded  as  an

hypothesis,  and  not  as  a  scientific  fact.  Galileo  was  also  instructed  toconclude the book with special arguments which had been supplied by the

Pope  himself,  and  which  appeared  to  his  Holiness  to  be  quite  conclusive

against the new doctrine of Copernicus.

  Formal leave for the publication of the Dialogue was then given to Galileo

by the Inquisitor General, and it was accordingly sent to the press. It might be

thought that the anxieties of the astronomer about his book would then have

terminated. As a matter of fact, they had not yet seriously begun. Riccardi,

the  Master  of  the  Sacred  Palace,  having  suddenly  had  some  further

misgivings, sent to Galileo for the manuscript while the work was at the

printer’s, in order that the doctrine it implied might be once again examined.

Apparently, Riccardi had come to the conclusion that he had not given the

matter sufficient attention, when the authority to go to press had been first

and, perhaps, hastily given. Considerable delay in the issue of the book was

the  result  of  these  further  deliberations.  At  last,  however,  in  June,  1632,

Galileo’s great work, “The Dialogue of the two Systems,” was produced for

the instruction of the world, though the occasion was fraught with ruin to the

immortal author.    FACSIMILE SKETCH OF LUNAR SURFACE BY GALILEO.

  The  book,  on  its  publication,  was  received  and  read  with  the  greatest

avidity. But presently the Master of The Sacred Palace found reason to regret

that  he  had  given  his  consent  to  its  appearance.  He  accordingly  issued  a

peremptory order to sequestrate every copy in Italy. This sudden change in

the  Papal  attitude  towards  Galileo  formed  the  subject  of  a  strong

remonstrance  addressed  to  the  Roman  authorities  by  the  Grand  Duke  of

Tuscany. The Pope himself seemed to have become impressed all at once

with the belief that the work contained matter of an heretical description. The

general interpretation put upon the book seems to have shown the authorities

that they had mistaken its true tendency, notwithstanding the fact that it had

been examined again and again by theologians deputed for the duty. To the

communication from the Grand Duke the Pope returned answer, that he had

decided to submit the book to a congregation of “learned, grave, and saintlymen,”  who  would  weigh  every  word  in  it.  The  views  of  his  Holiness

personally  on  the  subject  were  expressed  in  his  belief  that  the  Dialogue

contained the most perverse matter that could come into a reader’s hands.

  The Master of the Sacred Palace was greatly blamed by the authorities for

having given his sanction to its issue. He pleaded that the book had not been

printed  in  the  precise  terms  of  the  original  manuscript  which  had  been

submitted to him. It was also alleged that Galileo had not adhered to his

promise  of  inserting  properly  the  arguments  which  the  Pope  himself  had

given in support of the old and orthodox view. One of these had, no doubt,

been introduced, but, so far from mending Galileo’s case, it had made matters

really look worse for the poor philosopher. The Pope’s argument had been

put  into  the  mouth  of  one  of  the  characters  in  the  Dialogue  named

“Simplicio.” Galileo’s enemies maintained that by adopting such a method

for the expression of his Holiness’s opinion, Galileo had intended to hold the

Pope himself up to ridicule. Galileo’s friends maintained that nothing could

have been farther from his intention. It seems, however, highly probable that

the suspicions thus aroused had something to say to the sudden change of

front on the part of the Papal authorities.

  On  1st  October,  1632,  Galileo  received  an  order  to  appear  before  the

Inquisition  at  Rome  on  the  grave  charge  of  heresy.  Galileo,  of  course,

expressed his submission, but pleaded for a respite from compliance with the

summons, on the ground of his advanced age and his failing health. The Pope

was, however, inexorable; he said that he had warned Galileo of his danger

while he was still his friend. The command could not be disobeyed. Galileo

might perform the journey as slowly as he pleased, but it was imperatively

necessary for him to set forth and at once.

  On 20th January, 1633, Galileo started on his weary journey to Rome, in

compliance  with  this  peremptory  summons.  On  13th  February  he  was

received as the guest of Niccolini, the Tuscan ambassador, who had acted as

his wise and ever-kind friend throughout the whole affair. It seemed plain

that the Holy Office were inclined to treat Galileo with as much clemency

and  consideration  as  was  consistent  with  the  determination  that  the  case

against him should be proceeded with to the end. The Pope intimated that in

consequence of his respect for the Grand Duke of Tuscany he should permit

Galileo to enjoy the privilege, quite unprecedented for a prisoner charged

with heresy, of remaining as an inmate in the ambassador’s house. He ought,

strictly, to have been placed in the dungeons of the Inquisition. When theexamination of the accused had actually commenced, Galileo was confined,

not, indeed, in the dungeons, but in comfortable rooms at the Holy Office.

  By the judicious and conciliatory language of submission which Niccolini

had urged Galileo to use before the Inquisitors, they were so far satisfied that

they interceded with the Pope for his release. During the remainder of the

trial Galileo was accordingly permitted to go back to the ambassador’s, where

he was most heartily welcomed. Sister Maria Celeste, evidently thinking this

meant that the whole case was at an end, thus expresses herself: —

  “The joy that your last dear letter brought me, and the having to read it

over and over to the nuns, who made quite a jubilee on hearing its contents,

put  me  into  such  an  excited  state  that  at  last  I  got  a  severe  attack  of

headache.”

  In his defence Galileo urged that he had already been acquitted in 1616 by

Cardinal Bellarmine, when a charge of heresy was brought against him, and

he contended that anything he might now have done, was no more than he

had done on the preceding occasion, when the orthodoxy of his doctrines

received solemn confirmation. The Inquisition seemed certainly inclined to

clemency, but the Pope was not satisfied. Galileo was accordingly summoned

again on the 21st June. He was to be threatened with torture if he did not

forthwith give satisfactory explanations as to the reasons which led him to

write  the  Dialogue.  In  this  proceeding  the  Pope  assured  the  Tuscan

ambassador  that  he  was  treating  Galileo  with  the  utmost  consideration

possible in consequence of his esteem and regard for the Grand Duke, whose

servant  Galileo  was.  It  was,  however,  necessary  that  some  exemplary

punishment be meted out to the astronomer, inasmuch as by the publication

of the Dialogue he had distinctly disobeyed the injunction of silence laid

upon him by the decree of 1616. Nor was it admissible for Galileo to plead

that his book had been sanctioned by the Master of the Sacred College, to

whose inspection it had been again and again submitted. It was held, that if

the Master of the Sacred College had been unaware of the solemn warning

the philosopher had already received sixteen years previously, it was the duty

of Galileo to have drawn his attention to that fact.

  On  the  22nd  June,  1633,  Galileo  was  led  to  the  great  hall  of  the

Inquisition, and compelled to kneel before the cardinals there assembled and

hear  his  sentence.  In  a  long  document,  most  elaborately  drawn  up,  it  is

definitely  charged  against  Galileo  that,  in  publishing  the  Dialogue,  he

committed the essentially grave error of treating the doctrine of the earth’smotion as open to discussion. Galileo knew, so the document affirmed, that

the Church had emphatically pronounced this notion to be contrary to Holy

Writ, and that for him to consider a doctrine so stigmatized as having any

shadow of probability in its favour was an act of disrespect to the authority of

the  Church  which  could  not  be  overlooked.  It  was  also  charged  against

Galileo  that  in  his  Dialogue  he  has  put  the  strongest  arguments  into  the

mouth, not of those who supported the orthodox doctrine, but of those who

held the theory as to the earth’s motion which the Church had so deliberately

condemned.

  After  due  consideration  of  the  defence  made  by  the  prisoner,  it  was

thereupon  decreed  that  he  had  rendered  himself  vehemently  suspected  of

heresy by the Holy Office, and in consequence had incurred all the censures

and penalties of the sacred canons, and other decrees promulgated against

such persons. The graver portion of these punishments would be remitted, if

Galileo would solemnly repudiate the heresies referred to by an abjuration to

be pronounced by him in the terms laid down.

  At the same time it was necessary to mark, in some emphatic manner, the

serious offence which had been committed, so that it might serve both as a

punishment to Galileo and as a warning to others. It was accordingly decreed

that he should be condemned to imprisonment in the Holy Office during the

pleasure of the Papal authorities, and that he should recite once a week for

three years the seven Penitential Psalms.

  Then  followed  that  ever-memorable  scene  in  the  great  hall  of  the

Inquisition,  in  which  the  aged  and  infirm  Galileo,  the  inventor  of  the

telescope and the famous astronomer, knelt down to abjure before the most

eminent  and  reverend  Lords  Cardinal,  Inquisitors  General  throughout  the

Christian  Republic  against  heretical  depravity.  With  his  hands  on  the

Gospels, Galileo was made to curse and detest the false opinion that the sun

was the centre of the universe and immovable, and that the earth was not the

centre of the same, and that it moved. He swore that for the future he will

never say nor write such things as may bring him under suspicion, and that if

he does so he submits to all the pains and penalties of the sacred canons. This

abjuration was subsequently read in Florence before Galileo’s disciples, who

had been specially summoned to attend.

  It has been noted that neither on the first occasion, in 1616, nor on the

second in 1633, did the reigning Pope sign the decrees concerning Galileo.

The contention has accordingly been made that Paul V. and Urban VIII. areboth alike vindicated from any technical responsibility for the attitude of the

Romish Church towards the Copernican doctrines. The significance of this

circumstance has been commented on in connection with the doctrine of the

infallibility of the Pope.

  We can judge of the anxiety felt by Sister Maria Celeste about her beloved

father  during  these  terrible  trials.  The  wife  of  the  ambassador  Niccolini,

Galileo’s  steadfast  friend,  most  kindly  wrote  to  give  the  nun  whatever

quieting assurances the case would permit. There is a renewed flow of these

touching epistles from the daughter to her father. Thus she sends word —

  “The news of your fresh trouble has pierced my soul with grief all the

more that it came quite unexpectedly.”

  And again, on hearing that he had been permitted to leave Rome, she

writes —

  “I wish I could describe the rejoicing of all the mothers and sisters on

hearing of your happy arrival at Siena. It was indeed most extraordinary. On

hearing  the  news  the  Mother  Abbess  and  many  of  the  nuns  ran  to  me,

embracing me and weeping for joy and tenderness.”

  The  sentence  of  imprisonment  was  at  first  interpreted  leniently  by  the

Pope. Galileo was allowed to reside in qualified durance in the archbishop’s

house at Siena. Evidently the greatest pain that he endured arose from the

forced separation from that daughter, whom he had at last learned to love

with an affection almost comparable with that she bore to him. She had often

told  him  that  she  never  had  any  pleasure  equal  to  that  with  which  she

rendered any service to her father. To her joy, she discovers that she can

relieve him from the task of reciting the seven Penitential Psalms which had

been imposed as a Penance: —

  “I  began  to  do  this  a  while  ago,”  she  writes,  “and  it  gives  me  much

pleasure.  First,  because  I  am  persuaded  that  prayer  in  obedience  to  Holy

Church must be efficacious; secondly, in order to save you the trouble of

remembering it. If I had been able to do more, most willingly would I have

entered a straiter prison than the one I live in now, if by so doing I could have

set you at liberty.”  CREST OF GALILEO’S FAMILY.

  Sister Maria Celeste was gradually failing in health, but the great privilege

was accorded to her of being able once again to embrace her beloved lord and

master. Galileo had, in fact, been permitted to return to his old home; but on

the very day when he heard of his daughter’s death came the final decree

directing him to remain in his own house in perpetual solitude.

  Amid the advancing infirmities of age, the isolation from friends, and the

loss of his daughter, Galileo once again sought consolation in hard work. He

commenced his famous dialogue on Motion. Gradually, however, his sight

began  to  fail,  and  blindness  was  at  last  added  to  his  other  troubles.  On

January 2nd, 1638, he writes to Diodati: —

  “Alas, your dear friend and servant, Galileo, has been for the last month

perfectly blind, so that this heaven, this earth, this universe which I by my

marvellous  discoveries  and  clear  demonstrations  have  enlarged  a  hundredthousand  times  beyond  the  belief  of  the  wise  men  of  bygone  ages,

henceforward is for me shrunk into such a small space as is filled by my own

bodily sensations.”

  But the end was approaching — the great philosopher, was attacked by

low fever, from which he died on the 8th January, 1643.