Natation of Solids is made.]


It followes, now, that we proceed forward to demonstrate more particularly,

how much such Solids shall be inferiour in Gravity to the water elevated;

namely, what part of them shall rest submerged, and what shall be visible

above the Surface of the water: but first it is necessary to demonstrate the

                                  subsequent Lemma.


                                      LEMMA I.


  The absolute Gravity of Solids, are in a proportion compounded of their

                      Specifick Gravities, and of their Masses.


The  absolute  Gravities  of  Solids,  have  a  proportion  compounded  of  the

proportions of their specificall Gravities, and of their Masses.










  Let A and B be two Solids. I say, that the Absolute Gravity of A, hath to

the Absolute Gravity of B, a proportion compounded of the proportions of the

specificall Gravity of A, to the Specificall Gravity of B, and of the Mass A to

the Mass B. Let the Line D have the same proportion to E, that the specifick

Gravity of A, hath to the specifick Gravity of B; and let E be to F, as the

Mass  A  to  the  Mass  B:  It  is  manifest,  that  the  proportion  of  D  to  F,  is

compounded  of  the  proportions  D  and  E;  and  E  and  F.  It  is  requisite,

therefore, to demonstrate, that as D is to F, so the absolute Gravity of A, is to

the absolute Gravity of B. Take the Solid C, equall in Mass to the Solid A,

and of the same Gravity in specie with the Solid B.

  Because, therefore, A and C are equall in Mass, the absolute Gravity of A,

shall have to the absolute Gravity of C, the same proportion, as the specificall

Gravity of A, hath to the specificall Gravity of C, or of B, which is the same

in specie; that is, as D is to E. And, because, C and B are of the same Gravity

in specie, it shall be, that as the absolute weight of C, is to the absoluteweight of B, so the Mass C, or the Mass A, is to the Mass B; that is, as the

Line  E  to  the  Line  F.  As  therefore,  the  absolute  Gravity  of  A,  is  to  the

absolute Gravity of C, so is the Line D to the Line E: and, as the absolute

Gravity of C, is to the absolute Gravity of B, so is the Line E to the Line F:

Therefore, by Equality of proportion, the absolute Gravity of A, is to the

absolute  Gravity  of  B,  as  the  Line  D  to  the  Line  F:  which  was  to  be

demonstrated. I proceed now to demonstrate, how that,


                                    THEOREME IV.


          The proportion of water requisite to make a Solid swim:


If a Solid, Cylinder, or Prisme, lesse grave specifically than the Water, being

put into a Vessel, as above, of whatsoever greatnesse, and the Water, be

afterwards infused, the Solid shall rest in the bottom, unraised, till the Water

arrive to that part of the Altitude, of the said Prisme, to which its whole

Altitude hath the same proportion, that the Specificall Gravity of the Water,

hath to the Specificall Gravity of the said Solid: but infusing more Water, the

Solid shall ascend.











Let the Vessell be M L G N of any bigness, and let there be placed in it the

Solid Prisme D F G E, less grave in specie than the water; and look what

proportion the Specificall Gravity of the water, hath to that of the Prisme,

such let the Altitude D F, have to the Altitude F B. I say, that infusing water

to  the  Altitude  F  B,  the  Solid  D  G  shall  not  float,  but  shall  stand  in

Equilibrium, so, that that every little quantity of water, that is infused, shall

raise it. Let the water, therefore, be infused to the Levell A B C; and; because

the Specifick Gravity of the Solid D G, is to the Specifick Gravity of the

water, as the altitude B F is to the altitude F D; that is, as the Mass B G to theMass G D; as the proportion of the Mass B G is to the Mass G D, as the

proportion of the Mass G D is to the Mass A F, they compose the Proportion

of the Mass B G to the Mass A F. Therefore, the Mass B G is to the Mass A

F, in a proportion compounded of the proportions of the Specifick Gravity of

the Solid G D, to the Specifick Gravity of the water, and of the Mass G D to

the Mass A F: But the same proportions of the Specifick Gravity of G D, to

the Specifick Gravity of the water, and of the Mass G D to the Mass A F, do

also  by  the  precedent  Lemma,  compound  the  proportion  of  the  absolute

Gravity of the Solid D G, to the absolute Gravity of the Mass of the water A

F: Therefore, as the Mass B G is to the Mass A F, so is the Absolute Gravity

of the Solid D G, to the Absolute Gravity of the Mass of the water A F. But

as the Mass B G is to the Mass A F; so is the Base of the Prisme D E, to the

Surface of the water A B; and so is the descent of the water A B, to the

Elevation of the Prisme D G; Therefore, the descent of the water is to the

elevation  of  the  Prisme,  as  the  absolute  Gravity  of  the  Prisme,  is  to  the

absolute  Gravity  of  the  water:  Therefore,  the  Moment  resulting  from  the

absolute  Gravity  of  the  water  A  F,  and  the  Velocity  of  the  Motion  of

declination,  with  which  Moment  it  forceth  the  Prisme  D  G,  to  rise  and

ascend, is equall to the Moment that results from the absolute Gravity of the

Prisme D G, and from the Velocity of the Motion, wherewith being raised, it

would  ascend:  with  which  Moment  it  resists  its  being  raised:  because,

therefore, such Moments are equall, there shall be an Equilibrium between

the water and the Solid. And, it is manifest, that putting a little more water

unto the other A F, it will increase the Gravity and Moment, whereupon the

Prisme  D  G,  shall  be  overcome,  and  elevated  till  that  the  only  part  B  F

remaines submerged. Which is that that was to be demonstrated.


  COROLLARY I.


        How far Solids less grave in specie than water, do submerge.


By what hath been demonstrated, it is manifest, that Solids less grave in

specie than the water, submerge only so far, that as much water in Mass, as

is the part of the Solid submerged, doth weigh absolutely as much as the

whole Solid.For, it being supposed, that the Specificall Gravity of the water, is to the

Specificall Gravity of the Prisme D G, as the Altitude D F, is to the Altitude

F  B;  that  is,  as  the  Solid  D  G  is  to  the  Solid  B  G;  we  might  easily

demonstrate, that as much water in Mass as is equall to the Solid B G, doth

weigh  absolutely  as  much  as  the  whole  Solid  D  G;  For,  by  the  Lemma

foregoing, the Absolute Gravity of a Mass of water, equall to the Mass B G,

hath to the Absolute Gravity of the Prisme D G, a proportion compounded of

the proportions, of the Mass B G to the Mass G D, and of the Specifick

Gravit{y}  of  the  water,  to  the  Specifick  Gravity  of  the  Prisme:  But  the

Gravity in specie of the water, to the Gravity in specie of the Prisme, is

supposed to be as the Mass G D to the Mass G B. Therefore, the Absolute

Gravity  of  a  Mass  of  water,  equall  to  the  Mass  B  G,  is  to  the  Absolute

Gravity of the Solid D G, in a proportion compounded of the proportions, of

the Mass B G to the Mass G D, and of the Mass D G to the Mass G B; which

is a proportion of equalitie. The Absolute Gravity, therefore, of a Mass of

Water equall to the part of the Mass of the Prisme B G, is equall to the

Absolute Gravity of the whole Solid D G.


  COROLLARY II.


                    A Rule to equilibrate Solids in the water.


It followes, moreover, that a Solid less grave than the water, being put into a

Vessell of any imaginable greatness, and water being circumfused about it to

such  a  height,  that  as  much  water  in  Mass,  as  is  the  part  of  the  Solid

submerged, do weigh absolutely as much as the whole Solid; it shall by that

water be justly sustained, be the circumfused Water in quantity greater or

lesser.




  For, if the Cylinder or Prisme M, less grave than the water, v. gra.

  in Subsequiteriall proportion, shall be put into the capacious Vessell A B

C D, and the water raised about it, to three quarters of its height, namely, to

its Levell A D: it shall be sustained and exactly poysed in Equilibrium. The

same will happen; if the Vessell E N S F were very small, so, that between

the Vessell and the Solid M, there were but a very narrow space, and onlycapable of so much water, as the hundredth part of the Mass M, by which it

should be likewise raised and erected, as before it had been elevated to three

fourths of the height of the Solid: which to many at the first sight, may seem

a  notable  Paradox,  and  beget  a  conceit,  that  the  Demonstration  of  these

effects, were sophisticall and fallacious: but, for those who so repute it, the

Experiment is a means that may fully satisfie them. But he that shall but

comprehend of what Importance Velocity of Motion is, and how it exactly

compensates  the  defect  and  want  of  Gravity,  will  cease  to  wonder,  in

considering that at the elevation of the Solid M, the great Mass of water A B

C D abateth very little, but the little Mass of water E N S F decreaseth very

much, and in an instant, as the Solid M before did rise, howbeit for a very

short  space:  Whereupon  the  Moment,  compounded  of  the  small  Absolute

Gravity of the water E N S F, and of its great Velocity in ebbing, equalizeth

the Force and and Moment, that results from the composition of the immense

Gravity of the water A B C D, with its great slownesse of ebbing; since that

in the Elevation of the Sollid M, the abasement of the lesser water E S, is

performed just so much more swiftly than the great Mass of water A C, as

this is more in Mass than that which we thus demonstrate.


The proportion according to which water riseth and falls in different Vessels

                    at the Immersion and Elevation of Solids.


In the rising of the Solid M, its elevation hath the same proportion to the

circumfused water E N S F, that the Surface of the said water, hath to the

Superficies or Base of the said Solid M; which Base hath the same proportion

to the Surface of the water A D, that the abasement or ebbing of the water A

C, hath to the rise or elevation of the said Solid M. Therefore, by Perturbation

of proportion, in the ascent of the said Solid M, the abasement of the water A

B C D, to the abasement of the water E N S F, hath the same proportion, that

the Surface of the water E F, hath to the Surface of the water A D; that is, that

the whole Mass of the water E N S F, hath to the whole Mass A B C D, being

equally high: It is manifest, therefore, that in the expulsion and elevation of

the Solid M, the water E N S F shall exceed in Velocity of Motion the water

A B C D, asmuch as it on the other side is exceeded by that in quantity:

whereupon their Moments in such operations, are mutually equall.  And,  for  ampler  confirmation,  and  clearer  explication  of  this,  let  us

consider the present Figure, (which if I be not deceived, may serve to detect

the errors of some Practick Mechanitians who upon a false foundation some

times attempt impossible enterprizes,) in which, unto the large Vessell E I D

F, the narrow Funnell or Pipe I C A B is continued, and suppose water

infused  into  them,  unto  the  Levell  L  G  H,  which  water  shall  rest  in  this

position, not without admiration in some, who cannot conceive how it can be,

that the heavie charge of the great Mass of water G D, pressing downwards,

should not elevate and repulse the little quantity of the other, contained in the

Funnell or Pipe C L, by which the descent of it is resisted and hindered: But

such wonder shall cease, if we begin to suppose the water G D to be abased

only to Q D, and shall afterwards consider, what the water C L hath done,

which to give place to the other, which is descended from the Levell G H, to

the Levell Q O, shall of necessity have ascended in the same time, from theLevell L unto A B. And the ascent L B, shall be so much greater than the

descent G Q, by how much the breadth of the Vessell G D, is greater than

that of the Funnell I C; which, in summe, is as much as the water G D, is

more than the water L C: but in regard that the Moment of the Velocity of the

Motion, in one Moveable, compensates that of the Gravity of another what

wonder is it, if the swift ascent of the lesser Water C L, shall resist the slow

descent of the greater G D?


The same, therefore, happens in this operation, as in rhe Stilliard, in which a

weight of two pounds counterpoyseth an other of 200, asoften as that shall

move in the same time, a space 100 times greater than this: which falleth out

when one Arme of the Beam is an hundred times as long as the other. Let the

erroneous opinion of those therefore cease, who hold that a Ship is better, and
                                                                                  13
easier born up in a great abundance of water, then in a lesser quantity, (this

was believed by Aristotle in his Problems, Sect. 23, Probl. 2.) it being on the

  contrary true, that its possible, that a Ship may as well float in ten Tun of

                                water, as in an Ocean.

13
 A ship flotes as well in ten Tun of Water as in an Ocean.


A Solid specifiaclly graver than the water, cannot be born up by any quantity

                                          of it.


But following our matter, I say, that by what hath been hitherto demonstrated,

we may understand how, that

  COROLLARY III.

  One of the above named Solids, when more grave in specie than the water,

can never be sustained, by any whatever quantity of it.

  For having seen how that the Moment wherewith such a Solid, as grave in

specie  as  the  water,  contrasts  with  the  Moment  of  any  Mass  of  water

whatsoever, is able to retain it, even to its totall Submersion, without its ever

ascending; it remaineth, manifest, that the water is far less able to raise it up,

when it exceeds the same in specie: so, that though you infuse water till its

totall Submersion, it shall still stay at the Bottome, and with such Gravity,

and Resistance to Elevation, as is the excess of its Absolute Gravity, above

the Absolute Gravity of a Mass equall to it, made of water, or of a Matter in

specie equally grave with the water: and, though you should moreover addenever so much water above the Levell of that which equalizeth the Altitude of

the Solid, it shall not, for all that, encrease the Pression, or Gravitation, of the

parts circumfused about the said Solid, by which greater pression, it might

come to be repulsed; because, the Resistance is not made, but only by those

parts of the water, which at the Motion of the said Solid do also move, and

these  are  those  only,  which  are  comprehended  by  the  two  Superficies

equidistant to the Horizon, and their parallels, that comprehend the Altitude

of the Solid immerged in the water.

  I conceive, I have by this time sufficiently declared and opened the way to

the  contemplation  of  the  true,  intrinsecall  and  proper  Causes  of  diverse

Motions, and of the Rest of many Solid Bodies in diverse Mediums, and

particularly in the water, shewing how all in effect, depend on the mutuall

excesses  of  the  Gravity  of  the  Moveables  and  of  the Mediums:  and,  that

which did highly import, removing the Objection, which peradventure would

have begotten much doubting, and scruple in some, about the verity of my

Conclusion, namely, how that notwithstanding, that the excess of the Gravity

of the water, above the Gravity of the Solid, demitted into it, be the cause of

its floating and rising from the Bottom to the Surface, yet a quantity of water,

that weighs not ten pounds, can raise a Solid that weighs above 100 pounds:

in that we have demonstrated, That it sufficeth, that such difference be found

between  the  Specificall  Gravities  of  the Mediums  and  Moveables,  let  the

particular and absolute Gravities be what they will: insomuch, that a Solid,

provided  that  it  be  Specifically  less  grave  than  the  water,  although  its

absolute weight were 1000 pounds, yet may it be born up and elevated by ten

pounds of water, and less: and on the contrary, another Solid, so that it be

Specifically more grave than the water, though in absolute Gravity it were not

above a pound, yet all the water in the Sea, cannot raise it from the Bottom,

or float it. This sufficeth me, for my present occasion, to have, by the above

declared  Examples,  discovered  and  demonstrated,  without  extending  such

matters farther, and, as I might have done, into a long Treatise: yea, but that

there was a necessity of resolving the above proposed doubt, I should have

contented my self with that only, which is demonstrated by Archimedes, in
                                            14
his first Book De Insidentibus humido: where in generall termes he infers

and confirms the same Conclusions, namely, that Solids (a) less grave than

water, swim or float upon it, the (b) more grave go to the Bottom, and the (c)

  equally grave rest indifferently in all places, yea, though they should be

wholly under water.14
 Of Natation (a) Lib. 1, Prop. 4. (b) Id. Lib. 1. Prop.

3. (c) Id. Lib. 1. Prop. 3.


The Authors defence of Archimedes his Doctrine, against the oppositions of

                                      Buonamico.


But,  because  that  this  Doctrine  of  Archimedes,  perused,  transcribed  and

examined  by Signor  Francesco  Buonamico,  in  his fifth  Book  of  Motion,

Chap. 29, and afterwards by him confuted, might by the Authority of so

renowned, and famous a Philosopher, be rendered dubious, and suspected of

falsity; I have judged it necessary to defend it, if I am able so to do, and to

clear Archimedes,  from  those  censures,  with  which  he  appeareth  to  be
                                                                                15
charged. Buonamico  rejecteth  the  Doctrine  of Archimedes,  first,  as  not

consentaneous with the Opinion of Aristotle, adding, that it was a strange
                                                                            16
thing to him, that the Water should exceed the Earth in Gravity, seeing on

the  contrary,  that  the  Gravity  of  water,  increaseth,  by  means  of  the
                                                                    17
participation  of  Earth.  And  he  subjoyns  presently  after,  that  he  was  not

satisfied  with  the  Reasons  of Archimedes,  as  not  being  able  with  that

Doctrine, to assign the cause whence it comes, that a Boat and a Vessell,

which otherwise, floats above the water, doth sink to the Bottom, if once it be

filled with water; that by reason of the equality of Gravity, between the water

within  it,  and  the  other  water  without,  it  should  stay  a  top;  but  yet,

nevertheless, we see it to go to the Bottom.

15
 His first Objection against the Doctrine of Archimedes.

16
 His Second Objection.

17
 His third Objection.

                      18
  He farther addes, that Aristotle had clearly confuted the Ancients, who
                                              19
said, that light Bodies moved upwards, driven by the impulse of the more

grave Ambient: which if it were so, it should seem of necessity to follow, that

all naturall Bodies are by nature heavy, and none light: For that the same

would  befall  the  Fire  and  Air,  if  put  in  the  Bottom  of  the  water.  And,

howbeit, Aristotle grants a Pulsion in the Elements, by which the Earth is

reduced into a Sphericall Figure, yet nevertheless, in his judgement; it is not

such that it can remove grave Bodies from their naturall places, but rather,that it send them toward the Centre, to which (as he somewhat obscurely

continues to say,) the water principally moves, if it in the interim meet not

with something that resists it, and, by its Gravity, thrusts it out of its place: in

which case, if it cannot directly, yet at least as well as it can, it tends to the

Centre: but it happens, that light Bodies by such Impulsion, do all ascend

upward:  but  this  properly  they  have  by  nature,  as  also,  that  other  of
                                      20
swimming. He concludes, lastly, that he concurs with Archimedes in his

Conclusions; but not in the Causes, which he would referre to the facile and

difficult Separation of the Medium, and to the predominance of the Elements,

so  that  when  the  Moveable  superates  the  power  of  the Medium;  as  for

example, Lead doth the Continuity of water, it shall move thorow it, else not.

18
 His fourth Objection.

19
 The Ancients denyed Absolute Levity.

20
 The causes of Natation & Submersion, according to the Peripateticks.


  This is all that I have been able to collect, as produced against Archimedes

by Signor  Buonamico:  who  hath  not  well  observed  the  Principles  and

Suppositions of Archimedes; which yet must be false, if the Doctrine be false,

which  depends  upon  them;  but  is  contented  to  alledge  therein  some

Inconveniences,  and  some  Repugnances  to  the  Doctrine  and  Opinion  of
                                                                21
Aristotle.  In  answer  to  which  Objections,  I  say,  first,  That  the  being  of

Archimedes Doctrine, simply different from the Doctrine of Aristotle, ought

not to move any to suspect it, there being no cause, why the Authority of this

should be preferred to the Authority of the other: but, because, where the

decrees of Nature are indifferently exposed to the intellectuall eyes of each,

the  Authority  of  the  one  and  the  other,  loseth  all  a{u}thenticalness  of

Perswasion, the absolute power residing in Reason; therefore I pass to that
                                                22
which he alledgeth in the second place, as an absurd consequent of the

Doctrine  of Archimedes,  namely,  That  water  should  be  more  grave  than

Earth. But I really find not, that ever Archimedes said such a thing, or that it

can be rationally deduced from his Conclusions: and if that were manifest

unto me, I verily believe, I should renounce his Doctrine, as most erroneous.

Perhaps this Deduction of Buonamico, is founded upon that which he citeth

of the Vessel, which swims as long as its voyd of water, but once full it sinks

to the Bottom, and understanding it of a Vessel of Earth, he infers againstArchimedes thus: Thou sayst that the Solids which swim, are less grave than

water:  this  Vessell  swimmeth:  therefore,  this  Vessell  is  lesse  grave  than

water. If this be the Illation. I easily answer, granting that this Vessell is lesse

grave than water, and denying the other consequence, namely, that Earth is

less Grave than Water. The Vessel that swims occupieth in the water, not

only a place equall to the Mass of the Earth, of which it is formed; but equall

to the Earth and to the Air together, contained in its concavity. And, if such a

Mass compounded of Earth and Air, shall be less grave than such another

quantity  of  water,  it  shall  swim,  and  shall  accord  with  the  Doctrine  of

Archimedes; but if, again, removing the Air, the Vessell shall be filled with

water, so that the Solid put in the water, be nothing but Earth, nor occupieth

other place, than that which is only possest by Earth, it shall then go to the

Bottom,  by  reason  that  the  Earth  is  heavier  than  the  water:  and  this

corresponds  well  with  the  meaning  of Archimedes.  See  the  same  effect

illustrated, with such another Experiment, In pressing a Viall Glass to the

Bottom of the water, when it is full of Air, it will meet with great resistance,

because it is not the Glass alone, that is pressed under water, but together

with the Glass a great Mass of Air, and such, that if you should take as much

water, as the Mass of the Glass, and of the Air contained in it, you would

have  a  weight  much  greater  than  that  of  the  Viall,  and  of  its  Air:  and,

therefore, it will not submerge without great violence: but if we demit only

the Glass into the water, which shall be when you shall fill the Glass with

water, then shall the Glass descend to the Bottom; as superiour in Gravity to

the water.

21
 The Authors answer to the first Objection.

22
 The Authors answer to the second Objection.


  Returning, therefore, to our first purpose; I say, that Earth is more grave

than water, and that therefore, a Solid of Earth goeth to the bottom of it; but

one may possibly make a composition of Earth and Air, which shall be less

grave than a like Mass of Water; and this shall swim: and yet both this and

the other experiment shall very well accord with the Doctrine of Archimedes.

But because that in my judgment it hath nothing of difficulty in it, I will not

positively affirme that Signor Buonamico, would by such a discourse object

unto Archimedes the absurdity of inferring by his doctrine, that Earth was lessgrave than Water, though I know not how to conceive what other accident he

could have induced thence.

  Perhaps such a Probleme (in my judgement false) was read by Signor

Buonamico in some other Author, by whom peradventure it was attributed as

a singular propertie, of some particular Water, and so comes now to be used

with a double errour in confutation of Archimedes, since he saith no such

thing, nor by him that did say it was it meant of the common Element of

Water.


                    The Authors answer to the third Objection.


The third difficulty in the doctrine of Archimedes  was,  that  he  could  not

render  a  reason  whence  it  arose,  that  a  piece  of  Wood,  and  a  Vessell  of

Wood,  which  otherwise  floats,  goeth  to  the  bottom,  if  filled  with  Water.

Signor Buonamico hath supposed that a Vessell of Wood, and of Wood that

by nature swims, as before is said, goes to the bottom, if it be filled with

water; of which he in the following Chapter, which is the 30 of the fifth Book

copiously  discourseth:  but  I  (speaking  alwayes  without  diminution  of  his

singular Learning) dare in defence of Archimedes deny this experiment, being

certain that a piece of Wood which by its nature sinks not in Water, shall not

sinke  though  it  be  turned  and  converted  into  the  forme  of  any  Vessell

whatsoever, and then filled with Water: and he that would readily see the

Experiment in some other tractable Matter, and that is easily reduced into

several Figures, may take pure Wax, and making it first into a Ball or other

solid Figure, let him adde to it so much Lead as shall just carry it to the

bottome,  so  that  being  a  graine  less  it  could  not  be  able  to  sinke  it,  and

making it afterwards into the forme of a Dish, and filling it with Water, he

shall finde that without the said Lead it shall not sinke, and that with the Lead

it shall descend with much slowness: & in short he shall satisfie himself, that

the Water included makes no alteration. I say not all this while, but that its

possible of Wood to make Barkes, which being filled with water, sinke; but

that proceeds not through its Gravity, encreased by the Water, but rather from

the Nailes and other Iron Workes, so that it no longer hath a Body less grave

than Water, but one mixt of Iron and Wood, more grave than a like Masse of

Water. Therefore let Signor Buonamico desist from desiring a reason of an

effect, that is not in nature: yea if the sinking of the Woodden Vessell when

its full of Water, may call in question the Doctrine of Archimedes, which hewould not have you to follow, is on the contrary consonant and agreeable to

the Doctrine of the Peripateticks, since it aptly assignes a reason why such a

Vessell must, when its full of Water, descend to the bottom; converting the

Argument  the  other  way,  we  may  with  safety  say  that  the  Doctrine  of

Archimedes is true, since it aptly agreeth with true experiments, and question

the other, whose Deductions are fastened upon erroneouss Conclusions. As

for  the  other  point  hinted  in  this  same  Instance,  where  it  seemes  that

Benonamico understands the same not only of a piece of wood, shaped in the

forme  of  a  Vessell,  but  also  of  massie  Wood,  which  filled, scilicet,  as  I

believe,  he  would  say,  soaked  and  steeped  in  Water,  goes  finally  to  the

bottom that happens in some porose Woods, which, while their Porosity is

replenished  with  Air,  or  other  Matter  less  grave  than  Water,  are  Masses

specificially less grave than the said Water, like as is that Viall of Glass

whilest  it  is  full  of  Air:  but  when,  such  light  Matter  departing,  there

succeedeth  Water  into  the  same  Porosities  and  Cavities,  there  results  a

compound of Water and Glass more grave than a like Mass of Water: but the

excess of its Gravity consists in the Matter of the Glass, and not in the Water,

which cannot be graver than it self: so that which remaines of the Wood, the

Air of its Cavities departing, if it shall be more grave in specie than Water, fil

but its Porosities with Water, and you shall have a Compost of Water and of

Wood more grave than Water, but not by vertue of the Water received into

and imbibed by the Porosities, but of that Matter of the Wood which remains

when the Air is departed: and being such it shall, according to the Doctrine of

Archimedes, goe to the bottom, like as before, according to the same Doctrine

it did swim.


                  The Authors answer to the fourth Objection.


As to that finally which presents itself in the fourth place, namely, that the

Ancients have been heretofore confuted by Aristotle, who denying Positive

and Absolute Levity, and truely esteeming all Bodies to be grave, said, that

that  which  moved  upward  was  driven  by  the  circumambient  Air,  and

therefore that also the Doctrine of Archimedes, as an adherent to such an

Opinion was convicted and confuted: I answer first, that Signor Buonamico

in  my  judgement  hath  imposed  upon Archimedes,  and  deduced  from  his

words more than ever he intended by them, or may from his Propositions becollected, in regard that Archimedes neither denies, nor admitteth Positive

Levity,  nor  doth  he  so  much  as  mention  it:  so  that  much  less  ought

Buonamico to inferre, that he hath denyed that it might be the Cause and
                                                                    23
Principle of the Ascension of Fire, and other Light Bodies: having but only

demonstrated,  that  Solid  Bodies  more  grave  than  Water  descend  in  it,

according  to  the  excess  of  their  Gravity  above  the  Gravity  of  that,  he
                                                                                        24
demonstrates  likewise,  how  the  less  grave  ascend  in  the  same  Water,

accordng to its excess of Gravity, above the Gravity of them. So that the most

that can be gathered from the Demonstration of Archimedes is, that like as the

excess of the Gravity of the Moveable above the Gravity of the Water, is the

Cause that it descends therein, so the excess of the Gravity of the water above

that of the Moveable, is a sufficient Cause why it descends not, but rather

betakes it self to swim: not enquiring whether of moving upwards there is, or

is not any other Cause contrary to Gravity: nor doth Archimedes discourse

less properly than if one should say: If the South Winde shall assault the

Barke with greater Impetus than is the violence with which the Streame of the

River carries it towards the South, the motion of it shall be towards the North:

but if the Impetus of the Water shall overcome that of the Winde, its motion

shall  be  towards  the  South.  The  discourse  is  excellent  and  would  be

unworthily  contradicted  by  such  as  should  oppose  it,  saying:  Thou  mis-

alledgest as Cause of the motion of the Bark towards the South, the Impetus

of the Stream of the Water above that of the South Winde; mis-alledgest I

say, for it is the Force of the North Winde opposite to the South, that is able

to  drive  the  Bark  towards  the  South.  Such  an  Objection  would  be

superfluous, because he which alledgeth for Cause of the Motion the Stream

of the Water, denies not but that the Winde opposite to the South may do the

same, but only affirmeth that the force of the Water prevailing over the South

Wind, the Bark shall move towards the South: and saith no more than is true.

  And  just  thus  when Archimedes  saith,  that  the  Gravity  of  the  Water

prevailing over that by which the moveable descends to the Bottom, such

moveable shall be raised from the Bottom to the Surface alledgeth a very true

Cause of such an Accident, nor doth he affirm or deny that there is, or is not,

a vertue contrary to Gravity, called by some Levity, that hath also a power of

moving  some  Matters  upwards.  Let  therefore  the  Weapons  of Signor
                                              25
Buonamico  be  directed  against Plato,  and  other Ancients,  who  totally

denying Levity,  and  taking  all  Bodies  to  be  grave,  say  that  the  Motion

upwards is made, not from an intrinsecal Principle of the Moveable, but onlyby the Impulse of the Medium; and let Archimedes and his Doctrine escape

him, since he hath given him no Cause of quarelling with him. But if this

Apologie,  produced  in  defence  of Archimedes,  should  seem  to  some

insufficient to free him from the Objections and Arguments, produced by

Aristotle against Plato, and the other Ancients, as if they did also fight against

Archimedes,  alledging  the  Impulse  of  the  Water  as  the  Cause  of  the
                                                  26
swimming of some Bodies less grave than it, I would not question, but that I

should be able to maintaine the Doctrine of Plato and those others to be most

true, who absolutely deny Levity, and affirm no other Intrinsecal Principle of

Motion to be in Elementary Bodies save only that towards the Centre of the
    27
Earth, nor no other Cause of moving upwards, speaking of that which hath

the resemblance of natural Motion, but only the repulse of the Medium, fluid,
                                                      28
and  exceeding  the  Gravity  of  the  Moveable:  and  as  to  the  Reasons  of

Aristotle on the contrary, I believe that I could be able fully to answer them,

and I would assay to do it, if it were absolutely necessary to the present

Matter, or were it not too long a Digression for this short Treatise. I will only

say, that if there were in some of our Ellementary Bodies an Intrinsecall

Principle and Naturall Inclination to shun the Centre of the Earth, and to

move towards the Concave of the Moon, such Bodies, without doubt, would

more swiftly ascend through those Mediums that least oppose the Velocity of

the Moveable, and these are the more tenuous and subtle; as is, for example,

the Air in comparison of the Water, we daily proving that we can with farre

more expeditious Velocity move a Hand or a Board to and again in one than
            29
in the other:  nevertheless,  we  never  could  finde  any  Body,  that  did  not

ascend much more swiftly in the water than in the Air. Yea of Bodies which

we see continually to ascend in the Water, there is none that having arrived to
                                                                30
the confines of the Air, do not wholly lose their Motion; even the Air it self,

which rising with great Celerity through the Water, being once come to its

Region it loseth all

23
 Of Natation, Lib. 1. Prop. 7.

24
 Of Natation, Lib. 1. Prop. 4.

25
 Plato denyeth Positive Levity.

26
 The Authors defence of the doctrine of Plato and the Ancients, who absolutely deny Levity:

27
 According to Plato there is no Principle of the Motion, of descent in Naturall Bodies, save that to the Centre.28
 No cause of the motion of Ascent, save the Impulse of the Medium, exceeding the Moveable in Gravitie.

29
 Bodies ascend much swifter in the Water, than in the Air.

30
 All Bodies ascending through Water, lose their Motion, comming to the confines of the Air.


            The lighter Bodies ascend more swiftly through Water.


And, howbeit, Experience shewes, that the Bodies, successively less grave,

do most expeditiously ascend in water, it cannot be doubted, but that the

Ignean Exhalations do ascend more swiftly through the water, than doth the

Air: which Air is seen by Experience to ascend more swiftly through the
                                                            31
Water, than the Fiery Exhalations through the Air: Therefore, we must of

necessity conclude, that the said Exhalations do much more expeditiously

ascend through the Water, than through the Air; and that, consequently, they

are moved by the Impulse of the Ambient Medium, and not by an intrinsick

Principle that is in them, of avoiding the Centre of the Earth; to which other

grave Bodies tend.

31
 Fiery Exhalations ascend thorow the Water more swiftly than doth the Air; & the Air ascends more swiftly thorow the Water,
than Fire thorow the Air.


    The Authors confutation of the Peripateticks Causes of Natation &

                                      Submersion.


To that which for a finall conclusion, Signor Buonamico produceth of going

about to reduce the descending or not descending, to the easie and uneasie

Division of the Medium, and to the predominancy of the Elements: I answer,

as to the first part, that that cannot in any manner be admitted as a Cause,

being that in none of the Fluid Mediums, as the Air, the Water, and other
                                                          32
Liquids, there is any Resistance against Division, but all by every the least

Force, are divided and penetrated, as I will anon demonstrate: so, that of such

Resistance of Division there can be no Act, since it self is not in being. As to
                                                                                      33
the other part, I say, that the predominancy of the Elements in Moveables, is

to be considered, as far as to the excesse or defect of Gravity, in relation to

the Medium: for in that Action, the Elements operate not, but only, so far as

they are grave or light: therefore, to say that the Wood of the Firre sinks not,

because Air predominateth in it, is no more than to say, because it is less

grave than the Water. Yea, even the immediate Cause, is its being less grave                34
than the Water: and it being under the predominancy of the Air, is the Cause

of  its  less  Gravity:  Therefore,  he  that  alledgeth  the  predominancy  of  the

Element for a Cause, brings the Cause of the Cause, and not the neerest and

immediate Cause. Now, who knows not that the true Cause is the immediate,
                      35
and not the mediate? Moreover, he that alledgeth Gravity, brings a Cause
                                36
most perspicuous to Sence: The cause we may very easily assertain our

selves; whether Ebony, for example, and Firre, be more or less grave than

water: but whether Earth or Air predominates in them, who shall make that

manifest?

  Certainly, no Experiment can better do it than to observe whether they

swim or sink. So, that he who knows, not whether such a Solid swims, unless

when  he  knows  that  Air  predominates  in  it,  knows  not  whether  it  swim,

unless he sees it swim, for then he knows that it swims, when he knows that it

is  Air  that  predominates,  but  knows  not  that  Air  hath  the  predominance,

unless he sees it swim: therefore, he knows not if it swims, till such time as

he hath seen it swim.

32
 Water & other fluids void of Resistance against Division.

33
 The predominancy of Elements in Moveables to be considered only in relation to their excess or defect of Gravity in reference
to the Medium.

34
 The immediate Cause of Natation is that the Moveable is less grave than the Water.

35
 The Peripateticks alledge for the reason of Natation the Cause of the Cause.

36
 Gravity a Cause most perspicuous to sence.


  Let us not then despise those Hints, though very dark, which Reason, after

some contemplation, offereth to our Intelligence, and lets be content to be
                                                                              37
taught by Archimedes, that then any Body shall submerge in water, when it
                                                                                      38
shall be specifically more grave than it, and that if it shall be less grave, it

shall of necessity swim, and that it will rest indifferently in any place under

water, if its Gravity be perfectly like to that of the water.

37
 Lib 1. of Natation Prop. 7

38
 Id. Lib. 1. Prop. 4.                                            39
  These things explained and proved, I come to consider that which offers

it self, touching what the Diversity of figure given unto the said Moveable

hath to do with these Motions and Rests; and proceed to affirme, that,

39
 Id. Lib 1. Prop. 3.


                                    THEOREME V.


    Diversity of Figure no Cause of its absolute Natation or Submersion.


The diversity of Figures given to this or that Solid, cannot any way be a

Cause of its absolute Sinking or Swimming.

  So that if a Solid being formed, for example, into a Sphericall Figure, doth

sink or swim in the water, I say, that being formed into any other Figure, the

same figure in the same water, shall sink or swim: nor can such its Motion by

the Expansion or by other mutation of Figure, be impeded or taken away.


The Expansion of Figure, retards the Velocity of the ascent or descent of the

          Moveable in the water; but doth not deprive it of all Motion.


The Expansion of the Figure may indeed retard its Velocity, aswell of ascent

as descent, and more and more according as the said Figure is reduced to a

greater breadth and thinness: but that it may be reduced to such a form as that

that same matter be wholly hindred from moving in the same water, that I

hold  to  be  impossible.  In  this  I  have  met  with  great  contradictors,  who

producing some Experiments, and in perticular a thin Board of Ebony, and a

Ball of the same Wood, and shewing how the Ball in Water descended to the

bottom, and the Board being put lightly upon the Water submerged not, but

rested; have held, and with the Authority of Aristotle, confirmed themselves

in their Opinions, that the Cause of that Rest was the breadth of the Figure,

u{n}able by its small weight to pierce and penetrate the Resistance of the

Waters  Crassitude,  which  Resistance  is  readily  overcome  by  the  other

Sphericall Figure.

  This is the Principal point in the present Question, in which I perswade my

self to be on the right side.

  Therefore,  beginning  to  investigate  with  the  examination  of  exquisite

Experiments that really the Figure doth not a jot alter the descent or Ascent ofthe same Solids, and having already demonstrated that the greater or less

Gravity of the Solid in relation to the Gravity of the Medium is the cause of

Descent or Ascent: when ever we would make proof of that, which about this

Effect the diversity of Figure worketh, its necessary to make the Experiment

with Matter wherein variety of Gravities hath no place. For making use of

Matters which may be different in their Specifical Gravities, and meeting

with varieties of effects of Ascending and Descending, we shall alwayes be

left  unsatisfied  whether  that  diversity  derive  it  self  really  from  the  sole

Figure, or else from the divers Gravity also. We may remedy this by takeing

one only Matter, that is tractable and easily reduceable into every sort of

Figure. Moreover, it will be an excellent expedient to take a kinde of Matter,

exactly alike in Gravity unto the Water: for that Matter, as far as pertaines to

the  Gravity,  is  indifferent  either  to  Ascend  or  Descend;  so  that  we  may

presently  observe  any  the  least  difference  that  derives  it  self  from  the

diversity of Figure.


An Experiment in Wax, that proveth Figure to have no Operation in Natation

                                    & Submersion.


Now to do this, Wax is most apt, which, besides its incapacity of receiveing

any sensible alteration from its imbibing of Water, is ductile or pliant, and the

same piece is easily reduceable into all Figures: and being in Specie a very

inconsiderable matter inferiour in Gravity to the Water, by mixing therewith a

little of the fileings of Lead it is reduced to a Gravity exactly equall to that of

the Water.

  This  Matter  prepared,  and,  for  example,  a  Ball  being  made  thereof  as

bigge as an Orange or biger, and that made so grave as to sink to the bottom,

but so lightly, that takeing thence one only Grain of Lead, it returns to the

top,  and  being  added,  it  submergeth  to  the  bottom,  let  the  same  Wax

afterwards  be  made  into  a  very  broad  and  thin  Flake  or  Cake;  and  then,

returning to make the same Experiment, you shall see that it being put to the

bottom, it shall, with the Grain of Lead rest below, and that Grain deducted, it

shall ascend to the very Surface, and added again it shall dive to the bottom.

And  this  same  effect  shall  happen  alwaies  in  all  sort  of  Figures,  as  wel

regular as irregular: nor shall you ever finde any that will swim without the

removall of the Grain of Lead, or sinke to the bottom unless it be added: and,

in short, about the going or not going to the Bottom, you shall discover nodiversity, although, indeed, you shall about the quick and slow descent: for

the more expatiated and distended Figures move more slowly aswel in the

diveing to the bottom as in the rising to the top; and the other more contracted

and compact Figures, more speedily. Now I know not what may be expected

from the diversity of Figures, if the most contrary to one another operate not

so much as doth a very small Grain of Lead, added or removed.

  Me  thinkes  I  hear  some  of  the  Adversaries  to  raise  a  doubt  upon  my
                        40
produced Experiment. And first that they offer to my consideration, that the

Figure, as a Figure simply, and disjunct from the Matter workes not any

effect, but requires to be conjoyned with the Matter; and, furthermore, not

with every Matter, but with those only, wherewith it may be able to execute

the desired operation. Like as we see it verified by Experience, that the Acute

and sharp Angle is more apt to cut, than the Obtuse; yet alwaies provided,

that both the one and the other, be joyned with a Matter apt to cut, as for

example,  with  Steel.  Therefore,  a  Knife  with  a  fine  and  sharp  edge,  cuts

Bread or Wood with much ease, which it will not do, if the edge be blunt and

thick: but he that will instead of Steel, take Wax, and mould it into a Knife,

undoubtedly shall never know the effects of sharp and blunt edges: because

neither of them will cut, the Wax being unable by reason of its flexibility, to

overcome the hardness of the Wood and Bread. And, therefore, applying the

like discourse to our purpose, they say, that the difference of Figure will shew

different effects, touching Natation and Submersion, but not conjoyned with

any kind of Matter, but only with those Matters which, by their Gravity, are

apt to resist the Velocity of the water, whence he that would elect for the

Matter, Cork or other light wood, unable, through its Levity, to superate the

Crassitude of the water, and of that Matter should forme Solids of divers

Figures,  would  in  vain  seek  to  find  out  what  operation  Figure  hath  in

Natation or Submersion; because all would swim, and that not through any

property of this or that Figure, but through the debility of the Matter, wanting

so much Gravity, as is requisite to superate and overcome the Density and

Crassitude of the water.

40
 An objection against the Experiment in Water.


  Its  needfull,  therefore,  if  wee  would  see  the  effect  wrought  by  the

Diversity  of  Figure,  first  to  make  choice  of  a  Matter  of  its  nature  apt  to
                                                                    41
penetrate the Crassitude of the water. And, for this effect, they have made

choice of such a Matter, as fit, that being readily reduced into SphericallFigure, goes to the Bottom; and it is Ebony, of which they afterwards making

a small Board or Splinter, as thin as a Lath, have illustrated how that this, put

upon the Surface of the water, rests there without descending to the Bottom:

and making, on the otherside, of the same wood a Ball, no less than a hazell

Nut, they shew, that this swims not, but descendes. From which Experiment,

they think they may frankly conclude, that the Breadth of the Figure in the

flat Lath or Board, is the cause of its not descending to the Bottom, for as

much as a Ball of the same Matter, not different from the Board in any thing

but in Figure, submergeth in the same water to the Bottom. The discourse and

the Experiment hath really so much of probability and likelyhood of truth in

it,  that  it  would  be  no  wonder,  if  many  perswaded  by  a  certain  cursory

observation,  should  yield  credit  to  it;  nevertheless,  I  think  I  am  able  to

discover, how that it is not free from falacy.

41
 An Experiment in Ebany, brought to disprove the Experiment in Wax.


  Beginning, therefore, to examine one by one, all the particulars that have

been produced, I say, that Figures, as simple Figures, not only operate not in

naturall  things,  but  neither  are  they  ever  seperated  from  the  Corporeall
          42
substance: nor have I ever alledged them stript of sensible Matter, like as

also I freely admit, that in our endeavouring to examine the Diversity of

Accidents, dependant upon the variety of Figures, it is necessary to apply

them to Matters, which obstruct not the various operations of those various

Figures: and I admit and grant, that I should do very ill; if I would experiment

the influence of Acutenesse of edge with a Knife of Wax, applying it to cut

an Oak, because there is no Acuteness in Wax able to cut that very hard

wood.

  But  yet  such  an  Experiment  of  this  Knife,  would  not  be  besides  the

purpose, to cut curded Milk, or other very yielding Matter: yea, in such like

Matters, the Wax is more commodious than Steel; for finding the diversity

depending upon Angles, more or less Acute, for that Milk is indifferently cut

with a Raisor, and with a Knife, that hath a blunt edge. It needs, therefore,

that regard be had, not only to the hardness, solidity or Gravity of Bodies,

which under divers figures, are to divide and penetrate some Matters, but it

forceth also, that regard be had, on the other side, to the Resistance of the

Matters,  to  be  divided  and  penetrated.  But  since  I  have  in  making  the

Experiment concerning our Contest; chosen a Matter which penetrates the

Resistance of the water; and in all figures descendes to the Bottome, theAdversaries can charge me with no defect; yea, I have propounded so much a

more excellent Method than they, in as much as I have removed all other

Causes, of descending or not descending to the Bottom, and retained the only

sole  and  pure  variety  of  Figures,  demonstrating  that  the  same  Figures  all

descende with the only alteration of a Grain in weight: which Grain being

removed, they return to float and swim; it is not true, therefore, (resuming the

Example by them introduced) that I have gon{e} about to experiment the

efficacy of Acuteness, in cutting with Matters unable to cut, but with Matters

proportioned to our occasion, since they are subjected to no other variety,

then that alone which depends on the Figure more or less acute.

42
 Figure is unseperable from Corporeall Substance.


      The answer to the Objection against the Experiment of the Wax.


But  let  us  proceed  a  little  farther,  and  observe,  how  that  indeed  the

Consideration, which, they say, ought to be had about the Election of the

Matter,  to  the  end,  that  it  may  be  proportionate  for  the  making  of  our

experiment, is needlessly introduced, declaring by the example of Cutting,

that like as Acuteness is inefficient to cut, unless when it is in a Matter hard

and apt to superate the Resistance of the wood or other Matter, which we

intend to cut; so the aptitude of descending or not descending in water, ought

and  can  only  be  known  in  those  Matters,  that  are  able  to  overcome  the

Renitence, and superate the Crassitude of the water. Unto which, I say, that to

make distinction and election, more of this than of that Matter, on which to

impress the Figures for cutting or penetrating this or that Body, as the solidity

or obdurateness of the said Bodies shall be greater or less, is very necessary:

but withall I subjoyn, that such distinction, election and caution would be

superfluous and unprofitable, if the Body to be cut or penetrated, should have

no Resistance, or should not at all withstand the Cutting or Penitration: and if

the Knife were to be used in cutting a Mist or Smoak, one of Paper would be

equally serviceable with one of Damascus Steel: and so by reason the water

hath not any Resistance against the Penitration of any Solid Body, all choice

of Matter is superfluous and needless, and the Election which I said above to

have been well made of a Matter reciprocall in Gravity to water, was not

because it was necessary, for the overcoming of the crassitude of the water,

but its Gravity, with which only it resists the sinking of Solid Bodies: and for

what concerneth the Resistance of the crassitude, if we narrowly consider it,we shall find that all Solid Bodies, as well those that sink, as those that swim,

are indifferently accomodated and apt to bring us to the knowledge of the

truth in question. Nor will I be frighted out of the belief of these Conclusions,

by the Experiments which may be produced against me, of many severall

Woods, Corks, Galls, and, moreover, of subtle slates and plates of all sorts of

Stone and Mettall, apt by means of their Naturall Gravity, to move towards

the  Centre  of  the  Earth,  the  which,  nevertheless,  being  impotent,  either

through the Figure (as the Adversaries thinke) or through Levity, to break and

penetrate the Continuity of the parts of the water, and to distract its union, do

continue to swimm without submerging in the least: nor on the other side,

shall  the  Authority  of Aristotle  move  me,  who  in  more  than  one  place,

affirmeth the contrary to this, which Experience shews me.


No Solid of such Levity, nor of such Figure, but that it doth penetrate the

                              Crassitude of the Water.


Bodies of all Figures, laid upon the water, do penetrate its Crassitude, and in

                                  what proportion.


I return, therefore, to assert, that there is not any Solid of such Levity, nor of

such Figure, that being put upon the water, doth not divide and penetrate its

Crassitude: yea if any with a more perspicatious eye, shall return to observe

more exactly the thin Boards of Wood, he shall see them to be with part of

their thickness under water, and not only with their inferiour Superficies, to

kisse the Superiour of the water, as they of necessity must have believed, who

have said, that such Boards submerge not, as not being able to divide the

Tenacity of the parts of the water: and, moreover, he shall see, that subtle

shivers of Ebony, Stone or Metall, when they float, have not only broak the

Continuity of the water, but are with all their thickness, under the Surface of

it; and more and more, according as the Matters are more grave: so that a thin

Plate of Lead, shall be lower than the Surface of the circumfused water, by at

least twelve times the thickness of the Plate, and Gold shall dive below the

Levell of the water, almost twenty times the thickness of the Plate, as I shall

anon declare.

  But let us proceed to evince, that the water yields and suffers it self to be

penetrated by every the lightest Body; and therewithall demonstrate, how,

even  by  Matters  that  submerge  not,  we  may  come  to  know  that  Figureoperates nothing about the going or not going to the Bottom, seeing that the

water suffers it self to be penetrated equally by every Figure.


The Experiment of a Cone, demitted with its Base, and after with its Point

                                      downwards.


Make a Cone, or a Piramis of Cypress, of Firre, or of other Wood of like

Gravity, or of pure Wax, and let its height be somewhat great, namely a

handfull, or more, and put it into the water with the Base downwards: first,

you shall see that it will penetrate the water, nor shall it be at all impeded by

the largeness of the Base, nor yet shall it sink all under water, but the part

towards the point shall lye above it: by which shall be manifest, first, that that

Solid forbeares not to sink out of an inability to divide the Continuity of the

water, having already divided it with its broad part, that in the opinion of the

Adversaries is the less apt to make the division. The Piramid being thus fixed,

note what part of it shall be submerged, and revert it afterwards with the point

downwards, and you shall see that it shall not dive into the water more than

before,  but  if  you  observe  how  far  it  shall  sink,  every  person  expert  in

Geometry, may measure, that those parts that remain out of the water, both in

the one and in the other Experiment are equall to an hair: whence he may

manifestly conclude, that the acute Figure which seemed most apt to part and

penetrate the water, doth not part or penetrate it more than the large and

spacious.

  And  he  that  would  have  a  more  easie  Experiment,  let  him  take  two

Cylinders of the same Matter, one long and small, and the other short, but

very broad, and let him put them in the water, not distended, but erect and

endways: he shall see, if he diligently measure the parts of the one and of the

other,  that  in  each  of  them  the  part  submerged,  retains  exactly  the  same

proportion to that out of the water, and that no greater part is submerged of

that long and small one, than of the other more spacious and broad: howbeit,

this rests upon a very large, and that upon a very little Superficies of water:

therefore the diversity of Figure, occasioneth neither facility, nor difficulty, in

parting and penetrating the Continuity of the water, and, consequently, cannot

be the Cause of the Natation or Submersion. He may likewise discover the

non operating of variety of Figures, in arising from the Bottom of the water,

towards  the  Surface,  by  taking  Wax,  and  tempering  it  with  a  competent

quantity of the filings of Lead, so that it may become a considerable mattergraver than the water: then let him make it into a Ball, and thrust it unto the

Bottom of the water; and fasten to it as much Cork, or other light matter, as

just  serveth  to  raise  it,  and  draw  it  towards  the  Surface:  for  afterwards

changing the same Wax into a thin Cake, or into any other Figure, that same

Cork shall raise it in the same manner to a hair.

  This  silenceth  not  my  Antagonists,  but  they  say,  that  all  the  discourse

hitherto made by me little importeth to them, and that it serves their turn, that

they have demonstrated in one only particular, and in what matter, and under

what Figure pleaseth them, namely, in a Board and in a Ball of Ebony, that

this put in the water, descends to the Bottom, and that stays atop to swim: and

the Matter being the same, and the two Bodies differing in nothing but in

Figure,  they  affirm,  that  they  have  with  all  perspicuity  demonstrated  and

sensibly manifested what they undertook; and lastly, that they have obtained

their intent. Nevertheless, I believe, and thinke, I can demonstrate, that that

same Experiment proveth nothing against my Conclusion.


In Experiments of Natation, the Solid is to be put into, not upon the water.


And first, it is false, that the Ball descends, and the Board not: for the Board

shall also descend, if you do to both the Figures, as the words of our Question

requireth; that is, if you put them both into the water.


                          The Question of Natation stated.


The  words  were  these.  That  the  Antagonists  having  an  opinion,  that  the

Figure would alter the Solid Bodies, in relation to the descending or not

descending, ascending or not ascending in the same Medium, as v. gr. in the

same water, in such sort, that, for Example, a Solid that being of a Sphericall

Figure, shall descend to the Bottom, being reduced into some other Figure,

shall not descend: I holding the contrary, do affirm, that a Corporeall Solid

Body, which reduced into a Sphericall Figure, or any other, shall go to the

Bottom, shall do the like under whatsoever other Figure, {&}c.


                      Place defined according to Aristotle.But to be in the water, implies to be placed in the water, and by Aristotles

  own Definition of place, to be placed, importeth to be invironed by the

Superficies of the Ambient Body, therefore, then shall the two Figures be in

the water, when the Superficies of the water, shall imbrace and inviron them:

but when the Adversaries shew the Board of Ebony not descending to the

Bottom, they put it not into the water, but upon the water, where being by a

certain impediment (as by and by we will shew) retained, it is invironed, part

by water, and part by air, which thing is contrary to our agreement, that was,

that the Bodies should be in the water, and not part in water, and part in air.


The which is again made manifest, by the questions being put as well about

the things which go to the Bottom, as those which arise from the Bottom to

swimme, and who sees not that things placed in the Bottom, must have water

about them.


                The confutation of the Experiment in the Ebany.


It is now to be noted, that the Board of Ebany and the Ball, put into the water,

both sink, but the Ball more swiftly, and the Board more slowly; and slower

and slower, according as it shall be more broad and thin, and of this Tardity

the  breadth  of  the  Figure  is  the  true  Cause:  But  these  broad  Boards  that

slowly  descend,  are  the  same,  that  being  put  lightly  upon  the  water,  do

swimm: Therefore, if that were true which the Adversaries affirm, the same

numerical Figure, would in the same numericall water, cause one while Rest,

and  another  while  Tardity  of  Motion,  which  is  impossible:  for  every
                                                        43
perticular Figure which descends to the Bottom, hath of necessity its own

determinate Tardity and slowness, proper and naturall unto it, according to

which it moveth, so that every other Tardity, greater or lesser is improper to

its nature: if, therefore, a Board, as suppose of a foot square, descendeth

naturally with six degrees of Tardity, it is impossible, that it should descend

with ten or twenty, unless some new impediment do arrest it. Much less can

it, by reason of the same Figure rest, and wholly cease to move; but it is

necessary,  that  when  ever  it  resteth,  there  do  some  greater  impediment

intervene than the breadth of the Figure. Therefore, it must be somewhat else,

and not the Figure, that stayeth the Board of Ebany above water, of which

Figure the only Effect is the retardment of the Motion, according to which it

descendeth  more  slowly  than  the  Ball.  Let  it  be  confessed,  therefore,rationally discoursing, that the true and sole Cause of the Ebanys going to the

Bottom, is the excess of its Gravity above the Gravity of the water: and the

Cause  of  the  greater  or  less  Tardity,  the  breadth  of  this  Figure,  or  the

contractedness of that: but of its Rest, it can by no means be allowed, that the

quallity  of  the  Figure,  is  the  Cause  thereof:  aswell,  because,  making  the

Tardity greater, according as the Figure more dilateth, there cannot be so

immense  a  Dilatation,  to  which  there  may  not  be  found  a  correspondent

immence Tardity without redusing it to Nullity of Motion; as, because the

Figures produced by the Antagonists for effecters of Rest, are the self same

that do also go to the Bottom.

43
 Every perticular Figure hath its own peculiar Tardity.


  I will not omit another reason, founded also upon Experience, and if I

deceive not my self, manifestly concluding, how that the Introduction of the

breadth  or  amplitude  of  Figure,  and  the  Resistance  of  the  water  against

penetration, have nothing to do in the Effect of descending, or ascending, or
                      D
resting in the water. Take a piece of wood or other Matter, of which a Ball

ascends from the Bottom of the water to the Surface, more slowly than a Ball

of Ebony of the same bignesse, so that it is manifest, that the Ball of Ebony

more readily divideth the water in descending, than the other in ascending; as

for Example, let the Wood be Walnut-tree. Then take a Board of Walnut-tree,

like and equall to that of Ebony of the Antagonists, which swims; and if it be

true, that this floats above water, by reason of the Figure, unable through its

breadth,  to  pierce  the  Crassitude  of  the  same,  the  other  of  Wallnut-tree,

without all question, being thrust unto the Bottom, will stay there, as less apt,

through the same impediment of Figure, to divide the said Resistance of the

water. But if we shall find, and by experience see, that not only the thin

Board, but every other Figure of the same Wallnut-tree will return to float, as

undoubtedly we shall, then I must desier my opposers to forbear to attribute

the floating of the Ebony, unto the Figure of the Board, in regard that the

Resistance of the water is the same, as well to the ascent, as to the descent,

and the force of the Wallnut-trees ascension, is lesse than the Ebonys force in

going to the Bottom.
  D
 The Figure & Resistance of the Medium against Division, have nothing

to  do  with  the  Effect  of  Natation  or  Submersion,  by  an  Experiment  in

Wallnut tree.An Experiment in Gold, to prove the non-operating of Figure in Natation and

                                      Submersion.


Nay, I will say more, that if we shall consider Gold in comparison of water,

we shall find, that it exceeds it in Gravity almost twenty times, so that the

Force and Impetus, wherewith a Ball of Gold goes to the Bottom, is very

great. On the contrary, there want not matters, as Virgins Wax, and some

Woods, which are not above a fiftieth part less grave than water, whereupon

their Ascension therein is very slow, and a thousand times weaker than the

Impetus of the Golds descent: yet notwithstanding, a plate of Gold swims

without descending to the Bottom, and, on the contrary, we cannot make a

Cake of Wax, or thin Board of Wood, which put in the Bottom of the Water,

shall  rest  there  without  ascending.  Now  if  the  Figure  can  obstruct  the

Penetration, and impede the descent of Gold, that hath so great an Impetus,

how  can  it  choose  but  suffice  to  resist  the  same  Penetration  of  the  other

matter in ascending, when as it hath scarce a thousandth part of the Impetus

that the Gold hath in descending? Its therefore, necessary, that that which

suspends the thin Plate of Gold, or Board of Ebony, upon the water, be some

thing that is wanting to the other Cakes and Boards of Matters less grave than

the water; since that being put to the Bottom, and left at liberty, they rise up

to the Surface, without any obstruction: But they want not for flatness and

breadth  of  Figure:  Therefore,  the  spaciousnesse  of  the  Figure,  is  not  that

which makes the Gold and Ebony to swim.

  And, because, that the excess of their Gravity above the Gravity of the

water, is questionless the Cause of the sinking of the flat piece of Ebony, and

the thin Plate of Gold, when they go to the Bottom, therefore, of necessity,

when  they  float,  the  Cause  of  their  staying  above  water,  proceeds  from

Levity,  which  in  that  case,  by  some  Accident,  peradventure  not  hitherto

observed, cometh to meet with the said Board, rendering it no longer as it

was before, whilst it did sink more ponderous than the water, but less.

  Now, let us return to take the thin Plate of Gold, or of Silver, or the thin

Board of Ebony, and let us lay it lightly upon the water, so that it stay there

without sinking, and diligently observe its effect.

  And first, see how false the assertion of Aristotle, and our oponents is, to

wit, that it stayeth above water, through its unability to pierce and penetrate

the Resistance of the waters Crassitude: for it will manifestly appear, not only

that  the  said  Plates  have  penetrated  the  water,  but  also  that  they  are  aconsiderable matter lower than the Surface of the same, the which continueth

eminent, and maketh as it were a Rampert on all sides, round about the said

Plates, the profundity of which they stay swimming: and, according as the

said Plates shall be more grave than the water, two, four, ten or twenty times,

it is necessary, that their Superficies do stay below the universall Surface of

the water, so much more, than the thickness of those Plates, as we shal more

distinctly shew anon. In the mean space, for the more easie understanding of

what I say, observe with me a little the present Scheme: in which let us

suppose the Surface of the water to be distended, according to the Lines F L

D B, upon which if one shall put a board of matter specifically more grave

than water, but so lightly that it submerge not, it shall not rest any thing

above, but shall enter with its whole thickness into the water: and, moreover,

shall sink also, as we see by the Board A I, O I, whose breadth is wholly sunk

into the water, the little Ramperts of water L A and D O incompassing it,

whose Superficies is notably higher than the Superficies of the Board. See

now whether it be true, that the said Board goes not to the Bottom, as being

of Figure unapt to penetrate the Crassitude of the water.









      Why solids having penitrated the Water, do not proceed to a totall

                                      Submersion.


But, if it hath already penetrated, and overcome the Continuity of the water,

&  is  of  its  own  nature  more  grave  than  the  said  water,  why  doth  it  not

proceed in its sinking, but stop and suspend its self within that little dimple or

cavitie,  which  with  its  ponderosity  it  hath  made  in  the  water?  I  answer;

because that in submerging it self, so far as till its Superficies come to the

Levell with that of the water, it loseth a part of its Gravity, and loseth the rest

of it as it submergeth & descends beneath the Surface of the water, which

maketh  Ramperts  and  Banks  round  about  it,  and  it  sustaines  this  loss  by

means of its drawing after it, and carrying along with it, the Air that is above

it, and by Contact adherent to it, which Air succeeds to fill the Cavity that isinvironed by the Ramperts of water; so that that which in this case descends

and is placed in the water, is not only the Board of Ebony or Plate of Iron, but

a composition of Ebony and Air, from which resulteth a Solid no longer

superiour in Gravity to the water, as was the simple Ebony, or the simple

Gold. And, if we exactly consider, what, and how great the Solid is, that in

this Experiment enters into the water, and contrasts with the Gravity of the

same, it will be found to be all that which we find to be beneath the Surface

of the water, the which is an aggregate and Compound of a Board of Ebony,

and of almost the like quantity of Air, or a Mass compounded of a Plate of

Lead, and ten or twelve times as much Air.

  But, Gentlemen, you that are my Antagonists in our Question, we require

the Identity of Matter, and the alteration only of the Figure; therefore, you

must  remove  that  Air,  which  being  conjoyned  with  the  Board,  makes  it

become another Body less grave than the Water, and put only the Ebony into

the Water, and you shall certainly see the Board descend to the Bottom; and,

if that do not happen, you have got the day. And to seperate the Air from the
      44
Ebony, there needs no more but only to bath the Superficies of the said

Board with the same Water: for the Water being thus interposed between the

Board and the Air, the other circumfused Water shall run together without

any impediment, and shall receive into it the sole and bare Ebony, as it was to

do.

44
 How to seperate the Air from Solids in demitting them into the water.


  But, me thinks I hear some of the Adversaries cunningly opposing this,

and telling me, that they will not yield, by any means, that their Board be

wetted, because the weight added thereto by the Water, by making it heavier

than  it  was  before,  draws  it  to  the  Bottom,  and  that  the  addition  of  new

weight is contrary to our agreement, which was, that the Matter be the same.

  To this, I answer, first; that treating of the operation of Figure in Bodies

put into the Water, none can suppose them to be put into the Water without

being wet; nor do I desire more to be done to the Board, then I will give you

leave to do to the Ball. Moreover, it is untrue, that the Board sinks by vertue

of the new Weight added to it by the Water, in the single and slight bathing of

it: for I will put ten or twenty drops of Water upon the same Board, whilst it

is sustained upon the water; which drops, because not conjoyned with the

other Water circumfused, shall not so encrease the weight of it, as to make it

sink: but if the Board being taken out, and all the water wiped off that wasadded thereto, I should bath all its Superficies with one only very small drop,

and put it again upon the water, without doubt it shall sink, the other Water

running to cover it, not being retained by the superiour Air; which Air by the

interposition of the thin vail of water, that takes away its Contiguity unto the

Ebony, shall without Renitence be seperated, nor doth it in the least oppose

the succession of the other Water: but rather, to speak better, it shall descend

freely; because it shall be all invironed and covered with water, as soon as its

superiour Superficies, before vailed with water, doth arrive to the Levell of

the universall Surface of the said water. To say, in the next place, that water

can encrease the weight of things that are demitted into it, is most false; for
                                  45
water hath no Gravity in water, since it descends not: yea, if we would well

consider what any immense Mass of water doth put upon a grave Body; that

is placed in it, we shall find experimentally, that it, on the contrary, will
                                                      46
rather in a great part deminish the weight of it, and that we may be able to

lift  an  huge  Stone  from  the  Bottom  of  the  water,  which  the  water  being

removed, we are not able to stir. Nor let them tell me by way of reply, that

although the superposed water augment not the Gravity of things that are in

it, yet it increaseth the ponderosity of those that swim, and are part in the
                                                                                47
water and part in the Air, as is seen, for Example, in a Brass Ketle, which

whilst it is empty of water, and replenished only with Air shall swim, but

pouring of Water therein, it shall become so grave, that it shall sink to the

Bottom, and that by reason of the new weight added thereto. To this I will

return  answer,  as  above,  that  the  Gravity  of  the  Water,  contained  in  the

Vessel is not that which sinks it to the Bottom, but the proper Gravity of the

Brass, superiour to the Specificall Gravity of the Water: for if the Vessel were
                                                                            48
less grave than water, the Ocean would not suffice to submerge it. And, give

me leave to repeat it again, as the fundamentall and principall point in this

Case, that the Air contained in this Vessel before the infusion of the Water,
                                  49
was that which kept it a-float, since that there was made of it, and of the

Brass, a Composition less grave than an equall quantity of Water: and the

place that the Vessel occupyeth in the Water whilst it floats, is not equall to

the Brass alone, but to the Brass and to the Air together, which filleth that

part of the Vessel that is below the Levell of the water: Moreover, when the

Water is infused, the Air is removed, and there is a composition made of

Brass and of water, more grave in specie than the simple water, but not by

vertue of the water infused, as having greater Specifick Gravity than the other

water, but through the proper Gravity of the Brass, and through the alienationof the Air. Now, as he that should say that Brass, that by its nature goes to the
                                                        50
Bottom, being formed into the Figure of a Ketle, acquireth from that Figure

a vertue of lying in the Water without sinking, would say that which is false;

because that Brass fashioned into any whatever Figure, goeth always to the

Bottom, provided, that that which is put into the water be simple Brass; and it

is not the Figure of the Vessel that makes the Brass to float, but it is because

that that is not purely Brass which is put into the water, but an aggregate of

Brass and of Air: so is it neither more nor less false, that a thin Plate of Brass

or of Ebony, swims by vertue of its dilated & broad Figure: for the truth is,

that it bares up without submerging, because that that which is put in the

water, is not pure Brass or simple Ebony, but an aggregate of Brass and Air,

or  of  Ebony  and  Air.  And,  this  is  not  contrary  unto  my  Conclusion,  the

which,  (having  many  a  time  seen  Vessels  of  Mettall,  and  thin  pieces  of

diverse grave Matters float, by vertue of the Air conjoyned with them)

  did affirm, That Figure was not the Cause of the Natation or Submersion

of such Solids as were placed in the water. Nay more, I cannot omit, but must

tell my Antagonists, that this new conceit of denying that the Superficies of

the Board should be bathed, may beget in a third person an opinion of a

poverty of Arguments of defence on their part, since that such bathing was

never insisted upon by them in the beginning of our Dispute, and was not

questioned in the least, being that the Originall of the discourse arose upon

the swiming of Flakes of Ice, wherein it would be simplicity to require that

their Superficies might bedry: besides, that whether these pieces of Ice be wet

or  dry  they  alwayes  swim,  and  as  the  Adversaries  say,  by  reason  of  the

Figure.

45
 Water hath no Gravity in Water.

46
 Water deminisheth the Gravity of Solids immerged therein.

47
 The Experiment of a brass Ketle swiming when empty, & sinking when full, alledged to prove that water gravitates in water,
answered.

48
 An Ocean sufficeth not to sink a Vessel specifically less grave than water.

49
 Air, the Cause of the Natation of empty Vessels of Matters graver in specie than the water.

50
 Neither Figure, nor the breadth of Figure, is the Cause of Natation.  Some peradventure, by way of defence, may say, that wetting the Board of

Ebony, and that in the superiour Superficies, it would, though of it self unable

to pierce and penetrate the water, be born downwards, if not by the weight of

the additionall water, at least by that desire and propension that the superiour

parts of the water have to re-unite and rejoyn themselves: by the Motion of

which  parts,  the  said  Board  cometh  in  a  certain  manner,  to  be  depressed

downwards.


The Bathed Solid descends not out of any affectation of union in the upper

                                  parts of the water.


This  weak  Refuge  will  be  removed,  if  we  do  but  consider,  that  the

repugnancy of the inferiour parts of the water, is as great against Dis-union,

as the Inclination of its superiour parts is to union: nor can the uper unite

themselves  without  depressing  the  board,  nor  can  it  descend  without

disuniting the parts of the nether Water: so that it doth follow, by necessary

consequence, that for those respects, it shall not descend. Moreover, the same

that may be said of the upper parts of the water, may with equall reason be

said of the nether, namely, that desiring to unite, they shall force the said

Board upwards.

  Happily, some of these Gentlemen that dissent from me, will wonder, that

I affirm, that the contiguous superiour Air is able to sustain that Plate of

Brass or of Silver, that stayeth above water; as if I would in a certain sence
              51
allow the Air, a kind of Magnetick vertue of sustaining the grave Bodies,

with which it is contiguous. To satisfie all I may, to all doubts, I have been

considering how by some other sensible Experiment I might demonstrate,

how  truly  that  little  contiguous  and  superiour  Air  sustaines  those  Solids,

which being by nature apt to descend to the Bottom, being placed lightly on

the water submerge not, unless they be first thorowly bathed; and have found,

that one of these Bodies having descended to the Bottom, by conveighing to

it (without touching it in the least) a little Air, which conjoyneth with the top

of the same, it becometh sufficient, not only, as before to sustain it, but also

to raise it, and to carry it back to the top, where it stays and abideth in the

same manner, till such time, as the assistance of the conjoyned Air is taken

away. And to this effect, I have taken a Ball of Wax, and made it with a little

Lead, so grave, that it leasurely descends to the Bottom, making with all its

Superficies very smooth and pollite: and this being put gently into the water,almost wholly submergeth, there remaining vissible only a little of the very
  52
top, the which so long as it is conjoyned with the Air, shall retain the Ball a-

top, but the Contiguity of the Air taken away by wetting it, it shall descend to

the Bottom and there remain. Now to make it by vertue of the Air, that before

sustained it to return again to the top, and stay there, thrust into the water a

Glass reversed with the mouth downwards, the which shall carry with it the

Air it contains, and move this towards the Ball, abasing it till such time that

you see, by the transparency of the Glass, that the contained Air do arrive to
                          53
the summity of the Ball: then gently withdraw the Glass upwards, and you
                                                                                54
shall see the Ball to rise, and afterwards stay on the top of the water, if you

carefully part the Glass and the water without overmuch commoving and

disturbing it.

  There is, therefore, a certain affinity between the Air and other Bodies,

which holds them unied, so, that they seperate not without a kind of violence.
                                              55
The same likewise is seen in the water; for if we shall wholly submerge

some Body in it, so that it be thorowly bathed, in the drawing of it afterwards

gently out again, we shall see the water follow it, and rise notably above its
                                                                56
Surface, before it seperates from it. Solid Bodies, also, if they be equall and

alike  in  Superficies,  so,  that  they  make  an  exact  Contact  without  the

interposition of the least Air, that may part them in the seperation and yield

untill that the ambient Medium succeeds to replenish the place, do hold very

firmly  conjoyned,  and  are  not  to  be  seperated  without  great  force  but,

because,  the  Air,  Water,  and  other  Liquids,  very  expeditiously  shape

themselves  to  contact  with  any  Solid Bodies,  so  that  their  Superficies  do

exquisitely  adopt  themselves  to  that  of  the  Solids,  without  any  thing

remaining  between  them,  therefore,  the  effect  of  this  Conjunction  and

Adherence is more manifestly and frequently observed in them, than in hard

and  inflexible  Bodies,  whose  Superficies  do  very  rarely  conjoyn  with
                        57
exactness of Contact. This is therefore that Magnetick vertue, which with

firm  Connection  conjoyneth  all  Bodies,  that  do  touch  without  the

interposition of flexible fluids; and, who knows, but that that a Contact, when

it is very exact, may be a sufficient Cause of the Union and Continuity of the

parts of a naturall Body?

51
 A Magnetisme in the Air, by which it bears up those Solids in the water, that are contiguous with it.

52
 The Effect of the Airs Contiguity in the Natation of Solids.53
 The force of Contact.

54
 An Affectation of Conjunction betwixt Solids and the Air contiguous to them.

55
 The like affectation of Conjunction betwixt Solids & the water.

56
 Also the like affectation and Conjunction betwixt Solids themselves.

57
 Contact may be the Cause of the Continuity of Naturall Bodies.


  Now, pursuing my purpose, I say; that it needs not, that we have recourse

to  the  Tenacity,  that  the  parts  of  the  water  have  amongst  themselves,  by

which they resist and oppose Division, Distraction, and Seperation, because

there is no such Coherence and Resistance of Division for if there were, it

would be no less in the internall parts than in those nearer the superiour or

externall  Surface,  so  that  the  same  Board,  finding  alwayes  the  same

Resistance and Renitence, would no less stop in the middle of the water than

about the Surface, which is false. Moreover, what Resistance can we place in

the Continuity of the water, if we see that it is impossible to find any Body of

whatsoever Matter, Figure or Magnitude, which being put into the water,

shall be obstructed and impeded by the Tenacity of the parts of the water to

one another, so, but that it is moved upwards or downwards, according as the

Cause of their Motion transports it? And, what greater proof of it can we

desier, than that which we daily see in Muddy waters, which being put into
                                                                    58
Vessels to be drunk, and being, after some hours setling, still, as we say,

thick in the end, after four or six dayes they are wholly setled, and become

pure and clear?

  Nor  can  their  Resistance  of  Penetration  stay  those  impalpable  and

insensible Atomes of Sand, which by reason of their exceeding small force,

spend six dayes in descending the space of half a yard.

58
 The settlement of Muddy Water, proveth that that Element hath no aversion to Division.


  Nor let them say, that the seeing of such small Bodies, consume six dayes

in  descending  so  little  a  way,  is  a  sufficient  Argument  of  the  Waters

Resistance  of  Division;  because  that  is  no  resisting  of  Division,  but  a

retarding of Motion; and it would be simplicity to say, that a thing opposeth
        59
Division, and that in the same instant, it permits it self to be divided: nor

doth the Retardation of Motion at all favour the Adversaries cause, for thatthey are to instance in a thing that wholly prohibiteth Motion, and procureth

Rest; it is necessary, therefore, to find out Bodies that stay in the water, if one

would shew its repugnancy to Division, and not such as move in it, howbeit

but slowly.

59
 Water cannot oppose division, and at the same time permit it self to be divided.


  What then is this Crassitude of the water, with which it resisteth Division?

What, I beseech you, should it be, if we (as we have said above) with all

diligence attempting the reduction of a Matter into so like a Gravity with the

water, that forming it into a dilated Plate it rests suspended as we have said,

between the two waters, it be impossible to effect it, though we bring them to

such an Equiponderance, that as much Lead as the fourth part of a Grain of

Musterd-seed, added to the same expanded Plate, that in Air [i. e. out of the

water] shall weigh four or six pounds, sinketh it to the Bottom, and being

substracted, it ascends to the Surface of the water?

  I cannot see, (if what I say be true, as it is most certain) what minute

vertue and force we can possibly find or imagine, to which the Resistance of

the water against Division and Penetration is not inferiour; whereupon, we

must  of  necessity  conclude  that  it  is  nothing:  because,  if  it  were  of  any

sensible power, some large Plate might be found or compounded of a Matter

alike in Gravity to the water, which not only would stay between the two

waters;  but,  moreover,  should  not  be  able  to  descend  or  ascend  without
                                                                                        60
notable force. We may likewise collect the same from an other Experiment,

shewing that the Water gives way also in the same manner to transversall

Division; for if in a setled and standing water we should place any great Mass

that goeth not to the bottom, drawing it with a single Womans Hair, we might

carry it from place to place without any opposition, and this whatever Figure

it hath, though that it possess a great space of water, as for instance, a great

Beam would do moved side-ways. Perhaps some might oppose me and say,

that if the Resistance of water against Division, as I affirm, were nothing;

Ships should not need such a force of Oars and Sayles for the moving of them

from place to place in a tranquile Sea, or standing Lake. To him that should
                                                61
make  such  an  objection,  I  would  reply,  that  the  water  contrasteth  not

against, nor simply resisteth Division, but a sudden Division, and with so

much greater Renitence, by how much greater the Velocity is: and the Cause

of  this  Resistance  depends  not  on  Crassitude,  or  any  other  thing  thatabsolutely opposeth Division, but because that the parts of the water divided,

in  giving  way  to  that  Solid  that  is  moved  in  it,  are  themselves  also

necessitated locally to move, some to the one side, and some to the other, and

some downwards: and this must no less be done by the waves before the

Ship, or other Body swimming through the water, than by the posteriour and

subsequent; because, the Ship proceeding forwards, to make it self a way to

receive its Bulk, it is requisite, that with the Prow it repulse the adjacent parts

of the water, as well on one hand as on the other, and that it move them as

much  transversly,  as  is  the  half  of  the  breadth  of  the  Hull:  and  the  like

removall must those waves make, that succeeding the Poump do run from the

remoter  parts  of  the  Ship  towards  those  of  the  middle,  successively  to

replenish the places, which the Ship in advancing forwards, goeth, leaving
                                                                  62
vacant. Now, because, all Motitions are made in Time, and the longer in

greater time: and it being moreover true, that those Bodies that in a certain

time are moved by a certain power such a certain space, shall not be moved

the same space, and in a shorter Time, unless by a greater Power: therefore,

the broader Ships move slower than the narrower, being put on by an equall

Force: and the same Vessel requires so much greater force of Wind, or Oars,

the faster it is to move.

60
 An hair will draw a great Mass thorow the Water; which proveth, that it hath no Resistance against transversall Division.

61
 How ships are moved in the water.

62
 Bodies moved a certain space in a certain Time, by a certain power, cannot be moved the same space and in a shorter time, but
by a greater power.


  But yet for all this, any great Mass swimming in a standing Lake, may be

moved by any petit force; only it is true, that a lesser force more slowly

moves  it:  but  if  the  waters  Resistance  of  Division,  were  in  any  manner

sensible,  it  would  follow,  that  the  said  Mass,  should,  notwithstanding  the
                                                                                        63
percussion of some sensible force, continue immoveable, which is not so.

Yea, I will say farther, that should we retire our selves into the more internall

contemplation of the Nature of water and other Fluids, perhaps we should

discover the Constitution of their parts to be such, that they not only do not

oppose Division, but that they have not any thing in them to be divided: so
                                                                              64
that the Resistance that is observed in moving through the water, is like to

that  which  we  meet  with  in  passing  through  a  great  Throng  of  People,wherein we find impediment, and not by any difficulty in the Division, for that

none of those persons are divided whereof the Croud is composed, but only in

moving of those persons side-ways which were before divided and disjoyned:

and thus we find Resistance in thrusting a Stick into an heap of Sand, not

because any part of the Sand is to be cut in pieces, but only to be moved and
      65
raised. Two manners of Penetration, therefore, offer themselves to us, one

in Bodies, whose parts were continuall, and here Division seemeth necessary,
                                                                                    66
the other in the aggregates of parts not continuall, but contiguous only, and

here there is no necessity of dividing but of moving only. Now, I am not well

resolved, whether water and other Fluids may be esteemed to be of parts
                                  67
continuall or contiguous only; yet I find my self indeed inclined to think that

they  are  rather  contiguous  (if  there  be  in  Nature  no  other  manner  of

aggregating, than by the union, or by the touching of the extreams:) and I am

induced thereto by the great difference that I see between the Conjunction of
                                        68
the parts of an hard or Solid Body, and the Conjunction of the same parts

when the same Body shall be made Liquid and Fluid: for if, for example, I

take a Mass of Silver or other Solid and hard Mettall, I shall in dividing it

into two parts, find not only the resistance that is found in the moving of it
  69
only,  but  an  other  incomparably  greater,  dependent  on  that  vertue,

whatever it be, which holds the parts united: and so if we would divide again

those two parts into other two, and successively into others and others, we

should still find a like Resistance, but ever less by how much smaller the

parts to be divided shall be; but if, lastly, employing most subtile and acute

Instruments, such as are the most tenuous parts of the Fire, we shall resolve

it (perhaps) into its last and least Particles, there shall not be left in them any

longer  either  Resistance  of  Division,  or  so  much  as  a  capacity  of  being

farther divided, especially by Instruments more grosse than the acuities of

Fire: and what Knife or Rasor put into well melted Silver can we finde, that

will divide a thing which surpasseth the separating power of Fire? Certainly

none:  because  either  the  whole  shall  be  reduced  to  the  most  minute  and

ultimate  Divisions,  or  if  there  remain  parts  capable  still  of  other

Subdidivisions, they cannot receive them, but only from acuter Divisors than

Fire; but a Stick or Rod of Iron, moved in the melted Metall, is not such a
                                                                                        70
one. Of a like Constitution and Consistence, I account the parts of Water,

and other Liquids to be, namely, incapable of Division by reason of their

Ienuity; or if not absolutely indivisible, yet at least not to be divided by aBoard, or other Solid Body, palpable unto the hand, the Sector being alwayes

required to be more sharp than the Solid to be cut. Solid Bodies, therefore, do
                                            71
only move, and not divide the Water, when put into it; whose parts being

before  divided  to  the  extreamest  minuity,  and  therefore  capable  of  being

moved, either many of them at once, or few, or very few, they soon give place

to every small Corpuscle, that descends in the same: for that, it being little

and light, descending in the Air, and arriving to the Surface of the Water, it

meets with Particles of Water more small, and of less Resistance against

Motion  and  Extrusion,  than  is  its  own  prement  and  extrusive  force;

whereupon  it  submergeth,  and  moveth  such  a  portion  of  them,  as  is

proportionate to its Power. There is not, therefore, any Resistance in Water

against Division, nay, there is not in it any divisible parts. I adde; moreover,

that  in  case  yet  there  should  be  any  small  Resistance  found  (which  is
                  72
absolutely false) haply in attempting with an Hair to move a very great

natant Machine, or in essaying by the addition of one small Grain of Lead to

sink, or by removall of it to raise a very broad Plate of Matter, equall in

Gravity with Water, (which likewise will not happen, in case we proceed with

dexterity) we may observe that that Resistance is a very different thing from

that which the Adversaries produce for the Cause of the Natation of the Plate

of Lead or Board of Ebony, for that one may make a Board of Ebony, which

being put upon the Water swimmeth, and cannot be submerged, no not by the

addition of an hundred Grains of Lead put upon the same, and afterwards

being bathed, not only sinks, though the said Lead be taken away, but though

moreover  a  quantity  of  Cork,  or  of  some  other  light  Body  fastened  to  it,

sufficeth not to hinder it from sinking unto the bottome: so that you see, that

although it were granted that there is a certain small Resistance of Division

found in the substance of the Water, yet this hath nothing to do with that

Cause  which  supports  the  Board  above  the  Water,  with  a  Resistance  an

hundred times greater than that which men can find in the parts of the Water:

nor  let  them  tell  me,  that  only  the  Surface  of  the  Water  hath  such
          73
Resistance, and not the internall parts, or that such Resistance is found

greatest  in  the  beginning  of  the  Submersion,  as  it  also  seems  that  in  the

beginning, Motion meets with greater opposition, than in the continuance of

it;  because,  first,  I  will  permit,  that  the  Water  be  stirred,  and  that  the
                                                    74
superiour parts be mingled with the middle, and inferiour parts, or that

those above be wholly removed, and those in the middle only made use off,and yet you shall see the effect for all that, to be still the same: Moreover,

that Hair which draws a Beam through the Water, is likewise to divide the

upperparts, and is also to begin the Motion, and yet it begins it, and yet it

divides it: and finally, let the Board of Ebony be put in the midway, betwixt

the bottome and the top of the Water, and let it there for awhile be suspended

and setled, and afterwards let it be left at liberty, and it will instantly begin

its Motion, and will continue it unto the bottome. Nay, more, the Board so

soon as it is dimitted upon the Water, hath not only begun to move and divide

it, but is for a good space dimerged into it.

63
 The parts of Liquids, so farre from resisting Division, that they contain not any thing that may be divided.

64
 The Resistance a Solid findeth in moving through the water, like to that we meet with in passing through a throng of people:

65
 Or in thrusting a Stick into an heap of Sand.

66
 Two kinds of Penetration, one in Bodies continuall, the other in Bodies only contiguous.

67
 Water consists not of continuall, but only of contiguous parts.

68
 Se{e} what satisfaction he hath given, as to this point, in Lib. de Motu. Dial. 2.

69
 Great difference betwixt the Conjunction of the parts of a Body when Solid, and when fluid.

70
 Water consists of parts that admit of no farther division.

71
 Solids dimitted into the water, do onely move, and not divide it.

72
 If there were any Resistance of Division in water, it must needs be small, in that it is overcome by an Hair, a Grain of Lead, or
a slight bathing of the Solid.

73
 The uper parts of the Water, do no more resist Division than the middle or lower parts.

74
 Waters Resistance of division, not greater in the beginning of the Submersion.


  Let us receive it, therefore, for a true and undoubted Conclusion, That the

Water  hath  not  any  Renitence  against  simple  Division,  and  that  it  is  not

possible to find any Solid Body, be it of what Figure it will, which being put

into the Water, its Motion upwards or downwards, according as it exceedeth,

or shall be exceeded by the Water in Gravity (although such excesse and

difference be insensible)  shall be prohibited, and taken away, by the Crassitude of the said Water.

When, therefore, we see the Board of Ebony, or of other Matter, more grave

than  the  Water,  to  stay  in  the  Confines  of  the  Water  and  Air,  without

submerging, we must have recourse to some other Originall, for the investing

the Cause of that Effect, than to the breadth of the Figure, unable to overcome

the  Renitence  with  which  the  Water  opposeth  Division,  since  there  is  no

Resistance; and from that which is not in being, we can expect no Action. It

remains most true, therefore, as we have said before, that this so succeds, for

that that which in such manner put upon the water, not the same Body with

that which is put into the Water: because this which is put into the Water, is

the pure Board of Ebony, which for that it is more grave than the Water,

sinketh, and that which is put upon the Water, is a Composition of Ebony,

and of so much Air, that both together are specifically less grave than the

Water, and therefore they do not descend.

  I will farther confirm this which I say. Gentlemen, my Antagonists, we are

agreed, that the excess or defect of the Gravity of the Solid, unto the Gravity

of the Water, is the true and proper Cause of Natation or Submersion.


    Great Caution to be had in experimenting the operation of Figure in

                                        Natation.


Now, if you will shew that besides the former Cause, there is another which

is so powerfull, that it can hinder and remove the Submersion of those very

Solids, that by their Gravity sink, and if you will say, that this is the breadth

or ampleness of Figure, you are oblieged, when ever you would shew such an

Experiment, first to make the circumstances certain, that that Solid which you

put into the Water, be not less grave in specie than it, for if you should not do

so, any one might with reason say, that not the Figure, but the Levity was the

cause of that Natation. But I say, that when you shall dimit a Board of Ebony

into the Water, you do not put therein a Solid more grave in specie than the

Water, but one lighter, for besides the Ebony, there is in the Water a Mass of

Air, united with the Ebony, and such, and so light, that of both there results a

Composition less grave than the Water: See, therefore, that you remove the

Air, and put the Ebony alone into the Water, for so you shall immerge a Solid

more grave then the Water, and if this shall not go to the Bottom, you have

well Philosophized and I ill.  Now, since we have found the true Cause of the Natation of those Bodies,

which  otherwise,  as  being  graver  than  the  Water,  would  descend  to  the

bottom, I think, that for the perfect and distinct knowledge of this business, it

would be good to proceed in a way of discovering demonstratively those

particular Accidents that do attend these effects, and,


                                      PROBL. I.


To finde the proportion Figures ought to have to the waters Gravity, that by

                    help of the contiguous Air, they may swim.


To finde what proportion severall Figures of different Matters ought to have,

unto the Gravity of the Water, that so they may be able by vertue of the

Contiguous Air to stay afloat.





  Let, therefore, for better illustration, D F N E be a Vessell, wherein the

water  is  contained,  and  suppose  a  Plate  or  Board,  whose  thickness  is

comprehended  between  the  Lines  I  C  and  O  S,  and  let  it  be  of  Matter

exceeding the water in Gravity, so that being put upon the water, it dimergeth

and abaseth below the Levell of the said water, leaving the little Banks A I

and B C, which are at the greatest height they can be, so that if the Plate I S

should  but  descend  any  little  space  farther,  the  little  Banks  or  Ramparts

would no longer consist, but expulsing the Air A I C B, they would diffuse

themselves  over  the  Superficies  I  C,  and  would  submerge  the  Plate.  The

height A I B C is therefore the greatest profundity that the little Banks of

water admit of. Now I say, that from this, and from the proportion in Gravity,

that the Matter of the Plate hath to the water, we may easily finde of what

thickness, at most, we may make the said Plates, to the end, they may be able

to bear up above water: for if the Matter of the Plate or Board I S were, for

Example, as heavy again as the water, a Board of that Matter shall be, at the

most of a thickness equall to the greatest height of the Banks, that is, as thick

as A I is high: which we will thus demonstrate. Let the Solid I S be double in

Gravity to the water, and let it be a regular Prisme, or Cylinder, to wit, that

hath its two flat Superficies, superiour and inferiour, alike and equall, and atRight Angles with the other laterall Superficies, and let its thickness I O be

equall to the greatest Altitude of the Banks of water: I say, that if it be put

upon the water, it will not submerge: for the Altitude A I being equall to the

Altitude I O, the Mass of the Air A B C I shall be equall to the Mass of the

Solid C I O S: and the whole Mass A O S B double to the Mass I S; And

since the Mass of the Air A C, neither encreaseth nor diminisheth the Gravity

of the Mass I S, and the Solid I S was supposed double in Gravity to the

water;  Therefore  as  much  water  as  the  Mass  submerged  A  O  S  B,

compounded of the Air A I C B, and of the Solid I O S C, weighs just as

much as the same submerged Mass A O S B: but when such a Mass of water,

as is the submerged part of the Solid, weighs as much as the said Solid, it

descends not farther, but resteth, as by (a)
                75
  Archimedes, and above by us, hath been demonstrated: Therefore, I S

shall  descend  no  farther,  but  shall  rest.  And  if  the  Solid  I  S  shall  be

Sesquialter in Gravity to the water, it shall float, as long as its thickness be

not above twice as much as the greatest Altitude of the Ramparts of water,

that is, of A I. For I S being Sesquialter in Gravity to the water, and the

Altitude O I, being double to I A, the Solid submerged A O S B, shall be also

Sesquialter  in  Mass  to  the  Solid  I  S.  And  because  the  Air  A  C,  neither

increaseth nor diminisheth the ponderosity of the Solid I S: Therefore, as

much water in quantity as the submerged Mass A O S B, weighs as much as

the said Mass submerged: And, therefore, that Mass shall rest. And briefly in

generall.

75
 Of Natation Lib. 1. Prop. 3.






 


                                    THEOREME. VI.


The proportion of the greatest thickness of Solids, beyond which encreased

                                      they sink.When ever the excess of the Gravity of the Solid above the Gravity of the

Water, shall have the same proportion to the Gravity of the Water, that the

Altitude of the Rampart, hath to the thickness of the Solid, that Solid shall not

sink, but being never so little thicker it shall.





  Let the Solid I S be superior in Gravity to the water, and of such thickness,

that the Altitude of the Rampart A I, be in proportion to the thickness of the

Solid I O, as the excess of the Gravity of the said Solid I S, above the Gravity

of a Mass of water equall to the Mass I S, is to the Gravity of the Mass of

water equall to the Mass I S. I say, that the Solid I S shall not sinke, but being

never so little thicker it shall go to the bottom: For being that as A I is to I O,

so is the Excess of the Gravity of the Solid I S, above the Gravity of a Mass

of water equall to the Mass I S, to the Gravity of the said Mass of water:

Therefore, compounding, as A O is to O I, so shall the Gravity of the Solid I

S,  be  to  the  Gravity  of  a  Mass  of  water  equall  to  the  Mass  I  S:  And,

converting, as I O is to O A, so shall the Gravity of a Mass of water equall to

the Mass I S, be to the Gravity of the Solid I S: But as I O is to O A, so is a

Mass of water I S, to a Mass of water equall to the Mass A B S O: and so is

the Gravity of a Mass of water I S, to the Gravity of a Mass of water A S:

Therefore as the Gravity of a Mass of water, equall to the Mass I S, is to the

Gravity of the Solid I S, so is the same Gravity of a Mass of water I S, to the

Gravity of a Mass of Water A S: Therefore the Gravity of the Solid I S, is

equall to the Gravity of a Mass of water equall to the Mass A S: But the

Gravity of the Solid I S, is the same with the Gravity of the Solid A S,

compounded of the Solid I S, and of the Air A B C I. Therefore the whole

compounded Solid A O S B, weighs as much as the water that would be

comprised in the place of the said Compound A O S B: And, therefore, it

shall make an Equilibrium and rest, and that same Solid I O S C shall sinke

no farther. But if its thickness I O should be increased, it would be necessary

also  to  encrease  the  Altitude  of  the  Rampart  A  I,  to  maintain  the  due

proportion: But by what hath been supposed, the Altitude of the Rampart A I,

is the greatest that the Nature of the Water and Air do admit, without the

waters repulsing the Air adherent to the Superficies of the Solid I C, and

possessing the space A I C B: Therefore, a Solid of greater thickness than IO,  and  of  the  same  Matter  with  the  Solid  I  S,  shall  not  rest  without

submerging, but shall descend to the bottome: which was to be demonstrated.

In  consequence  of  this  that  hath  been  demonstrated,  sundry  and  various

Conclusions may be gathered, by which the truth of my principall Proposition

comes to be more and more confirmed, and the imperfection of all former

Argumentations touching the present Question cometh to be discovered.

  And first we gather from the things demonstrated, that,


                                    THEOREME VII.


                        The heaviest Bodies may swimme.


All Matters, how heavy soever, even to Gold it self, the heaviest of all Bodies,

known by us, may float upon the Water.

  Because its Gravity being considered to be almost twenty times greater

than that of the water, and, moreover, the greatest Altitude that the Rampart

of  water  can  be  extended  to,  without  breaking  the  Contiguity  of  the  Air,

adherent  to  the  Surface  of  the  Solid,  that  is  put  upon  the  water  being

predetermined, if we should make a Plate of Gold so thin, that it exceeds not

the nineteenth part of the Altitude of the said Rampart, this put lightly upon

the water shall rest, without going to the bottom: and if Ebony shall chance to

be  in  sesquiseptimall  proportion  more  grave  than  the  water,  the  greatest

thickness that can be allowed to a Board of Ebony, so that it may be able to

stay  above  water  without  sinking,  would  be  seaven  times  more  than  the

height of the Rampart Tinn, v. gr. eight times more grave than water, shall

swimm as oft as the thickness of its Plate, exceeds not the 7th part of the

Altitude of the Rampart.


He elsewhere cites this as a Proposition, therefore I make it of that number.


And here I will not omit to note, as a second Corrollary dependent upon the

things demonstrated, that,


                                  THEOREME VIII.Natation and Submersion, collected from the thickness, excluding the length

                                and breadth of Plates.


The Expansion of Figure not only is not the Cause of the Natation of those

grave Bodies, which otherwise do submerge, but also the determining what

be  those  Boards  of  Ebony,  or  Plates  of  Iron  or  Gold  that  will  swimme,

depends not on it, rather that same determination is to be collected from the

only  thickness  of  those  Figures  of  Ebony  or  Gold,  wholly  excluding  the

consideration of length and breadth, as having no wayes any share in this

Effect.

  It hath already been manifested, that the only cause of the Natation of the

said Plates, is the reduction of them to be less grave than the water, by means

of  the  connexion  of  that  Air,  which  descendeth  together  with  them,  and

possesseth  place  in  the  water;  which  place  so  occupyed,  if  before  the

circumfused water diffuseth it self to fill it, it be capable of as much water, as

shall weigh equall with the Plate, the Plate shall remain suspended, and sinke

no farther.

  Now let us see on which of these three dimensions of the Solid depends

the terminating, what and how much the Mass of that ought to be, that so the

assistance of the Air contiguous unto it, may suffice to render it specifically

less grave than the water, whereupon it may rest without Submersion. It shall

undoubtedly be found, that the length and breadth have not any thing to do in

the said determination, but only the height, or if you will the thickness: for, if

we take a Plate or Board, as for Example, of Ebony, whose Altitude hath unto

the greatest possible Altitude of the Rampart, the proportion above declared,

for which cause it swims indeed, but yet not if we never so little increase its

thickness; I say, that retaining its thickness, and encreasing its Superficies to

twice, four times, or ten times its bigness, or dminishing it by dividing it into

four, or six, or twenty, or a hundred parts, it shall still in the same manner

continue to float: but encreasing its thickness only a Hairs breadth, it will

alwaies submerge, although we should multiply the Superficies a hundred

and a hundred times. Now forasmuch as that this is a Cause, which being

added, we adde also the Effect, and being removed, it is removed; and by

augmenting or lessening the length or breadth in any manner, the effect of

going, or not going to the bottom, is not added or removed: I conclude, that

the greatness and smalness of the Superficies hath no influence upon the

Natation  or  Submersion.  And  that  the  proportion  of  the  Altitude  of  theRamparts  of  Water,  to  the  Altitude  of  the  Solid,  being  constituted  in  the

manner aforesaid, the greatness or smalness of the Superficies, makes not any

variation, is manifest from that which hath been above demonstrated, and

from this, that, The Prisms and Cylinders which have the same Base, are in
                                                                                        76
proportion to one another as their heights. Whence Cylinders or Prismes,

namely,  the  Board,  be  they  great  or  little,  so  that  they  be  all  of  equall

thickness, have the same proportion to their Conterminall Air, which hath for

Base the said Superficies of the Board, and for height the Ramparts of water;

so that alwayes of that Air, and of the Board, Solids, are compounded, that in

Gravity equall a Mass of water equall to the Mass of the Solids, compounded

of  Air,  and  of  the  Board:  whereupon  all  the  said  Solids  do  in  the  same

manner continue afloat. We will conclude in the third place, that,

76
 Prismes and Cylinders having the same Base, are to one another as their heights.


                                    THEOREME. IX.


All Figures of all Matters, float by hep of the Rampart replenished with Air,

                        and some but only touch the water.


All sorts of Figures of whatsoever Matter, albeit more grave than the Water,

do by Benefit of the said Rampart, not only float, but some Figures, though of

the gravest Matter, do stay wholly above Water, wetting only the inferiour

Surface that toucheth the Water.

  And these shall be all Figures, which from the inferiour Base upwards,

grow  lesser  and  lesser;  the  which  we  shall  exemplifie  for  this  time  in

Piramides or Cones, of which Figures the passions are common. We will

demonstrate therefore, that,

  It is possible to form a Piramide, of any whatsoever Matter preposed,

which  being  put  with  its  Base  upon  the  Water,  rests  not  only  without

submerging, but without wetting it more then its Base.


  For the explication of which it is requisite, that we first demonstrate the

                          subsequent Lemma, namely, that,


                                      LEMMA II.Solids whose Masses are in contrary proportion to their Specifick Gravities

                          are equall in absolute Gravity.


Solids  whose  Masses  answer  in  proportion  contrarily  to  their  Specificall

Gravities, are equall in Absolute Gravities.






  Let A C and B be two Solids, and let the Mass A C be to the Mass B, as

the Specificall Gravity of the Solid B, is to the Specificall Gravity of the

Solid A C: I say, the Solids A C and B are equall in absolute weight, that is,

equally grave. For if the Mass A C be equall to the Mass B, then, by the

Assumption, the Specificall Gravity of B, shall be equall to the Specificall

Gravity of A C, and being equall in Mass, and of the same Specificall Gravity

they shall absolutely weigh one as much as another. But if their Masses shall

be unequall, let the Mass A C be greater, and in it take the part C, equall to

the Mass B.

  And, because the Masses B and C are equall; the Absolute weight of B,

shall  have  the  same  proportion  to  the  Absolute  weight  of  C,  that  the

Specificall Gravity of B, hath to the Specificall Gravity of C; or of C A,

which is the same in specie: But look what proportion the Specificall Gravity

of  B,  hath  to  the  Specificall  Gravity  of  C  A,  the  like  proportion,  by  the

Assumption,  hath  the  Mass  C  A,  to  the  Mass  B,  that  is,  to  the  Mass  C:

Therefore, the absolute weight of B, to the absolute weight of C, is as the

Mass A C to the Mass C: But as the Mass A C, is to the Mass C, so is the

absolute weight of A C, to the absolute weight of C: Therefore the absolute

weight of B, hath the same proportion to the absolute weight of C, that the

absolute weight of A C, hath to the absolute weight of C: Therefore, the two

Solids  A  C  and  B  are  equall  in  absolute  Gravity:  which  was  to  be

demonstrated.

  Having demonstrated this, I say,


                                    THEOREME X.There may be Cones and Piramides of any Matter, which demitted into the

                            water, rest only their Bases.


That it is possible of any assigned Matter, to form a Piramide or Cone upon

any Base, which being put upon the Water shall not submerge, nor wet any

more than its Base.












  Let the greatest possible Altitude of the Rampart be the Line D B, and the

Diameter of the Base of the Cone to be made of any Matter assigned B C, at

right  angles  to  D  B:  And  as  the  Specificall  Gravity  of  the  Matter  of  the

Piramide or Cone to be made, is to the Specificall Gravity of the water, so let

the Altitude of the Rampart D B, be to the third part of the Piramide or Cone

A B C, described upon the Base, whose Diameter is B C: I say, that the said

Cone A B C, and any other Cone, lower then the same, shall rest upon the

Surface of the water B C without sinking. Draw D F parallel to B C, and

suppose the Prisme or Cylinder E C, which shall be tripple to the Cone A B

C.


And, because the Cylinder D C hath the same proportion to the Cylinder C E,

that the Altitude D B, hath to the Altitude B E: But the Cylinder C E, is to the

  Cone A B C, as the Altitude E B is to the third part of the Altitude of the

Cone: Therefore, by Equality of proportion, the Cylinder D C is to the Cone

A B C, as D B is to the third part of the Altitude B E: But as D B is to the

  third part of B E, so is the Specificall Gravity of the Cone A B C, to the

Specificall Gravity of the water: Therefore, as the Mass of the Solid D C, is

to the Mass of the Cone A B C, so is the Specificall Gravity of the said Cone,

to the Specificall Gravity of the water: Therefore, by the precedent Lemma,

the Cone A B C weighs in absolute Gravity, as much as a Mass of Waterequall to the Mass D C: But the water which by the imposition of the Cone A

B C, is driven out of its place, is as much as would precisely lie in the place

D C, and is equall in weight to the Cone that displaceth it: Therefore, there

shall be an Equilibrium, and the Cone shall rest without farther submerging.

                                  And its manifest,


                                    COROLARY I.


Amongst Cones of the same Base, those of least Altitude shall sink the least.


That making upon the same Basis, a Cone of a less Altitude, it shall be also

less grave, and shall so much the more rest without Submersion.


                                    COROLARY II.


There may be Cones and Piramides of any Matter, which demitted with the

                          Point downwards do float atop.


It is manifest, also, that one may make Cones and Piramids of any Matter

whatsoever, more grave than the water, which being put into the water, with

the Apix or Point downwards, rest without Submersion.

  Because if we reassume what hath been above demonstrated, of Prisms

and Cylinders, and that on Bases equall to those of the said Cylinders, we

make Cones of the same Matter, and three times as high as the Cylinders,

they shall rest afloat, for that in Mass and Gravity they shall be equall to

those Cylinders, and by having their Bases equall to those of the Cylinders,

they shall leave equall Masses of Air included within the Ramparts. This,

which for Example sake hath been demonstrated, in Prisms, Cylinders, Cones

and Piramids, might be proved in all other Solid Figures, but it would require

a whole Volume (such is the multitude and variety of their Symptoms and

Accidents) to comprehend the particuler demonstration of them all, and of

their severall Segments: but I will to avoid prolixity in the present Discourse,

content my self, that by what I have declared every one of ordinary Capacity

may comprehend, that there is not any Matter so grave, no not Gold it self, of

which one may not form all sorts of Figures, which by vertue of the superiour

Air adherent to them, and not by the Waters Resistance of Penetration, doremain afloat, so that they sink not. Nay, farther, I will shew, for removing

that Error, that,


                                    THEOREME XI.


A Piramide or Cone, demitted with the Point downwards shal swim, with its

                            Base downward shall sink.


A  Piramide  or  Cone  put  into  the  Water,  with  the  Point  downward  shall

swimme, and the same put with the Base downwards shall sinke, and it shall

be impossible to make it float.

  Now the quite contrary would happen, if the difficulty of Penetrating the

water, were that which had hindred the descent, for that the said Cone is far

apter to pierce and penetrate with its sharp Point, than with its broad and

spacious Base.

  And, to demonstrate this, let the Cone be A B C, twice as grave as the

water, and let its height be tripple to the height of the Rampart D A E C: I say,

first, that being put lightly into the water with the Point downwards, it shall

not descend to the bottom: for the Aeriall Cylinder contained betwixt the

Ramparts D A C E, is equall in Mass to the Cone A B C; so that the whole

Mass of the Solid compounded of the Air D A C E, and of the Cone A B C,

shall be double to the Cone A C B: And, because the Cone A B C is supposed

to be of Matter double in Gravity to the water, therefore as much water as the

whole Masse D A B C E, placed beneath the Levell of the water, weighs as

much as the Cone A B C: and, therefore, there shall be an Equilibrium, and

the Cone A B C shall descend no lower. Now, I say farther, that the same

Cone placed with the Base downwards, shall sink to the bottom, without any

possibility of returning again, by any means to swimme.






  Let, therefore, the Cone be A B D, double in Gravity to the water, and let

its height be tripple the height of the Rampart of water L B: It is already

manifest, that it shall not stay wholly out of the water, because the Cylinder

being comprehended betwixt the Ramparts L B D P, equall to the Cone A BD, and the Matter of the Cone, beig double in Gravity to the water, it is

evident that the weight of the said Cone shall be double to the weight of the

Mass of water equall to the Cylinder L B D P: Therefore it shall not rest in

this state, but shall descend.













                                    COROLARY I.


    Much less shall the said Cone swim, if one immerge a part thereof.


I say farther; that much lesse shall the said Cone stay afloat, if one immerge

a part thereof.

  Which you may see, comparing with the water as well the part that shall

immerge as the other above water. Let us therefore of the Cone A B D,

submergeth part N T O S, and advance the Point N S F above water.

  The Altitude of the Cone F N S, shall either be more than half the whole

Altitude of the Cone F T O, or it shall not be more: if it shall be more than

half, the Cone F N S shall be more than half of the Cylinder E N S C: for the

Altitude of the Cone F N S, shall be more than Sesquialter of the Altitude of

the Cylinder E N S C: And, because the Matter of the Cone is supposed to be

double  in  Specificall  Gravity  to  the  water,  the  water  which  would  be

contained within the Rampart E N S C, would be less grave absolutely than

the Cone F N S; so that the whole Cone F N S cannot be sustained by the

Rampart: But the part immerged N T O S, by being double in Specificall

Gravity to the water, shall tend to the bottom: Therefore, the whole Cone F T

O, as well in respect of the part submerged, as the part above water shall

descend to the bottom. But if the Altitude of the Point F N S, shall be half the

Altitude of the whole Cone F T O, the same Altitude of the said Cone F N S

shall be Sesquialter to the Altitude E N: and, therefore, E N S C shall bedouble to the Cone F N S; and as much water in Mass as the Cylinder E N S

C, would weigh as much as the part of the Cone F N S. But, because the other

immerged part N T O S, is double in Gravity to the water, a Mass of water

equall to that compounded of the Cylinder E N S C, and of the Solid N T O

S, shall weigh less than the Cone F T O, by as much as the weight of a Mass

of  water  equall  to  the  Solid  N  T  O  S:  Therefore,  the Cone  sha{l}l  also

descend. Again, because the Solid N T O S, is septuple to the Cone F N S, to

which the Cylinder E S is double, the proportion of the Solid N T O S, shall

be to the Cylinder E N S C, as seaven to two: Therefore, the whole Solid

compounded of the Cylinder E N S C, and of the Solid N T O S, is much less

than double the Solid N T O S: Therefore, the single Solid N T O S, is much

graver than a Mass of water equall to the Mass, compounded of the Cylinder

E N S C, and of N T O S.


                                    COROLARY II.


      Part of the Cones towards the Cuspis removed, it shall still sink.


From whence it followeth, that though one should remove and take away the

part of the Cone F N S, the sole remainder N T O S would go to the bottom.


                                    COROLARY III.


    The more the Cone is immerged, the more impossible is its floating.


And if we should more depress the Cone F T O, it would be so much the more

impossible that it should sustain it self afloat, the part submerged N T O S

still encreasing, and the Mass of Air contained in the Rampart diminishing,

which ever grows less, the more the Cone submergeth.

  That  Cone,  therefore,  that  with  its  Base  upwards,  and  its Cuspis

downwards doth swimme, being dimitted with its Base downward must of

necessity sinke. They have argued farre from the truth, therefore, who have

ascribed the cause of Natation to waters resistance of Division, as to a passive

principle, and to the breadth of the Figure, with which the division is to be

made, as the Efficient.  I come in the fourth place, to collect and conclude the reason of that which

I have proposed to the Adversaries, namely,


                                    THEOREME XII.


Solids of any Figure & greatnesse, that naturally sink, may by help of the Air

                              in the Rampart swimme.


That  it  is  possible  to  fo{r}m  Solid  Bodies,  of  what  Figure  and  greatness

soever, that of their own Nature goe to the Bottome; But by the help of the Air

contained in the Rampart, rest without submerging.













  The  truth  of  this  Proposition  is  sufficiently  manifest  in  all  those  Solid

Figures, that determine in their uppermost part in a plane Superficies: for

making  such  Figures  of  some  Matter  specifically  as  grave  as  the  water,

putting them into the water, so that the whole Mass be covered, it is manifest,

that they shall rest in all places, provided, that such a Matter equall in weight

to the water, may be exactly adjusted: and they shall by consequence, rest or

lie  even  with  the  Levell  of  the  water,  without  making  any  Rampart.  If,

therefore,  in  respect  of  the  Matter,  such  Figures  are  apt  to  rest  without

submerging, though deprived of the help of the Rampart, it is manifest, that

they  may  admit  so  much  encrease  of  Gravity,  (without  encreasing  their

Masses) as is the weight of as much water as would be contained within the

Rampart, that is made about their upper plane Surface: by the help of which

being sustained, they shall rest afloat, but being bathed, they shall descend,

having been made graver than the water. In Figures, therefore, that determine

above in a plane, we may cleerly comprehend, that the Rampart added or

removed, may prohibit or permit the descent: but in those Figures that golessening upwards towards the top, some Persons may, and that not without

much seeming Reason, doubt whether the same may be done, and especially

by those which terminate in a very acute Point, such as are your Cones and

small Piramids. Touching these, therefore, as more dubious than the rest, I

will endeavour to demonstrate, that they also lie under the same Accident of

going, or not going to the Bottom, be they of any whatever bigness. Let

therefore the Cone be A B D, made of a matter specifically as grave as the

water; it is manifest that being put all under water, it shall rest in all places

(alwayes provided, that it shall weigh exactly as much as the water, which is

almost impossible to effect) and that any small weight being added to it, it

shall sink to the bottom: but if it shall descend downwards gently, I say, that

it shall make the Rampart E S T O, and that there shall stay out of the water

the point A S T, tripple in height to the Rampart E S: which is manifest, for

the Matter of the Cone weighing equally with the water, the part submerged S

B D T, becomes indifferent to move downwards or upwards; and the Cone A

S T, being equall in Mass to the water that would be contained in the concave

of the Rampart E S T O, shall be also equall unto it in Gravity: and, therefore,

there shall be a perfect Equilibrium, and, consequently, a Rest. Now here

ariseth a doubt, whether the Cone A B D may be made heavier, in such sort,

that when it is put wholly under water, it goes to the bottom, but yet not in

such sort, as to take from the Rampart the vertue of sustaining it that it sink

not, and, the reason of the doubt is this: that although at such time as the

Cone A B D is specifically as grave as the water, the Rampart E S T O

sustaines it, not only when the point A S T is tripple in height to the Altitude

of the Rampart E S, but also when a lesser part is above water; [for although

in the Descent of the Cone the Point A S T by little and little diminisheth, and

so  likewise  the  Rampart E  S  T  O,  yet  the  Point  diminisheth  in  greater

proportion than the Rampart, in that it diminisheth according to all the three

Dimensions,  but  the  Rampart  according  to  two  only,  the  Altitude  still

remaining  the  same;  or,  if  you  will,  because  the  Cone S  {A}  T  goes

diminishing, according to the proportion of the cubes of the Lines that do

successively become the Diameters of the Bases of emergent Cones, and the

Ramparts diminish according to the proportion of the Squares of the same

Lines; whereupon the proportions of the Points are alwayes Sesquialter of the

proportions of the Cylinders, contained within the Rampart; so that if, for

Example,  the  height  of  the  emergent  Point  were  double,  or  equall  to  the

height  of  the  Rampart,  in  these  cases,  the  Cylinder  contained  within  theRampart, would be much greater than the said Point, because it would be

either sesquialter or tripple, by reason of which it would perhaps serve over

and above to sustain the whole Cone, since the part submerged would no

longer weigh any thing;] yet, nevertheless, when any Gravity is added to the

whole Mass of the Cone, so that also the part submerged is not without some

excesse of Gravity above the Gravity of the water, it is not manifest, whether

the Cylinder contained within the Rampart, in the descent that the Cone shall

make, can be reduced to such a proportion unto the emergent Point, and to

such an excesse of Mass above the Mass of it, as to compensate the excesse

of the Cones Specificall Gravity above the Gravity of the water: and the

Scruple ariseth, because that howbeit in the descent made by the Cone, the

emergent Point A S T diminisheth, whereby there is also a diminution of the

excess of the Cones Gravity above the Gravity of the water, yet the case

stands  so,  that  the  Rampart  doth  also  contract  it  self,  and  the  Cylinder

contained in it doth deminish. Nevertheless it shall be demonstrated, how that

the Cone A B D being of any supposed bignesse, and made at the first of a

Matter exactly equall in Gravity to the Water, if there may be affixed to it

some Weight, by means of which i{t} may descend to the bottom, when

submerged under water, it may also by vertue of the Rampart stay above

without sinking.

 













  Let, therefore, the Cone A B D be of any supposed greatnesse, and alike in

specificall Gravity to the water. It is manifest, that being put lightly into the

water, it shall rest without descending; and it shall advance above water, the

Point A S T, tripple in height to the height of the Rampart E S: Now, suppose

the Cone A B D more depressed, so that it advance above water, only the

Point A I R, higher by half than the Point A S T, with the Rampart about it C IR N. And, because, the Cone A B D is to the Cone A I R, as the cube of the

Line S T is to the cube of the Line I R, but the Cylinder E S T O, is to the

Cylinder C I R N, as the Square of S T to the Square of I R, the Cone A S T

shall be Octuple to the Cone A I R, and the Cylinder E S T O, quadruple to

the Cylinder C I R N: But the Cone A S T, is equall to the Cylinder E S T O:

Therefore, the Cylinder C I R N, shall be double to the Cone A I R: and the

water which might be contained in the Rampart C I R N, would be double in

Mass and in Weight to the Cone A I R, and, therefore, would be able to

sustain the double of the Weight of the Cone A I R: Therefore, if to the whole

Cone A B D, there be added as much Weight as the Gravity of the Cone A I

R, that is to say, the eighth part of the weight of the Cone A S T, it also shall

be sustained by the Rampart C I R N, but without that it shall go to the

bottome: the Cone A B D, being, by the addition of the eighth part of the

weight of the Cone A S T, made specifically more grave than the water. But if

the Altitude of the Cone A I R, were two thirds of the Altitude of the Cone A

S T, the Cone A S T would be to the Cone A I R, as twenty seven to eight; and

the Cylinder E S T O, to the Cylinder C I R N, as nine to four, that is, as

twenty seven to twelve; and, therefore, the Cylinder C I R N, to the Cone A I

R, as twelve to eight; and the excess of the Cylinder C I R N, above the Cone

A I R, to the Cone A S T, as four to twenty seven: therefore if to the Cone A B

D be added so much weight as is the four twenty sevenths of the weight of

the Cone A S T, which is a little more then its seventh part, it also shall

continue to swimme, and the height of the emergent Point shall be double to

the height of the Rampart. This that hath been demonstrated in Cones, exactly

holds in Piramides, although the one or the other should be very sharp in their
                77
Point or Cuspis: From whence we conclude, that the same Accident shall so

much the more easily happen in all other Figures, by how much the less sharp

the Tops shall be, in which they determine, being assisted by more spacious

Ramparts.77
 Natatio{n} easiest effected in Figures broad toward the top.


                                  THEOREME XIII.


    All Figures sink or swim, upon bathing or not bathing of their tops.


All Figures, therefore, of whatever greatnesse, may go, and not go, to the

Bottom, according as their Sumities or Tops shall be bathed or not bathed.

  And this Accident being common to all sorts of Figures, without exception

of so much as one. Figure hath, therefore, no part in the production of this

Effect, of sometimes sinking, and sometimes again not sinking, but only the

being  sometimes  conjoyned  to,  and  sometimes  seperated  from,  the

supereminent Air: which cause, in fine, who so shall rightly, and, as we say,

with both his Eyes, consider this business, will find that it is reduced to, yea,

that it really is the same with, the true, Naturall and primary cause of Natation

or Submersion; to wit, the excess or deficiency of the Gravity of the water, in

relation  to  the  Gravity  of  that  Solid  Magnitude,  that  is  demitted  into  the

water. For like as a Plate of Lead, as thick as the back of a Knife, which being

put into the water by it self alone goes to the bottom, if upon it you fasten a

piece of Cork four fingers thick, doth continue afloat, for that now the Solid

that is demitted in the water, is not, as before, more grave than the water, but

less, so the Board of Ebony, of its own nature more grave than water; and,

therefore, descending to the bottom, when it is demitted by it self alone into

the water, if it shall be put upon the water, conjoyned with an Expanded vail

of Air, that together with the Ebony doth descend, and that it be such, as that

it doth make with it a compound less grave than so much water in Mass, as

equalleth the Mass already submerged and depressed beneath the Levell ofthe waters Surface, it shall not descend any farther, but shall rest, for no other

than the universall and most common cause, which is that Solid Magnitudes,

less grave in specie than the water, go not to the bottom.

  So that if one should take a Plate of Lead, as for Example, a finger thick,

and an handfull broad every way, and should attempt to make it swimme,

with putting it lightly on the water, he would lose his Labour, because that if

it should be depressed an Hairs breadth beyond the possible Altitude of the

Ramparts  of  water,  it  would  dive  and  sink;  but  if  whilst  it  is  going

downwards, one should make certain Banks or Ramparts about it, that should

hinder the defusion of the water upon the said Plate, the which Banks should

rise so high, as that they might be able to contain as much water, as should

weigh equally with the said Plate, it would, witho{u}t all Question, descend

no lower, but would rest, as being sustained by vertue of the Air contained

within the aforesaid Ramparts: and, in short, there would be a Vessell by this

means formed with the bottom of Lead. But if the thinness of the Lead shall

be such, that a very small height of Rampart would suffice to contain so

much Air, as might keep it afloat, it shall also rest without the Artificiall

Banks or Ramparts, but yet not without the Air, because the Air by it self

makes Banks sufficient for a small height, to resist the Superfusion of the

water: so that that which in this case swimmes, is as it were a Vessell filled

with Air, by vertue of which it continueth afloat.

  I will, in the last place, with an other Experime{n}t, attempt to remove all

difficulties, if so be there should yet be any doubt left in any one, touching
                        E
the opperation of this Continuity of the Air, with the thin Plate which swims,

and afterwards put an end to this part of my discourse.

E
 Or rather Contiguity,


  I suppose my self to be questioning with some of my Oponents.

  Whether Figure have any influence upon the encrease or diminution of the
                                                                      78
Resistance in any Weight against its being raised in the Air; and I suppose,

that I am to maintain the Affirmative, asserting that a Mass of Lead, reduced

to the Figure of a Ball, shall be raised with less force, then if the same had

been made into a thinne and broad Plate, because that it in this spacious

Figure,  hath  a  great  quantity  of  Air  to  penetrate,  and  in  that  other,  more

compacted and contracted very little: and to demonstrate the truth of such my

Opinion, I will hang in a small thred first the Ball or Bullet, and put that intothe water, tying the thred that upholds it to one end of the Ballance that I hold

in the Air, and to the other end I by degrees adde so much Weight, till that at

last it brings up the Ball of Lead out of the water: to do which, suppose a

Gravity of thirty Ounces sufficeth; I afterwards reduce the said Lead into a

flat and thinne Plate, the which I likewise put into the water, suspended by

three threds, which hold it parallel to the Surface of the water, and putting in

the same manner, Weights to the other end, till such time as the Plate comes

to be raised and drawn out of the water: I finde that thirty six ounces will not

suffice to seperate it from the water, and raise it thorow the Air: and arguing

from this Experiment, I affirm, that I have fully demonstrated the truth of my

Proposition. Here my Oponents desires me to look down, shewing me a thing

which I had not before observed, to wit, that in the Ascent of the Plate out of

the water, it draws after it another Plate (if I may so call it) of water, which

before it divides and parts from the inferiour Surface of the Plate of Lead, is

raised above the Levell of the other water, more than the thickness of the

back of a Knife: Then he goeth to repeat the Experiment with the Ball, and

makes me see, that it is but a very small quantity of water, which cleaves to

its  compacted  and  contracted  Figure:  and  then  he  subjoynes,  that  its  no

wonder, if in seperating the thinne and broad Plate from the water, we meet

with much greater Resistance, than in seperating the Ball, since together with

the Plate, we are to raise a great quantity of water, which occurreth not in the

Ball:  He  telleth  me  moreover,  how  that  our  Question  is,  whether  the

Resistance of Elevation be greater in a dilated Plate of Lead, than in a Ball,

and not whether more resisteth a Plate of Lead with a great quantity of water,

or a Ball with a very little water: He sheweth me in the close, that the putting

the Plate and the Ball first into the water, to make proofe thereby of their

Resistance in the Air, is besides our case, which treats of Elivating in the Air,

and of things placed in the Air, and not of the Resistance that is made in the

Confines of the Air and water, and by things which are part in Air and part in

water: and lastly, they make me feel with my hand, that when the thinne Plate

is in the Air, and free from the weight of the water, it is raised with the very

same Force that raiseth the Ball. Seeing, and understanding these things, I

know not what to do, unless to grant my self convinced, and to thank such a

Friend, for having made me to see that which I never till then observed: and,

being  advertised  by  this  same  Accident,  to  tell  my  Adversaries,  that  our

Question is, whether a Board and a Ball of Ebony, equally go to the bottom in

water, and not a Ball of Ebony and a Board of Ebony, joyned with anotherflat Body of Air: and, farthermore, that we speak of sinking, and not sinking

to the bottom, in water, and not of that which happeneth in the Confines of

the water and Air to Bodies that be part in the Air, and part in the water; nor

much less do we treat of the greater or lesser Force requisite in seperating this

or that Body from the Air; not omitting to tell them, in the last place, that the

Air doth resist, and gravitate downwards in the water, just so much as the

water (if I may so speak) gravitates and resists upwards in the Air, and that

the same Force is required to sinke a Bladder under water, that is full of Air,

as to raise it in the Air, being full of water, removing the consideration of the

weight of that Filme or Skinne, and considering the water and the Air only.

And it is likewise true, that the same Force is required to sink a Cup or such

like  Vessell  under  water,  whilst  it  is  full  of  Air,  as  to  raise  it  above  the

Superficies of the water, keeping it with the mouth downwards; whilst it is

full of water, which is constrained in the same manner to follow the Cup

which contains it, and to rise above the other water into the Region of the Air,

as the Air is forced to follow the same Vessell under the Surface of the water,

till that in this c{a}se the water, surmounting the brimme of the Cup, breaks

in, driving thence the Air, and in that case, the said brimme coming out of the

water, and arriving to the Confines of the Air, the water falls down, and the

Air sub-enters to fill the cavity of the Cup: upon which ensues, that he no less

transgresses the Articles of the Convention, who produceth a Plate conjoyned

with much Air, to see if it descend to the bottom in water, then he that makes

proof of the Resistance against Elevation in Air with a Plate of Lead, joyned

with a like quantity of water.

78
 An Experiment of the operation of Figures, in encreasing or lessening of the Airs Resistance of Division.


        Aristotles opinion touching the Operation of Figure examined.


I have said all that I could at present think of, to maintain the Assertion I have

undertook. It remains, that I examine that which Aristotle hath writ of this
                                                        79
matter towards the end of his Book De Cælo; wherein I shall note two

things: the one that it being true as hath been demonstrated, that Figure hath

nothing to do about the moving or not moving it self upwards or downwards,

its seemes that Aristotle at his first falling upon this Speculation, was of the

same opinion, as in my opinion may be collected from the examination of his

words. ’Tis true, indeed, that in essaying afterwards to render a reason of

such effect, as not having in my conceit hit upon the right, (which in thesecond  place  I  will  examine)  it  seems  that  he  is  brought  to  admit  the

largenesse  of  Figure,  to  be  interessed  in  this  operation.  As  to  the  first

particuler, hear the precise words of Aristotle.

79
 Aristot. de Cælo Lib. 4. Cap 6.


  Figures are not the Causes of moving simply upwards or downwards, but
                                      8081
of moving more slowly or swiftly, and by what means this comes to pass, it

is not difficult to see.

80
 Aristotle makes not Figure the cause of Motion absolutely, but of swift or slow motion,

81
 Lib. 4. Cap. 6: Text. 42.


  Here first I note, that the terms being four, which fall under the present

consideration,  namely,  Motion,  Rest,  Slowly  and  Swiftly:  And Aristotle

naming  figures  as  Causes  of  Tardity  and  Velocity,  excluding  them  from

being the Cause of absolute and simple Motion, it seems necessary, that he

exclude them on the other side, from being the Cause of Rest, so that his

meaning  is  this.  Figures  are  not  the  Causes  of  moving  or  not  moving

absolutely, but of moving quickly or slowly: and, here, if any should say the

mind of Aristotle is to exclude Figures from being Causes of Motion, but yet

not from being Causes of Rest, so that the sence would be to remove from

Figures, there being the Causes of moving simply, but yet not there being

Causes  of  Rest,  I  would  demand,  whether  we  ought  with Aristotle  to

understand, that all Figures universally, are, in some manner, the causes of

Rest in those Bodies, which otherwise would move, or else some particular

Figures only, as for Example, broad and thinne Figures: If all indifferently,

then every Body shall rest: because every Body hath some Figure, which is

false; but if some particular Figures only may be in some manner a Cause of

Rest, as, for Example, the broad, then the others would be in some manner

the Causes of Motion: for if from seeing some Bodies of a contracted Figure

move, which after dilated into Plates rest, may be inferred, that the Amplitude

of Figure hath a part in the Cause of that Rest; so from seeing such like

Figures rest, which afterwards contracted move, it may with the same reason

be affirmed, that the united and contracted Figure, hath a part in causing

Motion, as the remover of that which impeded it: The which again is directly

opposite to what Aristotle saith, namely, that Figures are not the Causes ofMotion. Besides, if Aristotle had admitted and not excluded Figures from

being Causes of not moving in some Bodies, which moulded into another

Figure would move, he would have impertinently propounded in a dubitative

manner, in the words immediately following, whence it is, that the large and

thinne  Plates  of  Lead  or  Iron,  rest  upon  the  water,  since  the  Cause  was

apparent, namely, the Amplitude of Figure. Let us conclude, therefore, that

the meaning of Aristotle in this place is to affirm, that Figures are not the

Causes of absolutely moving or not moving, but only of moving swiftly or

slowly: which we ought the rather to believe, in regard it is indeed a most

true  conceipt  and  opinion.  Now  the  mind  of Aristotle  being  such,  and

appearing by consequence, rather contrary at the first sight, then favourable

to the assertion of the Oponents, it is necessary, that their Interpretation be

not exactly the same with that, but such, as being in part understood by some

of them, and in part by others, was set down: and it may easily be indeed so,

being  an  Interpretation  consonent  to  the  sence  of  the  more  famous

Interpretors, which is, that the Adverbe Simply or Absolutely, put in the Text,

ought not to be joyned to the Verbe to Move, but with the Noun Causes: so

that the purport of Aristotles words, is to affirm, That Figures are not the

Causes absolutely of moving or not moving, but yet are Causes Secundum

quid, viz.  in  some  sort;  by  which  means,  they  are  called  Auxiliary  and

Concomitant Causes: and this Proposition is received and asserted as true by

Signor Buonamico Lib. 5. Cap. 28. where he thus writes.

  There  are  other  Causes  concomitant,  by  which  some  things  float,  and

others sink, among which the Figures of Bodies hath the first place, &c.

  Concerning this Proposition, I meet with many doubts and difficulties, for

which me thinks the words of Aristotle are not capable of such a construction

and sence, and the difficulties are these.

  First  in  the  order  and  disposure  of  the  words  of Aristotle, the particle

Simpliciter, or if you will absoluté, is conjoyned with the Verb to move, and

seperated from the Noun Causes, the which is a great presumption in my

favour, seeing that the writing and the Text saith, Figures are not the Cause of

moving simply upwards or downwards, but of quicker or slower Motion: and,

saith  not,  Figures  are  not  simply  the  Causes  of  moving  upwards  or

downwards,  and  when  the  words  of  a  Text  receive,  transposed,  a  sence

different from that which they sound, taken in the order wherein the Author

disposeth them, it is not convenient to inverte them. And who will affirm thatAristotle desiring to write a Proposition, would dispose the words in such

sort, that they should import a different, nay, a contrary sence? contrary, I

say, because understood as they are written; they say, that Figures are not the

Causes  of  Motion,  but  inverted,  they  say,  that  Figures  are  the  Causes  of

Motion, &c.

  Moreover, if the intent of Aristotle had been to say, that Figures are not

simply  the  Causes  of  moving  upwards  or  downwards,  but  only  Causes

Secundum  quid,  he  would  not  have  adjoyned  those  words, but  they  are

Causes of the more swift or slow Motion; yea, the subjoining this would have

been  not  only  superfluous  but  false,  for  that  the  whole  tenour  of  the

Proposition would import thus much. Figures are not the absolute Causes of

moving upwards or downwards, but are the absolute Cause of the swift or

slow Motion; which is not true: because the primary Causes of greater or

lesser Velocity, are by Aristotle in the 4th of his Physicks, Text. 71. attributed

to the greater or lesser Gravity of Moveables, compared among themselves,

and to the greater or lesser Resistance of the Medium’s, depending on their

greater or less Crassitude: and these are inserted by Aristotle as the primary

Causes; and these two only are in that place nominated: and Figure comes

afterwards to be considered, Text. 74. rather as an Instrumentall Cause of the

force of the Gravity, the which divides either with the Figure, or with the

Impetus; and, indeed, Figure by it self without the force of Gravity or Levity,

would opperate nothing.

  I adde, that if Aristotle had an opinion that Figure had been in some sort

the  Cause  of  moving  or  not  moving,  the  inquisition  which  he  makes

immediately in a doubtfull manner, whence it comes, that a Plate of Lead

flotes, would have been impertinent; for if but just before he had said, that

Figure was in a certain sort the Cause of moving or not moving, he needed

not to call in Question, by what Cause the Plate of Lead swims, and then

ascribing the Cause to its Figure; and framing a discourse in this manner.

Figure is a Cause Secundum quid of not sinking: but, now, if it be doubted,

for  what  Cause  a  thin  Plate  of  Lead  goes  not  to  the  bottom;  it  shall  be

answered, that that proceeds from its Figure: a discourse which would be

indecent in a Child, much more in Aristotle; For where is the occasion of

doubting? And who sees not, that if Aristotle had held, that Figure was in

some sort a Cause of Natation, he would without the least Hesitation have

writ; That Figure is in a certain sort the Cause of Natation, and therefore the

Plate of Lead in respect of its large and expatiated Figure swims; but if wetake the proposition of Aristotle as I say, and as it is written, and as indeed it

is true, the ensuing words come in very oppositely, as well in the introduction

of swift and slow, as in the question, which very pertinently offers it self, and

would say thus much.

  Figures are not the Cause of moving or not moving simply upwards or

downwards, but of moving more quickly or slowly: But if it be so, the Cause

is doubtfull, whence it proceeds, that a Plate of Lead or of Iron broad and thin

doth swim, &c. And the occasion of the doubt is obvious, because it seems at

the first glance, that the Figure is the Cause of this Natation, since the same

Lead, or a less quantity, but in another Figure, goes to the bottom, and we

have already affirmed, that the Figure hath no share in this effect.

  Lastly, if the intent of Aristotle in this place had been to say, that Figures,

although not absolutely, are at least in some measure the Cause of moving or

not moving: I would have it considered, that he names no less the Motion

upwards,  than  the  other  downwards:  and  because  in  exemplifying  it

afterwards, he produceth no other Experiments than of a Plate of Lead, and

Board of Ebony, Matters that of their own Nature go to the bottom, but by

vertue (as our Adversaries say) of their Figure, rest afloat; it is fit that they

should  produce  some  other  Experiment  of  those  Matters,  which  by  their

Nature swims, but retained by their Figure rest at the bottom. But since this is

impossible to be done, we conclude, that Aristotle in this place, hath not

attributed any action to the Figure of simply moving or not moving.

  But though he hath exquisitely Philosophiz’d, in investigating the solution

of  the  doubts  he  proposeth,  yet  will  I  not  undertake  to  maintain,  rather

various difficulties, that present themselves unto me, give me occasion of

suspecting that he hath not entirely displaid unto us, the true Cause of the

present Conclusion: which difficulties I will propound one by one, ready to

change opinion, whenever I am shewed, that the Truth is different from what

I  say;  to  the  confession  whereof  I  am  much  more  inclinable  than  to

contradiction.


      Aristotle erred in affirming a Needle dimitted long wayes to sink.


Aristotle having propounded the Question, whence it proceeds, that broad

Plates of Iron or Lead, float or swim; he addeth (as it were strengthening the

occasion of doubting) forasmuch as other things, less, and less grave, be they

round or long, as for instance a Needle go to the bottom. Now I here doubt, orrather am certain that a Needle put lightly upon the water, rests afloat, no less

than the thin Plates of Iron or Lead. I cannot believe, albeit it hath been told

me,  that  some  to  defend Aristotle  should  say,  that  he  intends  a  Needle

demitted  not  longwayes  but  endwayes,  and  with  the  Point  downwards;

nevertheless, not to leave them so much as this, though very weak refuge, and

which in my judgement Aristotle himself would refuse, I say it ought to be

understood, that the Needle must be demitted, according to the Dimension

named by Aristotle, which is the length: because, if any other Dimension than

that which is named, might or ought to be taken, I would say, that even the

Plates of Iron and Lead, sink to the bottom, if they be put into the water

edgewayes and not flatwayes. But because Aristotle saith, broad Figures go

not to the bottom, it is to be understood, being demitted broadwayes: and,

therefore, when he saith, long Figures as a Needle, albeit light, rest not afloat,

it ought to be understood of them when demitted longwayes.

  Moreover, to say that Aristotle is to be understood of the Needle demitted

with the Point downwards, is to father upon him a great impertinency; for in

this place he saith, that little Particles of Lead or Iron, if they be round or

long as a Needle, do sink to the bottome; so that by his Opinion, a Particle or

small Grain of Iron cannot swim: and if he thus believed, what a great folly

would it be to subjoyn, that neither would a Needle demitted endwayes swim?

And what other is such a Needle, but many such like Graines accumulated

one upon another? It was too unworthy of such a man to say, that one single

Grain of Iron could not swim, and that neither can it swim, though you put a

hundred more upon it.

  Lastly, either Aristotle believed, that a Needle demitted longwayes upon

the water, would swim, or he believed that it would not swim: If he believed

it would not swim, he might well speak as indeed he did; but if he believed

and knew that it would float, why, together with the dubious Problem of the

Natation  of  broad  Figures,  though  of  ponderous  Matter,  hath  he  not  also

introduced  the  Question;  whence  it  proceeds,  that  even  long  and  slender

Figures,  howbeit  of  Iron  or  Lead  do  swim?  And  the  rather,  for  that  the

occasion of doubting seems greater in long and narrow Figures, than in broad

and thin, as from Aristotles not having doubted of it, is manifested.

  No lesser an inconvenience would they fasten upon Aristotle, who in his

defence should say, that he means a Needle pretty thick, and not a small one;

for take it for granted to be intended of a small one; and it shall suffice toreply, that he believed that it would swim; and I will again charge him with

having avoided a more wonderfull and intricate Probleme, and introduced the

more facile and less wonderfull.

  We say freely therefore, that Aristotle did hold, that only the broad Figure

did  swim,  but  the  long  and  slender,  such  as  a  Needle,  not.  The  which

nevertheless is false, as it is also false in round Bodies: because, as from what

hath been predemonstrated, may be gathered, little Balls of Lead and Iron, do

in like manner swim.


      Aristotle affirmeth some Bodies volatile for their Minuity, Text. 42.


He proposeth likewise another Conclusion, which likewise seems different

from the truth, and it is, That some things, by reason of their littleness fly in

the Air, as the small dust of the Earth, and the thin leaves of beaten Gold: but

in my Opinion, Experience shews us, that that happens not only in the Air,

but also in the water, in which do descend, even those Particles or Atomes of

Earth, that disturbe it, whose minuity is such, that they are not deservable,

save only when they are many hundreds together. Therefore, the dust of the

Earth, and beaten Gold, do not any way sustain themselves in the Air, but

descend downwards, and only fly to and again in the same, when strong

Windes raise them, or other agitations of the Air commove them: and this

also happens in the commotion of the water, which raiseth its Sand from the

bottom, and makes it muddy. But Aristotle cannot mean this impediment of

the commotion, of which he makes no mention, nor names other than the

lightness of such Minutiæ or Atomes, and the Resistance of the Crassitudes

of the Water and Air, by which we see, that he speakes of a calme, and not

disturbed and agitated Air: but in that case, neither Gold nor Earth, be they

never so small, are sustained, but speedily descend.

      Democritus placed the Cause of Natation in certain fiery Atomes.

                                                82
He passeth next to confute Democritus, which, by his Testimony would

have it, that some Fiery Atomes, which continually ascend through the water,

do spring upwards, and sustain those grave Bodies, which are very broad, and

that the narrow descend to the bottom, for that but a small quantity of those

Atomes, encounter and resist them.

82
 Aristot. De Cælo lib. 4. cap. 6. text. 43.                                              83
  I say, Aristotle confutes this position, saying, that that should much more

occurre in the Air, as the same Democritus instances against himself, but after

he had moved the objection, he slightly resolves it, with saying, that those

Corpuscles which ascend in the Air, make not their Impetus conjunctly. Here
                                                                      84
I will not say, that the reason alledged by Democritus is true, but I will only

say, it seems in my judgement, that it is not wholly confuted by Aristotle,

whilst he saith, that were it true, that the calid ascending Atomes, should

sustain Bodies grave, but very broad, it would much more be done in the Air,

than  in  Water,  for  that  haply  in  the  Opinion  of Aristotle,  the  said  calid

Atomes ascend with much greater Force and Velocity through the Air, than

through the water. And if this be so, as I verily believe it is, the Objection of

Aristotle in my judgement seems to give occasion of suspecting, that he may

possibly be deceived in more than one particular: First, because those calid

Atomes, (whether they be Fiery Corpuscles, or whether they be Exhalations,

or in short, whatever other matter they be, that ascends upwards through the

Air) cannot be believed to mount faster through Air, than through water: but

rather on the contrary, they peradventure move more impetuously through the

water, than through the Air, as hath been in part demonstrated above. And

here  I  cannot  finde  the  reason,  why Aristotle  seeing,  that  the  descending

Motion of the same Moveable, is more swift in Air, than in water, hath not

advertised us, that from the contrary Motion, the contrary should necessarily

follow; to wit, that it is more swift in the water, than in the Air: for since that

the Moveable which descendeth, moves swifter through the Air, than through

the water, if we should suppose its Gravity gradually to diminish, it would

first become such, that descending swiftly through the Air, it would descend

but  slowly  through  the  water:  and  then  again,  it  might  be  such,  that

descending in the Air, it should ascend in the water: and being made yet less

grave, it shall ascend swiftly through the water, and yet descend likewise

through the Air: and in short, before it can begin to ascend, though but slowly

through the Air, it shall ascend swiftly through the water: how then is it true,

that ascending Moveables move swifter through the Air, than through the

water?

83
 Democritus confuted by Aristotle, text 43.

84
 Aristotles confutation of Democritus refuted by the Author.  That  which  hath  made Aristotle  believe,  the  Motion  of  Ascent  to  be

swifter in Air, than in water, was first, the having referred the Causes of slow

and  quick,  as  well  in  the  Motion  of  Ascent,  as  of  Descent,  only  to  the

diversity of the Figures of the Moveable, and to the more or less Resistance

of the greater or lesser Crassitude, or Rarity of the Medium; not regarding the

comparison of the Excesses of the Gravities of the Moveables, and of the

Mediums: the which notwithstanding, is the most principal point in this affair:

for if the augmentation and diminution of the Tardity or Velocity, should

have only respect to the Density or Rarity of the Medium, every Body that

descends  in  Air,  would  descend  in  water:  because  whatever  difference  is

found between the Crassitude of the water, and that of the Air, may well be

found between the Velocity of the same Moveable in the Air, and some other

Velocity:  and  this  should  be  its  proper  Velocity  in  the  water,  which  is

absolutely false. The other occasion is, that he did believe, that like as there is

a  positive  and  intrinsecall  Quality,  whereby  Elementary  Bodies  have  a

propension of moving towards the Centre of the Earth, so there is another
                      85
likewise intrinsecall, whereby some of those Bodies have an Impetus of

flying  the  Centre,  and  moving  upwards:  by  Vertue  of  which  intrinsecall

Principle, called by him Levity, the Moveables which have that same Motion

more easily penetrate the more subtle Medium, than the more dense: but such

a Proposition appears likewise uncertain, as I have above hinted in part, and

as with Reasons and Experiments, I could demonstrate, did not the present

Argument importune me, or could I dispatch it in few words.

85
 Lib. 4. Cap. 5.


  The Objection therefore of Aristotle against Democritus, whilst he saith,

that if the Fiery ascending Atomes should sustain Bodies grave, but of a

distended Figure, it would be more observable in the Air than in the water,

because such Corpuscles move swifter in that, than in this, is not good; yea

the contrary would evene, for that they ascend more slowly through the Air:

and, besides their moving slowly, they ascend, not united together, as in the

water, but discontinue, and, as we say, scatter: And, therefore, as Democritus

well  replyes,  resolving  the  instance  they  make  not  their  push  or Impetus

conjunctly.

  Aristotle, in the second place, deceives himself, whilst he will have the

said grave Bodies to be more easily sustained by the said Fiery ascendingAtomes in the Air than in the Water: not observing, that the said Bodies are

much  more  grave  in  that,  than  in  this,  and  that  such  a  Body  weighs  ten

pounds in the Air, which will not in the water weigh 1/2 an ounce; how can it

then be more easily sustained in the Air, than in the Water?


                        Democritus confuted by the Authour.


Let  us  conclude,  therefore,  that Democritus  hath  in  this  particular  better

Philosophated than Aristotle. But yet will not I affirm, that Democritus hath

reason’d rightly, but I rather say, that there is a manifest Experiment that

overthrows his Reason, and this it is, That if it were true, that calid ascending

Atomes should uphold a Body, that if they did not hinder, would go to the

bottom, it would follow, that we may find a Matter very little superiour in

Gravity to the water, the which being reduced into a Ball, or other contracted

Figure, should go to the bottom, as encountring but few Fiery Atomes; and

which being distended afterwards into a dilated and thin Plate, should come

to  be  thrust  upwards  by  the  impulsion  of  a  great  Multitude  of  those

Corpuscles, and at last carried to the very Surface of the water: which wee

see not to happen; Experience shewing us, that a Body v. gra. of a Sphericall

Figure, which very hardly, and with very great leasure goeth to the bottom,

will rest there, and will also descend thither, being reduced into whatsoever

other distended Figure.

  We  must  needs  say  then,  either  that  in  the  water,  there  are  no  such

ascending Fiery Atoms, or if that such there be, that they are not able to raise

and lift up any Plate of a Matter, that without them would go to the bottom:

Of which two Positions, I esteem the second to be true, understanding it of

water, constituted in its naturall Coldness. But if we take a Vessel of Glass, or

Brass, or any other hard matter, full of cold water, within which is put a Solid

of a flat or concave Figure, but that in Gravity exceeds the water so little, that

it goes slowly to the bottom; I say, that putting some burning Coals under the

said  Vessel,  as  soon  as  the  new  Fiery  Atomes  shall  have  penetrated  the

substance of the Vessel, they shall without doubt, ascend through that of the

water,  and  thrusting  against  the  foresaid  Solid,  they  shall  drive  it  to  the

Superficies,  and  there  detain  it,  as  long  as  the  incursions  of  the  said

Corpuscles shall last, which ceasing after the removall of the Fire, the Solid

being abandoned by its supporters, shall return to the bottom.  But Democritus notes, that this Cause only takes place when we treat of

raising and sustaining of Plates of Matters, but very little heavier than the

water, or extreamly thin: but in Matters very grave, and of some thickness, as

Plates of Lead or other Mettal, that same Effect wholly ceaseth: In Testimony

of which, let’s observe that such Plates, being raised by the Fiery Atomes,

ascend through all the depth of the water, and stop at the Confines of the Air,

still staying under water: but the Plates of the Opponents stay not, but only

when they have their upper Superficies dry, nor is there any means to be

used, that when they are within the water, they may not sink to the bottom.

  The  cause,  therefore,  of  the  Supernatation  of  the  things  of  which

Democritus  speaks  is  one,  and  that  of  the  Supernatation  of  the  things  of
                                                              86
which we speak is another. But, returning to Aristotle, methinks that he hath

more weakly confuted Democritus, than Democritus himself hath done: For

Aristotle having propounded the Objection which he maketh against him, and

opposed him with saying, that if the calid ascendent Corpuscles were those

that raised the thin Plate, much more then would such a Solid be raised and

born upwards through the Air, it sheweth that the desire in Aristotle to detect

Democritus, was predominate over the exquisiteness of Solid Philosophizing:

which desire of his he hath discovered in other occasions, and that we may

not digress too far from this place, in the Text precedent to this Chapter
                          87
which we have in hand; where he attempts to confute the same Democritus

for  that  he,  not  contenting  himself  with  names  only,  had  essayed  more

particularly  to  declare  what  things  Gravity  and  Levity  were;  that  is,  the

Causes  of  descending  and  ascending,  (and  had  introduced  Repletion  and

Vacuity) ascribing this to Fire, by which it moves upwards, and that to the

Earth, by which it descends; afterwards attributing to the Air more of Fire,

and to the water more of Earth. But Aristotle desiring a positive Cause, even

of ascending Motion, and not as Plato, or these others, a simple negation, or
                                                                              88
privation,  such  as  Vacuity  would  be  in  reference  to  Repletion,  argueth

against Democritus and saith: If it be true, as you suppose, then there shall be

a great Mass of water, which shall have more of Fire, than a small Mass of

Air, and a great Mass of Air, which shall have more of Earth than a little

Mass of water, whereby it would ensue, that a great Mass of Air, should

come more swiftly downwards, than a little quantity of water: But that is

never in any case soever: Therefore Democritus discourseth erroneously.

86
 Aristotle shews his desire of finding Democritus in an Error, to exceed that of discovering Truth.87
 Cap. 5. Text 41.

88
 Id. ibid.


  But in my opinion, the Doctrine of Democritus is not by this allegation

overthrown,  but  if  I  erre  not,  the  manner  of Aristotle  deduction  either

concludes not, or if it do conclude any thing, it may with equall force be

restored against himself. Democritus will grant to Aristotle, that there may be

a great Mass of Air taken, which contains more Earth, than a small quantity

of  water,  but  yet  will  deny,  that  such  a  Mass  of  Air,  shall  go  faster

downwards than a little water, and that for many reasons. First, because if the

greater quantity of Earth, contained in the great Mass of Air, ought to cause a

greater Velocity than a less quantity of Earth, contained in a little quantity of

water, it would be necessary, first, that it were true, that a greater Mass of

pure Earth, should move more swiftly than a less: But this is false, though

Aristotle in many places affirms it to be true: because not the greater absolute,
                                                                              89
but the greater specificall Gravity, is the cause of greater Velocity: nor doth

a  Ball  of  Wood,  weighing  ten  pounds,  descend  more  swiftly  than  one

weighing ten Ounces, and that is of the same Matter: but indeed a Bullet of

Lead of four Ounces, descendeth more swiftly than a Ball of Wood of twenty

Pounds: because the Lead is more grave in specie than the Wood. Therefore,

its not necessary, that a great Mass of Air, by reason of the much Earth
                                                                                90
contained in it, do descend more swiftly than a little Mass of water, but on

the contrary, any whatsoever Mass of water, shall move more swiftly than

any other of Air, by reason the participation of the terrene parts in specie is

greater in the water, than in the Air. Let us note, in the second place, how that

in multiplying the Mass of the Air, we not only multiply that which is therein

of  terrene,  but  its  Fire  also:  whence  the  Cause  of  ascending,  no  less

encreaseth, by vertue of the Fire, than that of descending on the account of its

multiplied Earth. It was requisite in increasing the greatness of the Air, to

multiply that which it hath of terrene only, leaving its Fire in its first state, for

then the terrene parts of the augmented Air, overcoming the terrene parts of

the  small  quantity  of  water,  it  might  with  more  probability  have  been

pretended, that the great quantity of Air, ought to descend with a greater

Impetus, than the little quantity of water.

89
 The greater Specificall, not the greater absolute Gravity, is the Cause of Velocity.90
 Any Mass of water shal move more swiftly, than any of Air, and why.


  Therefore, the Fallacy lyes more in the Discourse of Aristotle, than in that

of Democritus, who with severall other Reasons might oppose Aristotle, and

alledge; If it be true, that the extreame Elements be one simply grave, and the

other simply light, and that the mean Elements participate of the one, and of

the other Nature; but the Air more of Levity, and the water more of Gravity,

then  there  shall  be  a  great  Mass  of  Air,  whose  Gravity  shall  exceed  the

Gravity of a little quantity of water, and therefore such a Mass of Air shall

descend more swiftly than that little water: But that is never seen to occurr:

Therefore its not true, that the mean Elements do participate of the one, and

the other quality. This argument is fallacious, no less than the other against

Democritus.

  Lastly, Aristotle having said, that if the Position of Democritus were true,

it would follow, that a great Mass of Air should move more swiftly than a

small Mass of water, and afterwards subjoyned, that that is never seen in any

Case: methinks others may become desirous to know of him in what place

this  should  evene,  which  he  deduceth  against Democritus,  and  what

Experiment teacheth us, that it never falls out so. To suppose to see it in the

Element of water, or in that of the Air is vain, because neither doth water

through  water,  nor  Air  through  Air  move,  nor  would  they  ever  by  any

whatever participation others assign them, of Earth or of Fire: the Earth, in

that it is not a Body fluid, and yielding to the mobility of other Bodies, is a

most  improper  place  and Medium  for  such  an  Experiment: Vacuum,

according  to  the  same Aristotle  himself,  there  is  none,  and  were  there,

nothing would move in it: there remains the Region of Fire, but being so far

distant from us, what Experiment can assure us, or hath assertained Aristotle

in such sort, that he should as of a thing most obvious to sence, affirm what

he produceth in confutation of Democritus, to wit, that a great Mass of Air, is

moved no swifter than a little one of water? But I will dwell no longer upon

this  matter,  whereon  I  have  spoke  sufficiently:  but  leaving Democritus,  I

return  to  the  Text  of Aristotle,  wherein  he  goes  about  to  render  the  true

reason, how it comes to pass, that the thin Plates of Iron or Lead do swim on

the water; and, moreover, that Gold it self being beaten into thin Leaves, not

only swims in water, but flyeth too and again in the Air. He supposeth that of
            91
Continualls,  some  are  easily  divisible,  others  not:  and  that  of  the  easilydivisible, some are more so, and some less: and these he affirms we should

esteem the Causes.

  He addes that that is easily divisible, which is well terminated, and the

more the more divisible, and that the Air is more so, than the water, and the

water  than  the  Earth.  And,  lastly,  supposeth  that  in  each  kind,  the  lesse

quantity is easlyer divided and broken than the greater.

91
 De Cælo l. 4. c. 6. t. 44.


  Here I note, that the Conclusions of Aristotle in generall are all true, but

methinks, that he applyeth them to particulars, in which they have no place,

as indeed they have in others, as for Example, Wax is more easily divisible

than Lead, and Lead than Silver, inasmuch as Wax receives all the terms

more easlier than Lead, and Lead than Silver. Its true, moreover, that a little

quantity  of  Silver  is  easlier  divided  than  a  great  Mass:  and  all  these

Propositions are true, because true it is, that in Silver, Lead and Wax, there is

simply a Resistance against Division, and where there is the absolute, there is

also the respective. But if as well in water as in Air, there be no Renitence

against simple Division, how can we say, that the water is easlier divided

than  the  Air?  We  know  not  how  to  extricate  our  selves  from  the

Equivocation:  whereupon  I  return  to  answer,  that  Resistance  of  absolute

Division is one thing, and Resistance of Division made with such and such

Velocity  is  another.  But  to  produce  Rest,  and  to  abate  the  Motion,  the

Resistance of absolute Division is necessary; and the Resistance of speedy

Division, causeth not Rest, but slowness of Motion. But that as well in the

Air, as in water, there is no Resistance of simple Division, is manifest, for

that there is not found any Solid Body which divides not the Air, and also the

water:  and  that  beaten  Gold,  or  small  dust,  are  not  able  to  superate  the

Resistance of the Air, is contrary to that which Experience shews us, for we

see Gold and Dust to go waving to and again in the Air, and at last to descend

downwards,  and  to  do  the  same  in  the  water,  if  it  be  put  therein,  and

separated from the Air. And, because, as I say, neither the water, nor the Air

do resist simple Division, it cannot be said, that the water resists more than

the Air. Nor let any object unto me, the Example of most light Bodies, as a

Feather, or a little of the pith of Elder, or water-reed that divides the Air and

not the water, and from this infer, that the Air is easlier divisible than the

water; for I say unto them, that if they do well observe, they shall see the
                                                                  92
same Body likewise divide the Continuity of the water, and submerge inpart, and in such a part, as that so much water in Mass would weigh as much

as the whole Solid. And if they shal yet persist in their doubt, that such a

Solid sinks not through inability to divide the water, I will return them this

reply, that if they put it under water, and then let it go, they shall see it divide

the water, and presently ascend with no less celerity, than that with which it

divided the Air in descending: so that to say that this Solid ascends in the Air,

but that coming to the water, it ceaseth its Motion, and therefore the water is

more difficult to be divided, concludes nothing: for I, on the contrary, will

propose them a piece of Wood, or of Wax, which riseth from the bottom of

the water, and easily divides its Resistance, which afterwards being arrived at

the Air, stayeth there, and hardly toucheth it; whence I may aswell say, that

the water is more easier divided than the Air.

92
 Archimed. De Insident. humi lib. 2. prop. 1.


  I will not on this occasion forbear to give warning of another fallacy of

these persons, who attribute the reason of sinking or swimming to the greater

or lesse Resistance of the Crassitude of the water against Division, making

use of the example of an Egg, which in sweet water goeth to the bottom, but

in salt water swims; and alledging for the cause thereof, the faint Resistance

of fresh water against Division, and the strong Resistance of salt water. But if

I mistake not, from the same Experiment, we may aswell deduce the quite

contrary;  namely,  that  the  fresh  water  is  more  dense,  and  the  salt  more

tenuous  and  subtle,  since  an  Egg  from  the  bottom  of  salt  water  speedily

ascends to the top, and divides its Resistance, which it cannot do in the fresh,

in  whose  bottom  it  stays,  being  unable  to  rise  upwards.  Into  such  like

perplexities, do false Principles Lead men: but he that rightly Philosophating,

shall acknowledge the excesses of the Gravities of the Moveables and of the

Mediums, to be the Causes of those effects, will say, that the Egg sinks to the

bottom in fresh water, for that it is more grave than it, and swimeth in the

salt,  for  that  its  less  grave  than  it:  and  shall  without  any  absurdity,  very

solidly establish his Conclusions.

  Therefore the reason totally ceaseth, that Aristotle subjoyns in the Text
      93
saying;  The  things,  therefore,  which  have  great  breadth  remain  above,

because  they  comprehend  much,  and  that  which  is  greater,  is  not  easily

divided. Such discoursing ceaseth, I say, because its not true, that there is in

water or in Air any Resistance of Division; besides that the Plate of Lead

when  it  stays,  hath  already  divided  and  penetrated  the  Crassitude  of  thewater, and profounded it self ten or twelve times more than its own thickness:

besides that such Resistance of Division, were it supposed to be in the water,

could not rationally be affirmed to be more in its superiour parts than in the

middle, and lower: but if there were any difference, the inferiour should be

the more dense, so that the Plate would be no less unable to penetrate the

lower,  than  the  superiour  parts  of  the  water;  nevertheless  we  see  that  no

sooner do we wet the superiour Superficies of the Board or thin Piece of

Wood, but it precipitatly, and without any retension, descends to the bottom.

93
 Text 45.  I believe not after all this, that any (thinking perhaps thereby to defend

Aristotle) will say, that it being true, that the much water resists more than the

little, the said Board being put lower descendeth, because there remaineth a

less Mass of water to be divided by it: because if after the having seen the

same Board swim in four Inches of water, and also after that in the same to

sink, he shall try the same Experiment upon a profundity of ten or twenty

fathom water, he shall see the very self same effect. And here I will take

occasion to remember, for the removall of an Error that is too common; That

that Ship or other whatsoever Body, that on the depth of an hundred or a

thousand fathom, swims with submerging only six fathom of its own height,

[or in the Sea dialect, that draws six fathom water] shall swim in the same
                                                                                94
manner in water, that hath but six fathom and half an Inch of depth. Nor do

I on the other side, think that it can be said, that the superiour parts of the

water are the more dense, although a most grave Authour hath esteemed the

superiour water in the Sea to be so, grounding his opinion upon its being

more  salt,  than  that  at  the  bottom:  but  I  doubt  the  Experiment,  whether

hitherto in taking the water from the bottom, the Observatour did not light

upon some spring of fresh water there spouting up: but we plainly see on the

contrary,  the  fresh  Waters  of  Rivers  to  dilate  themselves  for  some  miles

beyond  their  place  of  meeting  with  the  salt  water  of  the  Sea,  without

descending  in  it,  or  mixing  with  it,  unless  by  the  intervention  of  some

commotion or turbulency of the Windes.

94
 A Ship that in 100 Fathome water draweth 6 Fathome, shall float in 6 Fathome and 1/2 an Inch of depth.


  But returning to Aristotle, I say, that the breadth of Figure hath nothing to

do in this business more or less, because the said Plate of Lead, or other
                                                                  95
Matter, cut into long Slices, swim neither more nor less; and the same shall

the Slices do, being cut anew into little pieces, because its not the breadth but

the thickness that operates in this business. I say farther, that in case it were

really  true,  that  the  Renitence  to  Division  were  the  proper  Cause  of
          96
swimming, the Figures more narrow and short, would much better swim

than the more  spacious and broad, so that augmenting the breadth of the

Figure, the facility of supernatation will be deminished, and decreasing, that

this will encrease.

95
 Thickness not breadth of Figure to be respected in Natation.96
 Were Renitence the cause of Natation, breadth of Figure would hinder the swiming of Bodies.


  And for declaration of what I say, consider that when a thin Plate of Lead

descends,  dividing  the  water,  the  Division  and  discontinuation  is  made

between the parts of the water, invironing the perimeter or Circumference of

the said Plate, and according to the bigness greater or lesser of that circuit, it

hath to divide a greater or lesser quantity of water, so that if the circuit,

suppose  of  a  Board,  be  ten  Feet  in  sinking  it  flatways,  it  is  to  make  the

seperation and division, and to so speak, an incission upon ten Feet of water;

and likewise a lesser Board that is four Feet in Perimeter, must make an

incession  of  four  Feet.  This  granted,  he  that  hath  any  knowledge  in

Geometry, will comprehend, not only that a Board sawed in many long thin

pieces, will much better float than when it was entire, but that all Figures, the

more short and narrow they be, shall so much the better swim. Let the Board

A B C D be, for Example, eight Palmes long, and five broad, its circuit shall

be twenty six Palmes; and so many must the incession be, which it shall make

in the water to descend therein: but if we do saw ir, as suppose into eight little

pieces, according to the Lines E F, G H, {&}c. making seven Segments, we

must adde to the twenty six Palmes of the circuit of the whole Board, seventy

others; whereupon the eight little pieces so cut and seperated, have to cut

ninty six Palmes of water. And, if moreover, we cut each of the said pieces

into five parts, reducing them into Squares, to the circuit of ninty six Palmes,

with four cuts of eight Palmes apiece; we shall adde also sixty four Palmes,

whereupon the said Squares to descend in the water, must divide one hundred

and sixty Palmes of water, but the Resistance is much greater than that of

twenty six; therefore to the lesser Superficies, we shall reduce them, so much

the more easily will they float: and the same will happen in all other Figures,

whose Superficies are simular amongst themselves, but different in bigness:

because the said Superficies, being either deminished or encreased, always

diminish  or  encrease  their  Perimeters  in  subduple  proportion;  to  wit,  the

Resistance that they find in penetrating the water; therefore the little pieces

gradually swim, with more and more facility as their breadth is lessened.  This is manifest; for keeping still the same height of the Solid, with the

same proportion as the Base encreaseth or deminisheth, doth the said Solid

also encrease or diminish; whereupon the Solid more diminishing than the

Circuit,  the  Cause  of  Submersion  more  diminisheth  than  the  Cause  of

Natation: And on the contrary, the Solid more encreasing than the Circuit,

the Cause of Submersion encreaseth more, that of Natation less.

  And this may all be deduced out of the Doctrine of Aristotle against his

own Doctrine.
                                                                        97
  Lastly, to that which we read in the latter part of the Text, that is to say,

that we must compare the Gravity of the Moveable with the Resistance of the

Medium  against  Division,  because  if  the  force  of  the  Gravity  exceed  the

Resistance of the Medium, the Moveable will descend, if not it will float. I

need not make any other answer, but that which hath been already delivered;namely, that its not the Resistance of absolute Division, (which neither is in

Water nor Air)

  but the Gravity of the Medium that must be compared with the Gravity of

the Moveables; and if that of the Medium be greater, the Moveable shall not

descend,  nor  so  much  as  make  a  totall  Submersion,  but  a  partiall  only;

because in the place which it would occupy in the water, there must not

remain  a  Body  that  weighs  less  than  a  like  quantity  of  water:  but  if  the

Moveable be more grave, it shall descend to the bottom, and possess a place

where it is more conformable for it to remain, than another Body that is less

grave. And this is the only true proper and absolute Cause of Natation and

Submersion,  so  that  nothing  else  hath  part  therein:  and  the  Board  of  the

Adversaries swimmeth, when it is conjoyned with as much Air, as, together

with it, doth form a Body less grave than so much water as would fill the

place that the said Compound occupyes in the water; but when they shall

demit  the  simple  Ebony  into  the  water,  according  to  the  Tenour  of  our

Question, it shall alwayes go to the bottom, though it were as thin as a Paper.

97
 Lib. 4. c. 6. Text 45.





                                        FINIS.


                                          Caption    DIALOGUE CONCERNING THE TWO CHIEF

                          WORLD SYSTEMS




                          Translated by Thomas Salusbury


The Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems was first published

in Italian as Dialogo sopra i due massimi sistemi del mondo in 1632 (see

Figure 1).  As with the earlier Discourse on Floating Bodies, it was aimed at

a general readership and only appeared in Latin (as Systema cosmicum) in

1635. Again, as with the earlier volume, it was dedicated to the Grand Duke

of Tuscany, now Ferdinando II de’ Medici.

  The focus of this landmark volume is the comparison of the Copernican

planetary system (which was heliocentric, with the planets orbiting the sun)

with the classical Ptolemaic system (where everything in the Universe circles

around the Earth).  It takes the form of a discussion (occurring over four

days) between three characters (Figure 2): Salviati, an intellectual, who is a

mouthpiece for Galileo’s arguments; Sagredo, a wealthy, inquisitive layman;

and  Simplicio  (“simpleton”)  -  a  philosopher  who  puts  up  ineffectual

Aristotolean  arguments  for  Salviati  to  refute.    In  the  introduction  (to  the

discerning reader) Galileo writes “I have taken the Copernican side in the

discourse, proceeding as with a pure mathematical hypothesis and striving by

every artifice to represent it as superior to supposing the earth motionless.”

  Even though this book was published in Florence with a formal license

from  the  Inquisition,  a  year  later  Galileo  was  tried  and  condemned  (see

Figure 3). He was found to be “vehemently suspect of heresy”, and the book

was placed on the Index of Forbidden Books, where it remained for a further

two  centuries.  In  a  secret  action,  the  publication  of  anything  else  he  had

written, or ever might write, was also banned in Catholic countries.  Galileo,

himself, was sentenced to indefinite imprisonment, and was kept under house

arrest until his death in 1642.Figure 1:  The title page of ‘Dialogo sopra i due massimi sistemi del mondo’, published in Florence, in
                                          1632.Figure 2:  The frontispiece of ‘Dialogo sopra i due massimi sistemi del mondo’, published in Florence,
                                        in 1632.Figure 3: “Galileo before the Holy Office”, a painting by Joseph Nicolas Robert-Fleury (1797–1890)                                    CONTENTS


TO THE MOST SERENE GRAND DUKE OF TUSCANY.

TO THE NOBLE AND MOST PERFECTLY ACCOMPLISHED SR. JOHN

DENHAM KNIGHT OF THE NOBLE ORDER OF THE BATH, AND

SURVEYOR GENERAL OF HIS MATIES WORKS, &C.

THE AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION.

THE FIRST DIALOGUE.

THE SECOND DIALOGUE.

THE THIRD DIALOGUE.

THE FOURTH DIALOGUE.

   TO THE MOST SERENE GRAND DUKE OF TUSCANY.


THOUGH the difference between Men and other living Creatures be very

great, yet happly he that should say that he could shew little less between

Man and Man would not speak more than he might prove. What proportion

doth one bear to a thousand? and yet it is a common Proverb, One Man is

worth a thousand, when as a thousand are not worth one. This difference hath

dependence upon the different abilities of their Intellectuals; which I reduce

to the being, or not being a Philosopher; in regard that Philosophy as being

the proper food of such as live by it, distinguisheth a Man from the common

Essence of the Vulgar in a more or less honourable degree according to the

variety of that diet. In this sence he that hath the highest looks, is of highest

quality; and the turning over of the great Volume of Nature, which is the

proper Object of Philosophy is the way to make one look high: in which

Book, although whatsoever we read, as being the Work of Almighty God, is

therefore most proportionate; yet notwithstanding that is more absolute and

noble wherein we more plainly deserne his art and skill. The Constitution of

the  Vnivers,  among  all  Physical  points  that  fall  within  Humane

Comprehension, may, in my opinion, be preferred to the Precedency: for if

that in regard of universal extent it excell all others, it ought as the Rule and

Standard of the rest to goe before them in Nobility. Now if ever any persons

might challenge to be signally distinguished for Intellectuals from other men, 

Ptolomey and Copernicus were they that have had the honour to see farthest

into, and discourse most profoundly of the Worlds Systeme. About the Works

of which famous Men these Dialous being chiefly conversant, I conceived it

my duty to Dedicate them only to Your Highness. For laying all the weight

upon these two, whom I hold to be the Ablest Wits that have left us their

Works upon these Subjects; to avoid a Solecisme in Manners, I was obliged

to address them to Him, who with me, is the Greatest of all Men, from whom

they can receive either Glory or Patrociny. And if these two persons have so

farre illuminated my Understanding as that this my Book may in a great part

be confessed to belong to them, well may it also be acknowledged to belong

to Your Highness, unto whose Bounteous Magnificence I owe the time and

leasure I had to write it, as also unto Your Powerful Assistance, (never weary

of honouring me) the means that at length I have had to publish it. May Your

Highness therefore be pleased to accept of it according to Your accustomedGoodness; and if any thing shall be found therein, that may be subservient

towards the information or satisfaction of those that are Lovers of Truth; let

them acknowledge it to be due to Your Self, who are so expert in doing good,

that Your Happy Dominion cannot shew the man that is concerned in any of

those general Calamities that disturb the World; so that Praying for Your

Prosperity,  and  continuance  in  this  Your  Pious  and  Laudable  Custome,  I

humbly kiss Your Hands;

  Your Most Serene Highnesses Most Humble and most devoted Servant

and Subject GALILEO GALILEI.            TO THE NOBLE AND MOST PERFECTLY

  ACCOMPLISHED SR. JOHN DENHAM KNIGHT OF THE

      NOBLE ORDER OF THE BATH, AND SURVEYOR

              GENERAL OF HIS MATIES WORKS, &C.


SIR,

  I  Humbly  begge  your  Pardon  for  bringing  this  Book  under  your

Protection. Were it a Work of my own, or I any thing but the Translatour, I

should master my Thoughts to a meaner Dedication; But being a Collection

of some of the greatest Masters in the World, and never made English till

now,  I  conceived  I  might  sooner  procure  their  Welcome  to  a  person  so

eminent for Noble Candor, as well as for all those Intellectual Excellencies

wherewith Your Rich Soul is known to be furnished. I resolv’d to be as kind

to this Book as I could,  and seriously considering which way to effect it, I at

last concluded to prefix Your Name, whom His Majesty and all his Subjects,

(who have a higher Sense and Judgement of Excellent Parts) know best able

to  defend  my  Imperfections.  And  yet  I  confess  there’s  one  thing  makes

against me, which is your eminent Integrity and great Affection to Truth,

whereby my Lapses in a Work of this Nature might justly despair of Shelter,

but that the Excellency of Your Native Candor strives for Predominancy over

all  Your  great  Abilities.  For  ’tis  all-most  impossible  to  think  what  Your

Matchless Wit is not able to Conquer, would Your known Modesty but give

leave: therefore Galileus, Kepler, and those other Worthies in Learning are

now  brought  before  You  in  English  Habit,  having  chang’d  their  Latine,

Italian and French, whereby they were almost Strangers to our Nation, unless

to such as You, who so perfectly master the Originals. I know you have so

much and great imployment for His Majesty, and his good Subjects that I

shall not robb you of another Minutes loss; besides the liberty of subscribing

my Self;

  SIR,

  Your Honours Most Humble and Most obedient Servant


THOMAS SALUSBURY.

 

  READER,    MATHEMATICAL Learning (to speak nothing touching the necessity &

delight thereof; hath bin so sparingly imparted to our Countrymen in their

native English, especially the nobler and sublimer part, that in Compliance

with the Solicitations of several of my noble and learned Friends, and the

Inclinations of such as are Mathematically disposed, more especially those,

who  either  want  Time  or  Patience  to  look  into  the  vulgar  and  unstudied

Languages, I did adventure upon this Work of Collecting & Translating from

amongst the excellent Pieces that are so abounding in the Italian and French

Tongues,  some  of  those  that  my  own  observation  and  the  intimation  of

Friends were most usefull and desired, and with all most wanting in their

Own.

  I was, indeed, at first seriously Conscious, and am now, by experience,

fully convinced how disproportionate the weight of the Enterprize is to the

weakness of the Vndertaker, but yet the Passion I ever had to be subservient

to  my  Friends  and  Compatriots  in  their  Inquisition  after  these  Sublime

Studies, and a Patience which I owe to the Flegme that is predominant in my

Constitution, joyned with a nine-years conversence in these Languages, as

also an unhappy and long Vacation that the persecutions of the late Tyrants

gave me from more advantagious employments so prevailed with me, that I

resolved  to  improve  even  my  very  Confinement  to  serve  those  Friends,

whom, as the Times then stood, I could not see.

  The Book being for Subject and Design intended chiefly for Gentlemen, I

have bin as careless of using a studied Pedantry in my Style; as careful in

contriving a pleasant and beautiful Impression. And when I had considered

the hazard, and computed the charge of the undertaking, I found it to exceed

the  ability  of  a  private  Purse,  especially  of  mine,  that  had  bin  so  lately

emptied by the hand of violent enemies, and perfidious friends; not to make

mention here of the Sums that a Loyal Reflexion upon my Princes Affairs

had at the same time drawn from me; and judg’d that the most safe, easy, and

reasonable way was to invite those Persons who had appeared desirous of the

Book, to be contributary to their own Contentment, by subscribing towards

the charge of this Publication.

  And for the better management of the Work, I joyned to my self a Printer,

whose Genius having rendered him Mathematical, and my overtures of profit

having interessed his diligence, I was induced to promise my self a more than

common  Assistance  from  him:  and  at  his  door  I  with  reason  lay  all

miscarriages that concerns his Profession in the Business.  In this Work I found more than ordinary Encouragement from that publick

spirited Person the Reverend and Learned Dr. Thomas Barlow, Provost of

Queens Colledge Oxford, and Margaret Professor in that Vniversity, as also

from  those  two  able  Mathematicians  and  my  Reall  Friends  Major  Miles

Symner, and Mr. Robert Wood of Trinity Colledge Dublin, and some few

others  whose  Modesty  hath  expresly  enjoin’d  me  a  concealment  of  their

Names.

  Well, at length I have got to the end of my first Stage; and if I have not rid

Post, let my excuse be that my long stay for my Warrant caused me to set out

late; and being ill mounted, and in a road full of rubbs, I could not with any

safety go faster; but hope to get it up in the next Stage, for in that I intend to

shift my Horses.

  The names of those Authors and Treatices which I judged would most

grace  our  Language,  and  gratify  Students,  are  particularly  exprest  in  the

General Title of the two Tomes. Distinct Tomes they are as consisting of

several Pieces: Collections I call them, because they have bin so published,

disperst, and worn out of Print, that they very rarely meet in one hand: and

Translations I own them to be, as not pretending to any thing more than the

disposure  and  conversion  of  them:  those  Tracts  only  excepted  which

compose the second Part of the second Tome.

  The  first  Book  which  offers  it  self  to  your  view  in  this  Tome  is  that

singular and unimitable Piece of Reason and Demonstration the Systeme of

Galileo. The subject of it is a new and Noble p rt of Astronomy, to wit the

Doctrine and Hypothesis of the Mobility of the Earth and the Stability of the

Sun; the History whereof I shall hereafter give you at large in the Life of that

famous Man. Only this by the by; that the Reader may not wonder why these

Dialogues found so various entertainment in Italy (for he cannot but have

heard  that  though  they  have  been  with  all  veneration  valued,  read  &

applauded by the Iudicious, yet they were with much detestation persecuted,

suppressed & exploded by the Superstitious) I am to tell him that our Author

having  assigned  his  intimate  Friends  Salviati  and  Sagredo  the  more

successfull  Parts  of  the  Challenger,  and  Moderater,  he  made  the  famous

Commentator Simplicius to personate the Peripatetick. The Book coming out,

and Pope Urban the VIII. taking his Honour to be concern’d as having in his

private  Capacity  bin  very  positive  in  declaiming  against  the  Samian

Philosophy, and now (as he supposed) being ill delt with by Galileo who had

summed up all his Arguments, and put them into the mouth of Simplicius; hisHoliness thereupon conceived an implacable Displeasure against our Author,

and  thinking  no  other  revenge  sufficient,  he  employed  his  Apostolical

Authority, and deals with the Consistory to condemn him and proscribe his

Book  as  Heretical;  prostituting  the  Censure  of  the  Church  to  his  private

revenge. This was Galileo’s fortune in Italy: but had I not reason to hope that

the English will be more hospitable, on the account of that Principle which

induceth them to be civil to (I say not to dote on) Strangers, I should fear to

be  charged  with  imprudence  for  appearing  an  Interpreter  to  that  great

Philosopher.  And  in  this  confidence  I  shall  forbear  to  make  any  large

Exordium concerning him or his Book: & the rather in regard that such kind

of Gauderies become not the Gravity of the Subject; as also knowing how

much (coming from me) they must fall short of the Merits of it, or him: but

principally because I court only persons of Judgement & Candor, that can

distinguish between a Native Beauty, and spurious Vernish. This only let me

premise,  though  more  to  excuse  my  weakness  in  the  menaging,  than  to

insinuate  my  ability  in  accomplishing  this  so  arduous  a  Task,  that  these

profound  Dialogues  have  bin  found  so  uneasy  to  Translate,  that  neither

affectation of Novelty could induce the French, nor the Translating humour

perswade the Germans to undertake them. This difficulty, as I conceived, was

charged  either  upon  the  Intricacy  of  this  manner  of  Writing,  or  upon  the

singular Elegance in the stile of Galileo, or else upon the  miscarriage of the

unfortunate Mathias Berneggeius who first attempted to turn them into Latine

for the benefit of the Learned World.

  I shall not presume to Censure the Censure which the Church of Rome

past upon this Doctrine and its Assertors. But, on the contrary, my Author

having  bin  indefinite  in  his  discourse,  I  shall  forbear  to  exasperate,  and

attempt to reconcile such persons to this Hypothesis as devout esteem for

Holy Scripture, and dutifull Respect to Canonical Injunctions hath made to

stand off from this Opinion: and therefore for their sakes I have at the end of

the Dialogues by way of supplement added an Epistle of Galileo to Her Most

Serene  Highness  Christina  Lotharinga  the  Grand  Dutchesse  Mother  of

Tuscany;  as  also  certain  Abstracts  of  John  Kepler,  Mathematician  to  two

Emperours, and Didacus à Stunica a famous Divine of Salamanca, with an

Epistle of Paulo Antonio Foscarini a learned Carmelite of Naples, that shew

the Authority of Sacred Scripture in determining of Philosophical and Natural

Controversies: hoping that the ingenious & impartial Reader will meet with

full satisfaction in the same. And least what I have spoken of the prohibitingof these Pieces by the Inquisition may deterre any scrupulous person from

reading  of  them,  I  have  purposely  inserted  the  Imprimatur  by  which  that

Office licenced them. And for a larger account of the Book or Author, I refer

you to the Relation of his Life, which shall bring up the Reare in the Second

Tome.

  What remains of this, is that Excellent Discourse of D. Benedetto Castelli

Abbate di San Benedetto Aloysio, concerning the Mensuration of Running

Waters, with other Treatises of that Learned Prelate, & of the Superintendent

Corsini. Some may alledge, and I doe confess that I promised to publish the

Life of Galileo in this place: But the great miscarriages of Letters from some

Friends  in  Italy  and  else  where,  to  whom  I  am  a  Debtor  for  several

Remarques, & from whom I daily expect yet greater Helps concerning the

History of that famous Personage: these disappointments, I say, joyned with

the undeniable Request of some Friends, who were impatient to see Castelli

in English, together with a consideration of the disproportionate Bulk that

would otherwise have bin betwixt the two Volumes, perswaded me to this

exchange.  This  deviation  from  my  Promise  I  hope  is  Venial,  and  for  the

expiating of it I plead Supererrogation: having in each Tome made so large

Aditions (though to my great expense) that they make neer a third part more

than I stood by promise bound to Publish. That this is so will appear by

comparing  the  Contents  I  here  prefix  with  the  Advertisment  I  formerly

Printed.  For  not  to  mention  those  Epitomes  of  Kepler  and  à  Stunica,  the

whole second and following Books of Castelli, were not come to my hands at

the time of my penning that Paper; yet knowing how imperfect the Volume

would be without them, they being partly a supplement to the Theoremes and

Problemes which the Abbot had formerly Printed, and partly experiments that

had procured him and his Doctrine a very great Reputation, knowing this I

say, I apprehended a necessity of publishing them with the rest: and hope that

if you think not the service I have done therein worth your acknowledgement,

you  will  yet  at  least  account  the  encrease  of  my  expence  a  sufficient

extenuation of the Trespass that those Additions have forced me to commit

upon your Patience in point of Time.

  As for the second Tome, I have only this to assure the Generous Readers;

1 that I am very confident I shall be much more punctual in publishing that,

than (for the reasons above related.) I was able to be in setting forth this: 2

that they shall not be abused in advancing of their moneys, (as hath bin used

in the like case) by selling the remaining Copyes at an under rate; and 3 that Ihave a very great care that no disesteem may by my means arise unto this

way of publishing Books, for that it is of excellent use in ushering Great and

Costly Volumes into the World.

  To say nothing of the disadvantages of Translations in general, this of

mine doubtless is not without it’s Errours, and oversights: but those of the

Printer discounted, I hope the rest may be allowed me upon the score of

Human  Imbecilitie.  The  truth  is,  I  have  assumed  the  Liberty  to  note  the

Mistakes in the Florid Version of Berneggerus in the Margent, not so much to

reproach him, as to convince those who told me that they accounted my pains

needless, having his Latine Translation by them. The like they said of the

whole  two  Tomes:  but  they  thereby  caused  me  to  question  their

Understanding or Veracity. For some of the Books were yet never extant: As

for instance; the Mechanicks of Monsieur Des Cartes, a Manuscript which I

found amongst the many other Rarities that enrich the well-chosen Library of

my Learned and Worthy Friend Dr. Charles Scarburgh; the Experiments of

Gravity,  and  the  Life  of  Galileo,  both  my  own:  Others  were  included  in

Volumes of great price, or so dispersed that they were not to be purchased for

any money; as those of Kepler, à Stunica, Archimedes, Tartaglia, and the

Mechanicks of Galileo: And the remainder, though easyer to procure, were

harder to be understood; as Tartaglia his notes on Archimedes, Torricellio his

Doctrine of Projects, Galileo his Epistle to the Dutchesse of Tuscany, and

above all his Dialogues de Motu; (never till now done into any Language)

which were so intermixt of Latine and Italian, that the difficulty of the Stile,

joyned with the intricatnesse of the Subject rendered them Unpleasant, if not

wholly  Vnintelligible,  to  such  as  were  not  absolute  Masters  of  both  the

Tongues.

  To conclude; according to the entertainment that you please to afford these

Collections, I shall be encouraged to proceed with the Publication of a large

Body of Hydrography; declaring the History, Art, Lawes, and Apendages of

that Princely Study of Navigation, wherein I have omitted nothing of note

that can be found either in Dudley, Fournier, Aurigarius, Nonius, Snellus,

Marsennus,  Baysius,  Morisetus,  Blondus,  Wagoner,  abroad,  or  learnt

amongst  our  Mariners  at  home,  touching  the  Office  of  an  Admiral,

Commander, Pilot, Modellist, Shipwright, Gunner, &c.

  But order requiring that I should discharge my first Obligation before I

contract a second; I shall detein you no longer in the Portall, but put you into

possession of the Premises,  Novemb. 20. 1661.

  T. S.                  THE AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION.


Judicious Reader,

  THERE was published some years since in Rome a salutiferous Edict,

that, for the obviating of the dangerous Scandals of the present Age, imposed

a seasonable Silence upon the Pythagorean Opinion of the Mobility of the

Earth. There want not such as unadvisedly affirm, that that Decree was not

the production of a sober Scrutiny, but of an illinformed Passion; & one may

hear  some  mutter  that  Consultors  altogether  ignorant  of  Astronomical

Observations ought not to clipp the Wings of Speculative Wits with rash

Prohibitions. My zeale cannot keep silence when I hear these inconsiderate

complaints. I thought fit, as being thoroughly acquainted with that prudent

Determination, to appear openly upon the Theatre of the World as a Witness

of  the  naked  Truth.  I  was  at  that  time  in  Rome;  and  had  not  only  the

audiences, but applauds of the most Eminent Prelates of that Court; nor was

that Decree Published without Previous Notice given me thereof. Therefore it

is my resolution in the present case to give Foraign Nations to see, that this

point is as well understood in Italy, and particularly in Rome, as Transalpine

Diligence  can  imagine  it  to  be:  and  collecting  together  all  the  proper

Speculations that concern the Copernican Systeme, to let them know, that the

notice  of  all  preceded  the  Censure  of  the  Roman  Court;  and  that  there

proceed from this Climate not only Doctrines for the health of the Soul, but

also ingenious Discoveries for the recreating of the Mind.

  To  this  end  I  have  personated  the  Copernican  in  this  Discourse;

proceeding upon an Hypothesis purely Mathematical; striving by all artificial

wayes to represent it Superiour, not to that of the Immobility of the Earth

absolutely, but according as it is mentioned by some, that retein no more, but

the name of Peripateticks, and are content, without going farther, to adore

Shadows,  not  philosophizing  with  requisit  caution,  but  with  the  sole

remembrance of four Principles, but badly understood.

  We shall treat of three principall heads. First I will endeavour to shew that

all Experiments that can be made upon the Earth are insufficient means to

conclude it’s Mobility, but are indifferently applicable to the Earth moveable

or immoveable: and I hope that on this occasion we shall discover many

observable passages unknown to the Ancients. Secondly we will examine the

Coelestiall Phoenomena that make for the Copernican Hypothesis, as if itwere  to  prove  absolutely  victorious;  adding  by  the  way  certain  new

Observations,  which  yet  serve  only  for  the  Astronomical  Facility,  not  for

Natural Necessity. In the third place I will propose an ingenuous Fancy. I

remember that I have said many years since, that the unknown Probleme of

the Tide might receive some light, admitting the Earths Motion. This Position

of  mine  passing  from  one  to  another  had  found  charitable  Fathers  that

adopted it for the Issue of their own wit. Now, because no stranger may ever

appear that defending himself with our armes, shall charge us with want of

caution in so principal an Accident, I have thought good to lay down those

probabilities that would render it credible, admitting that the Earth did move.

I hope, that by these Considerations the World will come to know, that if

other Nations have Navigated more than we, we have not studied less than

they;  &  that  our  returning  to  assert  the  Earths  Stability,  and  to  take  the

contrary only for a Mathematical Capriccio, proceeds not from inadvertency

of what others have thought thereof, but (had we no other inducements) from

those  Reasons  that  Pi    ty,  Religion,  the  Knowledge  of  the  Divine

Omnipotency, and a consciousness of the incapacity of mans Vnderstanding

dictate unto us.

  With all I conceived it very proper to express these conceits by way of

Dialogue,  which,  as  not  being  bound  up  to  the  riggid  observance  of

Mathematical Laws, gives place also to Digressions that are sometimes no

less curious than the principal Argument.

  I chanced to be several years since, at several times, in the Stupendious

Citty of Venice, where I conversed with Signore Giovan Francesco Sagredo

of a Noble Extraction, and piercing wit. There came thither from Florence at

the same time Signore Filippo Salviati, whose least glory was the Eminence

of his Blood, and Magnificence of his Estate: a sublime Wit that fed not more

hungerly upon any pleasure than on elevated Speculations. In the company of

these two I often discoursed of these matters before a certain Peripatetick

Philosopher who seemed to have no geater obstacle in understanding of the

Truth, than the Fame he had acquired by Aristotelical Interpretations.

  Now, seeing that inexorable Death hath deprived Venice and Florence of

those two great Lights in the very Meridian of their years, I did resolve, as far

as my poor ability would permit, to perpetuate their lives to their honour in

these leaves, bringing them in as Interlocutors in the present Controversy.

Nor shall the Honest Peripatetick want his place, to whom for his excessive

affection  towards  the  Commentaries  of  Simplicius,  I  thought  fit,  withoutmentioning his own Name, to leave that of the Author he so much respected.

Let those two great Souls, ever venerable to my heart, please to accept this

publick Monument of my never-dying Love; and let the remembrance of their

Eloquence assist me in delivering to Posterity the Considerations that I have

promised.

  There  casually  happened  (as  was  usuall)  several  discourses  at  times

between these Gentlemen, the which had rather inflamed than satisfied in

their wits the thirst they had to be learning; whereupon they took a discreet

resolution to meet together for certain dayes, in which all other business set

aside, they might betake themselves more methodically to contemplate the

Wonders of God in Heaven, and in the Earth: the place appointed for their

meeting being in the Palace of the Noble Sagredo, after the due, but very

short complements; Signore Salviati began in this manner.                          THE FIRST DIALOGUE.


INTERLOCVTORS. SALVIATUS, SAGREDUS, and SIMPLICIUS.


SALVIATUS.


IT  was  our  yesterdayes  resolution,  and  agreement,  that  we  should  to  day

discourse  the  most  distinctly,  and  particularly  we  could  possible,  of  the

natural reasons, and their efficacy that have been hitherto alledged on the one

or  other  part,  by  the  maintainers  of  the  Positions,  Aristotelian,  and

Ptolomaique; Copernicus reputeth the Earth a Globe like to a Planet. and by

the followers of the Copernican Systeme: And because Copernicus placing

the  Earth  among  the  moveable  Bodies  of  Heaven,  comes  to  constitute  a

Globe for the fame like to a Planet; it would be good that we began our

disputation with the examination of what, and how great the energy of the

Peripateticks arguments is, when they demonstrate, that this Hypothesis is

impossible:    Since  that  it  is  necessary  to  introduce  in  Nature,  Coelestial

substances that are in alterable and Elementary that be alterable, art necessary

in the opinion of Aristotle. substances different betwixt themselves, that is,

the Coelestial, and Elementary; that impassible and immortal, this alterable

and corruptible. Which argument Aristotle handleth in his book De Coelo,

insinuating  it  first,  by  some  discourses  dependent  on  certain  general

assumptions, and afterwards confirming it with experiments and perticular

demonstrations:  following  the  same  method,  I  will  propound,  and  freely

speak my judgement, submitting my self to your censure, and particularly to

Simplicius, a Stout Champion and contender for the Aristotelian Doctrine.


And the first Step of the Peripatetick arguments is that, Aristotle maketh the

World  perfect,  because  it  hath  the  threefold  demension.  where  Aristotle

proveth the integrity and perfection of the World, telling us, that it is not a

simple  line,  nor  a  bare  superficies,  but  a  body  adorned  with  Longitude,

Latitude, and Profundity; and because there are no more dimensions but these

three; The World having them, hath all, and having all, is to be concluded

perfect.  And  again,  that  by  simple  length,  that  magnitude  is  constituted,

which  is  called  a  Line,  to  which  adding  breadth,  there  is  framed  the

Superficies, and yet further adding the altitude or profoundity, there results

the Body, and after these three dimensions there is no passing farther, so thatin these three the integrity, and to so speak, totality is terminated, which I

might  but  with  justice  have  required  Aristotle  to  have  proved  to  me  by

necessary consequences, the rather in regard he was able to do it very plainly,

and speedily.


SIMPL.


What  say  you  to  the  excellent  demonstrations  in  the  2.  3.  and  4.  Texts,

Aristotles demonstrations▪ to prove the dimensions to be three and no more.

after the definition of Continual? have you it not first there proved, that there

is no more but three dimensions, for that those three are all things, and that

they  are  every  where?  And  is  not  this  confirmed  by  the  Doctrine  and

Authority  of  the  Pythagorians,  The  number  three  celebrated  amongst  the

Pythagorians  who  say  that  all  things  are  determined  by  three,  beginning,

middle, and end, which is the number of All? And where leave you that

reason, namely, that as it were by the law of Nature, this number is used in

the  sacrifices  of  the  Gods?  And  why  being  so  dictated  by  nature,  do  we

atribute to those things that are three, and not to lesse, the title of all? why of

two is it said both, and not all, unless they be three? And all this Doctrine you

have in the second Text. Afterwards in the third, Ad pleniorem scientiam,

Omne, Totum & Perfectum. we read that All, the Whole, and Perfect, are

formally  one  and  the  same;  and  that  therefore  onely  the  Body,  amongst

magnitudes is perfect: because it is determined by three, which is All, and

being divisible three manner of waies, it is every way divisible; but of the

others,  some  are  dividible  in  one  manner,  and  some  in  two,  because

according to the number affixed, they have their division and continuity, and

thus one magnitude is continuate one way, Or Solid. another two, a third,

namely the Body, every way.  Moreover in the fourth Text; doth he not after

some other Doctrines, prove it by another demonstration? Scilicet, That no

transition is made but according to some defect (and so there is a transition or

passing  from  the  line  to  the  superficies,  because  the  line  is  defective  in

breadth) and that it is impossible for the perfect to want any thing, it being

every way so; therefore there is no transition from the Solid or Body to any

other  magnitude.  Now  think  you  not  that  by  all  these  places  he  hath

sufficiently proved, how that there’s no going beyond the three dimensions,

Length, Breadth, and Thickness, and that therefore the body or solid, which

hath them all, is perfect?SALV.


To tell you true, I think not my self bound by all these reasons to grant any

more but onely this, That that which hath beginning, middle, and end, may,

and ought to be called perfect: But that then, because beginning, middle, and

end, are Three, the number Three is a perfect number, and hath a faculty of

conferring  Perfection  on  those  things  that  have  the  same,  I  find  no

inducement to grant; neither do I understand, nor believe that, for example, of

feet, the number three is more perfect then four or two, nor do I conceive the

number four to be any imperfection to the Elements: and that they would be

more perfect if they were three. Better therefore it had been to have left these

subtleties to the Rhetoricians, and to have proved his intent, by necessary

demonstration; for so it behoves to do in demonstrative sciences.


SIMPL.


You  seem  to  scorn  these  reasons,  and  yet  it  is  all  the  Doctrine  of  the

Pythagorians,  who  attribute  so  much  to  numbers;  and  you  that  be  a

Mathematician, and believe many opinions in the Pythagorick Philosophy,

seem now to contemn their Mysteries.


SALV.


That the Pythagorians had the science of numbers in high esteem, and that

Plato  himself  admired  humane  understanding,  Plato  held  that  humane

understanding  partook  of  divinity,  because  it  understood  numbers.  and

thought  that  it  pertook  of  Divinity,  for  that  it  understood  the  nature  of

numbers,  I  know  very  well,  nor  should  I  be  far  from  being  of  the  same

opinion: But that the Mysteries for which Pythagoras and his sect, had the

Science of numbers in such veneration, are the follies that abound in the

mouths  and  writings  of  the  vulgar,  The  Mystery  of  Pythagorick  numbers

fabulous. I no waies credit: but rather because I know that they, to the end

admirable things might not be exposed to the contempt, and scorne of the

vulgar, censured as sacrilegious, the publishing of the abstruce properties of

Numbers, De Papyrio p aetextato, Gellius 1. 2. 3. and incommensurable and

irrational  quantities,  by  them  investigated;  and  divulged,  that  he  who

discovered them, was tormented in the other World: I believe that some one

of them to deter the common sort, and free himself from their inquisitiveness,told them that the mysteries of numbers were those trifles, which afterwards

did so  spread amongst the vulgar; and this with a discretion and subtlety

resembling  that  of  the  prudent  young  man,  that  to  be  freed  from  the

importunity  of  his  inquisitive  Mother  or  Wife,  I  know  not  whether,  who

pressed him to impart the secrets of the Senate, contrived that story, which

afterwards brought her and many other women to be derided and laught at by

the same Senate.


SIMPL.


I  will  not  be  of  the  number  of  those  who  are  over  curious  about  the

Pythagorick mysteries; but adhering to the point in hand; I reply, that the

reasons produced by Aristotle to prove the dimensions to be no more than

three, seem to me concludent, and I believe, That had there been any more

evident demonstrations thereof, Aristotle would not have omitted them.


SAGR.


Put in at least, if he had known, or remembred any more. But you Salviatus

would do me a great pleasure to alledge unto me some arguments that may be

evident, and clear enough for me to comprehend.


SALV.


I will; and they shall be such as are not onely to be apprehended by you, but

even  by  Simplicius  himself:  nor  onely  to  be  comprehended,  but  are  also

already  known,  although  haply  unobserved;  and  for  the  more  easie

understanding thereof, we will take this Pen and Ink, which I see already

prepared  for  such  occasions,  A  Geometrical  demonstration  of  the  triple

dimension. and describe a few figures. And first we will note [Fig. 1. at the

end of this Dialog. ] these two points AB, and draw from the one to the other

the curved lines, ACB, and ADB, and the right line AB, I demand of you

which of them, in your mind, is that which determines the distance between

the terms AB, & why?


SAGR.I should say the right line, and not the crooked, as well because the right is

shorter, as because it is one, sole, and determinate, whereas the others are

infinit, unequal, and longer; and my determination is grounded upon that,

That it is one, and certain.


SALV.


We have then the right line to determine the length between the two terms; let

us add another right line and parallel to AB, which let be CD, [Fig. 2. ] so

that there is put between them a superficies, of which I desire you to assign

me the breadth, therefore departing from the point A, tell me how, and which

way you will go, to end in the line CD, and so to point me out the breadth

comprehended between those lines; let me know whether you will terminate

it according to the quantity of the curved line AE, or the right line AF, or any

other.


SIMPL.


According  to  the  right  AF,  and  not  according  to  the  crooked,  that  being

already excluded from such an use.


SAGR.


But I would take neither of them, seeing the right line AF runs obliquely; But

would draw a line, perpendicular to C D, for this should seem to me the

shortest, and the properest of infinite that are greater, and unequal to one

another, which may be  produced from the term A to any other part of the

opposite line CD.


SALV.


Your  choice,  and  the  reason  you  bring  for  it  in  my  judgment  is  most

excellent; so that by this time we have proved that the first dimension is

determined by a right line, the second namely the breadth with another line

right also, and not onely right, but withall, at right-angles to the other that

determineth the length, and thus we have the two dimensions of length and

breadth, definite and certain. But were you to bound or terminate a height, as

for example, how high this Roof is from the pavement, that we tread on,being  that  from  any  point  in  the  Roof,  we  may  draw  infinite  lines,  both

curved, and right, and all of diverse lengths to infinite points of the pavement,

which of all these lines would you make use of?


SAGR.


I would fasten a line to the Seeling, and with a plummet that should hang at

it,  would  let  it  freely  distend  it  self  till  it  should  reach  well  near  to  the

pavement, and the length of such a thread being the streightest and shortest of

all  the  lines,  that  could  possibly  be  drawn  from  the  same  point  to  the

pavement, I would say was the true height of this Room.


SALV.


Very well, And when from the point noted in the pavement by this pendent

thread  (taking  the  pavement  to  be  levell  and  not  declining)  you  should

produce two other right lines, one for the length, and the other for the breadth

of the superficies of the said pavement, what angles should they make with

the said thread?


SAGR.


They  would  doubtless  meet  at  right  angles,  the  said  lines  falling

perpendicular, and the pavement being very plain and levell.


SALV.


Therefore if you assign any point, for the term from whence to begin your

measure; and from thence do draw a right line, as the terminator of the first

measure, namely of the length, it will follow of necessity, that that which is to

design out the largeness or breadth, toucheth the first at right-angles, and that

that which is to denote the altitude, which is the third dimension, going from

the same point formeth also with the other two, not oblique but right angles,

and thus by the three perpendiculars, as by three lines, one, certain, and as

short as is possible, you have the three dimensions AB length, AC breadth,

and AD height; and because, clear it is, that there cannot concurre any more

lines  in  the  said  point,  so  as  to  make  therewith  right-angles,  and  the

dimensions  ought  to  be  determined  by  the  sole  right  lines,  which  makebetween themselves right-angles; therefore the dimensions are no more but

three, and that which hath three hath all, and that which hath all, is divisible

on all sides, and that which is so, is perfect, &c.


SIMPL.


And who saith that I cannot draw other lines? why may not I protract another

line underneath, unto the point A, that may be perpendicular to the rest?


SALV.


You can doubtless, at one and the same point, make no more than three right

lines concurre, that constitute right angles between themselves.


SAGR.


I see what Simplicius means, namely, that should the said DA be prolonged

downward, then by that means there might be drawn two others, but they

would be the same with the first three, differing onely in this, that whereas

now  they  onely  touch,  then  they  would  intersect,  but  not  produce  new

dimensions.


SIMPL.


I will not say that this your argument may not be concludent; In physical

proofs e metrical exactness is not necessary. but yet this I say with Aristotle,

that  in  things  natural  it  is  not  alwaies  necessary,  to  bring  Mathematical

demonstrations.


SAGR.


Grant that it were so where such proofs cannot be had, yet if this case admit

of them, why do not you use them? But it would be good we spent no more

words on this particular, for I think that Salviatus will yield, both to Aristotle,

and you, without farther demonstration, that the World is a body, and perfect,

yea most perfect, as being the greatest work of God.


SALV.So really it is, therefore leaving the general contemplation of the whole, Parts

of  the  world  are  two,  according  to  Aristotle,  Coelestial  and  Elementary

contrary to one another. let us descend to the consideration of its parts, which

Aristotle, in his first division, makes two, and they very different and almost

contrary  to  one  another;  namely  the  Coelestial,  and  Elementary:  that

ingenerable, incorruptible, unalterable, unpassible, &c. and this exposed to a

continual  alteration,  mutation,  &c.  Which  difference,  as  from  its  original

principle, he derives from the diversity of local motions, and in this method

he proceeds.


Leaving the sensible, if I may so speak, and retiring into the Ideal world, he

begins Architectonically to consider that nature being the principle of motion,

Local motion of three kinds, right, circular, & mixt. it followeth that natural

bodies be indued with local motion. Next he declares local motion to be of

three kinds, namely, circular, right, and mixt of right and circular: and the

two  first  he  calleth  simple,  Circular,  and  streight  motions  are  simple,  as

proceeding by simple lines. for that of all lines the circular, and right are

onely simple; and here somewhat restraining himself, he defineth anew, of

simple motions, one to be circular, namely that which is made about the

medium, and the other namely the right, upwards, and downwards; upwards,

that which moveth from the medium; downwards, that which goeth towards

the  medium.  And  from  hence  he  infers,  as  he  may  by  and  necessary

consequence, Ad medium, à , & circa medium. that all simple motions are

confined to these three kinds, namely, to the medium, from the medium, and

about the medium; the which corresponds saith he, with what hath been said

before of a body, that it also is perfected by three things, and so  is its motion.

Having confirmed these motions, he proceeds saying, that of natural bodies

some  being  simple,  and  some  composed  of  them  (and  he  calleth  simple

bodies those, that have a principle of motion from nature, as the Fire and

Earth) it follows that simple motions belong to simple bodies, and mixt to the

compound;  yet  in  such  sort,  that  the  compounded  incline  to  the  part

predominant in the composition.


SAGR.


Pray you hold a little Salviatus, for I find so many doubts to spring up on all

sides in this discourse, that I shall be constrained, either to communicatethem if I would attentively hearken to what you shall add, or to take off my

attention from the things spoken, if I would remember objections.


SALV.


I will very willingly stay, for that I also run the same hazard, and am ready at

every step to lose my self whilst I sail between Rocks, and boisterous Waves,

that make me, as they say, to lose my Compass; therefore before I make them

more, propound your difficulties.


SAGR.


You and Aristotle together would at first take me a little out of the sensible

World, The definition of Nature, either imperfect, or unseasonable, produced

by  Aristotle.  to  tell  me  of  the  Architecture,  wherewith  it  ought  to  be

fabricated;  and  very  appositly  begin  to  tell  me,  that  a  natural  body  is  by

nature moveable, nature being (as elsewhere it is defined) the principle of

motion. But here I am somewhat doubtfull why Aristotle said not that of

natural bodies, some are moveable by nature, and others immoveable, for that

in the definition, nature is said to be the principle of Motion, and Rest; for if

natural bodies have all a principle of motion, either he might have omitted the

mention of Rest, in the definition of nature: or not have introduced such a

definition in this place. Next, as to the declaration of what Aristotle intends

by simple motions, and how by Spaces he determines them, calling those

simple, that are made by simple lines, which are onely the right, and circular,

The Helix about the Cylinder may be said to be a simple line. I entertain it

willingly;  nor  do  I  desire  to  tenter  the  instance  of  the  Helix,  about  the

Cylinder; which in that it is in every part like to it self, might seemingly be

numbred among simple lines. But herein I cannot concurre, that he should so

restrain  simple  motions  (whilst  he  seems  to  go  about  to  repeat  the  same

definition  in  other  words)  as  to  call  one  of  them  the  motion  about  the

medium, the others Sursum & Deorsum, namely upwards and downward;

which terms are not to be used, out of the World fabricated, but imply it not

onely made, but already inhabited by us; for if the right motion be simple, by

the simplicity of the right line, and if the simple motion be natural, it is made

on every side, to wit, upwards, downwards, backwards, forwards, to the right,

to the left, and if any other way can be imagined, provided it be straight, it

shall agree to any simple natural body; or  if not so, then the supposion ofAristotle is defective. Aristotle accommodates the rules of Architecture to the

frame of the World, and not the frame to the rules. It appears moreover that

Aristotle  hinteth  but  one  circular  motion  alone  to  be  in  the  World,  and

consequently but one onely Center, to which alone the motions of upwards

and downwards, refer. All which are apparent proofs, that Aristotles aim is,

to make white black, and to accommodate Architecture to the building, and

not to modle the building according to the precepts of Arthitecture: for if I

should say that Nature in Universal may have a thousand Circular Motions,

and  by  consequence  a  thousand  Centers,  there  would  be  also  a  thousand

motions  upwards,  and  downwards.  Again  he  makes  as  hath  been  said,  a

simple motion, and a mixt motion, calling simple, the circular and right; and

mixt, the compound of them two: of natural bodies he calls some simple

(namely  those  that  have  a  natural  principle  to  simple  motion)  and  others

compound:  and  simple  motions  he  attributes  to  simple  bodies,  and  the

compounded to the compound; but by compound motion he doth no longer

understand the mixt of right and circular, which may be in the World; but

introduceth a mixt motion as impossible, as it is impossible to mixe opposite

motions made in the same right line, so as to produce from them a motion

partly upwards, partly downwards; and, to moderate such an absurdity, Right

motion  sometimes  simple,  and  sometimes  mixt  according  to  Arist.  and

impossibility, he asserts that such mixt bodies move according to the simple

part  predominant:  which  necessitates  others  to  say,  that  even  the  motion

made  by  the  same  right  line  is  sometimes  simple,  and  sometimes  also

compound: so that the simplicity of the motion, is no longer dependent onely

on the simplicity of the line.


SIMPL.


How? Is it not difference sufficient, that the simple and absolute are more

swift than that which proceeds from predominion? and how much faster doth

a piece of pure Earth descend, than a piece of Wood?


SAGR.


Well, Simplicius; But put case the simplicity for this cause was changed,

besides that there would be a hundred thousand mixt motions, you would not

be able to determine the simple; nay farther, if the greater or lesse velocity be

able to alter the simplicity of the motion, no simple body should move with asimple motion; since that in all natural right motions, the velocity is ever

encreasing, and by consequence still changing the simplicity, which as it is

simplicity,  ought  of  consequence  to  be  immutable,  and  that  which  more

importeth, you charge Aristotle with another thing, that in the definition of

motions  compounded,  he  hath  not  made  mention  of  tardity  nor  velocity,

which you now insert for a necessary and essential point. Again you can draw

no advantage from this rule, for that there will be amongst the mixt bodies

some, (and that not a few) that will move swiftly,  and others more slowly

than the simple; as for example, Lead, and Wood, in comparison of earth; and

therefore amongst these motions, which call you the simple, and which the

mixt?


SIMPL.


I would call that simple motion, which is made by a simple body, and mixt,

that of a compound body.


SAGR.


Very well, and yet Simplicius a little before you said, that the simple, and

compound  motions,  discovered  which  were  mixt,  and  which  were  simple

bodies; now you will have me by simple and mixt bodies, come to know

which is the simple, and which is the compound motion: an excellent way to

keep us ignorant, both of motions and bodies. Moreover, you have also a

little above declared, how that a greater velocity did not suffice, but you seek

a third condition for the definement of simple motion, for which Aristotle

contented himself with one alone, namely, of the simplicity of the Space, or

Medium: But now according to you, the simple motion, shall be that which is

made  upon  a  simple  line,  with  a  certain  determinate  velocity,  by  a  body

simply moveable. Now be it as you please, and let us return to Aristotle, who

defineth the mixt motion to be that compounded of the right, and circular, but

produceth not any body, which naturally moveth with such a motion.


SALV.


I come again to Aristotle, who having very well, and Methodically begun his

discourse, but having a greater aim to rest at, and hit a marke, predesigned in

his  minde,  then  that  to  which  his  method  lead  him,  digressing  from  thepurpose, he comes to assert, as a thing known and manifest, that as to the

motions directly upwards or downwards, they naturally agree to Fire, and

Earth; and that therefore it is necessary, that besides these bodies, which are

neer unto us, there must be in nature another, to which the circular motion

may agree: which shall be so much the more excellent by how much the

circular motion is more perfect, then the streight, but how much more pefect

that  is  than  this,  he  determines  from  the  greatness  of  the  circular  lines

perfection  above  the  right  line;  The  circular  line  perfect,  according  to

Aristotle, and but the right imperfect, and why. calling that perfect, and this

imperfect; imperfect, because if infinite it wanteth a termination, and end:

and if it be finite, there is yet something beyond which it may be prolonged.

This is the basis, ground work, and master-stone of all the Fabrick of the

Aristotelian World, upon which they superstruct all their other properties, of

neither  heavy  nor  light,  of  ingenerable  incorruptible,  exemption  from  all

motions, some onely the local, &c. And all these passions he affirmeth to be

proper to a simple body that is moved circularly; and the contrary qualities of

gravity, levity, corruptibility, &c. he assigns to bodies naturally moveable in

a  streight  line,  for  that  if  we  have  already  discovered  defects  in  the

foundation,  we  may  rationally  question  what  soever  may  farther    built

thereon. I deny not, that this which Aristotle hitherto hath introduced, with a

general  discourse  dependent  upon  universal  primary  principles,  hath  been

since in process of time, re-inforced with particular reasons, and experiments;

all which it would be necessary distinctly to consider and weigh; but because

what hath been said hitherto presents to such as consider the same many and

no  small  difficulties,  (and  yet  it  would  be  necessary,  that  the  primary

principles and fundamentals, were certain, firm, and established, that so they

might with more confidence be built upon) it would not be amiss, before we

farther multiply doubts, to see if haply (as I conjecture) betaking our selves to

other waies, we may not light upon a more direct and secure method; and

with  better  considered  principles  of  Architecture  lay  our  primary

fundamentals. Therefore suspending for the present the method of Aristotle,

(which we will re-assume again in its proper place, and particularly examine;

The world is supposed by the Author to be perfectly ordinate.) I say, that in

the things hitherto affirmed by him, I agree with him, and admit that the

World is a body enjoying all dimensions, and therefore most perfect; and I

add, that as such, it is necessarily most ordinate, that is, having parts betweenthemselves,  with  exquisite  and  most  perfect  order  disposed;  which

assumption I think is not to be denied, neither by you or any other.


SIMPL.


Who can deny it? the first particular (of the worlds dimensions) is taken from

Aristotle  himself,  and  its  denomination  of  ordinate  seems  onely  to  be

assumed from the order which it most exactly keeps.


SALV.


This  principle  then  established,  Streight  motion  impossible  in  the  world

exactly ordinate. one may immediately conclude, that if the entire parts of the

World should be by their nature moveable, it is impossible that their motions

should be right, or other than circular; and the reason is sufficiently easie, and

manifest; for that whatsoever moveth with a right motion, changeth place;

and continuing to move, doth by degrees more and more remove from the

term  from  whence  it  departed,  and  from  all  the  places  thorow  which  it

successively passed; and if such motion naturally suited with it, then it was

not at the beginning in its proper place; and so the parts of the World were

not  disposed  with  perfect  order.  But  we  suppose  them  to  be  perfectly

ordinate, therefore as such, it is impossible that they should by nature change

place, and consequently move in a right motion. Right motion nature infinite.

Again, the right motion being by nature infinite, for that the right line is

infinite  and  indeterminate,  it  is  impossible  that  any  moveable  can  have  a

natural principle of moving in a right line; Motion by a right line naturally

impossible. namely toward the place whither it is impossible to arrive, there

being  no  prae-finite  term;  Nature  attempts  not  things  impossible  to  be

effected. and nature, as Aristotle himself saith well, never attempts to do that

which can never be done,  nor essaies to move whither it is impossible to

arrive.  And  if  any  one  should  yet  object,  that  albeit  the  right  line,  and

consequently the motion by it is producible in infinitum, that is to say, is

interminate; yet nevertheless Nature, as one may say, arbitrarily hath assigned

them some terms, and given natural instincts to its natural bodies to move

unto the same; I will reply, that this might perhaps be fabled to have come to

pass in the first Chaos▪ Right motion might perhaps be in th  first Chaos.

where indistinct matters confusedly and inordinately wandered; to regulate

which, Right motion is commodious to range in order, things out of order.Nature very appositely made use of right motions, by which, like as the well-

constituted, moving, disorder themselves, so were they which were before

depravedly disposed by this motion ranged in order: but after their exquisite

distribution and collocation, it is impossible that there should remain natural

inclinations in them of longer moving in a right motion, from which now

would ensue their removal from their proper and natural place, that is to say,

their  disordination;  we  may  therefore  say  that  the  right  motion  serves  to

conduct  the  matter  to  erect  the  work;  but  once  erected,  that  it  is  to  rest

immoveable, or if moveable, Mundane bodies moved in the beginning in a

right line, and afterwards circularly, according to Plato. to move it self onely

circularly. Unless we will say with Plato, that these mundane bodies, after

they had been made and finished, were for a certain time moved by their

Maker,  in  a  right  motion,  but  that  after  their  attainment  to  certain  and

determinate places, they were revolved one by one in Spheres, passing from

the right to the circular motion, wherein they have been ever since kept and

maintained. A sublime conceipt, and worthy indeed of Plato: upon which, I

remember to have heard our common friend theThus doth he cover ly and

modestly stile himselfe throughout this work. Lyncean Academick discourse

in this manner, if I have not forgot it. Every body for any reason constituted

in a state of rest, but which is by nature moveable, being set at liberty doth

move; A moveable being in a state of rest, shall not move unless it have an

inclination  to  some  particular  place.  provided  withal,  that  it  have  an

inclination to some particular place; for should it stand indifferently affected

to all, it would remain in its rest, not having greater inducement to move one

way than another. From the having of this inclination necessarily proceeds,

The moveable accelerates its motion, going towards the place whither it hath

an inclination. that it in its moving shall continually increase its acceleration,

and beginning with a most slow motion, it shall not acquire any degree of

velocity, before it shall have passed thorow all the degrees of less velocity, or

greater tardity: for passing from the state of quiet (which is the infinite degree

of tardity of motion) there is no reason by which it should enter into such a

determinate  degree  of  velocity,  The  moveable  passing  from  rest,  goeth

thorow all the degrees of tardity. before it shall have entred into a less, and

into yet a less, before it entred into that: but rather it stands with reason, to

pass first by those degrees nearest to that from which it departed, and from

those to the more remote; Rest the infinite degree of tardity. but the degree

from whence the moveable began to move, is that of extreme tardity, namelyof rest.  Now this acceleration of motion is never made, The moveable doth

not accelerate, save only as it approacheth nearer to us term. but when the

moveable in moving acquireth it; nor is its acquist other than an approaching

to  the  place  desired,  to  wit,  whither  its  natural  inclination  attracts  it,  and

thither it tendeth by the shortest way; namely, by a right line. We may upon

good grounds therefore say, That Nature, to confer upon a moveable first

constituted in rest a determinate velocity, useth to make it move according to

a certain time and space with a right motion. Nature, to introduce in the

moveable a certain degree of velocity, made it move in a right line. This

presupposed, let us imagine God to have created the Orb v. g. of Jupiter, on

which he had determined to confer such a certain velocity, which it ought

afterwards to retain perpetually uniform; we may with Plato say, that he gave

it at the beginning a right and accelerate motion, and that it afterwards being

arrived to that intended degree of velocity, Vniform velocity convenient to

the circular motion. he converted its right, into a circular motion, the velocity

of which came afterwards naturally to be uniform.


SAGR.


I hearken to this Discourse with great delight; and I believe the content I take

therein will be greater, when you have satisfied me in a doubt: that is, (which

I do not very well comprehend) how it of necessity ensues, that a moveable

departing from its rest, Betwixt rest, and any assigned degree of velocity,

infinite degrees of less velocity interpose. and entring into a motion to which

it had a natural inclination, it passeth thorow all the precedent degrees of

tardity, comprehended between any assigned degree of velocity, and the state

of rest, which degrees are infinite? so that Nature was not able to confer them

upon the body of Jupiter, his circular motion being instantly created with

such and such velocity.


SALV.


I neither did, Nature doth not immediately confer a determinate degree of

velocity, howbeit she could. nor dare say, that it was impossible for God or

Nature to confer that velocity which you speak of, immediately; but this I

say, that de facto she did not do it; so that the doing it would be a work extra-

natural, and by consequence miraculousSAGR.


Then you believe, that a stone leaving its rest, and entring into its natural

motion towards the centre of the Earth, passeth thorow all the degrees of

tardity inferiour to any degree of velocity?


SALV.


I do believe it, nay am certain of it; and so certain, that I am able to make you

also very well satisfied with the truth thereof.


SAGR.


Though  by  all  this  daies  discourse  I  should  gain  no  more  but  such  a

knowledge, I should think my time very well bestowed.


SALV.


By what I collect from our discourse, a great part of your scruple lieth in that

it should in a time, and that very short, pass thorow those infinite degrees of

tardity precedent to any velocity, acquired by the moveable in that time: and

therefore  before  we  go  any  farther,  I  will  seek  to  remove  this  difficulty,

which  shall be an easie task; for I reply, that the moveable passeth by the

aforesaid  degrees,  The  moveable  departing  from  rest  passeth  thorow  all

degrees of velocity without staying in any. but the passage is made without

staying in any of them; so that the passage requiring but one sole instant of

time, and every small time containing infinite instants, we shall not want

enough of them to assign its own to each of the infinite degrees of tardity;

although the time were never so short.


SAGR.


Hither to I apprehend you; nevertheless it is very much that that Ball shot

from a Cannon (for such I conceive the cadent moveable) which yet we see to

fall with such a precipice, that in less than ten pulses it will pass two hundred

yards of altitude; should in its motion be  joyned with so small a degree of

velocity, that, should  to have moved at that rate without farther  it would not

have past the same in a day.SALV.


You may say, nor , nor in ten, no nor in a thousand; as I will endeavour  you,

and also happily without your contradiction, to some  simple questions that I

will propound to you. Therefore tell me if you make any question of granting

that, that that ball in descending goeth increasing its impetus and velocity.


SAGR.


I am most certain it doth.


SALV.


And if I should say that the impetus acquired in any place of its motion, is so

much, that it would suffice to re-carry it to that place from which it came,

would you grant it?


SAGR.


I should consent to it without contradiction, provided alwaies, that it might

imploy  without  impediment  its  whole  impetus  in  that  sole  work  of  re-

conducting it self, or another equal to it, to that self-same height as it would

do, The ponderous mover descending acquireth impetus sufficient to recarry

it to the like height. in case the Earth were bored thorow the centre, and the

Bullet fell a thousand yards from the said centre, for I verily believe it would

pass beyond the centre, ascending as much as it had descended; and this I see

plainly in the experiment of a plummet hanging at a line, which removed

from the perpendicular, which is its state of rest, and afterwards let go, falleth

towards the said perpendicular, and goes as far beyond it; or onely so much

less, as the opposition of the air, and line, or other accidents have hindred it.

The like I see in the water, which descending thorow a pipe, re-mounts as

much as it had descended.


SALV.


You argue very well. And for that I know you will not scruple to grant that

the acquist of the impetus is by means of the receding from the term whence

the  moveable  departed,  and  its  approach  to  the  centre,  whither  it  motiontendeth; will you stick to yeeld, that two equal moveables, though descending

by divers lines, without any impediment, acquire equal impetus, provided that

the approaches to the centre be equal?


SAGR.


I do not very well understand the question.


SALV.


I will express it better by drawing a Figure: therefore I will suppose the line

AB [in Fig. 3. ] parallel to the Horizon, and upon the point B, I will erect a

perpendicular BC; and after that I adde this slaunt line CA. Understanding

now the line CA to be an inclining plain exquisitely polished, and hard, upon

which descendeth a ball perfectly round and of very hard matter, and such

another I suppose freely to descend by the perpendicular CB: will you now

confess  that  the  impetus  of  that  which  descends  by  the  plain  CA,  being

arrived to the point A, may be equal to the impetus acquired by the other in

the point B, after the descent by the perpendicular CB?


SAGR.


I resolutely believe so: The impetuosity of moveables equally approaching to

the centre, are equal. for in effect they have both the same proximity to the

centre, and by that, which I have already granted, their impetuosities would

be equally sufficient to re-carry them to the same height.


SALV.


Tell  me  now  what  you  believe  the  same  ball  would  do  put  upon  the

Horizontal plane AB?


SAGR.


It would lie still, Vpon an horizontall plane the moveable lieth still. the said

plane having no declination.


SALV.But on the inclining plane CA it would descend, but with a gentler motion

than by the perpendicular CB?


SAGR.


I may confidently answer in the affirmative, it seeming to me necessary that

the  motion  by  the  perpendicular  CB  should  be  more  swift,  than  by  the

inclining plane CA; yet nevertheless, if this be, how can the Cadent by the

inclination arrived to the point A, have as much impetus, that is, the same

degree of velocity, that the Cadent by the perpendicular shall have in the

point B? these two Propositions seem contradictory.


SALV.


Then you would think it much more false, The velocity by the inclining plane

equal  to  the  velocity  by  the  perpendicular,  and  the  motion  by  the

perpendicular swifter than by the inclination. should I say, that the velocity of

the Cadents by the perpendicular, and inclination, are absolutely equal: and

yet this is a Proposition most true, as is also this that the Cadent moveth more

swiftly by the perpendicular, than by the inclination.


SAGR.


These  Propositions  to  my  ears  sound  very  harsh:  and  I  believe  to  yours

Simplicius?


SIMPL.


I have the same sense of them.


SALV.


I conceit you jest with me, pretending not to comprehend what you know

better  than  my  self:  therefore  tell  me  Simplicius,  when  you  imagine  a

moveable more swift than another, what conceit do you fancy in your mind?


SIMPL.I fancie one to pass in the same time a greater space than the other, or to

move equal spaces, but in lesser time.


SALV.


Very well: and for moveables equally swift, what’s your conceit of them?


SIMPL.


I fancie that they pass equal spaces in equal times.


SALV.


And have you no other conceit thereof than this?


SIMPL.


This I think to be the proper definition of equal motions.


SAGR.


We will add moreover this other: Velocities are said to be equal, when the

spaces passed are proportionate to their time. and call that equal velocity,

when the spaces passed have the same proportion, as the times wherein they

are past, and it is a more universal definition.


SALV.


It is so: for it comprehendeth the equal spaces past in equal times, and also

the unequal past in times unequal, but proportionate to those spaces. Take

now the same Figure, and applying the conceipt that you had of the more

hastie motion, tell me why you think the velocity of the Cadent by CB, is

greater than the velocity of the Descendent by CA?


SIMPL.


I think so; because in the same time that the Cadent shall pass all CB, the

Descendent shall pass in CA, a part less than CB.SALV.


True; and thus it is proved, that the moveable moves more swiftly by the

perpendicular, than by the inclination. Now consider, if in this same Figure

one may any way evince the other conceipt, and finde that the moveables

were equally swift by both the lines CA and CB.


SIMPL.


I see no such thing; nay rather it seems to contradict what was said before.


SALV.


And what say you, Sagredus? I would not teach you what you knew before,

and that of which but just now you produced me the definition.


SAGR.


The definition I gave you, was, that moveables may be called equally swift,

when the spaces passed are proportional to the times in which they passed;

therefore to apply the definition to the present case, it will be requisite, that

the time of descent by CA, to the time of falling by CB, should have the same

proportion that the line CA hath to the line CB; but I understand not how that

can be, for that the motion by CB is swifter than by CA.


SALV.


And yet you must of necessity know it. Tell me a little, do not these motions

go continually accelerating?


SAGR.


They do; but more in the perpendicular than in the inclination.


SALV.


But this acceleration in the perpendicular, is it yet notwithstanding such in

comparison of that of the inclined, that two equal parts being taken in anyplace of the said perpendicular and inclining lines, the motion in the parts of

the perpendicular is alwaies more swift, than in the part of the inclination?


SAGR.


I say not so: but I could take a space in the inclination, in which the velocity

shall be far greater than in the like space taken in the perpendicular; and this

shall be, if the space in the  perpendicular should be taken near to the end C,

and in the inclination, far from it.


SALV.


You  see  then,  that  the  Proposition  which  saith,  that  the  motion  by  the

perpendicular is more swift than by the inclination, holds not true universally,

but onely of the motions, which begin from the extremity, namely from the

point of rest: without which restriction, the Proposition would be so deficient,

that its very direct contrary might be true; namely, that the motion in the

inclining plane is swifter than in the perpendicular: for it is certain, that in the

said inclination, we may take a space past by the moveable in less time, than

the  like  space  past  in  the  perpendicular.  Now  because  the  motion  in  the

inclination is in some places more, in some less, than in the perpendicular;

therefore  in  some  places  of  the  inclination,  the  time  of  motion  of  the

moveable, shall have a greater proportion to the time of the motion of the

moveable, by some places of the perpendicular, than the space passed, to the

space passed: and in other places, the proportion of the time to the time, shall

be less than that of the space to the space. As for example: two moveables

departing  from  their  quiescence,  namely,  from  the  point  C,  one  by  the

perpendicular CB, [in Fig. 4. ] and the other by the inclination CA, in the

time that, in the perpendicular, the moveable shall have past all CB, the other

shall have past CT lesser. And therefore the time by CT, to the time by CB

(which is equal) shall have a greater proportion than the line CT to CB, being

that the same to the less, hath a greater proportion than to the greater. And on

the contrary, if in CA, prolonged as much as is requisite, one should take a

part equal to CB, but past in a shorter time; the time in the inclination shall

have a less proportion to the time in the perpendicular, than the space to the

space. If therefore in the inclination and perpendicular, we may suppose such

spaces and velocities, that the proportion between the said spaces be greater

and less than the proportion of the times; we may easily grant, that there arealso spaces, by which the times of the motions retain the same proportion as

the spaces.


SAGR.


I am already freed from my greatest doubt, and conceive that to be not onely

possible,  but  necessary,  which  I  but  now  thought  a  contradiction:  but

nevertheless I understand not as yet, that this whereof we now are speaking,

is one of these possible or necessary cases; so as that it should be true, that

the time of descent by CA, to the time of the fall by CB, hath the same

proportion that the line CA hath to CB; whence it may without contradiction

be affirmed, that the velocity by the inclination CA, and by the perpendicular

CB, are equal.


SALV.


Content your self for this time, that I have removed  your incredulity; but for

the knowledge of this, expect it at some other time, namely, when you shall

see the matters concerning local motion demonstrated by our Academick; at

which time you shall find it proved, that in the time that the one moveable

falls all the space CB, the other descendeth by CA as far as the point T, in

which falls the perpendicular drawn from the point B: and to find where the

same Cadent by the perpendicular would be when the other arriveth at the

point A, draw from A the perpendicular unto CA, continuing it, and CB unto

the interfection, and that shall be the point sought. Whereby you see how it is

true, that the motion by CB is swifter than by the inclination CA (supposing

the term C for the beginning of the motions compared) because the line CB is

greater  than  CT,  and  the  other  from  C  unto  the  intersection  of  the

perpendicular  drawn  from  A,  unto  the  line  CA,  is  greater  than  CA,  and

therefore the motion by it is swifter than by CA. But when we compare the

motion made by all CA, not with all the motion made in the same time by the

perpendicular continued, but with that made in part of the time, by the sole

part CB, it hinders not, that the motion by CA, continuing to descend beyond,

may arrive to A in such a time as is in proportion to the other time, as the line

CA is to the line CB. Now returning to our first purpose; which was to shew,

that the grave moveable leaving its quiescence, passeth descending by all the

degrees  of  tardity,  precedent  to  any  whatsoever  degree  of  velocity  that  it

acquireth,  re-assuming  the  same  Figure  which  we  used  before,  let  usremember that we did agree, that the Descendent by the inclination CA, and

the  Cadent  by  the  perpendicular  CB,  were  found  to  have  acquired  equal

degrees of velocity in the terms B and A: now to proceed, I suppose you will

not  scruple  to  grant,  that  upon  another  plane  less  steep  than  AC;  as  for

example, AD [in Fig. 5. ] the motion of the descendent would be yet more

flow than in the plane AC. So that it is not any whit dubitable, but that there

may be planes so little elevated above the Horizon AB, that the moveable,

namely the same ball, in any the longest time may reach the point A, which

being to move by the plane AB, an infinite time would not suffice: and the

motion is made always more slowly, by how much the declination is less. It

must be therefore confest, that there may be a point taken upon the term B, so

near to the said B, that drawing from thence to the point A a plane, the ball

would not pass it in a whole year. It is requisite next for you to know, that the

impetus, namely the degree of velocity the ball is found to have acquired

when it arriveth at the point A, is such, that should it continue to move with

this  self-same  degree  uniformly,  that  is  to  say,  without  accelerating  or

retarding;  in as much more time as it was in coming by the inclining plane, it

would pass double the space of the plane inclined: namely (for example) if

the ball had past the plane DA in an hour, continuing to move uniformly with

that degree of velocity which it is found to have in its arriving at the term A,

it shall pass in an hour a space double the length DA; and because (as we

have said) the degrees of velocity acquired in the points B and A, by the

moveables that depart from any point taken in the perpendicular CB, and that

descend, the one by the inclined plane, the other by the said perpendicular,

are always equal: therefore the cadent by the perpendicular may depart from a

term so near to B, that the degree of velocity acquired in B, would not suffice

(still maintaining the same) to conduct the moveable by a space double the

length of the plane inclined in a year, nor in ten, no nor in a hundred. We may

therefore conclude, that if it be true, that according to the ordinary course of

nature a moveable, all external and accidental impediments removed, moves

upon an inclining plane with greater and greater tardity, according as the

inclination shall be less; so that in the end the tardity comes to be infinite,

which is, when the inclination concludeth in, and joyneth to the horizontal

plane; and if it be true likewise, that the degree of velocity acquired in some

point of the inclined plane, is equal to that degree of velocity which is found

to be in the moveable that descends by the perpendicular, in the point cut by a

parallel to the Horizon, which passeth by that point of the inclining plane; itmust of necessity be granted, that the cadent departing from rest, passeth

thorow all the infinite degrees of tardity, and that consequently, to acquire a

determinate degree of velocity, it is necessary that it move first by right lines,

descending by a short or long space, according as the velocity to be acquired,

ought to be either less or greater, and according as the plane on which it

descendeth is more or less inclined; so that a plane may be given with so

small inclination, that to acquire in it the assigned degree of velocity, it must

first move in a very great space, and take a very long time; whereupon in the

horizontal plane, any how little soever velocity, would never be naturally

acquired, since that the moveable in this case will never move: but the motion

by  the  horizontal  line,  The  circular  motion  is  never  acquired  naturally,

without right motion precede it. Circular motion perpetually uniform. which

is neither declined or inclined, is a circular motion about the centre: therefore

the  circular  motion  is  never  acquired  naturally,  without  the  right  motion

precede it; but being once acquired, it will continue perpetually with uniform

velocity. I could with other discourses evince and demonstrate the same truth,

but I will not by so great a digression interrupt our principal argument: but

rather will return to it upon some other occasion; especially since we not

assumed the  same, not to serve for a necessary demonstration, but to adorn a

Platonick Conceit; to which I will add another particular observation of our

Academick, which hath in it something of admirable. Let us suppose amongst

the decrees of the divine Architect, a purpose of creating in the World these

Globes, which we behold continually moving round, and of assigning the

centre of their conversions; and that in it he had placed the Sun immoveable,

and had afterwards made all the said Globes in the same place, and with the

intended inclinations of moving towards the Centre, till they had acquired

those degrees of velocity, which at first seemed good to the same Divine

Minde; the which being acquired, we lastly suppose that they were turned

round,  each  in  his  Sphere  retaining  the  said  acquired  velocity:  it  is  now

demanded, in what altitude and distance from the Sun the place was where

the said Orbs were primarily created; and whether it be possible that they

might all be created in the same place? To make this investigation, we must

take from the most skilfull Astronomers the magnitude of the Spheres in

which the Planets revolve, and likewise the time of their revolutions: from

which two cognitions is gathered how much (for example) Jupiter is swifter

than  Saturne;  and  being  found  (as  indeed  it  is)  that  Jupiter  moves  more

swiftly,  it  is  requisite,  that  departing  from  the  same  altitude,  Jupiter  bedescended more than Saturne, as we really know it is, its Orbe being inferiour

to that of Saturne. But by proceeding forwards, from the proportions of the

two velocities of Jupiter and Saturne, and from the distance between their

Orbs, and from the proportion of acceleration of natural motion, one may

finde in what altitude and distance from the centre of their revolutions, The

magnitude of the Orbs, and the velocity of the motion of the Planets, answer

proportionably, as if descended from the same place. was the place from

whence  they  first  departed.  This  found  out,  and  agreed  upon,  it  is  to  be

sought, whether Mars descending from thence to his Orb, the magnitude of

the Orb, and the velocity of the motion, agree with that which is found by

calculation; and let the like be done of the Earth, of Venus, and of Mercury;

the greatness of which Spheres, and the velocity of their motions, agree so

nearly to what computation gives, that it is very admirable.


SAGR.


I have hearkened to this conceit with extreme delight; and, but that I believe

the making of these calculations truly would be a long and painfull task, and

perhaps too hard for me to comprehend, I would make a trial of them.


SALV.


The operation indeed is long and difficult; nor could I be certain to finde it so

readily; therefore we shall refer it to another time, and for the present we will

return to our first proposal, going on there where we made digression; which,

if I well remember, was about the proving the motion by a right line of no 

use, in the ordinate parts of the World; and we did proceed to say, that it was

not so in circular motions, of which that which is made by the moveable in it

self, Finite and terminate circular motions disorder not the parts of the World.

still retains it in the same place, and that which carrieth the moveable by the

circumference of a circle about its fixed centre, neither puts it self, nor those

about it in disorder; for that such a motion primarily is finite and terminate

(though  not  yet  finished  and  determined)  but  there  is  no  point  in  the

circumference, In the circular motion, every point in the circumference is the

begining and end. that is not the first and last term in the circulation; and

continuing it in the circumference assigned it, it leaveth all the rest, within

and  without  that,  free  for  the  use  of  others,  without  ever  impeding  ordisordering them. This being a motion that makes the moveable continually

leave, and continually arrive at the end; Circular motion onely is uniform. it

alone therefore can primarily be uniform; for that acceleration of motion is

made  in  the  moveable,  when  it  goeth  towards  the  term,  to  which  it  hath

inclination; and the retardation happens by the repugnance that it hath to

leave  and  part  from  the  same  term;  and  because  in  circular  motion,  the

moveable  continually  leaves  the  natural  term,  and  continually  moveth

towards the same, therefor, in it, the repugnance and inclination are always of

equal  force:  from  which  equality  results  a  velocity,  neither  retarded  nor

accelerated, i. e. an uniformity in motion. From this conformity, and from the

being terminate, Circular motion may be continued perpetually. may follow

the perpetual continuation by successively reiterating the circulations; which

in  an  undeterminated  line,  and  in  a  motion  continually  retarded  or

accelerated, cannot naturally be. Right motion cannot naturally be perpetual. I

say,  naturally;  because  the  right  motion  which  is  retarded,  is  the  violent,

which cannot be perpetual; and the accelerate arriveth necessarily at the term,

if one there be; and if there be none, it cannot be moved to it, because nature

moves not whether it is impossible to attain. I conclude therefore, that the

circular motion can onely naturally consist with natural bodies, parts of the

universe, and constituted in an excellent disposure; and that the right, at the

most that can be said for it, is assigned by nature to its bodies, Right motion

assigned to natural bodies, to reduce them to perfect order, when removed

from their places. and their parts, at such time as they shall be out of their

proper  places,  constituted  in  a  depraved  disposition,  and  for  that  cause

needing to be redu d by the shortest way to their natural state. Hence, me

thinks, it may rationally be concluded, that for maintenance of perfect order

amongst the parts of the World, it is necessary to say, that moveables are

moveable onely circularly; and if there be any that move not circularly, Rest

onely, and circular motion are apt to conserve order. these of necessity are

immoveable:  there  being  nothing  but  rest  and  circular  motion  apt  to  the

conservation  of  order.  And  I  do  not  a  little  wonder  with  my  self,  that

Aristotle, who held that the Terrestrial globe was placed in the centre of the

World,  and  there  remained  immoveable,  should  not  say,  that    of  natural

bodies  some  are  moveable  by  nature,  and  others  immoveable;  especially

having before defined Nature, to be the principle of Motion and Rest.


SIMPL.Aristotle, though of a very perspicacious wit, would not strain it further than

needed:  Sensible  experiments  are  to  be  preferred  before  humane

argumentations. holding in all his argumentations, that sensible experiments

were to be preferred before any reasons founded upon strength of wit, and

said those which should deny the testimony of sense deserved to be punished

with the loss of that sense; He who denies sense, deserves to be deprived of

it. Sense sheweth that things grave move to the medium, and the light to the

concave. now who is so blind, that sees not the parts of the Earth and Water

to move, as being grave, naturally downwards, namely; towards the centre of

the Universe, assigned by nature her self for the end and term of right motion

deorsùm; and doth not likewise see the Fire and Air to move right upwards

towards  the  Concave  of  the  Lunar  Orb,  as  to  the  natural  end  of  motion

sursùm? And this being so manifestly seen, and we being certain, that eadem

est ratio totius & partium, why may we not assert it for a true and manifest

proposition,  that  the  natural  motion  of  the  Earth  is  the  right  motion  ad

medium, and that of the Fire, the right à medio?


SALV.


The most that you can pretend from this your Discourse, were it granted to be

true, is that, like as the parts of the Earth removed from the whole, namely,

from the place where they naturally rest, that is in short reduced to a depraved

and disordered disposure, return to their place spontaneously, and therefore

naturally in a right motion, (it being granted, that eadem sit ratio totius &

partium) so it may be inferred, that the Terrestrial Globe removed violently

from the place assigned it by nature, It is questionable whether descending

weights move in a right line. it would return by a right line. This, as I have

said,  is  the  most  that  can  be  granted  you,  and  that  onely  for  want  of

examination; but he that shall with exactness revise these things, will first

deny, that the parts of the Earth, in returning to its whole, move in a right

line, and not by a circular or mixt; and really you would have enough to do to

demonstrate  the  contrary,  as  you  shall  plainly  see  in  the  answers  to  the

particular  reasons  and  experiments  alledged  by  Ptolomey  and  Aristotle.

Secondly, If another should say that the parts of the Earth, go not in their

motion towards the Centre of the World, but to unite with its Whole, and that

for that reason they naturally incline towards the centre of the Terrestrial

Globe, by which inclination they conspire to form and preserve it, what otherAll, or what other Centre would you find for the World, The Earth sperical by

the conspiration of its parts to its Centre. to which the whole Terrene Globe,

being thence removed, would seek to return, that so the reason of the Whole

might be like to that of its parts? It may be added, That neither Aristotle, nor

you can ever prove, that the Earth de facto is in the centre of the Universe;

but if any Centre  may be assigned to the Universe, The Sun more probably

in the centre of the Vniverse, than the Earth. we shall rather find the Sun

placed in it, as by the sequel you shall understand.


Now, like as from the consentaneous conspiration of all the parts of the Earth

to form its whole, doth follow, that they with equal inclination concurr thither

from all parts; Natural inclination of the parts of all the globes of the World

to go to their centre. and to unite themselves as much as is possible together,

they there spherically adapt themselves; why may we not believe that the

Sun, Moon, and other mundane Bodies, be also of a round figure, not by

other  than  a  concordant  instinct,  and  natural  concourse  of  all  the  parts

composing  them?  Of  which,  if  any,  at  any  time,  by  any  violence  were

separated  from  the  whole,  is  it  not  reasonable  to  think,  that  they  would

spontaneously and by natural instinct return? and in this manner to infer, that

the right motion agreeth with all mundane bodies alike.


SIMPL.


Certainly, if you in this manner deny not onely the Principles of Sciences, but

manifest Experience, and the Senses themselves, you can never be convinced

or removed from any opinion which you once conceit, therefore I will choose

rather to be silent (for, contra negantes principia non est disputandum) than

contend with you. And insisting on the things alledged by you even now

(since you question so much as whether grave moveables have a right motion

or no) how can you ever rationally deny, The right motion of grave bodies

manifest to sense. that the parts of the Earth; or, if you will, that ponderous

matters descend towards the Centre, with a right motion; whenas, if from a

very high Tower, whose walls are very upright and perpendicular, you let

them fall, they shall descend gliding and sliding by the Tower to the Earth,

exactly in that very place where a plummet would fall, being hanged by a line

fastned above, just there, whence the said weights were let fall? is not this a

more  than  evident  argument  of  the  motions  being  right,  and  towards  theCentre?Arguments  of  Aristotle,  to  prove  that  grave  bodies  move  with  an

inclination to arrive at the centre of the Vniverse. In the second place you call

in  doubt,  whether  the  parts  of  the  Earth  are  moved,  as  Aristotle  affirms,

towards the Centre of the World; as if he had not rationally demonstrated it

by contrary motions, whilst he thus argueth; The motion of heavie bodies is

contrary to that of the light: but the motion of the light is manifest to be

directly upwards, namely, towards the circumference of the World, therefore

the motion of the heavie is directly towards the Centre of the World: and it

happens per accidens, Heavie bodies move towards the centre of the Earth

per accidens. that it be towards the centre of the Earth, for that this striveth to

be united to that. The seeking in the next place, what a part of the Globe of

the  Sun  or  Moon  would  do,  were  it  separated  from  its  whole,  is  vanity;

because  that  thereby  that  is  sought,  To  seek  what  would  follow  upon  an

impossibility, is folly. which would be the consequence of an impossibility;

in  regard  that,  as  Aristotle  also  demonstrates,  the  coelestial  bodies  are

impassible,  impenetrable,  and  infrangible;  so  that  such    a  case  can  never

happen: Coelestial bodies neither heavie nor light, according to Aristotle. and

though it should, and that the separated part should return to its whole, it

would not return as grave or light, for that the same Aristotle proveth, that the

Coelestial Bodies are neither heavie nor light.


SALV.


With  what  reason  I  doubt,  whether  grave  bodies  move  by  a  right  and

perpendicular line, you shall hear, as I said before, when I shall examine this

particular argument. Touching the second point, I wonder that you should

need to discover the Paralogism of Aristotle, being of it self so manifest; and

that  you  perceive  not,  that  Aristotle  supposeth  that  which  is  in  question:

therefore take notice.


SIMPL.


Pray Salviatus speak with more respect of Aristotle: for who can you ever

perswade, that he who was the first, only, and admirable explainer of the

Syllogistick forms of demonstration, Aristotle cannot equivocate, being the

inventer  of  Logick.  of  Elenchs,  of  the  manner  of  discovering  Sophisms,

Paralogisms, and in short, of all the parts of Logick, should afterwards so

notoriously equivocate in imposing that for known, which is in question? Itwould be better, my Masters, first perfectly to understand him, and then to

try, if you have a minde, to oppose him.


SALV.


Simplicius,  we  are  here  familiarly  discoursing  among  our  selves,  to

investigate some truth; I shall not be displeased that you discover my errors;

and if I do not follow the mind of Aristotle, freely reprehend me, and I shall

take it in good part. Onely give me leave to expound my doubts, and to reply

something  to  your  last  words,  telling  you,  that  Logick,  as  it  is  well

understood,  is  the  Organe  with  which  we  philosophate;  but  as  it  may  be

possible, that an Artist may be excellent in making Organs, but unlearned in

playing on them, thus he might be a great Logician, but unexpert in making

use of Logick; like as we have many that theorically understand the whole

Art of Poetry, and yet are unfortunate in composing but meer four Verses;

others enjoy all the precepts of Vinci A famous Italian Painter., and yet know

not how to paint a Stoole. The playing on the Organs is not taught by them

who know how to make Organs, but by him that knows how to play on them:

Poetry is learnt by continual reading of Poets: Limning is learnt by continual

painting  and  designing:  Demonstration  from  the  reading  of  Books  full  of

demonstrations, which are the Mathematical onely, and not the Logical. Now

returning to our purpose, I say, that that which Aristotle seeth of the motion

of light bodies, is the departing of the Fire from any part of the Superficies of

the Terrestrial Globe, and directly retreating from it, mounting upwards; and

this indeed is to move towards a circumference greater than that of the Earth;

yea, the same Aristotle makes it to move to the concave of the Moon, but that

this circumference is that of the World, or concentrick to it, so  that to move

towards this, is a moving towards that of the World, that he cannot affirm,

unless he supposeth, That the Centre of the Earth, Paralogism of Aristotle, in

proving the Earth to be in the Centre of the World. from which we see these

light ascendent bodies to depart, be the same with the Centre of the World;

which is as much as to say, that the terrestrial Globe is constituted in the

midst of the World: which is yet that of which we were in doubt, and which

Aristotle  intended  to  prove.  And  do  you  say  that  this  is  not  a  manifest

Paralogism? The Paralogisme of Aristotle another way discovered.


SAGR.This  Argument  of  Aristotle  appeared  to  me  deficient  also,  and  non-

concludent  for  another  respect;  though  it  were  granted,  that  that

Circumference, to which the Fire directly moveth, be that which includeth the

World: for that in a circle, not onely the centre, but any other point being

taken, every moveable which departing thence, shall move in a right line, and

towards  any  whatsoever  part,  shall  without  any  doubt  go  towards  the

circumference, and continuing the motion, shall also arrive thither; so that we

may truly say, that it moveth towards the circumference: but yet it doth not

follow,  that  that  which  moveth  by  the  same  line  with  a  contrary  motion,

would go towards the centre, unless when the point taken were the centre it

self, or that the motion were made by that onely line, which produced from

the point assigned, passeth thorow the centre. So that to say, that Fire moving

in a right line, goeth towards the circumference of the World, therefore the

parts of the Earth which by the same lines move with a contrary motion, go

towards  the  centre  of  the  World,  concludeth  not,  unless  then  when  it  is

presupposed, that the lines of the Fire prolonged pass by the centre of the

World; and because we know certainly of them, that they pass by the centre

of  the  Terrestrial  Globe  (being  perpendicular  to  its  superficies,  and  not

inclined) therefore to conclude, it must be supposed, that the centre of the

Earth is the same with the centre of the World; or at least, that the parts of the

Fire and Earth descend not, save onely by one sole line which passeth by the

centre  of  the  World.  Which  nevertheless  is  false,  and  repugnant  to

experience, which sheweth us, that the parts of Fire, not by one line onely,

but by infinite, produced from the centre of the Earth towards all the parts of

the World, ascend always by lines perpendicular to the Superficies of the

Terrestrial Globe.


SALV.


You do very ingeniously lead Aristotle to the same inconvenience, Sagredus,

shewing his manifest equivoke; but withal you add another inconsistency. We

see the Earth to be spherical, and therefore are certain that it hath its centre, to

which we see all its parts are moved; for so we must say, whilst their motions

are all perpendicular to the Superficies of the Earth; we  mean, that as they

move  to  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  they  move  to  their  Whole,  and  to  their

Universal Mother: and we are still farther so free, that we will suffer our

selves to be perswaded, that their natural instinct is, Grave bodies may morerationally be affirmed to tend to the Centre of the Earth, than of the Vniverse.

not to go towards the centre of the Earth, but towards that of the Universe;

which we know not where to find, or whether it be or no; and were it granted

to be, it is but an imaginary point, and a nothing without any quality. As to

what Simplicius said last, that the contending whether the parts of the Sun,

Moon, or other coelestial Body, separated from their Whole, should naturally

return to it, is a vanity, for that the case is impossible; it being clear by the

Demonstrations of Aristotle, that the coelestial Bodies are impassible, The

conditions and attributes which differ the coelestial bodies from Elementary,

depend on the motions assigned them by Arist. impenetrable, unpartable, &c.

I answer, that none of the conditions, whereby Aristotle distinguisheth the

Coelestial  Bodies  from  Elementary,  hath  other  foundation  than  what  he

deduceth  from  the  diversity  of  the  natural  motion  of  those  and  these;

insomuch  that  it  being  denied,  that  the  circular  motion  is  peculiar  to

Coelestial Bodies, and affirmed, that it is agreeable to all Bodies naturally

moveable, it is behoofull upon necessary consequence to say, either that the

attributes of generable, or ingenerable, alterable, or unalterable, partable, or

unpartable,  &c.  equally  and  commonly  agree  with  all  worldly  bodies,

namely, as well to the Coelestial as to the Elementary; or that Aristotle hath

badly and erroneously deduced those from the circular motion, which he hath

assigned to Coelestial Bodies.


SIMPL.


This  manner  of  argumentation  tends  to  the  subversion  of  all  Natural

Philosophy, and to the disorder and subversion of Heaven and Earth, and the

whole Universe; but I believe the Fundamentals of the Peripateticks are such,

that we need not fear that new Sciences can be erected upon their ruines.


SALV.


Take  no  thought  in  this  place  for  Heaven  or  the  Earth,  neither  fear  their

subversion, or the ruine of Philosophy. As to Heaven, your fears are vain for

that which you your self hold unalterable and impassible; as for the Earth, we

strive to enoble and perfect it, whilst we make it like to the Coelestial Bodies,

and as it were place it in Heaven, whence your Philosophers have exiled it.

The disputes and contradictions of Philosophers may conduce to the benefit

of  Philosophy.  Philosophy  it  self  cannot  but  receive  benefit  from  ourDisputes, for if our conceptions prove true, new Discoveries will be made; if

false, the first Doctrine will be more confirmed. Rather bestow your care

upon some Philosophers, and help and defend them; for as to the Science it

self,  it  cannot  but  improve.  And  that  we  may  return  to  our  purpose,  be

pleased freely to produce what presents it self to you in confirmation of that

great difference which Aristotle puts between the Coelestial Bodies, and the

Elementary parts of the World, in making those ingenerable,  incorruptible,

unalterable, &c. and this corruptible, alterable, &c.


SIMPL.


I see not yet any need that Aristotle hath of help, standing as he doth stoutly

and strongly on his feet; yea not being yet assaulted, much less foiled by you.

And what ward will you choose in this combate for this first blow?Aristotles

discourse  to  prove  the  incorruptibility  of  Heaven.  Aristotle  writeth,  that

whatever is generated, is made out of a contrary in some subject, and likewise

is  corrupted  in  some  certain  subject  from  a  contrary  into  a  contrary;

Generation & corruption is onely amongst contraries, according to Arist. so

that (observe) corruption and generation is never but onely in contraries; If

therefore to a Coelestial Body no contrary can be assigned, for that to the

circular motion no other motion is contrary, To the circular motion no other

motion is contrary. then Nature hath done very well to make that exempt

from  contraries,  which  was  to  be  ingenerable  and  incorruptible,  This

fundamental first confirmed, it immediately followeth of consequence, that it

is inaugmentable, inalterable, Heaven an habitation for the immortal Gods.

impassible, and finally eternal, and a proportionate habitation to the immortal

Deities, conformable to the opinion even of all men that have any conceit of

the  Gods.  He  afterwards  confirmeth  the  same  by  sense;  Immutability  of

Heaven  evident  to  sense.  in  regard,  that  in  all  times  past,  according  to

memory  or  tradition,  we  see  nothing  removed,  according  to  the  whole

outward Heaven, nor any of its proper parts. He proveth that the circular

motion hath no contrary. Next, as to the circular motion, that no other is

contrary to it, Aristotle proveth many ways; but without reciting them all, it is

sufficiently demonstrated, since simple motions are but three, to the medium,

from the medium, and about the medium, of which the two right, sursum and

deorsum, are manifestly contrary; and because one onely hath onely one for

contrary, therefore there rests no other motion which may be contrary to thecircular.  You  see  the  subtle  and  most  concluding  discourse  of  Aristotle,

whereby he proveth the incorruptibility of Heaven.


SALV.


This  is  nothing  more,  save  the  pure  progress  of  Aristotle,  by  me  hinted

before; wherein, besides that I affirm, that the motion which you attribute to

the Coelestial Bodies agreeth also to the Earth, its illation proves nothing. I

tell you therefore, that that circular motion which you assign to Coelestial

Bodies, suiteth also to the Earth, from which, supposing that the rest of your

discourse were concludent, will follow one of these three things, as I told you

a little before, and shall repeat; namely, either that the Earth it self is also

ingenerable, and incorruptible, as the Coelestial bodies; or that the Coelestial

bodies  are,  like  as  the  Elementary  generable,  alterable  &c.  or  that  this

difference of motion hath nothing to do with Generation and Corruption. The

discourse of Aristotle, and yours also contain many Propositions not to be

lightly admitted, and the better to examine them, it will be convenient to

reduce them to the most abstracted and  distinct that can be possible; and

excuse me Sagredus, if haply with some tediousness you hear me oft repeat

the same things, and fancie that you see me reassume my argument in the

publick circle of Disputations. You say Generation and Corruption are onely

made where there are contraries; contraries are onely amongst simple natural

bodies, moveable with contrary motions; contrary motions are onely those

which are made by a right line between contrary terms; and these are onely

two, that is to say, from the medium, and towards the medium; and such

motions belong to no other natural bodies, but to the Earth, the Fire, and the

other two Elements: therefore Generation and Corruption is onely amongst

the  Elements.  And  because  the  third  simple  motion,  namely,  the  circular

about the medium, hath no contrary, (for that the other two are contraries, and

one  onely,  hath  but  onely  one  contrary)  therefore  that  natural  body  with

which  such  motion  agreeth,  wants  a  contrary;  and  having  no  contrary  is

ingenerable  and  incorruptible,  &c.  Because  where  there  is  no  contrariety,

there is no generation or corruption, &c. But such motion agreeth onely with

the  Coelestial  bodies;  therefore  onely  these  are  ingenerable,  Its  easier  to

prove  the  Earth  to  move,  than  that  corruption  is  made  by  contraries.

incorruptible, &c. And to begin, I think it a more easie thing, and sooner done

to resolve, whether the Earth (a most vast Body, and for its vicinity to us,most tractable) moveth with a speedy motion, such as its revolution about its

own axis in twenty four hours would be, than it is to understand and resolve,

whether Generation and Corruption ariseth from contrariety, or else whether

there be such things as generation, corruption and contrariety in nature. And

if you, Simplicius, can tell me what method Nature observes in working,

when she in a very short time begets an infinite number of flies from a little

vapour of the Must of wine, and can shew me which are there the contraries

you speak of, what it is that corrupteth, and how; I should think you would do

more than I can; for I profess I cannot comprehend these things. Besides, I

would very gladly understand how, and why these corruptive contraries are

so favourable to Daws, and so cruel to Doves; so indulgent to Stags, and so

hasty to Horses, that they do grant to them many more years of life, that is, of

incorruptibility, than weeks to these. Peaches and Olives are planted in the

same soil, exposed to the same heat and cold, to the same wind and rains,

and, in a word, to the same contrarieties; and yet those decay in a short time,

and  these  live  many  hundred  years.  Furthermore,  I  never  was  thorowly

satisfied about this substantial transmutation (still keeping within pure natural

bounds)  whereby  a  matter  becometh  so  transform’d,  that  it  should  be

necessarily said to be destroy’d, so that nothing remaineth of its first being,

and that another body  quite differing there-from should be thence produced;

Bare transposition of parts may represent bodies under diverse asp cts. and if

I fancy to my self a body under one aspect, and by and by under another very

different, I cannot think it impossible but that it may happen by a simple

transposition of parts, without corrupting or ingendring any thing a-new; for

we see such kinds of Metamorphoses dayly: so that to return to my purpose, I

answer you, that inasmuch as you go about to perswade me that the Earth can

not  move  circularly  by  way  of  corruptibility  and  generability,  you  have

undertook  a  much  harder  task  than  I,  that  with  arguments  more  difficult

indeed, but no less concluding, will prove the contrary.


SAGR.


Pardon me, Salviatus, if I interrupt your discourse, which, as it delights me

much, for that I also am gravel’d with the same doubts; so I fear that you can

never  conclude  the  same,  without  altogether  digressing  from  your  chief

design: therefore if it be permitted to proceed in our first argument, I should

think  that  it  were  convenient  to  remit  this  question  of  generation  andcorruption to another distinct and single conference; as also, if it shall please

you and Simplicius, we may do by other particular questions which may fall

in the way of our discourse; which I will keep in my mind to propose, and

exactly discuss them some other time. Now as for the present, since you say,

that  if  Aristotle  deny  circular  motion  to  the  Earth  in  common  with  other

bodies Coelestial, it thence will follow, that the same which befalleth the

Earth, as to its being generable, alterable, &c. will hold also of Heaven, let us

enquire  no  further  if  there  be  such  things  in  nature,  as  generation  and

corruption, or not; but let us return to enquire what the Globe of the Earth

doth.


SIMPL.


I  cannot  suffer  my  ears  to  hear  it  question’d,  whether  generation  and

corruption be in rerum naturâ, it being a thing which we have continually

before our eyes, By denying Principles in the Sciences, any Paradox may be

maintained. and whereof Aristotle hath written two whole Books. But if you

go  about  to  deny  the  Principles  of  Sciences,  and  question  things  most

manifest,  who  knows  not,  but  that  you  may  prove  what  you  will,  and

maintain any Paradox? And if you do not dayly see herbs, plants, animals to

generate and corrupt, what is it that you do see? Also, do you not continually

behold contrarieties contend together, and the Earth change into Water, the

Water  turn  to  Air,  the  Air  into  Fire,  and  again  the  Air  to  condense  into

Clouds, Rains, Hails and Storms?


SAGR.


Yes, we see these things indeed, and therefore will grant you the discourse of

Aristotle, as to this part of generation and corruption made by contraries; but

if I shall conclude by virtue of the same propositions which are granted to

Aristotle,  that  the  Coelestial  bodies  themselves  are  also  generable  and

corruptible,  aswell as the Elementary, what will you say then?


SIMPL.


I will say you have done that which is impossible to be done.


SAGR.Go to; tell me, Simplicius, are not these affections contrary to one another?


SIMPL.


Which?


SAGR.


Why  these;  Alterable,  unalterable;  passible,  Or,  Impatible.  impassible;

generable, ingenerable; corruptible, incorruptible?


SIMPL.


They are most contrary.


SAGR.


Well then, if this be true, and it be also granted, that Coelestial Bodies are

ingenerable  and  incorruptible;  I  prove  that  of  necessity  Coelestial  Bodies

must be generable and corruptible.


SIMPL.


This must needs be a Sophism.


SAGR.


Hear my Argument, Coelestial Bodies are generable and corruptible, because

they  are  ingenerable  and  incorruptible.  and  then  censure  and  resolve  it.

Coelestial Bodies, for that they are ingenerable and incorruptible, have in

Nature  their  contraries,  which  are  those  Bodies  that  be  generable  and

corruptible;  but  where  there  is  contrariety,  there  is  also  generation  and

corruption; therefore Coelestial Bodies are generable and corruptible.


SIMPL.


Did I not say it could be no other than a Sophism? This is one of those forked

Arguments called Soritae: The forked Syllogism cal’d  like that of the Cretan,

who said that all Cretans were lyars; but he as being a Cretan, had told a lye,in saying that the Cretans were lyars; it followed therefore, that the Cretans

were no lyars, and consequently that he, as being a Cretan, had spoke truth:

And  yet  in  saying  the  Cretans  were  lyars,  he  had  said  true,  and

comprehending himself as a Cretan, he must consequently be a lyar. And thus

in these kinds of Sophisms a man may dwell to eternity, and never come to

any conclusion.


SAGR.


You have hitherto censured it, it remaineth now that you answer it, shewing

the fallacie.


SIMPL.


As to the resolving of it, and finding out its fallacie, do you not in the first

place see a manifest contradiction in it? Coelestial Bodies are ingenerable and

incorruptible;  Ergo,  Coelestial  Bodies  are  generable  and  corruptible.

Amongst Coelestial Bodies there is no contrariety. And again, the contrariety

is not betwixt the Coelestial Bodies, but betwixt the Elements, which have

the  contrariety  of  the  Motions,  sursùm  and  deorsùm,  and  of  levity  and

gravity; But the Heavens which move circularly, to which motion no other

motion is contrary, want contrariety, and therefore they are incorruptible.


SAGR.


Fair and softly, Simplicius; this contrariety whereby you say some simple

Bodies become corruptible, resides it in the same Body which is corrupted, or

else hath it relation to some other? I say, if, for example, humidity by which a

piece of Earth  is corrupted, resides it in the same Earth or in some other

bodie, which must either be the Air or Water? I believe you will grant, that

like as the Motions upwards and downwards, and gravity and levity, which

you make the first contraries, cannot be in the same Subject, so neither can

moist and dry, hot and cold: you must therefore consequently acknowledg

that when a bodie corrupteth, Contraries which are the causes of corruption,

reside not in the same body that corrupteth▪ it is occasioned by some quality

residing in another contrary to its own: therefore to make the Coelestial Body

become corruptible, it sufficeth that there are in Nature, bodies that have acontrariety to that Coelestial body; and such are the Elements, if it be true

that corruptibility be contrary to incorruptibility.


SIMPL.


This  sufficeth  not,  Sir;  The  Elements  alter  and  corrupt,  because  they  are

intermixed,  and  are  joyn’d  to  one  another,  and  so  may  exercise  their

contrariety; Coelestial Bodies touch, but are not touched by the Elements. but

Coelestial bodies are separated from the Elements, by which they are not so

much as toucht, though indeed they have an influence upon the Elements. It

is requisite, if you will prove generation and corruption in Coelestial bodies,

that you shew, that there resides contrarieties between them.


SAGR.


See how I will find those contrarieties between them. The first fountain from

whence you derive the contrariety of the Elements, is the contrariety of their

motions  upwards  and  downwards:  it  therefore  is  necessary  that  those

Principles be in like manner contraries to each other, Gravity & levity, rarity

and density, are contrary qualities. upon which those motions depend: and

because  that  is  moveable  upwards  by  lightness,  and  this  downwards  by

gravity, it is necessary that lightness and gravity are contrary to each other:

no less are we to believe those other Principles to be contraries, which are the

causes that this is heavy, and that light: but by your own confession, levity

and gravity follow as consequents of rarity and density; therefore rarity and

density shall be contraries: The stars infinitely surpass the substance of the

rest of Heaven in density. the which conditions or affections are so amply

found in Coelestial bodies, that you esteem the stars to be onely more dense

parts of their Heaven: and if this be so, it followeth that the density of the

stars exceeds that of the rest of Heaven, by almost infinite degrees: which is

manifest,  in  that  Heaven  is  infinitely  transparent,  and  the  stars  extremely

opacous; and for that there are there above no other qualities, but more and

less  density  and  rarity,  which  may  be  causes  of  the  greater  or  less

transparency.  There  being  then  such  contrariety  between  the  Coelestial

bodies, it is necessary that they also be generable and corruptible, in the same

manner as the Elementary bodies are; or else that contrariety is not the cause

of corruptibility, Rarity & density in Coelestial bodies, is different from the

rarity & density of the elements. &c.SIMPL.


There is no necessity either of one or the other, for that density and rarity in

Coelestial bodies, are not contraries to  each other, as in Elementary bodies;

for that they depend not on the primary qualities, cold and heat, which are

contraries; but on the more or less matter in proportion to quantity: now much

and little, speak onely a relative opposition, that is, the least of oppositions,

and which hath nothing to do with generation and corruption.


SAGR.


Therefore  affirming,  that  density  and  rarity,  which  amongst  the  Elements

should  be  the  cause  of  gravity  and  levity,  which  may  be  the  causes  of

contrary  motions  sursum  and  deors  m,  on  which,  again,  dependeth  the

contrarieties for generation and corruption; it sufficeth not that they be those

densnesses and rarenesses which under the same quantity, or (if you will)

mass contain much or little matter, but it is necessary that they be densnesses

and rarenesses caused by the primary qualities, hot and cold, otherwise they

would operate nothing at all: but if this be so, Aristotle defective in assigning

the  causes  why  the  elements  are  generable  &  corruptible.  Aristotle  hath

deceived us, for that he should have told it us at first, and so have left written

that those simple bodies are generable and corruptible, that are moveable with

simple motions upwards and downwards, dependent on levity and gravity,

caused by rarity and density, made by much or little matter, by reason of heat

and cold; and not to have staid at the simple motion sursum and deorsùm: for

I assure you that to the making of bodies heavy or light, whereby they come

to be moved with contrary motions, any kind of density and rarity sufficeth,

whether it proceed from heat and cold, or what else you please; for heat and

cold have nothing to do in this affair: and you shall upon experiment find,

that a red iron, which you must grant to have heat, weigheth as much, and

moves in the same manner as when it is cold. But to overpass this also, how

know you but that Coelestial rarity and density depend on heat and cold?


SIMPL.


I know it, because those qualities are not amongst Coelestial bodies, which

are neither hot nor cold.SALV.


I see we are again going about to engulph our selves in a bottomless ocean,

where there is no getting to shore; for this is a Navigation without Compass,

Stars, or Rudder: so that it will follow either that we be forced to pass from

Shelf to Shelf, or run on ground, or to sail continually in danger of being lost.

Therefore, if according to your advice we shall proceed in our main design,

we  must  of  necessity  for  the  present  overpass  this  general  consideration,

whether direct motion be necessary in Nature, and agree with some bodies;

and  come  to  the  particular  demonstrations,  observations  and  experiments;

propounding in the first place all those that have been hitherto alledged by

Aristotle,  Ptolomey,  and  others,  to  prove  the  stability  of  the  Earth,

endeavouring in the next place to answer them: and producing in  the last

place, those, by which others may be perswaded, that the Earth is no less than

the Moon, or any other Planet to be numbered amongst natural bodies that

move circularly.


SAGR.


I shall the more willingly incline to this, in that I am better satisfied with your

Architectonical and general discourse, than with that of Aristotle, for yours

convinceth me without the least scruple, and the other at every step crosseth

my way with some block. And I see no reason why Simplicius should not be

presently satisfied with the Argument you alledg, to prove that there can be

no such thing in nature as a motion by a right line, if we do but presuppose

that the parts of the Universe are disposed in an excellent constitution and

perfect order.


SALV.


Stay a little, good Sagredus, for just now a way comes into my mind, how I

may  give  Simplicius  satisfaction,  provided  that  he  will  not  be  so  strictly

wedded to every expression of Aristotle, as to hold it heresie to recede in any

thing from him. Nor is there any question to be made, but that if we grant the

excellent disposition and perfect order of the parts of the Universe, as to local

scituation, that then there is no other but the circular motion, and rest; for as

to the motion by a right line, I see not how it can be of use for any thing, butto reduce to their natural constitution, some integral bodies, that by some

accident were remov’d and separated from their whole, as we said above.


Let us now consider the whole Terrestrial Globe, and enquire the best we can,

whether it, and the other Mundane bodies are to conserve themselves in their

perfect and natural disposition. It is necessary to say,  that it rests and keeps

perpetually immoveable in its place; or else that continuing always in its

place, it revolves in its self; or that it turneth about a Centre, moving by the

circumference  of  a  circle.  Arist.  &  Ptolomey  make  the  Terrestrial  Globe

immoveable. Of which accidents, both Aristotle and Ptolomey, and all their

followers say, that it hath ever observed, and shall continually keep the first,

that  is,  a  perpetual  rest  in  the  same  place.  It  is  better  to  say,  that  the

Terrestrial Globe naturally resteth, than that it moveth directly downwards.

Now, why, I pray you, ought they not to have said, that its natural affection is

to rest immoveable, rather than to make natural unto it the motionThe word

is,  all’  ingiù,  which  the  Latine  version  rendreth  sursùm,  which  is  quite

contrary to the Authors sense. downwards, with which motion it never did or

shall move? And as to the motion by a right line, they must grant us that

Nature maketh use of it to reduce the small parts of the Earth, Water, Air,

Fire, and every other integral Mundane body to their Whole, when any of

them by chance are separated, and so transported out of their proper place; if

also haply, some circular motion might not be found to be more convenient to

make this restitution. In my judgment, this primary position answers much

better,  even  according  to  Aristotles  own  method,  to  all  the  other

consequences, than to attribute the straight motion to be an intrinsick and

natural  principle of the Elements. Which is manifest, for that if I aske the

Peripatetick, if, being of opinion that Coelestial bodies are incorruptibe and

eternal, he believeth that the Terrestial Globe is not so, but corruptible and

mortal, so that there shall come a time, when the Sun and Moon and other

Stars, continuing their beings and operations, the Earth shall not be found in

the  World,  but  shall  with  the  rest  of  the  Elements  be  destroyed  and

annihilated, I am certain that he would answer me, no: therefore generation

and corruption is in the parts and not in the whole; Right Motion with more

reason attributed to the parts, than to the whole Elements. and in the parts

very small and superficial, which are, as it were, incensible in comparison of

the whole masse. And because Aristotle deduceth generation and corruption

from the contrariety of streight motions, let us remit such motions to theparts, which onely change and decay, and to the whole Globe and Sphere of

the  Elements,  let  us  ascribe  either  the  circular  motion,  or  a  perpetual

consistance in its proper place: the only affections apt for perpetuation, and

maintaining of perfect order. This which is spoken of the Earth, may be said

with the same reason of Fire, and of the greatest part of the Air; to which

Elements, The Peripateticks improperly assign those motions to the Elements

for Natural, with which they never were moved, and those for Preternatural

with which they alwayes are moved. the Peripateticks are forced to ascribe

for intrinsical and natural, a motion wherewith they were never yet moved,

nor never shall be; and to call that motion preternatural to them, wherewith, if

they move at all, they do and ever shall move. This I say, because they assign

to  the  Air  and  Fire  the  motion  upwards,  wherewith  those  Elements  were

never moved, but only some parts of them, and those were so moved onely in

order to the recovery of their perfect constitution, when they were out of their

natural places; and on the contrary they call the circular motion preternatural

to them, though they are thereby incessantly moved: forgeting, as it seemeth,

what Aristotle oft inculcateth, that nothing violent can be permanent.


SIMPL.


To  all  these  we  have  very  pertinent  answers,  Sensible  experiments  to  be

preferred to humane Arguments. which I for this time omit, that we may

come to the more particular reasons, and sensible experiments, which ought

in conclusion to be opposed, as Aristotle saith well, to whatever humane

reason can present us with.


SAGR.


What hath been spoken hitherto, serves to clear up unto us which of the two

general  discourses  carrieth  with  it  most  of  probability,  I  mean  that  of

Aristotle, which would perswade us, that the sublunary bodies are by nature

generable, and corruptible, &c. and therefore most different from the essence

of Coelestial bodies, which are impassible, ingenerable, incorruptible, &c.

drawn from the diversity of simple motions; or else this of Salviatus, who

supposing  the  integral  parts  of  the  World  to  be  disposed  in  a  perfect

constitution, excludes by necessary consequence  the right or straight motion

of simple natural bodies, as being of no use in nature, and esteems the Earth it

self also to be one of the Coelestial bodies adorn’d with all the prerogativesthat agree with them; which last discourse is hitherto much more likely, in

my judgment, than that other. Therefore resolve, Simplicius, to produce all

the  particular  reasons,  experiments  and  observations,  as  well  Natural  as

Astronomical, that may serve to perswade us that the Earth differeth from the

Coelestial bodies, is immoveable, and situated in the Centre of the World,

and what ever else excludes its moving like to the Planets, as Jupiter or the

Moon, &c. And Salviatus will be pleased to be so civil as to answer to them

one by one.


SIMPL.


See here for a begining, two most convincing Arguments to demonstrate the

Earth to be most different from the Coelestial bodies. First, the bodies that are

generable, corruptible, alterable, &c. are quite different from those that are

ingenerable,  incorruptible,  unalterable,  &c.  But  the  Earth  is  generable,

corruptible,  alterable,  &c.  and  the  Coelestial  bodies  ingenerable,

incorruptible, unalterable, &c. Therefore the Earth is quite different from the

Coelestial bodies.


SAGR.


By your first Argument you spread the Table with the same Viands, which

but just now with much adoe were voided.


SIMPL.


Hold a little, Sir, and take the rest along with you, and then tell me if this be

not different from what you had before. In the former, the Minor was proved

à priori, & now you see it proved à posteriori: Judg then if it be the same. I

prove  the  Minor,  therefore  (the  Major  being  most  manifest)  by  sensible

experience, which  that in the Earth there are made continual generations,

corruptions, alterations, &c. which neither our senses, nor the traditions or

memories of our Ancestors, ever saw an instance of in Heaven; therefore

Heaven  is  unalterable,  &c.  and  the  Earth  alterable,  Heaven  immutable,

because there never was any mutation seen in it. &c. and therefore different

from  Heaven.  I  take  my  second  Argument  from  a  principal  and  essential

accident, and it is this. That body which is by its nature obscure and deprived

of light, Bodies naturally lucid, are different from those which are by natureobscure. is divers from the luminous and shining bodies; but the Earth is

obscure and void of light, and the Coelestial bodies splendid, and full of light;

Ergo, &c. Answer to these Arguments first, that we may not heap up too

many, and then I will alledge others.


SALV.


As to the first, the stresse whereof you lay upon experience, I desire that you

would a little more distinctly produce me the alteration which you see made

in the Earth, and not in Heaven; upon which you call the Earth alterable, and

the Heavens not so.


SIMPL.


I see in the Earth, plants and animals continually generating  and decaying;

winds, rains, tempests, storms arising; and in a word, the aspect of the Earth

to  be  perpetually  metamorphosing;  none  of  which  mutations  are  to  be

discern’d in the Coelestial bodies; the constitution and figuration of which is

most punctually conformable to that they ever were time out of mind; without

the generation of any thing that is new, or corruption of any thing that was

old.


SALV.


But  if  you  content  your  self  with  these  visible,  or  to  say  better,  seen

experiments, you must consequently account China and America Coelestial

bodies, for doubtlesse you never be held in them these alterations which you

see here in Italy, and that therefore according to your apprehension they are

inalterable.


SIMPL.


Though I never did see these alterations sensibly in those places, the relations

of them are not to be questioned; besides that, cum eadem sit ratio totius, &

partium, those Countreys being a part of the Earth, as well as ours, they must

of necessity be alterable as these are.


SALV.And why have you not, without being put to believe other mens relations,

examined and observed those alterations with your own eyes?


SIMPL.


Because those places, besides that they are not exposed to our eyes, are so

remote,  that  our  sight  cannot  reach  to  comprehend  therein  such  like

mutations.


SALV.


See now, how you have unawares discovered the fallacy of your Argument;

for, if you say that the alterations that are seen on the Earth neer at hand,

cannot, by reason of the too great distance, be seen in America, much lesse

can you see them in the Moon, which is so many hundred times more remote:

And if you believe the alterations in Mexico upon the report of those that

come from thence, what intelligence have you from the Moon, to assure you

that there is no such alterations in it? Therefore, from your not seeing any

alterations in Heaven, whereas, if there were any such, you could not see

them  by  reason  of  their  too  great  distance,  and  from  your  not  having

intelligence thereof, in regard that it cannot be had, you ought not to argue,

that there are no such alterations; howbeit, from the seeing and observing of

them on Earth, you well argue that therein such there are.


SIMPL.


I will shew so great mutations that have befaln on the Earth; that if any such

had happened in the Moon, they might very well have been observed here

below. The Mediterranian Sea made by the separation of Abila and Calpen.

We find in very antient records, that heretofore at the Streights of Gibraltar,

the  two  great  Mountains  Abila,  and  Calpen,  were  continued  together  by

certain other lesse Mountains, which there gave check  to the Ocean: but

those Hills, being by some cause or other separated, and a way being opened

for the Sea to break in, it made such an inundation, that it gave occasion to

the calling of it since the Mid-land Sea: the greatness whereof considered,

and the divers aspects the surfaces of the Water and Earth then made, had it

been beheld afar off, there is no doubt but so great a change might have been

discerned by one that was then in the Moon; as also to us inhabitants of theEarth, the like alterations would be perceived in the Moon; but we find not in

antiquity, that ever there was such a thing seen; therefore we have no cause to

say, that any of the Coelestial bodies are alterable, &c.


SALV.


That so great alterations have hapned in the Moon, I dare not say, but for all

that, I am not yet certain but that such changes might occur; and because such

a mutation could onely represent unto us some kind of variation between the

more clear, and more obscure parts of the Moon, I know not whether we have

had  on  Earth  observant  Selenographers,  who  have  for  any  considerable

number of years, instructed us with so exact Selenography, as that we should

confidently conclude, that there hath no such change hapned in the face of the

Moon; of the figuration of which I find no more particular description, than

the saying of some, that it represents an humane face; of others, that it is like

the muzle of a Lyon; and of others, that it is Cain with a bundle of thorns on

his back: therefore, to say Heaven is unalterable, because that in the Moon, or

other Coelestial bodies, no such alterations are seen, as discover themselves

on Earth, is a bad illation, and concludeth nothing.


SAGR.


And there is another odd kind of scruple in this Argument of Simplicius,

running  in  my  mind,  which  I  would  gladly  have  answered;  therefore  I

demand of him, whether the Earth before the Mediterranian inundation was

generable and corruptible, or else began then so to be?


SIMPL.


It was doubtless generable and corruptible also before that time; but that was

so vast a mutation, that it might have been observed as far as the Moon.


SAGR.


Go to; if the Earth was generable and corruptible before that Inundation, why

may not the Moon be so likewise without such a change? Or why should that

be necessary in the Moon, which importeth nothing on Earth?SALV.


It is a shrewd question: But I am doubtfull that Simplicius a little altereth the

Text of Aristotle, and the other Peripateticks, who say, they hold the Heavens

unalterable, for that they see therein no one star generate or corrupt, which is

probably  a  less  part  of  Heaven,  than  a  City  is  of  the  Earth,  and  yet

innumerable of these have been destroyed, so as that no mark of them hath

remain’d.


SAGR.


I verily believed otherwise, and conceited that Simplicius dissembled this

exposition of the Text, that he might not charge his Master and Consectators,

with a notion more absurd than the former. And what a folly it is to say the

Coelestial part is unalterable, because no stars do generate or corrupt therein?

What  then?  hath  any  one  seen  a  Terrestrial  Globe  corrupt,  and  another

regenerate in its place? And yet is it not on all hands granted by Philosophers,

that  there  are  very  few  stars  in  Heaven  less  than  the  Earth,  Its  no  less

impossible for a star to corrupt, than for the whole Terrestrial Globe. but very

many that are much bigger? So that for a star in Heaven to corrupt, would be

no less than if the whole Terrestrial Globe should be destroy’d. Therefore, if

for  the  true  proof  of  generation  and  corruption  in  the  Universe,  it  be

necessary that so vast bodies as a star, must corrupt and regenerate, you may

satisfie your self and cease your opinion; for I assure you, that you shall

never see the Terrestrial Globe or any other integral body of the World, to

corrupt or decay so, that having been beheld by us for so many years past,

they should so dissolve, as not to leave any footsteps of them.


SALV.


But to give Simplicius yet fuller satisfaction, and to reclaim him, Aristotle

would change his opinion, did he see the novelties of our age. if possible,

from  his  error;  I  affirm,  that  we  have  in  our  age  new  accidents  and

observations, and such, that I question not in the least, but if Aristotle were

now alive, they would make him change his opinion; which may be easily

collected from the very manner of his discoursing: For when he writeth that

he esteemeth the Heavens inalterable, &c. because no new thing was seen to

be begot therein, or any old to be dissolved, he seems implicitely to hint untous, that when he should see any such accident, he would hold the contrary:

and , as indeed it is meet, sensible experiments to natural reason: for had he

not made any reckoning of the senses, he would not then from the not seeing

of any sensible mutation, have argued immutability.


SIMPL.


Aristotle deduceth his principal Argument à priori, shewing the necessity of

the inalterability of Heaven by natural, manifest and clear principles; and then

stablisheth the same à posteriori, by sense, and the traditions of the antients.


SALV.


This you speak of is the Method he hath observed in delivering his Doctrine,

but I do not bethink it yet to be that wherewith he invented it; for I do believe

for certain, that he first procured by help of the senses, such experiments and

observations  as  he  could,  The  certainty  of  the  conclusion  helpeth  by  a

resolutive method to find the demonstration. to assure him as much as it was

possible, of the conclusion, and that he afterwards sought out the means how

to demonstrate it: For this is the usual course in demonstrative Sciences, and

the  reason  thereof  is,  because  when  the  conclusion  is  true,  by  help  of

resolutive Method, one may hit upon some proposition before demonstrated,

or come to some principle known  per se; but if the conclusion be false, a

man may proceed in infinitum, and never meet with any truth already known;

but  very  oft  he  shall  meet  with  some  impossibility  or  manifest  absurdity

Pythagoras offered an Hecatomb for a Geometrical demonstration which he

found. Nor need you question but that Pythagoras along time before he found

the demonstration for which he offered the Hecatomb, had been certain, that

the square of the side subtending the right angle in a rectangle triangle, was

equal to the square of the other two sides: and the certainty of the conclusion

conduced not a little to the investigating of the demonstration, understanding

me  alwayes  to  mean  in  demonstrative  Sciences.  But  what  ever  was  the

method  of  Aristotle,  and  whether  his  arguing  à  priori  preceded  sense  à

posteriori, or the contrary; it sufficeth that the same Aristotle preferreth (as

hath been oft said) sensible experiments before all discourses; besides, as to

the  Arguments  à  priori  their  force  hath  been  already  examined.  Now

returning to my purposed matter, I say, that the things in our times discovered

in  the  Heavens,  are,  and  have  been  such,  that  they  may  give  absolutesatisfaction to all Philosophers; forasmuch as in the particular bodies, and in

the universal expansion of Heaven, there have been, and are continually, seen

just  such  accidents  as  we  call  generations  and  corruptions,  being  that

excellent Astronomers have observed many Comets generated and dissolved

in parts higher than the Lunar Orb, besides the two new Stars, Anno 1572,

New stars discovered in Heaven. and Anno 1604, without contradiction much

higher than all the Planets; and in the face of the Sun it self, by help of the

Telescope, Spots generate and dissolve in the face of the Sun. certain dense

and obscure substances, in semblance very like to the foggs about the Earth,

are seen to be produced and dissolved; and many of these are so vast, that

they far exceed not only the Mediterranian Streight, but all Affrica and Asia

also. Solar spots are bigger than all Asia and Affrick. Now if Aristotle had

seen these things, what think you he would have said, and done Simplicius?


SIMPL.


I know not what Aristotle would have done or said, that was the great Master

of all the Sciences, but yet I know in part, what his Sectators do and say, and

ought to do and say, unlesse they would deprive themselves of their guide,

leader, and Prince in Philosophy. As to the Comets, are not those Modern

Astronomers,  who  would  make  them  Coelestial,  convinced  by

theAstronomers  confuted  by  Anti-Tycho.  Anti-Tycho,  yea,  and  overcome

with their own weapons, I mean by way of Paralaxes and Calculations, every

way  tryed,  concluding  at  the  last  in  favour  of  Aristotle,  that  they  are  all

Elementary?  And  this  being  overthrown,  which  was  as  it  were  their

foundation, have these Novellists any thing more wherewith to maintain their

assertion?


SALV.


Hold a little, good Simplicius, this modern Author, what saith he to the new

Stars, Anno 1572, and 1604, and to  the Solar spots? for as to the Comets, I

for my own particular little care to make them generated under or above the

Moon; nor did I ever put much stresse on the loquacity of Tycho; nor am I

hard to believe that their matter is Elementary, and that they may elevate

(sublimate) themselves at their pleasure, without meeting with any obstacle

from the impenetrability of the Peripatetick Heaven, which I hold to be far

more thin, yielding, and subtil than our Air; and as to the calculations of theParallaxes,  first,  the  uncertainty  whether  Comets  are  subject  to  such

accidents,  and  next,  the  inconstancy  of  the  observations,  upon  which  the

computations are made, make me equally suspect both those opinions: Anti-

Tycho  wresteth  Astronomical  observations  to  his  own  purpose.  and  the

rather,  for  that  I  see  him  you  call  Anti-Tycho,  sometimes  stretch  to  his

purpose, or else reject those observations which interfere with his design.


SIMPL.


As to the new Stars, Anti-Tycho extricates himself finely in three or four

words;  saying,  That  those  modern  new  Stars  are  no  certain  parts  of  the

Coelestial bodies, and that the adversaries, if they will prove alteration and

generation in those superior bodies, must shew some mutations that have

been made in the Stars described so many ages past, of which there is no

doubt but that they be Coelestial bodies, which they can never be able to do:

Next, as to those matters which some affirm, to generate and dissipate in the

face of the Sun, he makes no mention thereof; wherefore I conclude, that he

believed them fictious, or the illusions of the Tube, or at most, some petty

effects  caused  by  the  Air,  and  in  brief,  any  thing  rather  than  matters

Coelestial.


SALV.


But you, Simplicius, what answer could you give to the opposition of these

importunate spots which are started up to disturb the Heavens, and more than

that,  the  Peripatetick  Philosophy?  It  cannot  be  but  that  you,  who  are  so

resolute a Champion of it, have found some reply or solution for the same, of

which you ought not to deprive us.


SIMPL.


I have heard sundry opinions about this particular. One saith: ‘They are Stars

which in their proper Orbs, Sundry opinions touching the Solar spots. like as

Venus and Mercury, revolve about the Sun, and in passing under it, represent

themselves to us obscure; and for that they are many, they oft happen to

aggregate their parts together, and afterwards seperate again’. Others believe

them  to  be  äerial  impressions;  others,  the  illusions  of  the  chrystals;  and

others, other things: But I incline to think, yea am verily perswaded, Thatthey are an aggregate of many several opacous bodies, as it were casually

concurrent among themselves. And therefore we often see, that in one of

those spots one may number ten or more such small bodies, which are of

irregular  figures, and seem to us like flakes of snow, or flocks of wooll, or

moaths  flying:  they  vary  fire  amongst  themselves,  and  one  while  sever,

another while meet, and most of all beneath the Sun, about which, as about

their Centre, they continually move. But yet, must we not therefore grant, that

they are generated or dissolved, but that at sometimes they are hid behind the

body of the Sun, and at other times, though remote from it, yet are they not

seen for the vicinity of the immeasurable light of the Sun; in regard that in the

eccentrick  Orb  of  the  Sun,  there  is  constituted,  as  it  were,  an  Onion,

composed  of  many  folds  one  within  another,  each  of  which,  being  The

Original saith [tempestata si muove] which the Latine Translation, (mistaking

Tempestata,  a  word  in  Heraldry,  for  Tempestato,)  rendereth  [incitata

movetur] which signifieth a violent transportmeut, as in a storm, that of a

Ship. studded with certain small spots, doth move; and albeit their motion at

first seemeth inconstant and irregular, yet neverthelesse, it is said at last, to be

observed that the very same spots, as before, do within a determinate time

return again. This seemeth to me the fittest answer that hath been found to

assigne  a  reason  of  that  same  appearance,  and  withal  to  maintain  the

incorruptability  and  ingenerability  of  the  Heavens;  and  if  this  doth  not

suffice; there wants not more elevated wits, which will give you other more

convincing.


SALV.


If this of which we dispute, were some point of Law, or other part of the

Studies called Humanity, In natural Sciences, the art of Oratory is of no force.

wherein there is neither truth nor falshood, if we will give sufficient credit to

the acutenesse of the wit, readinesse of answers, and the general practice of

Writers,  then  he  who  most  aboundeth  in  these,  makes  his  reason  more

probable and plausible; but in Natural Sciences, the conclusions of which are

true and necessary, and wherewith the judgment of men hath nothing to do,

one is to be more cautious how he goeth abou  to maintain any thing that is

false; for a man but of an ordinary wit, if it be his good fortune to be of the

right side, may lay a thousand Demosthenes and a thousand Aristotles at his

feet. Therefore reject those hopes and conceits, wherewith you flatter your