Then Simplicius, seeing that to make the flux and reflux of the Sea, it is

necessary  to  introduce  a  Miracle,  let  us  suppose  the  Earth  to  move

miraculously, upon the motion of which the Sea moveth naturally: and this

effect shall be also the more simple, and I may say natural, amongst the

miraculous operations, in that the making a Globe to move round, of which

kind we see many others to move, is lesse difficult than to make an immense

masse of water go forwards and backwards, in one place more swiftly, and in

another lesse, and to rise and fall in some places more; in some lesse, and in

some not at all: and to work all these different effects in one and the same

Vessel that containeth it: besides, that these are several Miracles, and that is

but one onely. And here it may be added, that the Miracle of making the

water to move is accompanied with another, namely, the holding of the Earth

stedfast against impetuosities of the water, able to make it swage sometimes

one way, and sometimes another, if it were not miraculously kept to rights.


SAGR.


God  Simplicius,  let  us  for  the  present  suspend  our  judgement  about

sentencing the new opinion to be vain that Salviatus is about to explicate unto

us, nor let us so hastily flye out into passion like the scolding overgrown

Haggs: and as for the Miracle, we may as well recurre to it when we have

done hearing the Discourses contained within the bounds of natural causes:

though to speak freely, all the Works of nature, or rather of God, are in my

judgement miraculous.


SALV.


And I am of the same opinion; nor doth my saying, that the motion of the

Earth is the Natural cause of the ebbing and flowing, hinder, but that the said

motion of the Earth may be miraculous. Now reassuming our Argument, I

apply, and once again affirm, that it hath been hitherto unknown how it might

be that the Waters contained in our Mediterranean Straights should make

those motions, as we see it doth, if so be the said Straight, or containing

Vessel were immoveable. And that which makes the difficulty, and rendreth

this matter inextricable, are the things which I am about to speak of, and

which are daily observed. Therefore lend me your attention.We are here in Venice, where at this time the Waters are low,  the Sea calm,

It is proved impossible that there should naturally be any ebbing and flowing,

the Earth being immoveable. the Air tranquil; suppose it to be young flood,

and that in the term of five or six hours the water do rise ten Palms. hand

breadths and more; that rise is not made by the first water, which was said to

be rarefied, but it is done by the accession of new Water: Water of the same

sort with the former, of the same brackishness, of the same density, of the

same  weight:  Ships,  Simplicius,  float  therein  as  in  the  former,  without

drawing an hairs breadth more water; a Barrel of this second doth not weigh

one single grain more or less than such another quantity of the other, and

retaineth the same coldness without the least alteration: And it is, in a word,

Water newly and visibly entred by the Channels and Mouth of theLio is a fair

Port in the Venetian Gulph, lying N. E. from the City. Lio. Consider now,

how  and  from  whence  it  came  thither.  Are  there  happly  hereabouts  any

Gulphs or Whirle-pools in the bottom of the Sea, by which the Earth drinketh

in and spueth out the Water, breathing as it were a great and monstruous

Whale? But if this be so, how comes it that the Water doth not flow in the

space of six hours in Ancona, in * Ragusa, in Corfu, where the Tide is very

small, and happly unobservable? Who will invent a way to pour new Water

into an immoveable Vessel, and to make that it rise onely in one determinate

part  of  it,  and  in  other  places  not?  Will  you  say,  that  this  new  Water  is

borrowed from the Ocean, being brought in by the Straight of Gibraltar? This

will not remove the doubt aforesaid, but will beget a greater. And first tell me

what  ought  to  be  the  current  of  that  Water,  that  entering  at  the  Straights

mouth, is carried in six hours to the remotest Creeks of the Mediterrane, at a

distance of two or three thousand Miles, and that returneth the same space

again in a like time at its going back? What would Ships do that lye out at

Sea? What would become of those that should be in the Straights-mough in a

continual precipice of a vast accumulation of Waters, that entering in at a

Channel but eight Miles broad, is to give admittance to so much Water as in

six hours over-floweth a tract of many hundred Miles broad, & thousands in

length? What Tygre, what Falcon runneth or flyeth with so much swiftness?

With the swiftness, I say, of above 400 Miles an hour. The currents run (nor

can it be denied) the long-wayes of the Gulph, but so slowly, as that a Boat

with Oars will out-go them, though indeed not without defalking for their

wanderings. Moreover, if this Water come in at the Straight, the other doubt

yet remaineth, namely, how it cometh to flow here so high in a place soremote, without first rising a like or greater height in the parts more adjacent?

In a word, I cannot think that either obstinacy, or sharpness of wit can ever

find an answer to these Objections, nor consequently to maintain the stability

of the Earth against them, keeping within the bounds of Nature.


SAGR.


I have all the while perfectly apprehended you in this; and I stand greedily

attending  to  hear  in  what  manner  these  wonders  may  occur  without

obstruction from the motion already assigned to the Earth.


SALV.


These effects being to ensue in consequence of the motions that naturally

agree  with  the  Earth,  it  is  necessary  that  they  not  onely  meet  with  no

impediment or obstacle, but that they do follow easily, & not onely that they

follow  with  facility,  but  with  necessity,  so  as  that  it  is  impossible  that  it

should  succeed  otherwise,  for  such  is  the  property  &  condition  of  things

natural  &  true.  Having  therefore  shewen  the  impossibility  of  rendring  a

reason of the motions discerned in the Waters, True and natural effects follow

without  difficulty.  &  at  the  same  time  to  maintain  the  immobility  of  the

vessel that containeth them we may proceed to enquire, whether the mobility

of the Container may produce the required effect, in the manner that it is

observed to evene.


Two kinds of motions may be conferred upon a Vessel, whereby the Water

therein contained, Two sorts of motions of the containing Vessel, may make

the contained water to rise and fall. may acquire a faculty of fluctuating in it,

one while towards one side, and another while towards another; and there one

while to ebbe, and another while to flow. The first is, when first one, and then

another of those sides is declined, for then the Water running towards the

inclining side, will alternately be higher and lower, sometimes on one side,

and sometimes on another. But because that this rising and abating is no other

than  a  recession  and  accession  to  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  such  a  motion

cannot  be  ascribed  to  the  Cavities  of  the  said  Earth,  that  are  the  Vessels

which  contain  the  Waters;  the  parts  of  which  Vessel  cannot  by  any

whatsoever motion assigned to the Earth, The Cavities of the Earth cannot

approach or go farther from the centre of the same. be made to approach orrecede from the centre of the same: The other sort of motion is, when the

Vessel moveth (without inclining in the least) with a progressive motion, not

uniform, but that changeth velocity, by sometimes accellerating, and other

times retarding: from which disparity it would follow, The progpessive and

uneven motion may make the water contained in a Vessel to run to and fro.

that the Water contained in the Vessel its true, but not fixed fast to it, as its

other solid parts, but by reason of its fluidity, as if it were separated and at

liberty, and not obliged to follow all the mutations of its Container, in the

retardation of the Vessel, it keeping part of the impetus before conceived,

would run towards the the preceding part, whereupon it would of necessity

come to rise; and on the contrary, if new velocity should be added to the

Vessel, with retaining parts of its tardity, staying somewhat behind, before it

could habituate it self to the new impetus, it would hang back towards the

following part, where it would come to rise something. The which effects we

may plainly declare and make out to the Sense by the example of one of those

same Barks yonder, which continually come from  A Town lying S. E. of

Venice Lizza-Fusina, laden with fresh water, for the service of the City. Let

us therefore fancy one of those Barks, to come from thence with moderate

velocity along the Lake, carrying the water gently, of which it is full: and

then either by running a ground, or by some other impediment that it shall

meet with, let it be notably retarded. The water therein contained shall not, by

that means, lose, as the Bark doth, its pre-conceived impetus, but retaining

the same, shall run forwards towards the prow, where it shall rise notably,

falling as much a stern. But if, on the contrary, the said Bark, in the midst of

its  smooth  course,  shall  have  a  new  velocity,  with  notable  augmentation

added  to  it,  the  water  contained  before  it  can  habituate  it  self  thereto,

continuing  in  its  tardity,  shall  stay  behinde,  namely  a  stern,  where  of

consequence it shall mount, and abate for the same at the prow. This effect is

undoubted and manifest, and may hourly be experimented; in which I desire

that for the present three particulars may be noted. The first is, that to make

the water to rise on one side of the vessel, there is no need of new water, nor

that it run thither, forsaking the other side. The second is, that the water in the

middle doth not rise or fall notably, unlesse the course of the Bark were not

before that very swift, and the shock or other arrest that held it exceeding

strong and sudden, in which case its possible, that not only all the water

might run forwards, but that the greater part thereof might issue forth of the

Bark: and the same also would ensue, whilst that being under sail in a smoothcourse, a most violent impetus should, upon an instant, overtake it: But when

to its calme motion there is added a moderate retardation or incitation, the

middle  parts  (as  I  said)  unobservedly  rise  and  fall:  and  the  other  parts,

according  as  they  are  neerer  to  the  middle,  rise  the  lesse;  and  the  more

remote, more. The third is, that whereas the parts about the midst do make

little alteration in rising and falling, in respect of the waters of the sides; on

the contrary, they run forwards and backwards very much, in comparison of

the extreams. Now, my Masters, that which the Bark doth, in respect of the

water by it contained, and that which the water contained doth, in respect of

the  Bark  its  container,  is  the  self-same,  to  an  hair,  with  that  which  the

Mediterranean Vessel doth, in respect of the waters in it contained, and that

which the waters contained do, in respect of the Mediterranean Vessel their

container. The parts of the terrestrial Globe accelerate and regard in their

motion. It followeth now that we demonstrate how, and in what manner it is

true, that the Mediterrane, and all the other Straits; and in a word, all the parts

of the Earth do all move, with a motion notably uneven, though no motion

that is not regular and uniforme, is thereby assigned to all the said Globe

taken collectively.


SIMP.


This  Proposition,  at  first  sight  to  me,  that  am  neither  Geometrician  nor

Astronomer, hath the appearance of a very great Paradox; and if it should be

true, that the motion of the whole, being regular, that of the parts, which are

all united to their whole, may be irregular, the Paradox will overthrow the

Axiome that affirmeth, Eandem esse rationem totius & partium.


SALV.


I  will  demonstrate  my  Paradox,  and  leave  it  to  your  care,  Simplicius,  to

defend the Axiome from it, or else to reconcile them; and my demonstration

shall be short and familiar, depending on the things largely handled in our

precedent conferences, without introducing the least syllable, in favour of the

flux and reflux.


We  have  said,  Demonstrations  how  the  parts  of  the  terrestriall  Globe

accelerate and retard. that the motions assigned to the Terrestrial Globe are

two,  the  first  Annual,  made  by  its  centre  about  the  circumference  of  theGrand Orb, under the Ecliptick, according to the order of the Signes, that is,

from West to East; the other made by the said Globe revolving about its own

centre in twenty four hours; and this likewise from West to East: though

about an Axis somewhat inclined, and not equidistant from that of the Annual

conversion. From the mixture of these two motions, each of it self uniform, I

say, that there doth result an uneven and deformed motion in the parts of the

Earth. Which, that it may the more easily be understood, I will explain, by

drawing a Scheme thereof. And first, about the centre A [in Fig. 1. of this

Dialogue] I will describe the circumference of the Grand Orb B C, The parts

of a Circle regularly moved about its own centre move in divers times with

contrary motions. in which any point being taken, as B, about it as a centre

we will describe this lesser circle D E F G, representing the Terrestrial Globe;

the which we will suppose to run thorow the whole circumference of the

Grand Orb, with its centre B, from the West towards the East, that is, from

the part B towards C; and moreover we will suppose the Terrestrial Globe to

turn about its own centre B likewise from West to East, that is, according to

the succession of the points D E F G, in the space of twenty four hours. But

here we ought carefully to note, that a circle turning round upon its own

centre, each part of it must, at different times, move with contrary motions:

the which is manifest, considering that whilst the parts of the circumference,

about the point D move to the left hand, that is, towards E, the opposite parts

that are about F, approach to the right hand, that is, towards G; so that when

the parts D shall be in F, their motion shall be contrary to what it was before.

when it was in D. Furthermore, the same time that the parts E descend, if I

may so speak, towards F, those in G ascend towards D. It being therefore

presupposed, that  there are such contrarieties of motions in the parts of the

Terrestrial  Surface,  The  mixture  of  the  two  motions  annnal  and  diurnal,

causeth  the  inequality  in  the  motion  of  the  parts  of  the  terrestrial  Globe.

whilst it turneth round upon its own centre, it is necessary, that in conjoyning

this  Diurnal  Motion,  with  the  other  Annual,  there  do  result  an  absolute

motion  for  the  parts  of  the  said  Terrestrial  Superficies,  one  while  very

accelerate,  and  another  while  as  slow  again.  The  which  is  manifest,

considering first the parts about D, the absolute motion of which shall be

extream swift, as that which proceedeth from two motions made both one

way, namely, towards the left hand; the first of which is part of the Annual

Motion, common to all the parts of the Globe, the other is that of the said

point D., carried likewise to the left, by the Diurnal Revolution; so that, inthis case, the Diurnal motion increaseth and accelerateth the Annual. The

contrary to which happeneth in the opposite part F, which, whilst it is by the

common annual motion carried, together with the whole Globe, towards the

left, it happeneth to be carried by the Diurnal conversion also towards the

right: so that the Diurnal motion by that means detracteth from the Annual,

whereupon the absolute motion, resulting from the composition of both the

other, is much retarded. Again, about the points E and G, the absolute motion

becometh in a manner equal to the simple Annual one, in regard that little or

nothing increaseth or diminisheth it, as not tending either to the left hand, or

to the right, but downwards and upwards. We will conclude therefore, that

like as it is true, that the motion of the whole Globe, and of each of its parts,

would be equal and uniforme, in case they did move with one single motion,

whether it were the meer Annual, or the single Diurnal Revolution, so it is

requisite, that mixing those two motions together, there do result thence for

the  parts  of  the  said  Globe  irregular  motions,  one  while  accelerated,  and

another  while  retarded,  by  means  of  the  additions  or  substractions  of  the

Diurnal conversion from the annual circulation. So that, if it be true (and

most true it is, as experience proves) that the acceleration and retardation of

the motion of the Vessel, makes water contained therein to run to and again

the long wayes of it, and to rise and fall in its extreames, who will make

scruple of granting, that the said effect may, nay ought to succeed in the Sea-

waters, contained within their Vessels, subject to such like alterations, and

especially in those that distend themselves long-wayes from West to East,

which is the course that the motion of those same Vessels steereth?The most

potent and primary cause of the ebbing and flowing. Now this is the most

potent and primary cause of the ebbing and flowing, without the which no

such effect would ensue. But because the particular accidents are many and

various,  that  in  several  places  and  times  are  observed,  which  must  of

necessity have dependance  on other different concomitant causes, although

they ought all to have connexion with the primary; therefore it is convenient

that we propound and examine the several accidents that may be the causes of

such different effects.


The first of which is, Sundry accidents that happen in the ebbings & flowings

The first accident. that when ever the water, by means of a notable retardation

or acceleration of the motion of the Vessel, its container, shall have acquired

a cause of running towards this or that extream, The Water raised in one endof the Vessel returneth of its self to Aequilibrium. and shall be raised in the

one, and abated in the other, it shall not neverthelesse continue, for any time

in that state, when once the primary cause is ceased: but by vertue of its own

gravity and natural inclination to level and grow, even it shall speedily return

backwards of its own accord, and, as being grave and fluid, shall not only

move towards Aequilibrium; but being impelled by its own impetus, shall go

beyond it, rising in the part, where before it was lowest; nor shall it stay here,

but  returning  backwards  anew,  with  more  reiterated  reciprocations  of  its

undulations,  it  shall  give  us  to  know,  that  it  will  not  from  a  velocity  of

motion, once conceived, reduce it self, in an instant, to the privation thereof,

and to the state of rest, but will successively, by decreasing a little and a little,

reduce it self unto the same, just in the same manner as we see a weight

hanging at a cord, after it hath been once removed from its state of rest, that

is, from its perpendicularity, of its own accord, to return thither and settle it

self, but not till such time as it shall have often past to one side, and to the

other, with its reciprocall vibrations.


The second accident to be observed is, In the shorter Vessels the undulations

of waters are more frequent. that the before-declared reciprocations of motion

come to be made and repeated with greater or lesser frequency, that is, under

shorter  or  longer  times,  according  to  the  different  lengths  of  the  Vessels

containing the waters; so that in the shorter spaces the reciprocations are

more frequent, and in the longer more rare: just as in the former example of

pendent bodies, the vibrations of those that are hanged to longer cords are

seen to be lesse frequent, than those of them that hang at shorter strings.


And  here,  The  greater  profundity  maketh  the  undulations  of  waters  more

frequent. for a third observation, it is to be noted, that not onely the greater or

lesser length of the Vessel is a cause that the water maketh its reciprocations

under different times; but the greater or lesser profundity worketh the same

effect. And it happeneth, that of waters contained in receptacles of equall

length,  but  of  unequal  depth,  that  which  shall  be  the  deepest,  maketh  its

undulations  under  shorter  times,  and  the  reciprocations  of  the  shallower

waters are lesse frequent.


Fourthly, there are two effects worthy to be noted, and diligently observed,

which the water worketh in those its vibrations;  the one is its rising andfalling alternately towards the one and other extremity; Water riseth & falleth

in the extream parts of the Vessel, and runneth to and fro in the midst. the

other  is  its  moving  and  running,  to  so  speak,  Horizontally  forwards  and

backwards. Which two different motions differently reside in divers parts of

the Water: for its extream parts are those which most eminently rise and fall;

those in the middle never absolutely moving upwards, and downwards; of the

rest  successively  those  that  are  neerest  to  the  extreams  rise  and  fall

proportionally more than the remote: but on the contrary, touching the other

progressive motion forwards and backwards, the middle parts move notably,

going and returning, and the waters that are in the extream parts gain no

ground at all; save onely in case that in their rising they overflow their banks,

and break forth of their first channel and receptacle; but where there is the

obstacle  of  banks  to  keep  them  in,  they  onely  rise  and  fall;  which  yet

hindereth not the waters in the middle from fluctuating to and again; which

likewise the other parts do in proportion, undulating more or lesse, according

as they are neerer or more remote from the middle.


The fifth particular accident ought the more attentively to be considered, An

accident of the Earths motions impossible to be reduced to practice by art. in

that  it  is  impossible  to  represent  the  effect  thereof  by  an  experiment  or

example; and the accident is this. In the vessels by us framed with art, and

moved, as the abovenamed Bark, one while more, and another while lesse

swiftly, the acceleration and retardation is imparted in the same manner to all

the vessel, and to every part of it; so that whilst v. g. the Bark forbeareth to

move, the parts precedent retard no more than the subsequent, but all equally

partake  of  the  same  retardment;  and  the  self-same  holds  true  of  the

acceleration,  namely,  that  conferring  on  the  Bark  a  new  cause  of  greater

velocity, the Prow and Poop both accelerate in one and the same manner. But

in huge great vessels, such as are the very long bottomes of Seas, albeit they

also are no other than certain cavities made in the solidity of the Terrestrial

Globe, it alwayes admirably happeneth, that their extreams do not unitedly

equall, and at the same moments of time increase and diminish their motion,

but  it  happeneth  that  when  one  of  its  extreames  hath,  by  vertue  of  the

commixtion of the two Motions, Diurnal, and Annual, greatly retarded its

velocity, the other extream is animated with an extream swift motion. Which

for the better understanding of it we will explain, reassuming a Scheme like

to the former; in which if we do but suppose a tract of Sea to be long, v. g. afourth part, as is the arch B C [in Fig. 2. ] because the parts B are, as hath

been already declared, very swift in motion, by reason of the union of the two

motions diurnal and annual, towards one and the same way,  but the part C at

the same time is retarded in its motion, as being deprived of the progression

dependant on the diurnal motion: If we suppose, I say, a tract of Sea as long

as the arch B C, we have already seen, that its extreams shall move in the

same time with great inequality. And extreamly different would the velocities

of a tract of Sea be that is in length a semicircle, and placed in the position B

C D, in regard that the extream B would be in a most accelerate motion, and

the other D, in a most slow one; and the intermediate parts towards C, would

be in a moderate motion. And according as the said tracts of Sea shall be

shorter, they shall lesse participate of this extravagant accident, of being in

some  hours  of  the  day  with  their  parts  diversly  affected  by  velocity  and

tardity of motion. So that, if, as in the first case, we see by experience that the

acceleration and retardation, though equally imparted to all the parts of the

conteining Vessel, is the cause that the water contained fluctuates too and

again, what may we think would happen in a Vessel so admirably disposed,

that retardation and acceleration of motion is very unequally contributed to its

parts? Certainly we must needs grant that greater and more wonderful causes

of the commotions in the Water ought to be looked for. And though it may

seem impossible to some, that in artificial Machines and Vessels we should

be able to experiment the effects of such an accident; yet neverthelesse it is

not absolutely impossible to be done; and I have by me the model of an

Engine, in which the effect of these admirable commixtions of motions may

be particularly observed. But as to what concerns our present purpose, that

which  you  may  have  hitherto  comprehended  with  your  imagination  may

suffice.


SAGR.


I for my own particular very well conceive that this admirable accident ought

necessarily to evene in the Straights of Seas, and especially in those that

distend themselves for a great length from West to East; namely according to

the course of the motions of the Terrestrial Globe; and as it is in a certain

manner unthought of, and without a president among the motions possible to

be made by us, so it is not hard for me to believe, that effects may be derived

from the same, which are not to be imitated by our artificial experiments.SALV.


These  things  being  declared,  it  is  time  that  we  proceed  to  examine  the

particular accidents, which, together with their diversities, are observed by

experience in the ebbing and flowing of the waters. Reasons renewed of the

particnlar accidents observed in the ebbings and flowings. And first we need

not think it hard to guesse whence it happeneth, that in Lakes, Pooles, and

also in the lesser Seas there is no notable flux and reflux; the which hath two

very solid reasons. The one is, that by reason of the shortnesse  of the Vessel,

Second causes why in small Seas and in Lakes there are no ebbings and

flowings.  in  its  acquiring  in  several  hours  of  the  day  several  degrees  of

velocity, they are with very little difference acquired by all its parts; for as

well the precedent as the subsequent, that is to say, both the Eastern and

Western  parts,  do  accelerate  and  retard  almost  in  the  same  manner;  and

withal making that alteration by little and little, and not by giving the motion

of the conteining Vessel a sudden check, and retardment, or a sudden and

great impulse or acceleration; both it and all its parts, come to be gently and

equally impressed with the same degrees of velocity; from which uniformity

it  followeth,  that  also  the  conteined  water  with  but  small  resistance  and

opposition, receiveth the same impressions, and by consequence doth give

but very obscure signes of its rising or falling, or of its running towards one

part or another. The which effect is likewise manifestly to be seen in the little

artificial  Vessels,  wherein  the  contained  water  doth  receive  the  self  same

impressions of velocity; when ever the acceleration and retardation is made

by gentle and uniform proportion. But in the Straights and Bays that for a

great  length  distend  themselves  from  East  to  West,  the  acceleration  and

retardation is more notable and more uneven, for that one of its extreams

shall be much retarded in motion, and the other shall at the same time move

very swiftly: The reciprocal libration or levelling of the water proceeding

from the impetus that it had conceived from the motion of its container. The

which libration, as hath been noted, hath its undulations very frequent in

small  Vessels;  from  whence  ensues,  that  though  there  do  reside  in  the

Terrestrial motions the cause of conferring on the waters a motion onely from

twelve hours to twelve hours, for that the motion of the conteining Vessels do

extreamly accelerate and extreamly retard but once every day, and no more;

yet neverthelesse this same second cause depending on the gravity of the

water which striveth to reduce it self to equilibration, and that according tothe shortnesse of the Vessel hath its reciprocations of one, two, three, or more

hours, this intermixing with the first, which also it self in small Vessels is

very  little,  it  becommeth  upon  the  whole  altogether  insensible.  For  the

primary cause, which hath the periods of twelve hours, having not made and

end of imprinting the precedent commotion, it is overtaken and opposed by

the other second, dependant on the waters own weight, which according to

the brevity and profundity of the Vessel, hath the time of its undulations of

one,  two,  three,  four,  or  more  hours;  and  this  contending  with  the  other

former  one,  disturbeth  and  removeth  it,  not  permitting  it  to  come  to  the

height, no nor to the half of its motion; and by this contestation the evidence

of  the  ebbing  and    flowing  is  wholly  annihilated,  or  at  least  very  much

obscured. I passe by the continual alteration of the air, which disquieting the

water, permits us not to come to a certainty, whether any, though but small,

encrease or abatement of half an inch, or losse, do reside in the Straights, or

receptacles of water not above a degree or two in length.


I come in the second place to resolve the question, The reason given, why the

ebbings and flowings, for the most part, are every six hours. why, there not

residing any vertue in the primary principle of commoving the waters, save

onely every twelve hours, that is to say, once by the greatest velocity, and

once by the greatest tardity of motion; the ebbings and flowings should yet

neverthelesse appear to be every six hours. To which is answered, that this

determination cannot any wayes be taken from the primary cause onely; but

there is a necessity of introducing the secondary causes, as namely the greater

or lesse length of the Vessels, and the greater or lesse depth of the waters in

them conteined. Which causes although they have not any operation in the

motions of the waters, those operations belonging to the sole primary cause,

without which no ebbing or flowing would happen, yet neverthelesse they

have  a  principal  share  in  determining  the  times  or  periods  of  the

reciprocations, and herein their influence is so powerful, that the primary

cause must of force give way unto them. The period of six hours therefore is

no  more  proper  or  natural  than  those  of  other  intervals  of  times,  though

indeed its the most observed, as agreeing with our Mediterrane, which was

the onely Sea that for many Ages was navigated: though neither is that period

observed in all its parts; for that in some more angust places, such as are the

Hellespont, and the Aegean Sea, the periods are much shorter, and also very

divers  amongst  themselves;  for  which  diversities,  and  their  causesincomprehensible  to  Aristotle,  some  say,  that  after  he  had  a  long  time

observed it upon some cliffes of Negropont, being brought to desperation, he

threw himself into the adjoyning Euripus, and voluntarily drowned himself.


In the third place we have the reason ready at hand, The cause why some

Seas, though very long, suffer no ebbing and flowing. whence it commeth to

passe, that some Seas, although very long, as is the Red Sea, are almost

altogether  exempt  from  Tides,  which  happeneth  because  their  length

extendeth not from East to West, but rather transversly from the Southeast to

the Northwest; but the motions of the Earth going from West to East; the

impulses of the water, by that means, alwayes happen to fall in the Meridians,

and do not move from parallel to parallel; insomuch that in the Seas that

extend themselves athwart towards the Poles, and that the contrary way are

narrow,  there  is    no  cause  of  ebbing  and  flowing,  save  onely  by  the

participation of another Sea, wherewith it hath communication, that is subject

to great commotions.


In the fourth place we shall very easily find out the reason why the fluxes and

refluxes are greatest, Ebbings and flowings why greatest in the extremities of

Gulphs, and least in the middle parts. as to the waters rising and falling in the

utmost extremities of Gulphs, and least in the intermediate parts; as daily

experience sheweth here in Venice, lying in the farther end of the Adriatick

Sea, where that difference commonly amounts to five or six feet; but in the

places of the Mediterrane, far distant from the extreams, that mutation is very

small, as in the Isles of Corsica and Sardinnia, and in the Strands of Rome

and Ligorne, where it exceeds not half a foot; we shall understand also, why

on the contrary, where the risings and fallings are small, the courses and

recourses are great: I say it is an easie thing to understand the causes of these

accidents, seeing that we meet with many manifest occurrences of the same

nature in every kind of Vessel by us artificially composed, in which the same

effects are observed naturally to follow upon our moving it unevenly, that is,

one while faster, and another while flower.


Moreover, Why in narrow places the course of the waters is more swift than

in larger. considering in the fifth place, that the same quantity of Water being

moved, though but gently, in a spatious Channel, comming afterwards to go

through a narrow passage, will of necessity run, with great violence, we shallnot finde it hard to comprehend the cause of the great Currents that are made

in the narrow Channel that separateth Calabria from Sicilia: for that all the

Waters  that,  by  the  spaciousnesse  of  the  Isle,  and  by  the  Ionick  Gulph,

happens to be pent in the Eastern part of the Sea, though it do in that, by

reason of its largeness, gently descend towards the West, yet neverthelesse, in

that it is pent up in the Bosphorus, it floweth with great violence between

Scilla and Caribdis, and maketh a great agitation. Like to which, and much

greater, is said to be betwixt Africa and the great Isle of St. Lorenzo, where

the Waters of the two vast Seas, Indian and Ethiopick, that lie round it, must

needs  be  straightned  into  a  lesse  Channel  between  the  said  Isle  and  the

Ethiopian Coast. And the Currents must needs be very great in the Straights

of Megallanes, which joyne together the vast Oceans of Ethiopia, and Del

Zur, called also the Pacifick Sea.


It follows now, in the sixth place, A discussion of  abstruce  obse ved  ebbing

and  wing.  that  to  render  a  reason  of  some  more  abstruse  and  incredible

accidents, which are observed upon this occasion, we make a considerable

reflection upon the two principal causes of ebbings and flowings, afterwards

compounding and mixing them together. The first and simplest  of which is

(as hath often been said) the determinate acceleration and retardation of the

parts of the Earth, from whence the Waters have a determinate period put to

their decursions towards the East, and return towards the West, in the time of

twenty four hours. The other is that which dependeth on the proper gravity of

the Water, which being once commoved by the primary cause, seeketh, in the

next  place,  to  reduce  it  self  to  Aequilibrium,  with  iterated  reciprocations;

which are not determined by one sole and prefixed time; but have as many

varieties  of  times  as  are  the  different  lengths  and  profundities  of  the

receptacles, and Straights of Seas; and by what dependeth on this second

principle, they would ebbe and flow, some in one hour, others in two, in four,

in six, in eight, in ten, &c. Now if we begin to put together the first cause,

which hath its set Period from twelve hours to twelve hours, with some one

of the secondary, that hath its Period verb. grat. from five hours to five hours,

it would come to passe, that at sometimes the primary cause and secondary

would  accord  to  make  impulses  both  one  the  same  way;  and  in  this

concurrency, and (as one may call it) unanimous conspiration the flowings

shall be great. At other times it happening that the primary impulse doth, in a

certain manner, oppose that which the secondary Period would make, and inthis  contest  one  of  the  Principles  being  taken  away,  that  which  the  other

would  give,  will  weaken  the  commotion  of  the  Waters,  and  the  Sea  will

return to a very tranquil State, and almost immoveable. And at other times,

according as the two aforesaid Principles shall neither altogether contest, nor

altogether  concur,  there  shall  be  other  kinds  of  alterations  made  in  the

increase and diminution of the ebbing and flowing. It may likewise fall out

that two Seas, considerably great and which communicate by some narrow

Channel, may chance to have, by reason of the mixtion of the two Principles

of motion, one cause to flow at the time that the other hath cause to move a

contrary  way;  in  which  case  in  the  Channel,  whereby  they  disimbogue

themselves into each other, there do extraordinary conturbations insue, with

opposite and vortick motions, and most dangerous boilings and breakings, as

frequent relations and experiences do assure us. From such like discordant

motions, dependent not onely on the different positions and longitudes, but

very much also upon the different profundities of the Seas, which have the

said intercourse there do happen at sometimes different commotions in the

Waters, irregular, and that can be reduced to no rules of observation, the

reasons of which have much troubled, and alwayes do trouble Mariners, for

that they meet with them without seeing either impulse of winds, or  other

eminent aereal alteration that might occasion the same; of which disturbance

of the Air we ought to make great account in other accidents, and to take it

for a third and accidental cause, able to alter very much the observation of the

effects depending on the secondary and more essential causes. And it is not to

be  doubted,  but  that  impetuous  windes,  continuing  to  blow,  for  example,

from the East, they shall retein the Waters and prohibit the reflux or ebbing;

whereupon  the  second  and  third  reply  of  the  flux  or  tide  overtaking  the

former, at the hours prefixed, they will swell very high; and being thus born

up for some dayes, by the strength of the Winds, they shall rise more than

usual, making extraordinary inundations.


We ought also, (and this shall serve for a seventh Probleme) to take notice of

another cause of motion dependant on the great abundance of the Waters of

great Rivers that discharge themselves into Seas of no great capacity, The

cause why, in some narrow Channels, we see the Sea-waters run alwayes one

way. whereupon in the Straits or Bosphori that communicate with those Seas,

the Waters are seen to run always one way: as it happeneth in the Thracian

Bosphorus below Constantinople, where the water alwayes runneth from theBlack-Sea, towards the Propontis: For in the said Black-Sea by reason of its

shortnesse, the principal causes of ebbing and flowing are but of small force.

But,  on  the  contrary,  very  great  Rivers  falling  into  the  same,  those  huge

defluxions  of  water  being  to  passe  and  disgorge  themselves  by  the  the

straight, theOr current. course is there very notable and alwayes towards the

South. Where moreover we ought to take notice, that the said Straight or

Channel, albeit very narrow, is not subject to perturbations, as the Straight of

Scilla and Carybdis; for that that hath the Black-Sea above towards the North,

and the Propontis, the Aegean, and the Mediterranean Seas joyned unto it,

though by a long tract towards the South; but now, as we have observed, the

Seas, though of never so great length, lying North and South, are not much

subject to ebbings and flowings; but because the Sicilian Straight is situate

between the parts of the Mediterrane distended for a long tract or distance

from West to East, that is, according to the course of the fluxes and refluxes;

therefore  in  this  the  agitations  are  very  great;  and  would  be  much  more

violent between Hercules Pillars, in case the Straight of Gibraltar did open

lesse; and those of the Straight of Magellanes are reported to be extraordinary

violent.


This is what, for the present, cometh into my mind to say unto you about the

causes  of  this  first  period  diurnal  of  the  Tide,  and  its  various  accidents,

touching which, if you have any thing to offer, you may let us hear it, that so

we may afterwards proceed to the other two periods, monethly and annual.


SIMP.


In my opinion, it cannot be denied, but that your discourse carrieth with it

much of probability, arguing, as we say, ex suppositione, namely, granting

that the Earth moveth with the two motions assigned it by Copernicus: The

Hypothesis of the Earths mobility taken in favour of the Tide, opposed. but if

that motion be disproved, all that you have said is vain, and insignificant: and

for  the  disproval  of  that  Hypothesis,  it  is  very  manifestly  hinted  by  your

Discourse it self. You, with the supposition of the two Terrestrial motions,

give a reason of the ebbing and flowing; and then again, arguing circularly,

from the ebbing and flowing, draw the reason and confirmation of those very

motions; and so proceeding to a more specious Discourse, you say that the

Water, as being a fluid body, and not tenaciously annexed to the Earth, is notconstrained  punctually  to  obey  every  of  its  motions,  from  which  you

afterwards  infer  its  ebbing  and  flowing,  Now  I,  according  to  your  own

method, argue the quite contrary, and say; the Air is much more tenuous, and

fluid than the Water, and lesse annexed to the Earths superficies, to which the

Water, if it be for nothing else, yet by reason of its gravity that presseth down

upon the same more than the light Air, adhereth; therefore the Air is much

obliged to follow the motions of the Earth: and therefore were it so, that the

Earth did move in that manner, we the inhabitants of it, and carried round

with like velocity by it, ought perpetually to feel a Winde from the East that

beateth  upon  us  with  intolerable  force.  And  that  so  it  ought  to  fall  out,

quotidian experience assureth us: for if with onely riding post, at the speed of

eight or ten miles an hour in the tranquil Air, the incountering of it with our

face seemeth to us a Winde that doth not lightly blow upon us, what should

we expect from our rapid course of 800. or a thousand miles an hour, against

the Air, that is, free from that motion? And yet, notwithstanding we cannot

perceive any thing of that nature.


SALV.


To  this  objection  that  hath  much  of  likelihood  in  it,  The  answer  to  the

objections made against the motion of the Terrestrial Globe. I reply, that its

true, the Air is of greater tenuity and levity; and, by reason of its levity, lesse

adherent to the Earth than Water so much more grave andCorpulenta bulky;

but yet the consequence is false that you infer from these qualities; namely,

that upon account of that its levity, tenuity, and lesse adherence to the Earth,

it  should  be  more  exempt  than  the  Water  from  following  the  Terrestrial

Motions;  so  as  that  to  us,  who  absolutely  pertake  of  of  them,  the  said

exemption should be sensible and manifest; nay, it happeneth quite contrary;

for, if you well remember, the cause of the ebbing and flowing of the Water

assigned by us, consisteth in the Waters not following the unevennesse of the

motion of its Vessel, but retaining the impetus conceived before,  without

diminishing or increasing it according to the precise rate of its diminishing or

increasing  in  its  Vessel.  Because  therefore  that  in  the  conservation  and

retention of the impetus before conceived, The Water more apt to conserve an

impetus conceived, then the Air. the disobedience to a new augmentation or

diminution of motion consisteth, that moveable that shall be most apt for such

a retention, shall be also most commodious to demonstrate the effect thatfolloweth  in  consequence  of  that  retention.  Now  how  much  the  Water  is

disposed to maintain such a conceived agitation; though the causes cease that

impress  the  same,  the  experience  of  the  Seas  extreamly  disturbed  by

impetuous Winds sheweth us; the Billows of which, though the Air be grown

calm, and the Wind laid, for a long time after continue in motion: As the

Sacred Poet pleasantly sings, ‘Qual l’alto Egeo, &c.—’


And  that  long  continuing  rough  after  a  storm,  Light  bodies  easier  to  be

moved than heavy, but less apt to conserve the motion. dependeth on the

gravity of the water: For, as I have elsewhere said, light bodies are much

easier to be moved than the more grave, but yet are so much the less apt to

conserve the motion imparted, when once the moving cause ceaseth. Whence

it comes that the Aire, as being of it self very light and thin, is easily mov’d

by any very small force, yet it is withall very unable to hold on its motion, the

Mover once ceasing. Therefore, as to the Aire which environs the Terrestrial

Globe, I would fay, that by reason of its adherence, it is no lesse carried about

therewith then the Water; and especially that part which is contained in its

vessels;  which  vessels  are  the  valleys  enclosed  with  Mountains.  Its  more

rational that the Air be commoved by the rugged surface of the Earth▪ than by

the Celestial motion. And we may with much more reason affirm that this

same part of the Air is carried round, and born forwards by the rugged parts

of  the  Earth,  than  that  the  higher  is  whirl’d  about  by  the  motion  of  the

Heavens, as ye Peripateticks maintain.


What  hath  been  hitherto  spoken,  seems  to  me  a  sufficient  answer  to  the

allegation of Simplitius; The revolution of the Earth confirmed by a new

argument  taken  from  the  Air.  yet  nevertheless  with  a  new  instance  and

solution,  founded  upon  an  admirable  experiment,  I  will  superabundantly

satisfie him, and confirm to Sagredus the mobility of the Earth. I have told

you that the Air, and in particular that part of it which ascendeth not above

the tops of the highest Mountains, is carried round by the uneven parts of the

Earths  surface:  from  whence  it  should  seem,  that  it  must  of  consequence

come to passe, that in case the superficies of the Earth were not uneven, but

smooth and plain, no cause would remain for drawing the Air along with it,

or at least for revolving it with so much uniformity. Now the surface of this

our Globe, is not all craggy and rugged, but there are exceeding great tracts

very  even, to wit, the surfaces of very vast Seas, which being also far remotefrom the continuate ledges of Mountains which environ it, seem to have no

faculty of carrying the super-ambient Air along therewith: and not carrying it

about, we may perceive what will of consequence ensue in those places.


SIMP.


I was about to propose the very same difficulty, which I think is of great

validity.


SALV.


You say very well Simplicius, for from the not finding in the Air that which

of consequence would follow, did this our Globe move round; you argue its

immoveablenesse. But in case that this which you think ought of necessary

consequence to be found, be indeed by experience proved to be so; will you

accept it for a sufficient testimony and an argument for the mobility of the

said Globe?


SIMP.


In this case it is not requisite to argue with me alone, for if it should so fall

out, and that I could not comprehend the cause thereof, yet haply it might be

known by others.


SALV.


So that by playing with you, a man shall never get, but be alwayes on the

losing hand; and therefore it would be better to give over: Nevertheless, that

we may not cheat our third man we will play on. We said even now, and with

some addition we reitterate it, that the Ayr as if it were a thin and fluid body,

and not solidly conjoyned with the Earth, seem’d not to be necessitated to

obey its motion; unlesse so far as the cragginess of the terrestrial superficies,

transports and carries with it a part thereof contigious thereunto; which doth

not by any great space exceed the greatest altitude of Mountains: the which

portion  of  Air  ought  to  be  so  much  less  repugnant  to  the  terrestrial

conversion, by how much it is repleat with vapours, The vaporous parts of the

earth, partake of its motions. fumes, and exhalations, matters all participating

of terrene qualities, and consequently apt of their own nature to the samemotions. But where there are wanting the causes of motion, that is, where the

surface of the Globe hath great levels, and where there is less mixture of the

terrene vapours, there the cause whereby the ambient Air is constrained to

give entire obedience to the terrestrial conversion will cease in part; so that in

such  places,  whilst  the  Earth  revolveth  towards  the  East,  there  will  be

continually a wind perceived which will beat upon us, blowing from the East

towards  the  West:  and  such  gales  will  be  the  more  sensible,  where  the

revolution of the Globe is most swift; which will be in places more remote

from  the  Poles,  and  approaching  to  the  greatest  Circle  of  the  diurnal

conversion. But now de facto experience much confirmeth this Phylosophical

argumentation; for in the spatious Seas, and in their parts most remote from

Land, and situate under the Torrid Zone, that is bounded by the Tropicks,

where there are none of those  same terrestrial evaporations, Constant gales

within the Tropicks blow towards the West. we finde a perpetual gale move

from  the  East  with  so  constant  a  blast,  that  ships  by  favour  thereof  sail

prosperously  to  the  West-India’s.  And  from  the  same  coasting  along  the

Mexican shore, they with the same felicity pass the Pacifick Ocean towards

the India’s; which to us are East, but to them are West. The course to the

West-India’s easie, the return difficult. Whereas on the contrary the Course

from thence towards the East is difficult and uncertain, and not to be made by

the same Rhumb, but must vere more to Land-ward, to recover other Winds,

which  we  may  call  accidentary  and  tumultuary,  produced  from  other

Principles, as those that inhabit the continent find by experience. Of which

productions of Winds, the Causes are many and different, which shall not at

this time be mentioned. Winds from Land make rough the Seas. And these

accidentary Winds are those which blow indifferently from all parts of the

Earth, and make rough the Seas remote from the Equinoctial, and environed

by the rugged Surface of the Earth; which is as much as to say environ’d with

those perturbations of Air, that confound that primary Gale. The which, in

case these accidental impediments were removed, would be continually felt,

and especially upon the Sea. Now see how the effect of the Water and Air

seem wonderfully to accord with the Celestial observations, to confirm the

mobility of our Terrestrial Globe.


SAGR.I also for a final close will relate to you one particular, Another observation

taken from the Air in confirmation of the motion of the Earth. which as I

believe is unknown unto you, and which likewise may serve to confirm the

same conclusion: You Salviatus alledged, That Accident which Sailers meet

with between the Tropicks; I mean that perpetual Gale of Winde that beats

upon them from the East, of which I have an account from those that have

many times made the Voyage: And moreover (which is very observable) I

understand that the Mariners do not call it a Wind, but by anotherWhich

Wind with our English Mariners is called the Trade-wind. name, which I do

not now remember, taken haply from its so fixed and constant Tenor; which

when  they  have  met  with,  they  tie  up  their  shrouds  and  other  cordage

belonging to the Sails, and without any more need of touching them, though

they be in a sleep, they can continue their course. Now this constant Trade-

wind was known to be such by its continual blowing without interruptions;

for  if  it  were  interrupted  by  other  Windes,  it  would  not  have  been

acknowledged for a singular Effect, and different from the rest: from which I

will infer, That it may be that also our Mediterranean Sea doth partake of the

like  accident;  but  it  is  not  observed,  as  being  frequently  altered  by  the

confluence of other windes. And this I say, not without good grounds, yea

upon very probable conjectures whch came unto my knowledge, from that

which tendred it self to my notice on occasion of the voyage that I made into

Syria,  going  Consul  for  this  Nation    to  Aleppo,  The  voiages  in  the

Mediterrane from East to West are made in shorter times than from West to

East. and this it is: That keeping a particular account and memorial of the

dayes of the departure and arrival of the Ships in the Ports of Alexandria, of

Alexandretta, and this of Venice; in comparing sundry of them, which I did

for my curiosity, I found that in exactness of account the returns hither, that is

the voiages from East to West along the Mediterrane, are made in less time

then the contrary courses by 25. in the Hundred: So that we see that one with

another, the Eastern windes are stronger then the Western.


SALV.


I am very glad I know this particular, which doth not a little make for the

confirmation of the Earths mobility. And although it may be alledged, That

all the Water of the Mediterrane runs perpetually towards the Straits-mouth,

as being to disimbogue into the Ocean, the waters of as many Rivers, as dodischarge themselves into the same; I do not think that that current can be so

great, as to be able of it self alone to make so notable a difference: which is

also manifest by observing that the water in the Pharo of Sicily runneth back

again no less towards the East, than it runneth forwards towards the West.


SAGR.


I, that have not as Simplicius, an inclination to satisfie any one besides my

self, am satisfied with what hath been said as to this first particular: Therefore

Salviatus, when you think it sit to proceed forward, I am prepared to hear

you.


SALV.


I shall do as you command me, but yet I would fain hear the opinion also of

Simplicius, from whose judgement I can argue how much I may promise to

my self touching these discourses from the Peripatetick Schools, if ever they

should come to their ears.


SIMP.


I desire not that my opinion should serve or stand for a measure, whereby

you  should  judge  of  others  thoughts;  for  as  I  have  often  said,  I  am

inconsiderable in these kinde of studies, and such things may come into the

mindes of those that are entered into the deepest passages of Philosophy, as I

could never think of; as having (according to the Proverb) scarce kist her

Maid: yet nevertheless, to give you my sudden thoughts, I shall tell you, That

of those effects by you recounted, and particularly the last, there may in my

judgement very sufficient Reasons be given without the Earths mobility, by

the mobility of the Heavens onely; never introducing any novelty more, than

the  inversion  of  that  which  you  your  self  propose  unto  us.  It  hath  been

received  by  the  Peripatetick  Schools,  It  is  demonstrated  inverting  the

argument, that the perpetual motion of the Air from East to West cometh

from the motion of Heaven▪ that the Element of Fire, and also a great part of

the Aire is carried about according to the Diurnal conversion from East to

West, by the contact of the Concave of the Lunar Orb, as by the Vessel their

container. Now without going out of your track, I will that we determine the

Quantity of  the Aire which partaketh of that motion to distend so low as tothe Tops of the highest Hills, It is demonstrated inverting the argument, that

the perpetual motion of the Air from East to West, cometh from the motion of

Heaven. and that likewise they would reach to the Earth, if those Mountains

did not impede them, which agreeth with what you say: For as you affirm, the

Air, which is invironed by ledges of Mountains, to be carried about by the

asperity  of  the  moveable  Earth;  we  on  the  contrary  say,  That  the  whole

Element  of  Air  is  carried  about  by  the  motion  of  Heaven,  that  part  only

excepted which lyeth below those bodies, which is hindred by the asperity of

the  immoveable  Earth.  And  whereas  you  said,  That  in  case  that  asperity

should be removed, the Air would also cease to be whirld about; we may say,

That  the  said  asperity  being  removed,  the  whole  Aire  would  continue  its

motion. Whereupon, because the surfaces of spacious Seas are smooth, and

even; the Airs motion shall continue upon those, alwaies blowing from the

East: And this is more sensibly perceived in Climates lying under the Line,

and within the Tropicks, where the motion of Heaven is swifter; and like as

that Celestial motion is able to bear before it all the Air that is at liberty, so

we may very rationally affirm that it contributeth the same motion to the

Water moveable, as being fluid and not connected to the immobility of the

Earth: The motion of the Water dependeth on the motion of Heaven. And

with so much the more confidence may we affirm the same, in that by your

confession,  that  motion  ought  to  be  very  small  in  resect  of  the  efficient

Cause; which begirting in a natural day the whole Terrestrial Globe, passeth

many  hundreds  of  miles  an  hour,  and  especially  towards  the  Equinoctial;

whereas in the currents of the open Sea, it moveth but very few miles an

hour. And thus the voiages towards the West shall come to be commodious

and expeditious, not onely by reason of the perpetual Eastern Gale, but of the

course also of the Waters; from which course also perhaps the Ebbing and

Flowing may come, by reason of the different scituation of the Terrestrial

Shores: The flux and reflux may depend on the diurnal motion of Heaven.

against which the Water coming to beat, may also return backwards with a

contrary motion, like as experience sheweth us in the course of Rivers; for

according as the Water in the unevenness of the Banks, meeteth with some

parts that stand out, or make with their Meanders some Reach or Bay, here

the Water turneth again, and is seen to retreat back a considerable space.

Upon this I hold, That of those effects from which you argue the Earths

mobility, and alledge it as a cause of them, there may be assigned a causesufficiently valid, retaining the Earth stedfast, and restoring the mobility of

Heaven.


SALV.


It cannot be denied, but that your discourse is ingenious, & hath much of

probability, I mean probability in appearance, but not in reality & existence:

It consisteth of two parts: In the first it  assignes a reason of the continual

motion of the Eastern Winde, and also of a like motion in the Water. In the

second, It would draw from the same Sourse the cause of the Ebbing and

Flowing. The first part hath (as I have said) some appearance of probability,

but yet extreamly less then that which we take from the Terrestrial motion.

The second is not onely wholly improbable, but altogether impossible and

false. A reason of the continual motion of the Air and Water may be given,

making the Earth moveable, then by making it immoveable. And coming to

the first, whereas it is said that the Concave of the Moon carrieth about the

element of Fire, and the whole Air, even to the tops of the higher Mountains.

I answer first, that it is dubious whether there be any element of Fire: But

suppose there be, it is much doubted of the Orbe of the Moon, as also of all

the rest; that is, Whether there be any such solid bodies and vast, or elss,

Whether  beyond  the  Air  there  be  extended  a  continuate  expansion  of  a

substance of much more tenuity and purity than our Air, up and down which

the  Planets  go  wandring,  as  now  at  last  a  good  part  of  those  very

Phylosophers begin to think: Its improbable that the element of Fire should

be carried round by the Concave of the Moon. But be it in this or in that

manner,  there  is  no  reason  for  which  the  Fire,  by  a  simple  contract  to  a

superficies,  which  you  your  self  grant  to  be  smooth  and  terse,  should  be

according to its whole depth carried round in a motion different from its

natural inclination; as hath been defusely proved, and with sensible reasons

demonstrated  byA  Treatise  of  our  Author  formerly  cited.  Il  Saggiatore:

Besides the other improbability of the said motions transfusing it self from

the subtilest Fire throughout the Air, much more dense; and from that also

again to the Water. But that a body of rugged and mountainous surface, by

revolving in it self, should carry with it the Air contiguous to it, and against

which  its  promontaries  beat,  is  not  onely  probable  but  necessary,  and

experience thereof may be daily seen; though without seeing it, I believe that

there is no judgement that doubts thereof. As to the other part, supposing thatthe motion of Heaven did carry round the Air, and also the Water; yet would

that motion for all that have nothing to do with the Ebbing and Flowing. For

being that from one onely and uniform cause, there can follow but one sole

and uniform effect; The Ebbing and Flowing cannot depend on the motion of

Heaven. that which should be discovered in the Water, would be a continuate

and uniform course from East to West; and in that a Sea onely, which running

compass environeth the whole Globe. But in determinate Seas, such as is the

Mediterrane shut up in the East, there could be no such motion. For if its

Water might be driven by the course of Heaven towards the West, it would

have been dry many ages since: Besides that our Water runneth not onely

towards  the  West,  But  returneth  backwards  towards  the  East,  and  that  in

ordinal Periods: And whereas you say by the example of Rivers, that though

the course of the Sea were Originally that onely  from East to West, yet

nevertheless the different Position of the Shores may make part of the Water

regurgitate, and return backwards: I grant it you, but it is necessary that you

take notice my Simplicius, that where the Water upon that account returneth

backwards,  it  doth  so  there  perpetually;  and  where  it  runneth  straight

forwards, it runneth there alwayes in the same manner; for so the example of

the Rivers shewes you. But in the case of the ebbing and flowing, you must

finde and give us some reason why it doth in the self same place run one

while  one  way,  and  another  while  another;  Effects  that  being  contrary  &

irregular, can never be deduced from any uniform and constant Cause: And

this Argument, that overthrows the Hypothesis of the motion contributed to

the Sea from the Heavens diurnal motion, doth also confute that Position of

those who would admit the sole diurnal motion of the Earth, and believe that

they are able with that alone to give a reason of the Flux and Reflux: Of

which effect since it is irregular, the cause must of necessity be irregular and

alterable.


SIMP.


I have nothing to reply, neither of my own, by reason of the weakness of my

understanding; nor of that of others, for that the Opinion is so new: But I

could believe that if it were spread amongst the Schools, there would not

want Phylosophers able to oppose it.


SAGR.Expect  such  an  occasion;  and  we  in  the  mean  time  if  it  seem  good  to

Salviatus, will proceed forward.


SALV.


All that which hath been said hitherto, pertaineth to the diurnal period of the

ebbing and flowing; of which we have in the first place demonstrated in

general  the  primary  and  universal  Cause,  without  which,  no  such  effect

would follow: Afterw ds passing to the particular Accidents, various, and in a

certain  sort  irregular,  that  are  observed  therein:  We  have  handled  the

secondary and concommitant Causes upon which they depend. Now follow

the two other Periods, Monethly, and Annual, which do not bring with them

new  and  different  Accidents,  other  than  those  already  considered  in  the

diurnal Period; but they operate on the same Accidents, by rendring them

greater and lesser in several parts of the Lunar Moneth, and in several times

of the Solar Year; as if that the Moon and Sun did each conceive it self apart

in operating and producing of those Effects; a thing that totally clasheth with

my understanding, which seeing how that this of Seas is a local and sensible

motion, made in an immense mass of Water, it cannot be brought to subscribe

to Lights, to temperate Heats, to predominacies by occult Qualities, and to

such like vain Imaginations, that are so far from being, or being possible to

be Causes of the Tide; that on the contrary,  the Tide is the cause of them,

that  is,  of  bringing  them  into  the  brains  more  apt  for  loquacity  and

ostentation, than for the speculation and discovering of the more abstruse

secrets  of  Nature;  which  kind  of  people,  before  they  can  be  brought  to

pronounce that wise, ingenious, and modest sentence, I know it not, suffer to

escape from their mouths and pens all manner of extravagancies. And the

onely observing, that the same Moon, and the same Sun operate not with their

light  with  their  motion,  with  great  heat,  or  with  temperate,  on  the  lesser

reeeptacl s of Water, but that to effect their flowing by heat, they must be

reduced to little lesse than boiling, and in short, we not being able artificially

to imitate any way the motions of the Tide, save only by the motion of the

Vessel, ought it not to satisfie every one, that all the other things alledged, as

causes of those effects, are vaine fancies, and altogether estranged from the

Truth.  I  say,  The  alterations  in  the  effects  argue  alteration  in  the  cause.

therefore, that if it be true, that of one effect there is but one sole primary

cause, and that between the cause and effect, there is a firm and constantconnection; it is necessary that whensoever there is seen a firm and constant

alteration in the effect, there be a firm and constant alteration in the cause.

And because the alterations that happen in the ebbing and flowing in several

parts of the Year and Moneths, have their periods firm and constant, it is

necessary to say, that a regular alteration in those same times happeneth in

the primary cause of the ebbings and flowings. The causes as large assigned

of the Periods Monethly and Annual of the ebbings and flowings. And as for

the  alteration  that  in  those  times  happens  in  the  ebbings  and  flowings

consisteth onely in their greatness; that is, in the Waters rising and falling

more or lesse, and in running with greater or lesse impetus; therefore it is

necessary, that that which is the primary cause of the ebbing and flowing,

doth in those same determinate times increase and diminish its force. But we

have already concluded upon the inequality and irregularity of the motion of

the Vessels containing the Water to be the primary cause of the ebbings and

flowings. Therefore it is necessary, that that irregularity, from time to time,

correspondently grow more irregular, that is, grow greater and lesser. Now it

is requisite, that we call to minde, that the irregularity, that is, the different

velocity of the motions of the Vessels, to wit, of the parts of the Terrestrial

Superficies, dependeth on their moving with a compound motion, resulting

from the commixtion of the two motions, Annual and Diurnal, proper to the

whole  Terrestrial  Globe;  of  which  the  Diurnal  conversion,  by  one  while

adding to, and another while substracting from, the Annual motion, is that

which  produceth  the  irregularity  in  the  compound  motion;  so  that,  in  the

additions  and  substractions,  that  the  Diurnal  revolution  maketh  from  the

Annual motion,  consisteth the original cause of the irregular motion of the

Vessels, The monethly and annual alterations of the tide can depend upon

nothing, save on the alteration of the additions & substractions of the diurnal

period  from  the  annual.  and  consequently  of  the  Ebbing  and  Flowing:

insomuch that if these additions and substractions should alwayes proceed in

the same proportion, in respect of the Annual motion, the cause of the Ebbing

and Flowing would indeed continue, but yet so as that they would perpetually

return in the self same manner: But we are to finde out the cause of making

the same Ebbings and Flowings in divers times greater and lesser: Therefore

we must (if we will retain the identity of the cause) find the alteration in these

additions and substractions, that make them more & less potent, in producing

those effects which depend thereupon. But I see not how that potency and

impotence  can  be  introduced,  unlesse  by  making  the  same  additions  andsubstractions,  one  while  greater,  and  another  while  lesser;  so  that  the

acceleration  and  the  retardment  of  the  compound  motion,  may  be  made,

sometimes in greater, and sometimes in lesser proportion.


SAGR.


I feel my self very gently led, as it were, by the hand, and though I finde no

rubs in the way, yet neverthelesse, like a blind man, I see not whether your

Clue leadeth me, nor can I imagine where such a Journey will end.


SALV.


Though there be a great difference between my slow pac’t Philosophy, and

your more nimble Reason, yet neverthelesse, in this particular which we are

now upon, I do not much wonder, if the apprehensivenesse of your wit be a

little obscured by the dark and thick mist that hides the mark, at which we

aime: and that which lesseneth my admiration is, the remembrance of the

many hours, many dayes, yea more, many nights that I have consumed in this

contemplation, and of the many times that, despairing to bring it to a period, I

have,  for  an  incouragement  of  my  self,  indeavoured  to  believe,  by  the

example of the unfortunate Orlando, that that might not possibly be true,

which yet the testimony of so many credible men set before my eyes: wonder

not, therefore, if this once, contrary to your custome, you do not foresee what

I intend: and if you will needs admire, I believe that the event, as far as I can

judge unexpected, will make you cease your wonderment.


SAGR.


I thank God, that he did not permit that desperation of yours to end in the

Exit that is fabled of the miserable Orlando, nor in that which haply is no

lesse fabulously related of Aristotle,, that so neither my self nor others should

be deprived of the discovery of a thing, as abstruse as it was desirable: I

beseech you, therefore, to satisfie my eager appetite as soon as you can.


SALV.


I  am  ready  to  serve  you:  We  were  upon  an  inquiry  in  what  manner  the

additions and substractions of the Terrestriall  conversion from the Annualmotion, could be made, one while in a greater, and another while in a lesser

proportion; which diversity, and no other thing, could be assigned for the

cause of the alterations, Monethly and Annual, that are seen in the greatnesse

of the Ebbings and Flowings. I will now consider how this proportion of the

additions  and  substractions  of  the  Diurnal  Revolution,  Three  wayes  of

altering  the  proportion  of  the  additions  of  the  diurnal  Revolution  to  the

annual motion. and Annual motion may grow greater and lesser three several

wayes.  One  is  by  increasing  and  diminishing  the  velocity  of  the  Annual

motion,  retaining  the  additions  and  substractions  made  by  the  Diurnal

conversion in the same greatnesse, because the Annual motion being about

three  times  greater,  that  is,  more  velocious  than  the  Diurnal  motion

(considered likewise in the Grand Circle) if we increase it anew, the additions

and substractions of the Diurnal motion will occasion lesse alteration therein:

but,  on  the  other  side,  making  it  more  slow,  it  will  be  altered  in  greater

proportion, by that same diurnal motion, just as the adding or substracting

four degrees of velocity from one that moveth with twenty degrees, altereth

his course lesse, than those very four degrees would do, added or substracted

from one that should move onely with ten degrees. The second way would

be, by making the additions and substractions greater and lesser, retaining the

annual motion in the same velocity; which is as easie to be understood, as it

is manifest, that a velocity v. gr. of 20 degr. is more altered by the addition or

substraction of 10. deg. than by the addition or substraction of 4. The third

way  would  be,  in  case  these  two  were  joyned  together,  diminishing  the

annual motion, & increasing the diurnal additions and substractions. Hitherto,

as you see, it was no hard matter to attain, but yet it proved to me very hard

to find by what means this might be effected in Nature. That which to us is

hard to be understood, is with Nature easie to be effected. Yet in the end, I

finde  that  she  doth  admirably  make  use  thereof,  and  in  wayes  almost

incredible:  I  mean,  admirable  and  incredible  to  us,  but  not  to  her,  who

worketh  even  those  very  things,  which,  to  our  capacity,  are  of  infinite

wonder, with extraordinary facility and simplicity: and that which it is hard

for us to understand, is easie for her to effect. Now to proceed, having shewn

that the proportion between the additions and substractions of the Diurnal

conversion and Annual motion may be made greater and lesser, two wayes,

(and I say two, because the third is comprized in the two first) I adde, that

Nature maketh use of them both: and farthermore, I subjoyn, that if she did

make use but of one alone, it would be necessary to take away one of the twoPeriodical  alterations.  If  the  Diurnal  motion  should  not  alter,  the  annual

Period would cease That of the Monethly Period would cease, if the annual

motion should not alter. And in case the additions and substractions of the

diurnal revolution should continually  be equal, the alterations of the annual

Period would fail.


SAGR.


It seems then, that the Monethly alteration of ebbings and flowings dependeth

on the alteration of the annual motion of the Earth? And the annual alteration

of  those  ebbings  and  flowings  do,  it  seems,  depend  on  the  additions  and

substractions of the diurnal conversion? And here now I finde my self worse

puzzled than before, and more out of hope of being able to comprehend how

this intricacy may be, which is more inextricable, in my judgment, than the

Gordian knot. And I envy Simplicius, from whose silence I argue that he doth

apprehend the whole businesse, and is acquit of that confusion which greatly

puzzleth my brains.


SIMP.


I believe verily, Sagredus, that you are put to a a stand; and I believe that I

know also the cause of your confusion, which, if I mistake not, riseth from

your  understanding  part  of  those  particulars  but  even  now  alledged  by

Salviatus, and but a part. It is true likewise that I find my self free from the

like  confusion;  but  not  for  that  cause  as  you  think,  to  wit,  because  I

apprehend  the  whole,  nay  it  happens  upon  the  quite  contrary  account;

namely,  from  my  not  comprehending  any  thing,  and  confusion  is  in  the

plurality of things, and not in nothing.


SAGR.


You  see  Salviatus,  how  a  few  checks  given  to  Simplicius  in  the  dayes

preceding, have rendered him gentle, and brought him from the capriol to the

amble. But I beseech you without farther delay, put us both out of suspence.


SALV.I will endeavour it to the utmost of my harsh way of expressing my self, the

obtusenesse of which, the acutenesse of your wit shall supply. The accidents

of  which  we  are  to  enquire  the  causes  are  two:  The  first  respecteth  the

varieties that happen in the ebbings and flowings in the Monethly Period; and

the othr relateth to the Annual. We will first speak of the Monethly, and then

treat of the Annual; and it is convenient that we resolve them all according to

the Fundamentals and Hypothesis already laid down, without introducing any

novelty either in Astronomy, or in the Universe, in favour of the ebbings and

flowings; therefore let us demonstrate that of all the several accidents in them

observed, the causes reside in the things already known, The true Hypothesis

may dispatch its revolutions in a shorter time, in lesser circles than in greater;

the which is proved by two examples. and received for true and undoubted. I

say therefore, that it is a truly natural, yea necessary thing, that one and the

same moveable made to move round by the same moving virtue in a longer

time, do make its course by a greater circle, rather than by a lesser; and this is

a truth received by all, and confirmed by all experiments, The first example.

of which we will produce a few. In the wheel-clocks, and particularly in the

great ones, to moderate  the time, the Artificers that make them accomodate a

certain  voluble  staffe  horozontally,  and  at  each  end  of  it  they  fasten  two

Weights of Lead, and when the time goeth too slow, by the onely removing

those Leads a little nearer to the centre of the staffe, they render its vibrations

more  frequent;  and  on  the  contrary  to  retard  it,  it  is  but  drawing  those

Weights more towards the ends; for so the vibrations are made more seldome,

and consequently the intervals of the hours are prolonged.


Here  the  movent  vertue  is  the  same,  The  second  example.  namely  the

counterpoise,  the  moveables  are  those  same  Weights  of  lead,  and  their

vibrations are more frequent when they are neerer to the centre, that is, when

they move by lesser circles. Hanging equal Weights at unequal cords, and

being  removed  from  their  perpendicularity,  letting  them  go;  we  shall  see

those that are pendent at the shorter cords, to make their vibrations under

shorter times, as those that move by lesser circles. Again, let such a kind of

Weight be fastened to a cord, which cord let play upon a staple fastened in

the Seeling, and do you hold the other end of the cord in your hand, and

having  given  the  motion  to  the  pendent  Weight,  whilst  it  is  making  its

vibrations, pull the end of the cord that you hold in your hand, so that the

Weight may rise higher and higher: In its rising you shall see the frequencyof its vibrations encrease, in regard that they are made successively by lesser

and lesser circies. Two particular notable accidents in the penduli and their

vibrations. And here I desire you to take notice of two particulars worthy to

be observed. One is that the vibrations of one of those plummets are made

with  such  a  necessity  under  such  determinate  times,  that  it  is  altogether

impossible to cause them to be made under other times, unlesse it be by

prolonging,  or  abreviating  the  cord;  of  which  you  may  also  at  this  very

instant ascertain your selves by experience, tying a stone to a pack-threed,

and holding the other end in your hand, trying whether you can ever by any

artifice  be  able  to  swing  it  this  way  and  that  way  in  other  than  one

determinate time, unlesse by lengthening of shortening the string, which you

will find to be absolutely impossible. The other particular truly admirable is,

that  the  self  same  pendulum  makes  its  vibrations  with  one  and  the  same

frequency, or very little, and as it were insensibly different, whether they be

made by very great, or very small arches of the self-same circumference. I

mean that whether we remove the pendulum from perpendicularity one, two,

or three degrees onely, or whether we remove it 70. 80. nay to an entire

quadrant,  it  being  let  go,  will  in  the  one  case  and  in  the  other  make  its

vibrations with the same frequency, as well the former where it is to move by

an arch of but four or six degrees, as the second, where it is to passe arches of

160. or more  degrees. Which may the better be seen, by hanging two weights

at two strings of equal length, and then removing them from perpendicularity,

one a little way, and the other very far; the which being set at liberty, will go

& return under the same times, the one by arches very small, & the other by

very  great  ones,  from  whence  followeth  the  conclusion  of  an  admirable

Problem; Admirable Problems of moveables descending by the Quadrant of a

Circle, and of those descending by all the cords of the whole Circle. which is,

That a Quadrant of a Circle being given (take a little diagram of the same, [in

Fig. 3. ]) as for instance: AB erect to the Horizon, so as that it rest upon the

plain touching in the point B. and an Arch being made with a Hoop well

plained and smoothed in the concave part, bending it according to the curvity

of the Circumference ADB. So that a Bullet very round and smooth may

freely run to and again within it (the rim of a Sieve is very proper for the

experiment) I say, that the Bullet being put in any what ever place, neer or far

from the lowest term B. As for instance, putting it in the point C, or here in

D, or in E; and then let go, it will in equal times, or insensibly different arrive

at the term B, departing from C, or from D, or from E, or from whateverother place; an accident truly wonderfull. We may add another accident no

less strange than this, which is, That moreover by all the cords drawn from

the point B to the points C, D, E; and to any other whatsoever, taken not

onely in the Quadrant BA, but in all the whole circumference of the Circle

the said moveable shall descend in times absolutely equal; insomuch that it

shall be no longer in descending by the whole Diameter erect perpendicularly

upon the point B, then it shall in descending by B. C. although it do sublend

but one sole degree, or a lesser Arch. Let us add the other wonder, which is,

That the motions of the falling bodies made by the Arches of the Quadrant

AB; are made in shorter times than those that are made by the cords of those

same Arches; so that the swiftest motion, and made by a moveable in the

shortest time, to arrive from the point A, to the term B, shall be that which is

made, not by the right line A, B, (although it be the shortest of all those that

can de drawn between the points A. B.) but by the circumference ADB. And

any point being taken in the said Arch; as for example: The point D. and two

cords drawn AD, and D. B. the moveable departing from the qoint A, shall in

a less time come to B, moving by the two cords AD and DB. than by the sole

cord A, B. But the shortest of all the times shall be that of the fall by the Arch

ADB. And the self same accidents are to be understood of all the other lesser

Arches taken from the lowermost term B. upwards.


SAGR.


No more, no more; for you so confund and fill me with Wonders, and distract

my thoughts so many several wayes,  that I fear I shall have but a small part

of it left free and disingaged, to apply to the principal matter that is treated of,

and which of it self is but even too obscure and intricate: So that I intreat you

to  vouchsafe  me,  having  once  dispatcht  the  business  of  the  ebbings  and

flowings, to do this honour to my house (and yours) some other dayes, and to

discourse upon the so many other Problems that we have left in suspence; and

which perhaps are no less curious and admirable, than this that hath been

discussed these dayes past, and that now ought to draw to a conclusion.


SALV.


I  shall  be  ready  to  serve  you,  but  we  must  make  more  than  one  or  two

Sessions;  if  besides  the  other  questions  reserved  to  be  handled  apart,  we

would discusse those many that pertain to the local motion, as well of naturalmoveables, as of the rejected: an Argument largely treated of by our Lyncean

Accademick.  But  turning  to  our  first  purpose,  where  we  were  about  to

declare,  That  the  bodies  moving  circularly  by  a  movent  virtue,  which

continually remaineth the same, the times of the circulation were prefixt and

determined,  and  impossible  to  be  made  longer  or  shorter,  having  given

examples, and produced experiments thereof, sensible, and feasible, we may

confirm the same truth by the experiences of the Celestial motions of the

Planets; in which we see the same rule observed; for those that move by

greater  Circles,  confirm  longer  times  in  passing  them.  A  most  pertinent

observation of this we have from the Medicaean Planets, which in short times

make their revolutions about Jupiter: Insomuch that it is not to be questioned,

nay  we  may  hold  it  for  sure  and  certain,  that  if  for  example,  the  Moon

continuing to be moved by the same movent faculty, should retire by little

and little in lesser Circles, it would acquire a power of abreviating the times

of  its  Periods,  according  to  that  Pendulum,  of  which  in  the  course  of  its

vibrations,  we  by  degrees  shortned  the  cord,  that  is  contracted  the

Semidiameter of the circumferences by it passed. Know now that this that I

have alledged an example of it in the Moon, is seen and verified essentially in

fact. Let us call to mind, that it hath been already concluded by us, together

with  Copernicus,  The  Earths  annual  motion  by  the  Ecliptick,  unequal  by

means of the Moons motion, That it is not possible to separate the Moon from

the  Earth,  about  which  it  without  dispute  revolveth  in  a  Moneth:  Let  us

remember  also  that  the  Terrestrial  Globe,  accompanyed  alwayes  by  the

Moon, goeth along the circumference of the Grand Orb about the Sun in a

year, in which time the Moon revolveth about the Earth almost thirteen times;

from which revolution it followeth, that the said Moon sometimes is found

near  the  Sun;  that  is,  when  it  is  between  the  Sun  and  the  Earth,  and

sometimes much more remote, that is, when the Earth is situate between  the

Moon and Sun; neer, in a word, at the time of its conjunction and change;

remote, in its Full and Opposition; and the greatest vicinity differ the quantity

of the Diameter of the Lunar Orb. Now if it be true that the virtue which

moveth the Earth and Moon, about the Sun, be alwayes maintained in the

same vigour; and if it be true that the same moveable moved by the same

virtue, but in circles unequal, do in shorter times passe like arches of lesser

circles, it must needs be granted, that the Moon when it is at a lesse distance

from the Sun, that is in the time of conjunction, passeth greater arches of the

Grand Orb, than when it is at a greater distance, that is in its Opppsition andFull. And this Lunar inequality must of necessity be imparted to the Earth

also; for if we shall suppose a right line produced from the centre of the Sun

by the centre of the Terrestrial Globe, and prolonged as far as the Orb of the

Moon, this shall be the semidiameter of the Grand Orb, in which the Earth, in

case it were alone, would move uniformly, but if in the same semidiameter

we  should  place  another  body  to  be  carried  about,  placing  it  one  while

between the Earth and Sun, and another while beyond the Earth, at a greater

distance from the Sun, it is necessary, that in this second case the motion

common to both, according to the circumference of the great Orb by means

of the distance of the Moon, do prove a little slower than in the other case,

when the Moon is between the Earth and Sun, that is at a lesser distance. So

that in this businesse the very same happeneth that befals in the time of the

clock; that lead which is placed one while farther from the centre, to make the

vibrations of the staffe or ballance lesse frequent, and another while nearer, to

make them thicker, representing the Moon. Hence it may be manifest, that the

annual motion of the Earth in the Grand Orb, and under the Ecliptick, is not

uniform,  and  that  its  irregularity  proceedeth  from  the  Moon,  and  hath  its

Monethly Periods and Returns. And because it hath been concluded, that the

Monethly  and  Annual  Periodick  alterations  of  the  ebbings  and  flowings,

cannot be deduced from any other cause than from the altered proportion

between the annual motion and the additions and substractions of the diurnal

conversion; and that those alterations might be made two wayes, that is by

altering the annual motion, keeping the quantity of the additions unaltered, or

by  changing  of  the  bignesse  of  these,  reteining  the  uniformity  of  annual

motion.  We  have  already  found  the  first  of  these,  depending  on  the

irregularity of the annual motion occasioned by the Moon, and which hath its

Monethly  Periods.  It  is  therefore  necessary,  that  upon  that  account  the

ebbings and flowings have a Monethly Period in which they do grow  greater

and lesser. Now you see that the cause of the Monethly Period resideth in the

annual motion; and withal you see how much the Moon is concerned in this

business, and how it is therewith interrupted apart, without having any thing

to do with either, with Seas or Waters.


SAGR.


If one that never had seen any kinde of Stairs or Lader, were shewed a very

high Tower, and asked if ever he hoped to climb to the top of it, I verilybelieve that he would answer he did not, not conceiving how one should

come thither any way except by flying; but shewing him a stone of but a foot

high, and asking him whether he thought he could get to the top of that, I am

certain that he would answer he could; and farther, that he would not deny,

but that it was not onely one, but ten, twenty, and an hundred times easier to

climb that: But now if he should be shewed the Stairs, by means whereof,

with the facility by him granted, it is possible to get thither, whither he a little

before had affirmed it was impossible to ascend, I do think that laughing at

himself he would confess his dulness of apprehension. Thus, Salviatus, have

you step by step so gently lead me, that, not without wonder, I finde that I am

got with small pains to that height which I despaired of arriving at. ’Tis true;

that the Staircase having been dark, I did not perceive that I was got nearer to,

or arrived at the top, till that coming into the open Air I discovered a great

Sea, and spacious Country: And as in ascending one step, there is no labour;

so each of your propositions by it self seemed to me so plain, that thinking I

heard but little or nothing that was new unto me, I conceived that my benefit

thereby had been little or none at all: Whereupon I was the more amazed at

the unexpected exit of this discourse, that hath guided me to the knowledge

of  a  thing  which  I  held  impossible  to  be  demonstrated.  One  doubt  onely

remains, from which I desire to be freed, and this it is; Whether that if the

motion of the Earth together with that of the Moon under the Zodiack are

irregular motions, those irregularities ought to have been observed and taken

notice of by Astronomers, which I do not know that they are: Therefore I

pray you, who are better acquainted with these things than I, to free me from

this doubt, and tell me how the ase stands.


SALV.


You ask a rational question, and answering to the Objection, Many things

may  remain  as  yet  unobserved  in  Astronomy.  I  say;  That  although

Astronomy  in  the  courses  of  many  ages  hath  made  a  great  progress  in

discovering the constitution and motions of the Celestial bodies, yet is it not

hitherto arrived at that height, but that very many things remain undecided,

and haply many others also undiscovered. It is to be supposed that the first

observers of Heaven knew no more but one motion common  to all the Stars,

as is this diurnal one: yet I believe that in few dayes they perceived that the

Moon  was  inconstant  in  keeping  company  with  the  other  Stars;  but  yetwithal, that many years past, before that they distinguished all the Planets:

And in particular, Saturn for its slowness, and Mercury for its rareness of

appearing were amongst those that were last observed. I conceit that Saturn

by its slowness, and Mercury by reason of its seldom appearing, were the last

that were observed to be wandring and errant. It is to be thought that many

more  years  run  out  before  the  statio  s  and  retrogradations  of  the  three

superiour Planets were known, as also their approximations and recessions

from  the  Earth,  necessary  occasions  of  introducing  the  Eccentrix  and

Epicicles, things unknown even to Aristotle, for that he makes no mention

thereof. Mercury, and Venus, with their admirable apparitions; how long did

they keep Astronomers in suspence, before that they could resolve (not to

speak of any other of their qualities) upon their situation? Insomuch that the

very order onely of the Mundane bodies, and the integral structure of the

parts of the Universe by us known, hath been doubted of untill the time of

Copernicus, who hath at last given us notice of the true constitution, and real

systeme, according to which those parts are disposed; so that at length we are

certain that Mercury, Venus, and the other Planets do revolve about the Sun;

and that the Moon revolveth about the Earth. But how each Planet governeth

it  self  in  its  particular  revolution,  Particular  structures  of  the  Orbs  of  the

Planets not yet well resolved. and how precisely the structure of its Orb is

framed; which is that which is vulgarly called the Theory of the Planets, we

cannot  as  yet  undoubtedly  resolve.  Mars,  that  hath  so  much  puzled  our

Modern Astronomers, is a proof of this: And to the Moon her self there have

been  assigned  several  Theories,  after  that  the  said  Copernicus  had  much

altered it from that of Ptolomy. And to descend to our particular case, that is

to say, to the apparent motion of the Sun and Moon; touching the former,

there hath been observed a certain great irregularity, whereby it passeth the

two semicircles of the Ecliptick, The Sun passeth one half of the Zodiack

nine days sooner than the other. divided by the points of the Equinoxes in

very different times; in passing one of which, it spendeth about nine dayes

more  than  in  passing  the  other;  a  difference,  as  you  see,  very  great  and

notable. But if in passing small arches, such for example as are the twelve

Signs, he maintain a most regular motion, or else proceed with paces, one

while a little more swift, and another more slow, as it is necessary that it do,

in  case  the  annual  motion  belong  to  the  Sun  onely  in  appearance,  but  in

reality to the Earth in company with the Moon, it is what hath not hitherto

been  observed,  The  Moons  motion  principally  sought  in  the  account  ofEclipses. nor it may be, sought. Touching the Moon in the next place, whose

restitutions have been principally lookt into an account of the Eclipses, for

which it is sufficient to have an exact knowledge of its motion about the

Earth,  it hath not been likewise with a perfect curiosity inquired, what it 

course is thorow the particular arches of the Zodiack. That therefore the Earth

and Moon in running through the Zodiack, that is round the Grand Orb, do

somewhat accellerate at the Moons change, and retard at its full, ought not to

be doubted; for that the said difference is not manifest, which cometh to be

unobserved upon two accounts; First, Because it hath not been lookt for.

Secondly, Because that its possible it may not be very great. Nor is there any

need that it should be great, for the producing the effect that we see in the

alteration of the greatness of ebbings and flowings. Ebbings and flowings are

petty things in comparison of the vastness of Seas and of the velocity of the

motion of the Terrestrial Globe. For not onely those alterations, but the Tides

themselves are but small matters in respect of the grandure of the subjects on

which they work; albeit that to us, and to our littleness they seem great. For

the addition or subduction of one degree of velocity where there are naturally

700, or 1000, can be called no great alteration, either in that which conferreth

it, or in that Which receiveth it: the Water of our Mediterrane carried about

by the diurnal revolution, maketh about 700 miles an hour, (which is the

motion common to the Earth and to it, and therefore not perceptible to us) &

that which we sensibly discern to be made in the streams or currents, is not at

the rate of full one mile an hour, (I speak of the main Seas, and not of the

Straights) and this is that which altereth the first, naturall, and grand motion;

and this motion is very great in respect of us, and of Ships: for a Vessel that

in a standing Water by the help of Oares can make v. g. three miles an hour,

in that same current will row twice as far with the stream as against it: A

notable difference in the motion of the Boat, though but very small in the

motion of the Sea, which is altered but its seven hundredth part. The like I

say of its rising, and falling one, two, or three feet; and scarcely four or five

in the utmost bounds of a streight, two thousand, or more miles long, and

where there are depths of hundreds of feet; this alteration is much less than if

in one of the Boats that bring us fresh Water, the said Water upon the arrest

of  the  Boat  should  rise  at  the  Prow  the  thickness  of  a  leaf.  I  conclude

therefore that very small alterations in respect of the immense greatness, and

extraordinary  velocity  of  the  Seas,  is  sufficient  to  make  therein  great

mutations in relation to our smallness, and to our accidents.SAGR.


I am fully satisfied as to this particular; it remains to declare unto us how

those additions and substractions derived from the diurnal Vertigo are made

one while greater, and another while lesser; from which alterations you hinted

that the annual period of the augmentations and diminutions of the ebbings

and flowings did depend.


SALV.


I will use my utmost endeavours to render my self intelligible, The causes of

the inequality of the additions and substractions of the diurnal conversion

from the annual motion. but the difficulty of the accident it self, and the great

attention of mind requisite for the comprehending of it, constrains me to be

obscure. The unequalities of the additions and substractions, that the diurnal

motion maketh to or from the annual dependeth upon the inclination of the

Axis of the diurnal motion upon the plane of the Grand Orb, or, if you please,

of the Ecliptick; by means of which inclination the Equinoctial intersecteth

the said Ecliptick, remaining inclined and oblique upon the same according to

the said inclination of Axis. And the quantity of the additions importeth as

much as the whole diameter of the said Equinoctial, the Earths centre being at

the same time in the Solstitial points; but being out of them it importeth lesse

and lesse, according as the said centre successively approacheth to the points

of the Equinoxes, where those additions are lesser than in any other places.

This is the whole businesse, but wrapt up in the obscurity that you see.


SAGR.


Rather in that which I do no not see; for hitherto I comprehend nothing at all.


SALV.


I have already foretold it. Neverthelesse we will try whether by drawing a

Diagram thereof, we can give some small light to the same; though indeed it

might better be set forth by solid bodies than by bare Schemes; yet we will

help our selves with Perspective and fore-shortning. Let us draw therefore, as

before, the circumference of the Grand Orb, [as in Fig. 4. ] in which the point

A is understood to be one of the Solstitials, and the diameter AP the commonSection  of  the  Solstitial  Colure,  and  of  the  plane  of  the  Grand  Orb  or

Ecliptick; and in that same point A let us suppose the centre of the Terrestrial

Globe to be placed, the Axis of which CAB, inclined upon the Plane of the

Grand Orb, falleth on the plane of the said Colure that passeth thorow both

the  Axis  of  the  Equinoctial,  and  of  the  Ecliptick.  And  for  to  prevent

confusion,  let  us  only  draw  the  Equinoctial  circle,  marking  it  with  these

characters DGEF, the common section of which, with the plane of the grand

Orb, let be the line DE, so that half of the said Equinoctial DFE will remain

inclined below the plane of the Grand Orb, and the other half DGE elevated

above. Let now the Revolution of the said Equinoctial be made, according to

the order of the points DGEF, and the motion of the centre from A towards E.

And because the centre of the Earth being in A, the Axis CB (which is erect

upon the diameter of the Equinoctial DE) falleth, as hath been said, in the

Solstitial Colure, the common Section of which and of the Grand Orb, is the

diameter PA, the said line PA shall  be perpendicular to the same DE, by

reason that the Colure is erect upon the grand Orb; and therefore the said DE,

shall be the Tangent of the grand Orb in the point A. So that in this Position

the motion of the Centre by the arch AE; that is, of one degree every day

differeth very little; yea, is as if it were made by the Tangent DAE. And

because by means of the diurnal motion the point D, carried about by G, unto

E, encreaseth the motion of the Centre moved almost in the same line DE, as

much  as  the  whole  diameter  DE  amounts  unto;  and  on  the  other  side

diminisheth as much, moving about the other semicircle EFD. The additions

and subductions in this place therefore, that is in the time of the solstice, shall

be measured by the whole diameter DE.


Let us in the next place enquire, Whether they be of the same bigness in the

times of the Equinoxes; and transporting the Centre of the Earth to the point

I, distant a Quadrant of a Circle from the point A. Let us suppose the said

Equinoctial to be GEFD, its common section with the grand Orb DE, the

Axis with the same inclination CB; but the Tangent of the grand Orb in the

point I shall be no longer DE, but another which shall cut that at right Angles;

and let it be this marked HIL, according to which the motion of the Centre I,

shall make its progress, proceeding along the circumference of this grand

Orb.  Now  in  this  state  the  Additions  and  Substractions  are  no  longer

measured by the diameter DE, as before was done; because that diameter not

distending it self according to the line of the annual motion HL, rather cuttingit at right angles, those terms DE, do neither add nor substract any thing; but

the Additions and Substractons are to be taken from that diameter that falleth

in the plane that is errect upon the plane of the grand Orb, and that intersects

it according to the line HL; which diameter in this case shall be this GF and

the Adjective, if I may so say, shall be that made by the point G, about the

semicircle  GEF,  and  the  Ablative  shall  be  the  rest  made  by  the  other

semicircle FDG. Now this diameter, as not being in the same line HL of the

annual motion, but rather cutting it, as we see in the point I, the term G being

elevated above, and E depressed below the plane of the grand Orb, doth not

determine the Additions and Substractions according to its whole length, but

the quantity of those first ought to be taken from the part of the line HL, that

is intercepted between the perpendiculars drawn upon it from the terms GF;

namely, these two GS, and FV: So that the measure of the additions is the

line SV lesser then GF, or then DE; which was the measure of the additions

in the Solstice A. And so successively, according as the centre of the Earth

shall be constituted  in other points of the Quadrant AI, drawing the Tangents

in the said points, and the perpendiculars upon the same falling from the

terms of the diameters of the Equinoctial drawn from the errect planes by the

said Tangents to the plane of the grand Orb; the parts of the said Tangents

(which  shall  continually  be  lesser  towards  the  Equinoctials,  and  greater

towards  the  Solstices)  shall  give  us  the  quantities  of  the  additions  and

substractions. How much in the next place the least additions differ from the

greatest, is easie to be known, because there is the same difference betwixt

them, as between the whole Axis or Diameter of the Sphere, and the part

thereof that lyeth between the Polar-Circles; the which is less than the whole

diameter by very near a twelfth part, supposing yet that we speak of the

additions and substractions made in the Equinoctial; but in the other Parallels

they are lesser, according as their diameters do diminish.


This is all that I have to say upon this Argument, and all perhaps that can fall

under the comprehension of our knowledge, which, as you well know, may

not entertain any conclusions, save onely those that are firm and constant,

such as are the three kinds of Periods of the ebbings and flowings; for that

they depend on causes that are invariabl , simple, and eternal. But because

that secondary and particular causes, able to make many alterations, intermix

with these that are the primary and universal; and these secondary causes

being part of them inconstant, and not to be observed; as for example, Thealteration of Winds, and part (though terminate and fixed) unobserved for

their multiplicity, as are the lengths of the Straights, their various inclinations

towards this or that part, the so many and so different depths of the Waters,

who  shall  be  able,  unless  after  very  long  observations,  and  very  certain

relations, to frame so expeditious Histories thereof, as that they may serve for

Hypotheses, and certain suppositions to such as will by their combinations

give adequate reasons of all the appearances, and as I may say, Anomalie,

and  particular  irregularities  that  may  be  discovered  in  the  motions  of  the

Waters? I will content my self with advertising you, that the accidental causes

are in nature, and are able to produce many alterations; for the more minute

observations, I remit them to be made by those that frequent several Seas:

and onely by way of a conclusion to this our conference, I will propose to be

considered, how that the precise times of the fluxes and refluxes do not onely

happen  to  be  altered  by  the  length  of  Straights,  and  by  the  difference  of

depths;  but  I  believe  that  a  notable  alteration  may  also  proceed  from  the

comparing together of sundry tarcts of Sea, different in greatness; and in

position, or, if you will, inclination; which difference happeneth exactly here

in the Adriatick  Gulph, lesse by far than the rest of the Mediterrane, and

placed in so different an inclination, that whereas that hath its bounds that

incloseth it on the Eastern part, as are the Coasts of Syria, this is shut up in its

more Westerly part: and because the ebbings and flowings are much greater

towards the extremities, yea, because the Seas risings and fallings are there

onely greatest, it may probably happen that the times of Flood at Venice may

be the time of low Water in the other Sea, which, as being much greater, and

distended more directly from West to East, cometh in a certain sort to have

dominion over the Adriatick: and therefore it would be no wonder, in case the

effects depending on the primary causes, should not hold true in the times

that they ought, and that correspond to the periods in the Adriatick, as it doth

in  the  rest  of  the  Mediterrane.  But  these  Particularities  require  long

Observations, which I neither have made as yet, nor shall I ever be able to

make the same for the future.


SAGR.


You have, in my opinion, done enough in opening us the way to so lofty a

speculation, of which, if you had given us no more than that first general

Proposition that seemeth to me to admit of no reply, where you declare veryrationally, that the Vessels containing the Sea-waters continuing stedfast, it

would be impossible, according to the common course of Nature, that those

motions should follow in them which we see do follow; and that, on the other

side, granting the motions ascribed, for other respects, by Copernicus to the

Terrestrial Globe, these same alterations ought to ensue in the Seas, if I say

you  had  told  us  no  more,  this  alone  in  my  judgment,  so  far  exceeds  the

vanities introduced by so many others, that my meer looking on them makes

me nauseate them, and I very much admire, that among men of sublime wit,

of which nevertheless there are not a few, not one hath ever considered the

incompatibility that is between the reciprocal motion of the Water contained,

and the immobility of the Vessel containing, which contradiction seemeth to

me now so manifest.


SALV.


It is more to be admired, One single motion of the terrestrial Globe sufficeth

not to produce the Ebbing & Flowing that it having come into the thoughts of

some  to  refer  the  cause  of  the  Tide  to  the  motion  of  the  Earth,  therein

shewing  a  more  than  common  apprehension,  they  should,  in  afterwards

driving home the motion close with no side; and all, because they did not see

that one simple and uniform motion, as v. gr. the sole diurnal motion of the

Terrestrial  Globe,  doth  not  suffice,  but  that  there  is  required  an  uneven

motion,  one  while  accelerated,  and  another  while  retarded:  for  when  the

motion  of  the  Vessels  are  uniforme,  the  waters  contained  will  habituate

themselves thereto, without ever making any alteration. To say also (as it is

related of an ancient  Mathematician) that the motion of the Earth meeting

with  the  motion  of  the  Lunar  Orb,  The  opinion  of  Seleucus  the

Mathematician censured. the concurrence of them occasioneth the Ebbing

and Flowing, is an absolute vanity, not onely because it is not exprest, nor

seen  how  it  should  so  happen,  but  the  falsity  is  obvious,  for  that  the

Revolution of the Earth is not contrary to the motion of the Moon, but is

towards the same way. So that all that hath been hitherto said, and imagined

by others, is, in my judgment, altogether invalid. But amongst all the famous

men that have philosophated upon this admirable effect of Nature, Kepler is

with respect blamed. I more wonder at Kepler than any of the rest, who being

of a free and piercing wit, and having the motion ascribed to the Earth, beforehim, hath for all that given his ear and assent to the Moons predominancy

over the Water, and to occult properties, and such like trifles.


SAGR.


I am of opinion, that to these more spaculative persons the same happened,

that  at  present  befalls  me,  namely,  the  not  understanding  the  intricate

commixtion of the three Periods Annual, Monethly, and Diurnal; And how

their causes should seem to depend on the Sun, and on the Moon, without the

Suns or Moons having any thing to do with the Water; a businesse, for the

full understanding of which I stand in need of a little longer time to consider

thereof, which the novelty and difficulty of it hath hitherto hindred me from

doing: but I despair not, but that when I return in my solitude and silence to

ruminate that which remaineth in my fancy, not very well digested, I shall

make  it  my  own.  We  have  now,  from  these  four  dayes  Discourse,  great

attestations, in favour of the Copernican Systeme, amongst which these three

taken: the first, from the Stations and Retrogradations of the Planets, and

from their approaches, and recessions from the Earth; the second, from the

Suns revolving in it self, and from what is observed in its spots; the third,

from  the  Ebbing  and  Flowing  of  the  Sea  do  shew  very  rational  and

concluding.


SALV.


To which also haply, in short, one might adde a fourth, and peradventure a

fifth; a fourth, I say, taken from the fixed stars, seeing that in them, upon

exact observations, those minute mutations appear, that Copernicus thought

to have been insensible. There starts up, at this instant, a fifth novelty, from

which one may argue mobility in the Terrestrial Globe, by means of that

which the most Illustrious Signore Caesare, Sig. Caesare Marsilius observeth

the Meridian to be moveable. of the noble Family of the Marsilii of Bologna,

and a Lyncean Academick, discovereth with much ingenuity, who in a very

learned Tract of his, sheweth very particularly how that he had observed a

continual mutation, though very slow in the Meridian line, of which Treatise,

at length, with amazement, perused by me,  I hope he will communicate

Copies to all those that are Students of Natures Wonders.


SAGR.This is not the first time that I have heard speak of the exquisite Learning of

this  Gentleman,  and  of  his  shewing  himself  a  zealous  Patron  of  all  the

Learned,  and  if  this,  or  any  other  of  his  Works  shall  come  to  appear  in

publique, we may be aforehand assured, that they will be received, as things

of great value.


SALV.


Now because it is time to put an end to our Discourses, it remaineth, that I

intreat you, that if, at more leasure going over the things again that have been

alledged you meet with any doubts, or scruples not well resolved, you will

excuse  my  oversight,  as  well  for  the  novelty  of  the  Notion,  as  for  the

weaknesse of my wit, as also for the grandure of the Subject, as also finally,

because I do not, nor have pretended to that assent from others, which I my

self  do  not  give  to  this  conceit,  which  I  could  very  easily  grant  to  be  a

Chymaera,  and  a  meer  paradox;  and  you  Sagredus,  although  in  the

Discourses past you have many times, with great applause, declared, that you

were pleased with some of my conjectures, yet do I believe, that that was in

part more occasioned by the novelty than by the certainty of them, but much

more by your courtesie, which did think and desire, by its assent, to procure

me  that  content  which  we  naturally  use  to  take  in  the  approbation  and

applause of our own matters: and as your civility hath obliged me to you; so

am I also pleased with the ingenuity of Simplicius. Nay, his constancy in

maintaining  the  Doctrine  of  his  Master,  with  so  much  strength  &

undauntedness, hath made me much to love him. And as I am to give you

thanks, Sagredus, for your courteous affection; so of Simplicius, I ask pardon,

if I have sometimes moved him with my too bold and resolute speaking: and

let him be assured that I have not done the same out of any inducement of

sinister affection, but onely to give him occasion to set before us more lofty

fancies that might make me the more knowing.


SIMP.


There is no reason why you should make all these excuses, that are needlesse,

and  especially  to  me,  that  being  accustomed  to  be  at  Conferences  and

publique Disputes, have an hundred times seen the Disputants not onely to

grow hot and angry at one another, but likewise to break forth into injurious

words,  and  sometimes  to  come  very  neer  to  blows.  As  for  the  pastDiscourses,  and  particulatly  in  this  last,  of  the  reason  of  the  Ebbing  and

Flowing of the Sea, I do not, to speak the truth, very well apprehend the

same, but by that slight Idea, what ever it be, that I have formed thereof to my

self, I confesse that your conceit seemeth to me far more ingenuous than any

of all  those that I ever heard besides, but yet neverthelesse I esteem it not

true and concluding: but keeping alwayes before the eyes of my mind a solid

Doctrine that I have learn’t from a most learned and ingenuous person, and

with which it is necessary to sit down; I know that both you being asked,

Whether God, by his infinite Power and Wisdome might confer upon the

Element of Water the reciprocal motion which we observe in the same in any

other way, than by making the containing Vessel to move; I know, I say, that

you will answer, that he might, and knew how to have done the same many

wayes, and those unimaginable to our shallow understanding: upon which I

forthwith  conclude,  that  this  being  granted,  it  would  be  an  extravagant

boldnesse for any one to goe about to limit and confine the Divine Power and

Wisdome to some one particular conjecture of his own.


SALV.


This  of  yours  is  admirable,  and  truly  Angelical  Doctrine,  to  which  very

exactly that other accords, in like manner divine, which whilst it giveth us

leave  to  dispute,  touching  the  constitution  of  the  World,  addeth  withall

(perhaps to the end, that the exercise of the minds of men might neither be

discouraged, nor made bold) that we cannot find out the works made by his

hands. Let therefore the Disquisition permitted and ordain’d us by God, assist

us in the knowing, and so much more admiring his greatnesse, by how much

lesse we finde our selves too dull to penetrate the profound Abysses of his

infinite Wisdome.


SAGR.


And this may serve for a final close of our four dayes Disputations, after

which, if it seem good to Salviatus, to take some time to rest himself, our

curiosity must, of necessity, grant him the same, yet upon condition, that

when it is lesse incommodious for him, he will return and satisfie my desire

in particular concerning the Problemes that remain to be discust, and that I

have set down to be propounded at one or two other Conferences, according

to our agreement: and above all, I shall very impatiently wait to hear theElements of the new Science of our Academick about the natural and violent

local Motions. And in the mean time, we may, according to our custome,

spend an hour in taking the Air in the Gondola that waiteth for us.


                                        FINIS.          DISCOURSES AND MATHEMATICAL

  DEMONSTRATIONS RELATING TO TWO NEW

                                    SCIENCES




                Translated by Henry Crew and Alfonso de Salvio


The  Discourses  and  Mathematical  Demonstrations  Relating  to  Two  New

Sciences  was  first  published  in  Italian  as  Discorsi  e  Dimostrazioni

Matematiche Intorno a Due Nuove Scienze in 1638 (see Figure 1).  But the

circumstances of its publication were complex.  Galileo, after the judgment of

the  Inquisition,  was  under  house  arrest  (which,  ironically,  had  given  him

more  time  to  write).    Moreover,  publication  of  his  books  was  banned  in

Catholic  countries,  by  1638  he  was  completely  blind,  and  his  health  was

deteriorating.    However,  a  visit  to  Venice  from  Louis  Elsevier,  from  the

protestant Netherlands, led to the book being published in Leiden.  It was

dedicated  to  the  Comte  de  Noailles,  who  was  instrumental  in  getting  the

manuscript from Italy to the Netherlands. “I had decided not to publish any

more of my work. And yet, in order to save it from complete oblivion, it

seemed to me wise to leave a manuscript copy in some place where it would

be available at least to those who follow intelligently the subjects which I

have treated.  Accordingly I chose first to place my work in your Lordship’s

hands, asking no more worthy depository, and believing that, on account of

your affection for me, you would have at heart the preservation of my studies

and labours. Therefore, when you were returning home from your mission to

Rome, I came to pay my respects in person as I had already done many times

before by letter. At this meeting, I presented to your Lordship a copy of these

two  works  which  at  that  time  I  happened  to  have  ready.  In  the  gracious

reception which you gave these, I found assurance of their preservation.  The

fact of your carrying them to France and showing them to friends of yours

who are skilled in these sciences gave evidence that my silence was not to be

interpreted as complete idleness.  A little later, just as I was on the point of

sending other copies to Germany, Flanders, England, Spain and possibly to

some places in Italy, I was notified by the Elzevirs that they had these works

of mine in press and that I ought to decide upon a dedication.”  Two New Sciences, as it became popularly known, was to be Galileo’s

final, and arguably most important, book.  Appropriately, it discussed his key

works over the previous four decades.  Galileo did not like the published title

of the book, preferring the more academic “Dialogues on Motion”, but he

was given little choice by the publisher. The two new sciences discussed in

the book are the mechanical strength of materials (including bone, laying

foundations for modern biology) and kinematics.  The clarity and rigour of

his arguments, and his reliance on reproducible experimental data (made with

the aid of a classical water clock), led to Einstein stating that “Propositions

arrived at by purely logical means are completely empty as regards reality.

Because Galileo realised this, and particularly because he drummed it into the

scientific world, he is the father of modern physics — indeed, of modern

science altogether”.

  The book was constructed in a similar style to the earlier volume, The

Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems.  Galileo even used the

same three proponents, (Salviati, Sagredo, and Simplicio, although now more

mature and nuanced) to discuss, over four days, the key topics (see Figure 2)

– but now they are all clearly Galileo at different times of his life (Simplicio

being  his  youngest  self,  and  Salviati  being  the  most  mature).    Topics

discussed  include  a  discussion  of  the  concept  of  infinity,  and  detailed

experimental  and  mathematical  descriptions  of  bodies  in  motion,  which

anticipate the later work of Newton (who was born in the year that Galileo

died, 1642).  This book has to be one of the most important works of science

ever published.

  As a postscript, Pope John Paul II stated, in 1979, that the Church may

have  been  in  error  when  it  condemned  Galileo.    Four  years  later,  his

commission reported that Galileo should not have been condemned, and in

1992,  the  Pope  endorsed  the  commission’s  conclusion.    Better  late  than

never!Figure 1:  The title page of ‘Discorsi e Dimostrazioni Matematiche Intorno a Due Nuove Scienze’,
                                published in Leiden, in 1638.Figure 2:  The Structure of The Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations Relating to Two New
                                          Sciences                                    CONTENTS


Translators’ Preface

Introduction

To the Most Illustrious Lord Count of Noailles

The Publisher to the Reader

First Day

Second Day

Third Day

Fourth Day

Appendix

                             Translators’ Preface


“La Dynamique est la science des forces accélératrices or retardatrices, et des

mouvemens  variés  qu’elles  doivent  produire.  Cette  science  est  due

entièrement  aux  modernes,  et  Galilée  est  celui  qui  en  a  jeté  les  premiers

fondemens.”

  Lagrange Mec. Anal. I. 221.

  FOR more than a century English speaking students have been placed in

the  anomalous  position  of  hearing  Galileo  constantly  referred  to  as  the

founder of modern physical science, without having any chance to read, in

their own language, what Galileo himself has to say. Archimedes has been

made available by Heath; Huygens’ Light has been turned into English by

Thompson,  while  Motte  has  put  the Principia  of  Newton  back  into  the

language in which it was conceived. To render the Physics of Galileo also

accessible to English and American students is the purpose of the following

translation.

  The last of the great creators of the Renaissance was not a prophet without

honor in his own time; for it was only one group of his country-men that

failed to appreciate him. Even during his life time, his Mechanics had been

rendered into French by one of the leading physicists of the world, Mersenne.

  Within  twenty-five  years  after  the  death  of  Galileo,  his Dialogues  on

Astronomy, and those on Two New Sciences, had been done into English by

Thomas  Salusbury  and  were  worthily  printed  in  two  handsome  quarto

volumes. The Two New Sciences, which contains practically all that Galileo

has to say on the subject of physics, issued from the English press in 1665. It

is supposed that most of the copies were destroyed in the great London fire

which  occurred  in  the  year  following.  We  are  not  aware  of  any  copy  in

America: even that belonging to the British Museum is an imperfect one.

  Again in 1730 the Two New Sciences was done into English by Thomas

Weston; but this book, now nearly two centuries old, is scarce and expensive.

Moreover, the literalness with which this translation was made renders many

passages either ambiguous or unintelligible to the modern reader. Other than

these two, no English version has been made.

  Quite recently an eminent Italian scholar, after spending thirty of the best

years  of  his  life  upon  the  subject,  has  brought  to  completion  the  great

National Edition of the Works of Galileo. We refer to the twenty superbvolumes in which Professor Antonio Favaro of Padua has given a definitive

presentation of the labors of the man who created the modern science of

physics.

  The following rendition includes neither Le Mechaniche of Galileo nor his

paper De Motu Accelerato, since the former of these contains little but the

Statics  which  was  current  before  the  time  of  Galileo,  and  the  latter  is

essentially included in the Dialogue of the Third Day. Dynamics was the one

subject  to  which  under  various  forms,  such  as  Ballistics,  Acoustics,

Astronomy, he consistently and persistently devoted his whole life. Into the

one volume here translated he seems to have gathered, during his last years,

practically all that is of value either to the engineer or the physicist. The

historian, the philosopher, and the astronomer will find the other volumes

replete with interesting material.

  It is hardly necessary to add that we have strictly followed the text of the

National Edition — essentially the Elzevir edition of 1638. All comments and

annotations have been omitted save here and there a foot-note intended to

economize the reader’s time. To each of these footnotes has been attached the

signature  [Trans.]  in  order  to  preserve  the  original  as  nearly  intact  as

possible.

  Much  of  the  value  of  any  historical  document  lies  in  the  language

employed, and this is doubly true when one attempts to trace the rise and

growth of any set of concepts such as those employed in modern physics. We

have therefore made this translation as literal as is consistent with clearness

and modernity. In cases where there is any important deviation from this rule,

and in the case of many technical terms where there is no deviation from it,

we have given the original Italian or Latin phrase in italics enclosed in square

brackets.  The  intention  here  is  to  illustrate  the  great  variety  of  terms

employed  by  the  early  physicists  to  describe  a  single  definite  idea,  and

conversely, to illustrate the numerous senses in which, then as now, a single

word is used. For the few explanatory English words which are placed in

square  brackets  without  italics,  the  translators  alone  are  responsible.  The

paging of the National Edition is indicated in square brackets inserted along

the median line of the page.

  The imperfections of the following pages would have been many more but

for  the  aid  of  three  of  our  colleagues.  Professor  D.  R.  Curtiss  was  kind

enough to assist in the translation of those pages which discuss the nature of

Infinity: Professor O. H. Basquin gave valuable help in the rendition of thechapter on Strength of Materials; and Professor O. F. Long cleared up the

meaning of a number of Latin phrases.

  To Professor A. Favaro of the University of Padua the translators share,

with every reader, a feeling of sincere obligation for his Introduction.

  H. C.

  A. de S.

  Evanston, Illinois, 15 February, 1914.                                    Introduction


WRITING to his faithful friend Elia Diodati, Galileo speaks of the “New

Sciences” which he had in mind to print as being “superior to everything else

of mine hitherto published”; elsewhere he says “they contain results which I

consider the most important of all my studies”; and this opinion which he

expressed concerning his own work has been confirmed by posterity: the

“New Sciences” are, indeed, the masterpiece of Galileo who at the time when

he made the above remarks had spent upon them more than thirty laborious

years.

  One who wishes to trace the history of this remarkable work will find that

the great philosopher laid its foundations during the eighteen best years of his

life — those which he spent at Padua. As we learn from his last scholar,

Vincenzio Viviani, the numerous results at which Galileo had arrived while

in this city, awakened intense admiration in the friends who had witnessed

various experiments by means of which he was accustomed to investigate

interesting questions in physics. Fra Paolo Sarpi exclaimed: To give us the

Science  of  Motion,  God  and  Nature  have  joined  hands  and  created  the

intellect of Galileo. And when the “New Sciences” came from the press one

of his foremost pupils, Paolo Aproino, wrote that the volume contained much

which he had “already heard from his own lips” during student days at Padua.

  Limiting ourselves to only the more important documents which might be

cited in support of our statement, it will suffice to mention the letter, written

to Guidobaldo del Monte on the 29th of November, 1602, concerning the

descent of heavy bodies along the arcs of circles and the chords subtended by

them; that to Sarpi, dated 16th of October, 1604, dealing with the free fall of

heavy bodies; the letter to Antonio de’ Medici on the 11th of February, 1609,

in  which  he  states  that  he  has  “completed  all  the  theorems  and

demonstrations  pertaining  to  forces  and  resistances  of  beams  of  various

lengths, thicknesses and shapes, proving that they are weaker at the middle

than  near  the  ends,  that  they  can  carry  a  greater  load  when  that  load  is

distributed throughout the length of the beam than when concentrated at one

point, demonstrating also what shape should be given to a beam in order that

it may have the same bending strength at every point,” and that he was now

engaged “upon some questions dealing with the motion of projectiles”; and

finally in the letter to Belisario Vinta, dated 7th of May, 1610, concerning hisreturn from Padua to Florence, he enumerates various pieces of work which

were still to be completed, mentioning explicitly three books on an entirely

new science dealing with the theory of motion. Although at various times

after the return to his native state he devoted considerable thought to the work

which, even at that date, he had in mind as is shown by certain fragments

which clearly belong to different periods of his life and which have, for the

first time, been published in the National Edition; and although these studies

were always uppermost in his thought it does not appear that he gave himself

seriously  to  them  until  after  the  publication  of  the Dialogue  and  the

completion of that trial which was rightly described as the disgrace of the

century. In fact as late as October, 1630, he barely mentions to Aggiunti his

discoveries in the theory of motion, and only two years later, in a letter to

Marsili concerning the motion of projectiles, he hints at a book nearly ready

for publication in which he will treat also of this subject; and only a year after

this he writes to Arrighetti that he has in hand a treatise on the resistance of

solids.

  But  the  work  was  given  definite  form  by  Galileo  during  his  enforced

residence at Siena: in these five months spent quietly with the Archbishop he

himself  writes  that  he  has  completed  “a  treatise  on  a  new  branch  of

mechanics full of interesting and useful ideas”; so that a few months later he

was able to send word to Micanzio that the “work was ready”; as soon as his

friends learned of this, they urged its publication. It was, however, no easy

matter to print the work of a man already condemned by the Holy Office: and

since Galileo could not hope to print it either in Florence or in Rome, he

turned to the faithful Micanzio asking him to find out whether this would be

possible in Venice, from whence he had received offers to print the Dialogue

on the Principal Systems, as soon as the news had reached there that he was

encountering difficulties. At first everything went smoothly; so that Galileo

commenced sending to Micanzio some of the manuscript which was received

by  the  latter  with  an  enthusiasm  in  which  he  was  second  to  none  of  the

warmest admirers of the great philosopher. But when Micanzio consulted the

Inquisitor, he received the answer that there was an express order prohibiting

the printing or reprinting of any work of Galileo, either in Venice or in any

other place, nullo excepto.

  As soon as Galileo received this discouraging news he began to look with

more favor upon offers which had come to him from Germany where his

friend, and perhaps also his scholar, Giovanni Battista Pieroni, was in theservice of the Emperor, as military engineer; consequently Galileo gave to

Prince Mattia de’ Medici who was just leaving for Germany the first two

Dialogues to be handed to Pieroni who was undecided whether to publish

them at Vienna or Prague or at some place in Moravia; in the meantime,

however, he had obtained permission to print both at Vienna and at Olmütz.

But Galileo recognized danger at every point within reach of the long arm of

the Court of Rome; hence, availing himself of the opportunity offered by the

arrival of Louis Elzevir in Italy in 1636, also of the friendship between the

latter and Micanzio, not to mention a visit at Arcetri, he decided to abandon

all other plans and entrust to the Dutch publisher the printing of his new work

the manuscript of which, although not complete, Elzevir took with him on his

return home.

  In  the  course  of  the  year  1637,  the  printing  was  finished,  and  at  the

beginning of the following year there was lacking only the index, the title-

page and the dedication. This last had, through the good offices of Diodati,

been offered to the Count of Noailles, a former scholar of Galileo at Padua,

and  since  1634  ambassador  of  France  at  Rome,  a  man  who  did  much  to

alleviate the distressing consequences of the celebrated trial; and the offer

was  gratefully  accepted.  The  phrasing  of  the  dedication  deserves  brief

comment.  Since  Galileo  was  aware,  on  the  one  hand,  of  the  prohibition

against the printing of his works and since, on the other hand, he did not wish

to irritate the Court of Rome from whose hands he was always hoping for

complete  freedom,  he  pretends  in  the  dedicatory  letter  (where,  probably

through excess of caution, he gives only main outlines) that he had nothing to

do with the printing of his book, asserting that he will never again publish

any of his researches, and will at most distribute here and there a manuscript

copy. He even expresses great surprise that his new Dialogues have fallen

into the hands of the Elzevirs and were soon to be published; so that, having

been asked to write a dedication, he could think of no man more worthy who

could also on this occasion defend him against his enemies.

  As to the title which reads: Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations

concerning Two New Sciences pertaining to Mechanics and Local Motions,

this only is known, namely, that the title is not the one which Galileo had

devised and suggested; in fact he protested against the publishers taking the

liberty of changing it and substituting “a low and common title for the noble

and dignified one carried upon the title-page.”  In reprinting this work in the National Edition, I have followed the Leyden

text of 1638 faithfully but not slavishly, because I wished to utilize the large

amount of manuscript material which has come down to us, for the purpose

of correcting a considerable number of errors in this first edition, and also for

the sake of inserting certain additions desired by the author himself. In the

Leyden Edition, the four Dialogues are followed by an “Appendix containing

some  theorems  and  their  proofs,  dealing  with  centers  of  gravity  of  solid

bodies,  written  by  the  same  Author  at  an  earlier  date,”  which  has  no

immediate  connection  with  the  subjects  treated  in  the  Dialogues;  these

theorems were found by Galileo, as he tells us, “at the age of twenty-two and

after two years study of geometry” and were here inserted only to save them

from oblivion.

  But it was not the intention of Galileo that the Dialogues on the New

Sciences  should  contain  only  the  four  Days  and  the  above-mentioned

appendix which constitute the Leyden Edition; while, on the one hand, the

Elzevirs were hastening the printing and striving to complete it at the earliest

possible date, Galileo, on the other hand, kept on speaking of another Day,

besides the four, thus embarrassing and perplexing the printers. From the

correspondence which went on between author and publisher, it appears that

this Fifth Day was to have treated “of the force of percussion and the use of

the  catenary”;  but  as  the  typographical  work  approached  completion,  the

printer became anxious for the book to issue from the press without further

delay; and thus it came to pass that the Discorsi e Dimostrazioni appeared

containing only the four Days and the Appendix, in spite of the fact that in

April, 1638, Galileo had plunged more deeply than ever “into the profound

question of percussion” and “had almost reached a complete solution.”

  The “New Sciences” now appear in an edition following the text which I,

after the most careful and devoted study, determined upon for the National

Edition. It appears also in that language in which, above all others, I have

desired to see it. In this translation, the last and ripest work of the great

philosopher  makes  its  first  appearance  in  the  New  World:  if  toward  this

important result I may hope to have contributed in some measure I shall feel

amply rewarded for having given to this field of research the best years of my

life.

  Antonio Favaro.

  University of Padua,

  27th of October, 1913.        To the Most Illustrious Lord Count of Noailles


Counsellor of his Most Christian Majesty, Knight of the Order of the Holy

Ghost,  Field  Marshal  and  Commander,  Seneschal  and  Governor  of

Rouergue,  and  His  Majesty’s  Lieutenant  in  Auvergne,  my  Lord  and

Worshipful Patron

  MOST ILLUSTRIOUS LORD: —

  In the pleasure which you derive from the possession of this work of mine

I  recognize  your  Lordship’s  magnanimity.  The  disappointment  and

discouragement I have felt over the ill-fortune which has followed my other

books are already known to you. Indeed, I had decided not to publish any

more of my work. And yet in order to save it from complete oblivion, it

seemed to me wise to leave a manuscript copy in some place where it would

be available at least to those who follow intelligently the subjects which I

have treated. Accordingly I chose first to place my work in your Lordship’s

hands, asking no more worthy depository, and believing that, on account of

your affection for me, you would have at heart the preservation of my studies

and labors. Therefore, when you were returning home from your mission to

Rome, I came to pay my respects in person as I had already done many times

before by letter. At this meeting I presented to your Lordship a copy of these

two  works  which  at  that  time  I  happened  to  have  ready.  In  the  gracious

reception which you gave these I found assurance of their preservation. The

fact of your carrying them to France and showing them to friends of yours

who are skilled in these sciences gave evidence that my silence was not to be

interpreted as complete idleness. A little later, just as I was on the point of

sending other copies to Germany, Flanders, England, Spain and possibly to

some places in Italy, I was notified by the Elzevirs that they had these works

of mine in press and that I ought to decide upon a dedication and send them a

reply at once. This sudden and unexpected news led me to think that the

eagerness of your Lordship to revive and spread my name by passing these

works on to various friends was the real cause of their falling into the hands

of printers who, because they had already published other works of mine,

now wished to honor me with a beautiful and ornate edition of this work. But

these writings of mine must have received additional value from the criticism

of so excellent a judge as your Lordship, who by the union of many virtues

has won the admiration of all. Your desire to enlarge the renown of my workshows  your  unparalleled  generosity  and  your  zeal  for  the  public  welfare

which you thought would thus be promoted. Under these circumstances it is

eminently fitting that I should, in unmistakable terms, gratefully acknowledge

this generosity on the part of your Lordship, who has given to my fame wings

that have carried it into regions more distant than I had dared to hope. It is,

therefore, proper that I dedicate to your Lordship this child of my brain. To

this course I am constrained not only by the weight of obligation under which

you have placed me, but also, if I may so speak, by the interest which I have

in  securing  your  Lordship  as  the  defender  of  my  reputation  against

adversaries who may attack it while I remain under your protection.

  And  now,  advancing  under  your  banner,  I  pay  my  respects  to  you  by

wishing that you may be rewarded for these kindnesses by the achievement

of the highest happiness and greatness.

  I am your Lordship’s Most devoted Servant,

  Galileo Galilei.

  Arcetri, 6 March, 1638.                      The Publisher to the Reader


SINCE society is held together by the mutual services which men render one

to  another,  and  since  to  this  end  the  arts  and  sciences  have  largely

contributed,  investigations  in  these  fields  have  always  been  held  in  great

esteem and have been highly regarded by our wise forefathers. The larger the

utility and excellence of the inventions, the greater has been the honor and

praise bestowed upon the inventors. Indeed, men have even deified them and

have united in the attempt to perpetuate the memory of their benefactors by

the bestowal of this supreme honor.

  Praise  and  admiration  are  likewise  due  to  those  clever  intellects  who,

confining  their  attention  to  the  known,  have  discovered  and  corrected

fallacies and errors in many and many a proposition enunciated by men of

distinction  and  accepted  for  ages  as  fact.  Although  these  men  have  only

pointed out falsehood and have not replaced it by truth, they are nevertheless

worthy  of  commendation  when  we  consider  the  well-known  difficulty  of

discovering  fact,  a  difficulty  which  led  the  prince  of  orators  to  exclaim:
                                                                                    2
Utinam  tam  facile  possem  vera  reperire,  quam  falsa  convincere.  And

indeed, these latest centuries merit this praise because it is during them that

the arts and sciences, discovered by the ancients, have been reduced to so

great  and  constantly  increasing  perfection  through  the  investigations  and

experiments of clear-seeing minds. This development is particularly evident

in the case of the mathematical sciences. Here, without mentioning various

men who have achieved success, we must without hesitation and with the

unanimous  approval  of  scholars  assign  the  first  place  to  Galileo  Galilei,

Member of the Academy of the Lincei. This he deserves not only because he

has effectively demonstrated fallacies in many of our current conclusions, as

is amply shown by his published works, but also because by means of the

telescope  (invented  in  this  country  but  greatly  perfected  by  him)  he  has

discovered the four satellites of Jupiter, has shown us the true character of the

Milky Way, and has made us acquainted with spots on the Sun, with the

rough and cloudy portions of the lunar surface, with the threefold nature of

Saturn, with the phases of Venus and with the physical character of comets.

These  matters  were  entirely  unknown  to  the  ancient  astronomers  and

philosophers; so that we may truly say that he has restored to the world the

science of astronomy and has presented it in a new light.2
 Cicero. de Natura Deorum, I, 91. [Trans.]


  Remembering that the wisdom and power and goodness of the Creator are

nowhere exhibited so well as in the heavens and celestial bodies, we can

easily recognize the great merit of him who has brought these bodies to our

knowledge and has, in spite of their almost infinite distance, rendered them

easily visible. For, according to the common saying, sight can teach more and

with greater certainty in a single day than can precept even though repeated a

thousand  times;  or,  as  another  says,  intuitive  knowledge  keeps  pace  with

accurate definition.

  But the divine and natural gifts of this man are shown to best advantage in

the present work where he is seen to have discovered, though not without

many  labors  and  long  vigils,  two  entirely  new  sciences  and  to  have

demonstrated them in a rigid, that is, geometric, manner: and what is even

more remarkable in this work is the fact that one of the two sciences deals

with a subject of never-ending interest, perhaps the most important in nature,

one  which  has  engaged  the  minds  of  all  the  great  philosophers  and  one

concerning which an extraordinary number of  books have been written. I

refer to motion [moto locale], a phenomenon exhibiting very many wonderful

properties, none of which has hitherto been discovered or demonstrated by

any  one.  The  other  science  which  he  has  also  developed  from  its  very

foundations deals with the resistance which solid bodies offer to fracture by

external forces [per violenza],  a  subject  of  great  utility,  especially  in  the

sciences  and  mechanical  arts,  and  one  also  abounding  in  properties  and

theorems not hitherto observed.

  In this volume one finds the first treatment of these two sciences, full of

propositions to which, as time goes on, able thinkers will add many more;

also by means of a large number of clear demonstrations the author points the

way to many other theorems as will be readily seen and understood by all

intelligent readers.                                      First Day


                  Interlocutors: Salviati, Sagredo and Simplicio


Salv.  The  constant  activity  which  you  Venetians  display  in  your  famous

arsenal  suggests  to  the  studious  mind  a  large  field  for  investigation,

especially  that  part  of  the  work  which  involves  mechanics;  for  in  this

department  all  types  of  instruments  and  machines  are  constantly  being

constructed by many artisans, among whom there must be some who, partly

by inherited experience and partly by their own observations, have become

highly expert and clever in explanation.


Sagr. You  are  quite  right.  Indeed,  I  myself,  being  curious  by  nature,

frequently visit this place for the mere pleasure of observing the work of

those who, on account of their superiority over other artisans, we call “first

rank men.” Conference with them has often helped me in the investigation of

certain effects including not only those which are striking, but also those

which are recondite and almost incredible. At times also I have been put to

confusion and driven to despair of ever explaining something for which I

could  not  account,  but  which  my  senses  told  me  to  be  true.  And

notwithstanding the fact that what the old man told us a little while ago is

proverbial and commonly accepted, yet it seemed to me altogether false, like

many another saying which is current among the ignorant; for I think they

introduce  these  expressions  in  order  to  give  the  appearance  of  knowing

something about matters which they do not understand.

  You refer, perhaps, to that last remark of his when we asked the reason

why they employed stocks, scaffolding and bracing of larger dimensions for

launching a big vessel than they do for a small one; and he answered that they

did this in order to avoid the danger of the ship parting under its own heavy

weight [vasta mole], a danger to which small boats are not subject?


Sagr. Yes, that is what I mean; and I refer especially to his last assertion

which I have always regarded as a false, though current, opinion; namely,

that in speaking of these and other similar machines one cannot argue from

the small to the large, because many devices which succeed on a small scale

do not work on a large scale. Now, since mechanics has its foundation ingeometry, where mere size cuts no figure, I do not see that the properties of

circles, triangles, cylinders, cones and other solid figures will change with

their size. If, therefore, a large machine be constructed in such a way that its

parts bear to one another the same ratio as in a smaller one, and if the smaller

is sufficiently strong for the purpose for which it was designed, I do not see

why the larger also should not be able to withstand any severe and destructive

tests to which it may be subjected.


Salv. The  common  opinion  is  here  absolutely  wrong.  Indeed,  it  is  so  far

wrong that precisely the opposite is true, namely, that many machines can be

constructed even more perfectly on a large scale than on a small; thus, for

instance, a clock which indicates and strikes the hour can be made more

accurate on a large scale than on a small. There are some intelligent people

who maintain this same opinion, but on more reasonable grounds, when they

cut loose from geometry and argue that the better performance of the large

machine is owing to the imperfections and variations of the material. Here I

trust you will not charge me with arrogance if I say that imperfections in the

material,  even  those  which  are  great  enough  to  invalidate  the  clearest

mathematical  proof,  are  not  sufficient  to  explain  the  deviations  observed

between machines in the concrete and in the abstract. Yet I shall say it and

will  affirm  that,  even  if  the  imperfections  did  not  exist  and  matter  were

absolutely perfect, unalterable and free from all accidental variations, still the

mere  fact  that  it  is  matter  makes  the  larger  machine,  built  of  the  same

material and in the same proportion as the smaller, correspond with exactness

to  the  smaller  in  every  respect  except  that  it  will  not  be  so  strong  or  so

resistant  against  violent  treatment;  the  larger  the  machine,  the  greater  its

weakness. Since I assume matter to be unchangeable and always the same, it

is clear that we are no less able to treat this constant and invariable property

in  a  rigid  manner  than  if  it  belonged  to  simple  and  pure  mathematics.

Therefore, Sagredo, you would do well to change the opinion which you, and

perhaps also many other students of mechanics, have entertained concerning

the ability of machines and structures to resist external disturbances, thinking

that when they are built of the same material and maintain the same ratio

between parts, they are able equally, or rather proportionally, to resist or yield

to  such  external  disturbances  and  blows.  For  we  can  demonstrate  by

geometry  that  the  large  machine  is  not  proportionately  stronger  than  the

small. Finally, we may say that, for every machine and structure, whetherartificial or natural, there is set a necessary limit beyond which neither art nor

nature can pass; it is here understood, of course, that the material is the same

and the proportion preserved.


Sagr. My brain already reels. My mind, like a cloud momentarily illuminated

by a lightning-flash, is for an instant filled with an unusual light, which now

beckons to me and which now suddenly mingles and obscures strange, crude

ideas. From what you have said it appears to me impossible to build two

similar structures of the same material, but of different sizes and have them

proportionately strong; and if this were so, it would not be possible to find

two single poles made of the same wood which shall be alike in strength and

resistance but unlike in size.


Salv. So it is, Sagredo. And to make sure that we understand each other, I say

that if we take a wooden rod of a certain length and size, fitted, say, into a

wall at right angles, i. e., parallel to the horizon, it may be reduced to such a

length that it will just support itself; so that if a hair’s breadth be added to its

length it will break under its own weight and will be the only rod of the kind
              3
in the world. Thus if, for instance, its length be a hundred times its breadth,

you will not be able to find another rod whose length is also a hundred times

its breadth and which, like the former, is just able to sustain its own weight

and no more: all the larger ones will break while all the shorter ones will be

strong enough to support something more than their own weight. And this

which I have said about the ability to support itself must be understood to

apply also to other tests; so that if a piece of scantling [corrente] will carry

the weight of ten similar to itself, a beam [trave] having the same proportions

will not be able to support ten similar beams.

3
 The author here apparently means that the solution is unique. [Trans.]


  Please observe, gentlemen, how facts which at first seem improbable will,

even on scant explanation, drop the cloak which has hidden them and stand

forth in naked and simple beauty. Who does not know that a horse falling

from a height of three or four cubits will break his bones, while a dog falling

from the same height or a cat from a height of eight or ten cubits will suffer

no injury? Equally harmless would be the fall of a grasshopper from a tower

or the fall of an ant from the distance of the moon. Do not children fall withimpunity from heights which would cost their elders a broken leg or perhaps

a fractured skull? And just as smaller animals are proportionately stronger

and more robust than the larger, so also smaller plants are able to stand up

better than larger. I am certain you both know that an oak two hundred cubits

[braccia] high would not be able to sustain its own branches if they were

distributed as in a tree of ordinary size; and that nature cannot produce a

horse as large as twenty ordinary horses or a giant ten times taller than an

ordinary man unless by miracle or by greatly altering the proportions of his

limbs  and  especially  of  his  bones,  which  would  have  to  be  considerably

enlarged over the ordinary. Likewise the current belief that, in the case of

artificial  machines  the  very  large  and  the  small  are  equally  feasible  and

lasting is a manifest error. Thus, for example, a small obelisk or column or

other solid figure can certainly be laid down or set up without danger of

breaking,  while  the  very  large  ones  will  go  to  pieces  under  the  slightest

provocation, and that purely on account of their own weight. And here I must

relate a circumstance which is worthy of your attention as indeed are all

events which happen contrary to expectation, especially when a precautionary

measure turns out to be a cause of disaster. A large marble column was laid

out so that its two ends rested each upon a piece of beam; a little later it

occurred to a mechanic that, in order to be doubly sure of its not breaking in

the middle by its own weight, it would be wise to lay a third support midway;

this seemed to all an excellent idea; but the sequel showed that it was quite

the  opposite,  for  not  many  months  passed  before  the  column  was  found

cracked and broken exactly above the new middle support.


Simp. A very remarkable and thoroughly unexpected accident, especially if

caused by placing that new support in the middle.


Salv. Surely this is the explanation, and the moment the cause is known our

surprise vanishes; for when the two pieces of the column were placed on

level ground it was observed that one of the end beams had, after a long

while, become decayed and sunken, but that the middle one remained hard

and strong, thus causing one half of the column to project in the air without

any  support.  Under  these  circumstances  the  body  therefore  behaved

differently from what it would have done if supported only upon the first

beams; because no matter how much they might have sunken the column

would have gone with them. This is an accident which could not possiblyhave happened to a small column, even though made of the same stone and

having  a  length  corresponding  to  its  thickness,  i.  e.,  preserving  the  ratio

between thickness and length found in the large pillar.


Sagr. I am quite convinced of the facts of the case, but I do not understand

why the strength and resistance are not multiplied in the same proportion as

the material; and I am the more puzzled because, on the contrary, I have

noticed  in  other  cases  that  the  strength  and  resistance  against  breaking

increase in a larger ratio than the amount of material. Thus, for instance, if

two nails be driven into a wall, the one which is twice as big as the other will

support not only twice as much weight as the other, but three or four times as

much.

Salv. Indeed you will not be far wrong if you say eight times as much; nor

does this phenomenon contradict the other even though in appearance they

seem so different.


Sagr. Will you not then, Salviati, remove these difficulties and clear away

these obscurities if possible: for I imagine that this problem of resistance

opens up a field of beautiful and useful ideas; and if you are pleased to make

this the subject of to-day’s discourse you will place Simplicio and me under

many obligations.


Salv. I am at your service if only I can call to mind what I learned from our
              04
Academician who had thought much upon this subject and according to his

custom  had  demonstrated  everything  by  geometrical  methods  so  that  one

might fairly call this a new science. For, although some of his conclusions

had been reached by others, first of all by Aristotle, these are not the most

beautiful and, what is more important, they had not been proven in a rigid

manner from fundamental principles. Now, since I wish to convince you by

demonstrative reasoning rather than to persuade you by mere probabilities, I

shall suppose that you are familiar with present-day mechanics so far as it is

needed in our discussion. First of all it is necessary to consider what happens

when a piece of wood or any other solid which coheres firmly is broken; for

this is the fundamental fact, involving the first and simple principle which we

must take for granted as well known.

4
 I. e. Galileo: The author frequently refers to himself under this name. [Trans.]  To grasp this more clearly, imagine a cylinder or prism, AB, made of

wood or other solid coherent material. Fasten the upper end, A, so that the

cylinder hangs vertically. To the lower end, B, attach the weight C. It is clear

that  however  great  they  may  be,  the  tenacity  and  coherence  [tenacità  e

coerenza] between the parts of this solid, so long as they are not infinite, can

be overcome by the pull of the weight C, a weight which can be increased

indefinitely until finally the solid breaks like a rope. And as in the case of the

rope whose strength we know to be derived from a multitude of hemp threads

which compose it, so in the case of the wood, we observe its fibres and

filaments run lengthwise and render it much stronger than a hemp rope of the

same thickness. But in the case of a stone or metallic cylinder where the

coherence seems to be still greater the cement which holds the parts together

must be something other than filaments and fibres; and yet even this can be

broken by a strong pull.


Simp. If this matter be as you say I can well understand that the fibres of the

wood, being as long as the piece of wood itself, render it strong and resistant

against large forces tending to break it. But how can one make a rope one

hundred cubits long out of hempen fibres which are not more than two or

three cubits long, and still give it so much strength? Besides, I should be glad

to hear your opinion as to the manner in which the parts of metal, stone, and

other materials not showing a filamentous structure are put together; for, if I

mistake not, they exhibit even greater tenacity.Salv. To solve the problems which you raise it will be necessary to make a

digression into subjects which have little bearing upon our present purpose.


Sagr. But if, by digressions, we can reach new truth, what harm is there in

making one now, so that we may not lose this knowledge, remembering that

such an opportunity, once omitted, may not return; remembering also that we

are not tied down to a fixed and brief method but that we meet solely for our

own  entertainment?  Indeed,  who  knows  but  that  we  may  thus  frequently

discover something more interesting and beautiful than the solution originally

sought? I beg of you, therefore, to grant the request of Simplicio, which is

also mine; for I am no less curious and desirous than he to learn what is the

binding material which holds together the parts of solids so that they can

scarcely  be  separated.  This  information  is  also  needed  to  understand  the

coherence of the parts of fibres themselves of which some solids are built up.Salv. I am at your service, since you desire it. The first question is, How are

fibres, each not more than two or three cubits in length, so tightly bound

together  in  the  case  of  a  rope  one  hundred  cubits  long  that  great  force

[violenza] is required to break it?

  Now  tell  me,  Simplicio,  can  you  not  hold  a  hempen  fibre  so  tightly

between your fingers that I, pulling by the other end, would break it before

drawing it away from you? Certainly you can. And now when the fibres of

hemp  are  held  not  only  at  the  ends,  but  are  grasped  by  the  surrounding

medium throughout their entire length is it not manifestly more difficult to

tear them loose from what holds them than to break them? But in the case of

the rope the very act of twisting causes the threads to bind one another in

such a way that when the rope is stretched with a great force the fibres break

rather than separate from each other.

  At the point where a rope parts the fibres are, as everyone knows, very

short, nothing like a cubit long, as they would be if the parting of the rope

occurred, not by the breaking of the filaments, but by their slipping one over

the other.


Sagr. In confirmation of this it may be remarked that ropes sometimes break

not by a lengthwise pull but by excessive twisting. This, it seems to me, is a

conclusive argument because the threads bind one another so tightly that the

compressing fibres do not permit those which are compressed to lengthen the

spirals even that little bit by which it is necessary for them to lengthen in

order to surround the rope which, on twisting, grows shorter and thicker.


Salv. You are quite right. Now see how one fact suggests another. The thread

held between the fingers does not yield to one who wishes to draw it away

even when pulled with considerable force, but resists because it is held back

by a double compression, seeing that the upper finger presses against the

lower as hard as the lower against the upper. Now, if we could retain only

one of these pressures there is no doubt that only half the original resistance

would remain; but since we are not able, by lifting, say, the upper finger, to

remove one of these pressures without also removing the other, it becomes

necessary to preserve one of them by means of a new device which causes

the thread to press itself against the finger or against some other solid body

upon which it rests; and thus it is brought about that the very force which

pulls it in order to snatch it away compresses it more and more as the pullincreases. This is accomplished by wrapping the thread around the solid in

the manner of a spiral; and will be better understood by means of a figure.

Let AB and CD be two cylinders between which is stretched the thread EF:

and for the sake of greater clearness we will imagine it to be a small cord. If

these two cylinders be pressed strongly together, the cord EF, when drawn by

the end F, will undoubtedly stand a considerable pull before it slips between

the two compressing solids. But if we remove one of these cylinders the cord,

though remaining in contact with the other, will not thereby be prevented

from slipping freely. On the other hand, if one holds the cord loosely against

the top of the cylinder A, winds it in the spiral form AFLOTR, and then pulls

it by the end R, it is evident that the cord will begin to bind the cylinder; the

greater the number of spirals the more tightly will the cord be pressed against

the cylinder by any given pull. Thus as the number of turns increases, the line

of contact becomes longer and in consequence more resistant; so that the cord

slips and yields to the tractive force with increasing difficulty.Sagr. What you say has cleared up two points which I did not previously

understand. One fact is how two, or at most three, turns of a rope around the

axle  of  a  windlass  cannot  only  hold  it  fast,  but  can  also  prevent  it  from

slipping when pulled by the immense force of the weight [forza del peso]

which it sustains; and moreover how, by turning the windlass, this same axle,

by mere friction of the rope around it, can wind up and lift huge stones while

a mere boy is able to handle the slack of the rope. The other fact has to do

with a simple but clever device, invented by a young kinsman of mine, for

the  purpose  of  descending  from  a  window  by  means  of  a  rope  without

lacerating the palms of his hands, as had happened to him shortly before and

greatly to his discomfort. A small sketch will make this clear. He took a

wooden cylinder, AB, about as thick as a walking stick and about one span

long: on this he cut a spiral channel of about one turn and a half, and largeenough to just receive the rope which he wished to use. Having introduced

the rope at the end A and led it out again at the end B, he enclosed both the

cylinder and the rope in a case of wood or tin, hinged along the side so that it

could be easily opened and closed. After he had fastened the rope to a firm

support above, he could, on grasping and squeezing the case with both hands,

hang by his arms. The pressure on the rope, lying between the case and the

cylinder, was such that he could, at will, either grasp the case more tightly

and hold himself from slipping, or slacken his hold and descend as slowly as

he wished.





























  A truly ingenious device! I feel, however, that for a complete explanation

other considerations might well enter; yet I must not now digress upon this

particular topic since you are waiting to hear what I think about the breaking

strength of other materials which, unlike ropes and most woods, do not show

a filamentous structure. The coherence of these bodies is, in my estimation,produced by other causes which may be grouped under two heads. One is that

much-talked-of repugnance which nature exhibits towards a vacuum; but this

horror of a vacuum not being sufficient, it is necessary to introduce another

cause in the form of a gluey or viscous substance which binds firmly together

the component parts of the body.

  First I shall speak of the vacuum, demonstrating by definite experiment

the quality and quantity of its force [virtù]. If you take two highly polished

and smooth plates of marble, metal, or glass and place them face to face, one

will slide over the other with the greatest ease, showing conclusively that

there is nothing of a viscous nature between them. But when you attempt to

separate them and keep them at a constant distance apart, you find the plates

exhibit such a repugnance to separation that the upper one will carry the

lower one with it and keep it lifted indefinitely, even when the latter is big

and heavy.

  This  experiment  shows  the  aversion  of  nature  for  empty  space,  even

during the brief moment required for the outside air to rush in and fill up the

region between the two plates. It is also observed that if two plates are not

thoroughly polished, their contact is imperfect so that when you attempt to

separate  them  slowly  the  only  resistance  offered  is  that  of  weight;  if,

however, the pull be sudden, then the lower plate rises, but quickly falls back,

having  followed  the  upper  plate  only  for  that  very  short  interval  of  time

required for the expansion of the small amount of air remaining between the

plates,  in  consequence  of  their  not  fitting,  and  for  the  entrance  of  the

surrounding air. This resistance which is exhibited between the two plates is

doubtless likewise present between the parts of a solid, and enters, at least in

part, as a concomitant cause of their coherence.

  Allow me to interrupt you for a moment, please; for I want to speak of

something which just occurs to me, namely, when I see how the lower plate

follows the upper one and how rapidly it is lifted, I feel sure that, contrary to

the opinion of many philosophers, including perhaps even Aristotle himself,

motion  in  a  vacuum  is  not  instantaneous.  If  this  were  so  the  two  plates

mentioned above would separate without any resistance whatever, seeing that

the  same  instant  of  time  would  suffice  for  their  separation  and  for  the

surrounding medium to rush in and fill the vacuum between them. The fact

that the lower plate follows the upper one allows us to infer, not only that

motion  in  a  vacuum  is  not  instantaneous,  but  also  that,  between  the  two

plates, a vacuum really exists, at least for a very short time, sufficient toallow the surrounding medium to rush in and fill the vacuum; for if there

were no vacuum there would be no need of any motion in the medium. One

must admit then that a vacuum is sometimes produced by violent motion

[violenza] or contrary to the laws of nature, (although in my opinion nothing

occurs contrary to nature except the impossible, and that never occurs).

  But here another difficulty arises. While experiment convinces me of the

correctness of this conclusion, my mind is not entirely satisfied as to the

cause to which this effect is to be attributed. For the separation of the plates

precedes the formation of the vacuum which is produced as a consequence of

this separation; and since it appears to me that, in the order of nature, the

cause must precede the effect, even though it appears to follow in point of

time, and since every positive effect must have a positive cause, I do not see

how the adhesion of two plates and their resistance to separation — actual

facts — can be referred to a vacuum as cause when this vacuum is yet to

follow.  According  to  the  infallible  maxim  of  the  Philosopher,  the  non-

existent can produce no effect.


Simp. Seeing that you accept this axiom of Aristotle, I hardly think you will

reject another excellent and reliable maxim of his, namely, Nature undertakes

only that which happens without resistance; and in this saying, it appears to

me,  you  will  find  the  solution  of  your  difficulty.  Since  nature  abhors  a

vacuum, she prevents that from which a vacuum would follow as a necessary

consequence. Thus it happens that nature prevents the separation of the two

plates.

  Now admitting that what Simplicio says is an adequate solution of my

difficulty, it seems to me, if I may be allowed to resume my former argument,

that this very resistance to a vacuum ought to be sufficient to hold together

the parts either of stone or of metal or the parts of any other solid which is

knit together more strongly and which is more resistant to separation. If for

one effect there be only one cause, or if, more being assigned, they can be

reduced to one, then why is not this vacuum which really exists a sufficient

cause for all kinds of resistance?


Salv. I do not wish just now to enter this discussion as to whether the vacuum

alone is sufficient to hold together the separate parts of a solid body; but I

assure you that the vacuum which acts as a sufficient cause in the case of the

two plates is not alone sufficient to bind together the parts of a solid cylinderof marble or metal which, when pulled violently, separates and divides. And

now  if  I  find  a  method  of  distinguishing  this  well  known  resistance,

depending upon the vacuum, from every other kind which might increase the

coherence, and if I show you that the aforesaid resistance alone is not nearly

sufficient for such an effect, will you not grant that we are bound to introduce

another cause? Help him, Simplicio, since he does not know what reply to

make.


Simp. Surely, Sagredo’s hesitation must be owing to another reason, for there

can  be  no  doubt  concerning  a  conclusion  which  is  at  once  so  clear  and

logical.


Sagr. You have guessed rightly, Simplicio. I was wondering whether, if a

million of gold each year from Spain were not sufficient to pay the army, it

might not be necessary to make provision other than small coin for the pay of
            5
the soldiers.

5
 The bearing of this remark becomes clear on reading what Salviati says on p. 18 below. [Trans.]


  But go ahead, Salviati; assume that I admit your conclusion and show us

your method of separating the action of the vacuum from other causes; and

by measuring it show us how it is not sufficient to produce the effect in

question.


Salv. Your good angel assist you. I will tell you how to separate the force of

the  vacuum  from  the  others,  and  afterwards  how  to  measure  it.  For  this

purpose let us consider a continuous substance whose parts lack all resistance

to separation except that derived from a vacuum, such as is the case with

water, a fact fully demonstrated by our Academician in one of his treatises.

Whenever a cylinder of water is subjected to a pull and offers a resistance to

the separation of its parts this can be attributed to no other cause than the

resistance of the vacuum. In order to try such an experiment I have invented a

device which I can better explain by means of a sketch than by mere words.

Let  CABD  represent  the  cross  section  of  a  cylinder  either  of  metal  or,

preferably,  of  glass,  hollow  inside  and  accurately  turned.  Into  this  is

introduced a perfectly fitting cylinder of wood, represented in cross section

by EGHF, and capable of up-and-down motion. Through the middle of this

cylinder is bored a hole to receive an iron wire, carrying a hook at the end K,while  the  upper  end  of  the  wire,  I,  is  provided  with  a  conical  head.  The

wooden cylinder is countersunk at the top so as to receive, with a perfect fit,

the conical head I of the wire, IK, when pulled down by the end K.





























  Now insert the wooden cylinder EH in the hollow cylinder AD, so as not

to touch the upper end of the latter but to leave free a space of two or three

finger-breadths; this space is to be filled with water by holding the vessel

with the mouth CD upwards, pushing down on the stopper EH, and at the

same time keeping the conical head of the wire, I, away from the hollow

portion of the wooden cylinder. The air is thus allowed to escape alongside

the iron wire (which does not make a close fit) as soon as one presses down

on the wooden stopper. The air having been allowed to escape and the iron

wire  having  been  drawn  back  so  that  it  fits  snugly  against  the  conical

depression in the wood, invert the vessel, bringing it mouth downwards, and

hang on the hook K a vessel which can be filled with sand or any heavymaterial  in  quantity  sufficient  to  finally  separate  the  upper  surface  of  the

stopper, EF, from the lower surface of the water to which it was attached only

by the resistance of the vacuum. Next weigh the stopper and wire together

with the attached vessel and its contents; we shall then have the force of the

vacuum [forza del vacuo]. If one attaches to a cylinder of marble or glass a

weight which, together with the weight of the marble or glass itself, is just

equal to the sum of the weights before mentioned, and if breaking occurs we

shall then be justified in saying that the vacuum alone holds the parts of the

marble and glass together; but if this weight does not suffice and if breaking

occurs  only  after  adding,  say,  four  times  this  weight,  we  shall  then  be

compelled  to  say  that  the  vacuum  furnishes  only  one  fifth  of  the  total

resistance [resistenza].

Simp. No one can doubt the cleverness of the device; yet it presents many

difficulties which make me doubt its reliability. For who will assure us that

the air does not creep in between the glass and stopper even if it is well

packed with tow or other yielding material? I question also whether oiling

with wax or turpentine will suffice to make the cone, I, fit snugly on its seat.

Besides, may not the parts of the water expand and dilate? Why may not the

air or exhalations or some other more subtile substances penetrate the pores

of the wood, or even of the glass itself?


Salv. With great skill indeed has Simplicio laid before us the difficulties; and

he has even partly suggested how to prevent the air from penetrating the

wood or passing between the wood and the glass. But now let me point out

that, as our experience increases, we shall learn whether or not these alleged

difficulties really exist. For if, as is the case with air, water is by nature

expansible, although only under severe treatment, we shall see the stopper

descend;  and  if  we  put  a  small  excavation  in  the  upper  part  of  the  glass

vessel, such as indicated by V, then the air or any other tenuous and gaseous

substance, which might penetrate the pores of glass or wood, would pass

through the water and collect in this receptacle V. But if these things do not

happen we may rest assured that our experiment has been performed with

proper caution; and we shall discover that water does not dilate and that glass

does not allow any material, however tenuous, to penetrate it.


Sagr. Thanks to this discussion, I have learned the cause of a certain effect

which I have long wondered at and despaired of understanding. I once saw acistern which had been provided with a pump under the mistaken impression

that the water might thus be drawn with less effort or in greater quantity than

by means of the ordinary bucket. The stock of the pump carried its sucker and

valve in the upper part so that the water was lifted by attraction and not by a

push as is the case with pumps in which the sucker is placed lower down.

This pump worked perfectly so long as the water in the cistern stood above a

certain  level;  but  below  this  level  the  pump  failed  to  work.  When  I  first

noticed this phenomenon I thought the machine was out of order; but the

workman whom I called in to repair it told me the defect was not in the pump

but in the water which had fallen too low to be raised through such a height;

and he added that it was not possible, either by a pump or by any other

machine working on the principle of attraction, to lift water a hair’s breadth

above eighteen cubits; whether the pump be large or small this is the extreme

limit of the lift. Up to this time I had been so thoughtless that, although I

knew a rope, or rod of wood, or of iron, if sufficiently long, would break by

its own weight when held by the upper end, it never occurred to me that the

same thing would happen, only much more easily, to a column of water. And

really is not that thing which is attracted in the pump a column of water

attached at the upper end and stretched more and more until finally a point is

reached where it breaks, like a rope, on account of its excessive weight?


Salv. That  is  precisely  the  way  it  works;  this  fixed  elevation  of  eighteen

cubits is true for any quantity of water whatever, be the pump large or small

or even as fine as a straw. We may therefore say that, on weighing the water

contained in a tube eighteen cubits long, no matter what the diameter, we

shall obtain the value of the resistance of the vacuum in a cylinder of any

solid material having a bore of this same diameter. And having gone so far,

let us see how easy it is to find to what length cylinders of metal, stone,

wood, glass, etc., of any diameter can be elongated without breaking by their

own weight.


Sagr. It still remains for you to tell us upon what depends the resistance to

breaking,  other  than  that  of  the  vacuum;  what  is  the  gluey  or  viscous

substance which cements together the parts of the solid? For I cannot imagine

a glue that will not burn up in a highly heated furnace in two or three months,

or certainly within ten or a hundred. For if gold, silver and glass are kept for a

long while in the molten state and are removed from the furnace, their parts,on cooling, immediately reunite and bind themselves together as before. Not

only so, but whatever difficulty arises with respect to the cementation of the

parts of the glass arises also with regard to the parts of the glue; in other

words, what is that which holds these parts together so firmly?

  A little while ago, I expressed the hope that your good angel might assist

you. I now find myself in the same straits. Experiment leaves no doubt that

the reason why two plates cannot be separated, except with violent effort, is

that they are held together by the resistance of the vacuum; and the same can

be said of two large pieces of a marble or bronze column. This being so, I do

not see why this same cause may not explain the coherence of smaller parts

and indeed of the very smallest particles of these materials. Now, since each

effect  must  have  one  true  and  sufficient  cause  and  since  I  find  no  other

cement, am I not justified in trying to discover whether the vacuum is not a

sufficient cause?


Simp. But seeing that you have already proved that the resistance which the

large vacuum offers to the separation of two large parts of a solid is really

very small in comparison with that cohesive force which binds together the

most minute parts, why do you hesitate to regard this latter as something very

different from the former?


Salv. Sagredo  has  already  [p.  13  above]  answered  this  question  when  he

remarked that each individual soldier was being paid from coin collected by a

general tax of pennies and farthings, while even a million of gold would not

suffice to pay the entire army. And who knows but that there may be other

extremely minute vacua which affect the smallest particles so that that which

binds together the contiguous parts is throughout of the same mintage? Let

me tell you something which has just occurred to me and which I do not offer

as an absolute fact, but rather as a passing thought, still immature and calling

for more careful consideration. You may take of it what you like; and judge

the rest as you see fit. Sometimes when I have observed how fire winds its

way in between the most minute particles of this or that metal and, even

though these are solidly cemented together, tears them apart and separates

them, and when I have observed that, on removing the fire, these particles

reunite with the same tenacity as at first, without any loss of quantity in the

case of gold and with little loss in the case of other metals, even though these

parts  have  been  separated  for  a  long  while,  I  have  thought  that  theexplanation  might  lie  in  the  fact  that  the  extremely  fine  particles  of  fire,

penetrating the slender pores of the metal (too small to admit even the finest

particles  of  air  or  of  many  other  fluids),  would  fill  the  small  intervening

vacua and would set free these small particles from the attraction which these

same vacua exert upon them and which prevents their separation. Thus the

particles are able to move freely so that the mass [massa] becomes fluid and

remains so as long as the particles of fire remain inside; but if they depart and

leave the former vacua then the original attraction [attrazzione] returns and

the parts are again cemented together.

  In reply to the question raised by Simplicio, one may say that although

each particular vacuum is exceedingly minute and therefore easily overcome,

yet their number is so extraordinarily great that their combined resistance is,

so to speak, multipled almost without limit. The nature and the amount of

force [forza] which results [risulta] from adding together an immense number

of small forces [debolissimi momenti] is clearly illustrated by the fact that a

weight of millions of pounds, suspended by great cables, is overcome and

lifted, when the south wind carries innumerable atoms of water, suspended in

thin mist, which moving through the air penetrate between the fibres of the

tense ropes in spite of the tremendous force of the hanging weight. When

these particles enter the narrow pores they swell the ropes, thereby shorten

them, and perforce lift the heavy mass [mole].


Sagr. There can be no doubt that any resistance, so long as it is not infinite,

may be overcome by a multitude of minute forces. Thus a vast number of

ants might carry ashore a ship laden with grain. And since experience shows

us daily that one ant can easily carry one grain, it is clear that the number of

grains in the ship is not infinite, but falls below a certain limit. If you take

another  number  four  or  six  times  as  great,  and  if  you  set  to  work  a

corresponding number of ants they will carry the grain ashore and the boat

also. It is true that this will call for a prodigious number of ants, but in my

opinion this is precisely the case with the vacua which bind together the least

particles of a metal.


Salv. But even if this demanded an infinite number would you still think it

impossible?


Sagr. Not if the mass [mole] of metal were infinite; otherwise. . . .  Otherwise what? Now since we have arrived at paradoxes let us see if we

cannot prove that within a finite extent it is possible to discover an infinite

number of vacua. At the same time we shall at least reach a solution of the

most remarkable of all that list of problems which Aristotle himself calls

wonderful; I refer to his Questions in Mechanics. This solution may be no

less clear and conclusive than that which he himself gives and quite different

also  from  that  so  cleverly  expounded  by  the  most  learned  Monsignor  di
        6
Guevara.

6
 Bishop of Teano; b. 1561, d.1641. [Trans.]


  First it is necessary to consider a proposition, not treated by others, but

upon which depends the solution of the problem and from which, if I mistake

not, we shall derive other new and remarkable facts. For the sake of clearness

let us draw an accurate figure. About G as a center describe an equiangular

and equilateral polygon of any number of sides, say the hexagon ABCDEF.

Similar to this and concentric with it, describe another smaller one which we

shall call HIKLMN. Prolong the side AB, of the larger hexagon, indefinitely

toward S; in like manner prolong the corresponding side HI of the smaller

hexagon, in the same direction, so that the line HT is parallel to AS; and

through the center draw the line GV parallel to the other two. This done,

imagine the larger polygon to roll upon the line AS, carrying with it the

smaller polygon. It is evident that, if the point B, the end of the side AB,

remains fixed at the beginning of the rotation, the point A will rise and the

point C will fall describing the arc CQ until the side BC coincides with the

line BQ, equal to BC. But during this rotation the point I, on the smaller

polygon, will rise above the line IT because IB is oblique to AS; and it will

not again return to the line IT until the point C shall have reached the position

Q. The point I, having described the arc IO above the line HT, will reach the

position O at the same time the side IK assumes the position OP; but in the

meantime the center G has traversed a path above GV and does not return to

it until it has completed the arc GC. This step having been taken, the larger

polygon has been brought to rest with its side BC coinciding with the line BQ

while the side IK of the smaller polygon has been made to coincide with the

line  OP,  having  passed  over  the  portion  IO  without  touching  it;  also  the

center G will have reached the position C after having traversed all its course

above  the  parallel  line  GV.  And  finally  the  entire  figure  will  assume  aposition similar to the first, so that if we continue the rotation and come to the

next step, the side DC of the larger polygon will coincide with the portion

QX and the side KL of the smaller polygon, having first skipped the arc PY,

will fall on YZ, while the center still keeping above the line GV will return to

it at R after having jumped the interval CR. At the end of one complete

rotation the larger polygon will have traced upon the line AS, without break,

six lines together equal to its perimeter; the lesser polygon will likewise have

imprinted six lines equal to its perimeter, but separated by the interposition of

five arcs, whose chords represent the parts of HT not touched by the polygon:

the center G never reaches the line GV except at six points. From this it is

clear that the space traversed by the smaller polygon is almost equal to that

traversed  by  the  larger,  that  is,  the  line  HT  approximates  the  line  AS,

differing  from  it  only  by  the  length  of  one  chord  of  one  of  these  arcs,

provided we understand the line HT to include the five skipped arcs.




















  Now this exposition which I have given in the case of these hexagons

must  be  understood  to  be  applicable  to  all  other  polygons,  whatever  the

number  of  sides,  provided  only  they  are  similar,  concentric,  and  rigidly

connected,  so  that  when  the  greater  one  rotates  the  lesser  will  also  turn

however small it may be. You must also understand that the lines described

by these two are nearly equal provided we include in the space traversed bythe  smaller  one  the  intervals  which  are  not  touched  by  any  part  of  the

perimeter of this smaller polygon.

  Let  a  large  polygon  of,  say,  one  thousand  sides  make  one  complete

rotation and thus lay off a line equal to its perimeter; at the same time the

small  one  will  pass  over  an  approximately  equal  distance,  made  up  of  a

thousand small portions each equal to one of its sides, but interrupted by a

thousand spaces which, in contrast with the portions that coincide with the

sides  of  the  polygon,  we  may  call  empty.  So  far  the  matter  is  free  from

difficulty or doubt.

  But now suppose that about any center, say A, we describe two concentric

and rigidly connected circles; and suppose that from the points C and B, on

their radii, there are drawn the tangents CE and BF and that through the

center A the line AD is drawn parallel to them, then if the large circle makes

one complete rotation along the line BF, equal not only to its circumference

but also to the other two lines CE and AD, tell me what the smaller circle will

do and also what the center will do. As to the center it will certainly traverse

and touch the entire line AD while the circumference of the smaller circle

will have measured off by its points of contact the entire line CE, just as was

done by the above mentioned polygons. The only difference is that the line

HT  was  not  at  every  point  in  contact  with  the  perimeter  of  the  smaller

polygon, but there were left untouched as many vacant spaces as there were

spaces  coinciding  with  the  sides.  But  here  in  the  case  of  the  circles  the

circumference of the smaller one never leaves the line CE, so that no part of

the latter is left untouched, nor is there ever a time when some point on the

circle is not in contact with the straight line. How now can the smaller circle

traverse a length greater than its circumference unless it go by jumps?


Sagr. It seems to me that one may say that just as the center of the circle, by

itself, carried along the line AD is constantly in contact with it, although it is

only a single point, so the points on the circumference of the smaller circle,

carried along by the motion of the larger circle, would slide over some small

parts of the line CE.

  There are two reasons why this cannot happen. First because there is no

ground for thinking that one point of contact, such as that at C, rather than

another, should slip over certain portions of the line CE. But if such slidings

along CE did occur they would be infinite in number since the points of

contact  (being  mere  points)  are  infinite  in  number:  an  infinite  number  offinite slips will however make an infinitely long line, while as a matter of fact

the line CE is finite. The other reason is that as the greater circle, in its

rotation, changes its point of contact continuously the lesser circle must do

the same because B is the only point from which a straight line can be drawn

to A and pass through C. Accordingly the small circle must change its point

of  contact  whenever  the  large  one  changes:  no  point  of  the  small  circle

touches the straight line CE in more than one point. Not only so, but even in

the  rotation  of  the  polygons  there  was  no  point  on  the  perimeter  of  the

smaller which coincided with more than one point on the line traversed by

that perimeter; this is at once clear when you remember that the line IK is

parallel to BC and that therefore IK will remain above IP until BC coincides

with BQ, and that IK will not lie upon IP except at the very instant when BC

occupies the position BQ; at this instant the entire line IK coincides with OP

and immediately afterwards rises above it.


Sagr. This is a very intricate matter. I see no solution. Pray explain it to us.

Salv. Let us return to the consideration of the above mentioned polygons

whose behavior we already understand. Now in the case of polygons with

100000 sides, the line traversed by the perimeter of the greater, i. e., the line

laid down by its 100000 sides one after another, is equal to the line traced out

by the 100000 sides of the smaller, provided we include the 100000 vacant

spaces  interspersed.  So  in  the  case  of  the  circles,  polygons  having  an

infinitude  of  sides,  the  line  traversed  by  the  continuously  distributed

[continuamente disposti] infinitude of sides is in the greater circle equal to the

line laid down by the infinitude of sides in the smaller circle but with the

exception that these latter alternate with empty spaces; and since the sides are

not finite in number, but infinite, so also are the intervening empty spaces not

finite but infinite. The line traversed by the larger circle consists then of an

infinite number of points which completely fill it; while that which is traced

by the smaller circle consists of an infinite number of points which leave

empty spaces and only partly fill the line. And here I wish you to observe that

after dividing and resolving a line into a finite number of parts, that is, into a

number which can be counted, it is not possible to arrange them again into a

greater length than that which they occupied when they formed a continuum

[continuate] and were connected without the interposition of as many empty

spaces.  But  if  we  consider  the  line  resolved  into  an  infinite  number  of

infinitely small and indivisible parts, we shall be able to conceive the lineextended indefinitely by the interposition, not of a finite, but of an infinite

number of infinitely small indivisible empty spaces.

  Now this which has been said concerning simple lines must be understood

to hold also in the case of surfaces and solid bodies, it being assumed that

they are made up of an infinite, not a finite, number of atoms. Such a body

once divided into a finite number of parts it is impossible to reassemble them

so as to occupy more space than before unless we interpose a finite number

of empty spaces, that is to say, spaces free from the substance of which the

solid  is  made.  But  if  we  imagine  the  body,  by  some  extreme  and  final

analysis, resolved into its primary elements, infinite in number, then we shall

be  able  to  think  of  them  as  indefinitely  extended  in  space,  not  by  the

interposition of a finite, but of an infinite number of empty spaces. Thus one

can easily imagine a small ball of gold expanded into a very large space

without the introduction of a finite number of empty spaces, always provided

the gold is made up of an infinite number of indivisible parts.


Simp. It  seems  to  me  that  you  are  travelling  along  toward  those  vacua

advocated by a certain ancient philosopher.


Salv. But you have failed to add, “who denied Divine Providence,” an inapt

remark  made  on  a  similar  occasion  by  a  certain  antagonist  of  our

Academician.


Simp. I noticed, and not without indignation, the rancor of this ill-natured

opponent; further references to these affairs I omit, not only as a matter of

good form, but also because I know how unpleasant they are to the good

tempered and well ordered mind of one so religious and pious, so orthodox

and God-fearing as you.

  But to return to our subject, your previous discourse leaves with me many

difficulties  which  I  am  unable  to  solve.  First  among  these  is  that,  if  the

circumferences of the two circles are equal to the two straight lines, CE and

BF, the latter considered as a continuum, the former as interrupted with an

infinity of empty points, I do not see how it is possible to say that the line AD

described by the center, and made up of an infinity of points, is equal to this

center which is a single point. Besides, this building up of lines out of points,

divisibles out of indivisibles, and finites out of infinites, offers me an obstacledifficult to avoid; and the necessity of introducing a vacuum, so conclusively

refuted by Aristotle, presents the same difficulty.

  These  difficulties  are  real;  and  they  are  not  the  only  ones.  But  let  us

remember that we are dealing with infinities and indivisibles, both of which

transcend our finite understanding, the former on account of their magnitude,

the latter because of their smallness. In spite of this, men cannot refrain from

discussing them, even though it must be done in a round-about way.

  Therefore I also should like to take the liberty to present some of my ideas

which, though not necessarily convincing, would, on account of their novelty,

at least, prove somewhat startling. But such a diversion might perhaps carry

us too far away from the subject under discussion and might therefore appear

to you inopportune and not very pleasing.


Sagr. Pray  let  us  enjoy  the  advantages  and  privileges  which  come  from

conversation between friends, especially upon subjects freely chosen and not

forced upon us, a matter vastly different from dealing with dead books which

give  rise  to  many  doubts  but  remove  none.  Share  with  us,  therefore,  the

thoughts which our discussion has suggested to you; for since we are free

from urgent business there will be abundant time to pursue the topics already

mentioned; and in particular the objections raised by Simplicio ought not in

any wise to be neglected.


Salv. Granted, since you so desire. The first question was, How can a single

point be equal to a line? Since I cannot do more at present I shall attempt to

remove, or at least diminish, one improbability by introducing a similar or a
                                                                              7
greater one, just as sometimes a wonder is diminished by a miracle.

7
 Cf. p. 30 below. [Trans.]


  And this I shall do by showing you two equal surfaces, together with two

equal solids located upon these same surfaces as bases, all four of which

diminish  continuously  and  uniformly  in  such  a  way  that  their  remainders

always preserve equality among themselves, and finally both the surfaces and

the solids terminate their previous constant equality by degenerating, the one

solid and the one surface into a very long line, the other solid and the other

surface into a single point; that is, the latter to one point, the former to an

infinite number of points.  This  proposition  appears  to  me  wonderful,  indeed;  but  let  us  hear  the

explanation and demonstration.


Salv. Since the proof is purely geometrical we shall need a figure. Let AFB

be a semicircle with center at C; about it describe the rectangle ADEB and

from the center draw the straight lines CD and CE to the points D and E.

Imagine the radius CF to be drawn perpendicular to either of the lines AB or

DE, and the entire figure to rotate about this radius as an axis. It is clear that

the  rectangle  ADEB  will  thus  describe  a  cylinder,  the  semicircle  AFB  a

hemisphere, and the triangle CDE, a cone. Next let us remove the hemisphere

but leave the cone and the rest of the cylinder, which, on account of its shape,

we will call a “bowl.” First we shall prove that the bowl and the cone are

equal; then we shall show that a plane drawn parallel to the circle which

forms the base of the bowl and which has the line DE for diameter and F for a

center — a plane whose trace is GN — cuts the bowl in the points G, I, O, N,

and the cone in the points H, L, so that the part of the cone indicated by CHL

is always equal to the part of the bowl whose profile is represented by the

triangles GAI and BON. Besides this we shall prove that the base of the cone,

i. e., the circle whose diameter is HL, is equal to the circular surface which

forms the base of this portion of the bowl, or as one might say, equal to a

ribbon  whose  width  is  GI.  (Note  by  the  way  the  nature  of  mathematical

definitions which consist merely in the imposition of names or, if you prefer,

abbreviations  of  speech  established  and  introduced  in  order  to  avoid  the

tedious drudgery which you and I now experience simply because we have

not agreed to call this surface a “circular band” and that sharp solid portion of

the  bowl  a  “round  razor.”)  Now  call  them  by  what  name  you  please,  it

suffices to understand that the plane, drawn at any height whatever, so long

as it is parallel to the base, i. e., to the circle whose diameter is DE, always

cuts the two solids so that the portion CHL of the cone is equal to the upper

portion  of  the  bowl;  likewise  the  two  areas  which  are  the  bases  of  these

solids, namely the band and the circle HL, are also equal. Here we have the

miracle mentioned above; as the cutting plane approaches the line AB the

portions of the solids cut off are always equal, so also the areas of their bases.

And as the cutting plane comes near the top, the two solids (always equal) as

well as their bases (areas which are also equal) finally vanish, one pair of

them degenerating into the circumference of a circle, the other into a single

point, namely, the upper edge of the bowl and the apex of the cone. Now,since as these solids diminish equality is maintained between them up to the

very last, we are justified in saying that, at the extreme and final end of this

diminution, they are still equal and that one is not infinitely greater than the

other. It appears therefore that we may equate the circumference of a large

circle to a single point. And this which is true of the solids is true also of the

surfaces which form their bases; for these also preserve equality between

themselves throughout their diminution and in the end vanish, the one into

the circumference of a circle, the other into a single point. Shall we not then

call them equal seeing that they are the last traces and remnants of equal

magnitudes?  Note  also  that,  even  if  these  vessels  were  large  enough  to

contain immense celestial hemispheres, both their upper edges and the apexes

of the cones therein contained would always remain equal and would vanish,

the former into circles having the dimensions of the largest celestial orbits,

the latter into single points. Hence in conformity with the preceding we may

say that all circumferences of circles, however different, are equal to each

other, and are each equal to a single point.























Sagr. This presentation strikes me as so clever and novel that, even if I were

able, I would not be willing to oppose it; for to deface so beautiful a structure

by  a  blunt  pedantic  attack  would  be  nothing  short  of  sinful.  But  for  ourcomplete satisfaction pray give us this geometrical proof that there is always

equality between these solids and between their bases; for it cannot, I think,

fail to be very ingenious, seeing how subtle is the philosophical argument

based upon this result.


Salv. The demonstration is both short and easy. Referring to the preceding

figure, since IPC is a right angle the square of the radius IC is equal to the

sum of the squares on the two sides IP, PC; but the radius IC is equal to AC

and also to GP, while CP is equal to PH. Hence the square of the line GP is

equal to the sum of the squares of IP and PH, or multiplying through by 4, we

have the square of the diameter GN equal to the sum of the squares on IO and

HL. And, since the areas of circles are to each other as the squares of their

diameters, it follows that the area of the circle whose diameter is GN is equal

to the sum of the areas of circles having diameters IO and HL, so that if we

remove the common area of the circle having IO for diameter the remaining

area of the circle GN will be equal to the area of the circle whose diameter is

HL.  So  much  for  the  first  part.  As  for  the  other  part,  we  leave  its

demonstration for the present, partly because those who wish to follow it will

find it in the twelfth proposition of the second book of De centro gravitatis
                                                                  8
solidorum by the Archimedes of our age, Luca Valerio, who made use of it

for a different object, and partly because, for our purpose, it suffices to have

seen that the above-mentioned surfaces are always equal and that, as they

keep on diminishing uniformly, they degenerate, the one into a single point,

the other into the circumference of a circle larger than any assignable; in this
                      9
fact lies our miracle.
8
 Distinguished Italian mathematician; born at Ferrara about 1552; admitted to the Accademia dei
Lincei 1612; died 1618. [Trans.]

9
 Cf. p. 27 above. [Trans.]


Sagr. The demonstration is ingenious and the inferences drawn from it are

remarkable. And now let us hear something concerning the other difficulty

raised by Simplicio, if you have anything special to say, which, however,

seems to me hardly possible, since the matter has already been so thoroughly

discussed.


Salv. But I do have something special to say, and will first of all repeat what I

said a little while ago, namely, that infinity and indivisibility are in their verynature incomprehensible to us; imagine then what they are when combined.

Yet if we wish to build up a line out of indivisible points, we must take an

infinite number of them, and are, therefore, bound to understand both the

infinite and the indivisible at the same time. Many ideas have passed through

my  mind  concerning  this  subject,  some  of  which,  possibly  the  more

important, I may not be able to recall on the spur of the moment; but in the

course  of  our  discussion  it  may  happen  that  I  shall  awaken  in  you,  and

especially in Simplicio, objections and difficulties which in turn will bring to

memory that which, without such stimulus, would have lain dormant in my

mind. Allow me therefore the customary liberty of introducing some of our

human  fancies,  for  indeed  we  may  so  call  them  in  comparison  with

supernatural truth which furnishes the one true and safe recourse for decision

in our discussions and which is an infallible guide in the dark and dubious

paths of thought.

  One of the main objections urged against this building up of continuous

quantities out of indivisible quantities [continuo d’ indivisibili] is that the

addition of one indivisible to another cannot produce a divisible, for if this

were so it would render the indivisible divisible. Thus if two indivisibles, say

two points, can be united to form a quantity, say a divisible line, then an even

more divisible line might be formed by the union of three, five, seven, or any

other odd number of points. Since however these lines can be cut into two

equal parts, it becomes possible to cut the indivisible which lies exactly in the

middle of the line. In answer to this and other objections of the same type we

reply that a divisible magnitude cannot be constructed out of two or ten or a

hundred or a thousand indivisibles, but requires an infinite number of them.


Simp. Here a difficulty presents itself which appears to me insoluble. Since it

is clear that we may have one line greater than another, each containing an

infinite number of points, we are forced to admit that, within one and the

same class, we may have something greater than infinity, because the infinity

of points in the long line is greater than the infinity of points in the short line.

This assigning to an infinite quantity a value greater than infinity is quite

beyond my comprehension.


Salv. This is one of the difficulties which arise when we attempt, with our

finite minds, to discuss the infinite, assigning to it those properties which we

give to the finite and limited; but this I think is wrong, for we cannot speak ofinfinite quantities as being the one greater or less than or equal to another. To

prove this I have in mind an argument which, for the sake of clearness, I shall

put in the form of questions to Simplicio who raised this difficulty.

  I take it for granted that you know which of the numbers are squares and

which are not.

Simp. I am quite aware that a squared number is one which results from the

multiplication  of  another  number  by  itself;  thus  4,  9,  etc.,  are  squared

numbers which come from multiplying 2, 3, etc., by themselves.


Salv. Very  well;  and  you  also  know  that  just  as  the  products  are  called

squares so the factors are called sides or roots; while on the other hand those

numbers which do not consist of two equal factors are not squares. Therefore

if I assert that all numbers, including both squares and non-squares, are more

than the squares alone, I shall speak the truth, shall I not?


Simp. Most certainly.


Salv. If I should ask further how many squares there are one might reply truly

that there are as many as the corresponding number of roots, since every

square has its own root and every root its own square, while no square has

more than one root and no root more than one square.


Simp. Precisely so.


Salv. But if I inquire how many roots there are, it cannot be denied that there

are as many as there are numbers because every number is a root of some

square. This being granted we must say that there are as many squares as

there are numbers because they are just as numerous as their roots, and all the

numbers are roots. Yet at the outset we said there are many more numbers

than squares, since the larger portion of them are not squares. Not only so,

but  the  proportionate  number  of  squares  diminishes  as  we  pass  to  larger

numbers. Thus up to 100 we have 10 squares, that is, the squares constitute

1/10 part of all the numbers; up to 10000, we find only 1/100 part to be

squares; and up to a million only 1/1000 part; on the other hand in an infinite

number, if one could conceive of such a thing, he would be forced to admit

that there are as many squares as there are numbers all taken together.


Sagr. What then must one conclude under these circumstances?Salv. So far as I see we can only infer that the totality of all numbers is

infinite, that the number of squares is infinite, and that the number of their

roots is infinite; neither is the number of squares less than the totality of all

numbers,  nor  the  latter  greater  than  the  former;  and  finally  the  attributes

“equal,” “greater,” and “less,” are not applicable to infinite, but only to finite,

quantities.  When  therefore  Simplicio  introduces  several  lines  of  different

lengths and asks me how it is possible that the longer ones do not contain

more points than the shorter, I answer him that one line does not contain

more or less or just as many points as another, but that each line contains an

infinite number. Or if I had replied to him that the points in one line were

equal  in  number  to  the  squares;  in  another,  greater  than  the  totality  of

numbers; and in the little one, as many as the number of cubes, might I not,

indeed, have satisfied him by thus placing more points in one line than in

another and yet maintaining an infinite number in each? So much for the first

difficulty.


Sagr. Pray stop a moment and let me add to what has already been said an

idea  which  just  occurs  to  me.  If  the  preceding  be  true,  it  seems  to  me

impossible to say either that one infinite number is greater than another or

even that it is greater than a finite number, because if the infinite number

were greater than, say, a million it would follow that on passing from the

million to higher and higher numbers we would be approaching the infinite;

but this is not so; on the contrary, the larger the number to which we pass, the

more  we  recede  from  [this  property  of]  infinity,  because  the  greater  the

numbers the fewer [relatively] are the squares contained in them; but the

squares in infinity cannot be less than the totality of all the numbers, as we

have just agreed; hence the approach to greater and greater numbers means a
                          10
departure from infinity.

10
 A certain confusion of thought appears to be introduced here through a failure to distinguish between
the number n and the class of the first n numbers; and likewise from a failure to distinguish infinity as a
number from infinity as the class of all numbers. [Trans.]


Salv. And thus from your ingenious argument we are led to conclude that the

attributes “larger,” “smaller,” and “equal” have no place either in comparing

infinite  quantities  with  each  other  or  in  comparing  infinite  with  finite

quantities.  I  pass  now  to  another  consideration.  Since  lines  and  all  continuous

quantities are divisible into parts which are themselves divisible without end,

I do not see how it is possible to avoid the conclusion that these lines are built

up of an infinite number of indivisible quantities because a division and a

subdivision which can be carried on indefinitely presupposes that the parts

are infinite in number, otherwise the subdivision would reach an end; and if

the parts are infinite in number, we must conclude that they are not finite in

size, because an infinite number of finite quantities would give an infinite

magnitude. And thus we have a continuous quantity built up of an infinite

number of indivisibles.


Simp. But if we can carry on indefinitely the division into finite parts what

necessity is there then for the introduction of non-finite parts?


Salv. The very fact that one is able to continue, without end, the division into

finite parts [in parti quante] makes it necessary to regard the quantity as

composed of an infinite number of immeasurably small elements [di infiniti

non quanti]. Now in order to settle this matter I shall ask you to tell me

whether, in your opinion, a continuum is made up of a finite or of an infinite

number of finite parts [parti quante].


Simp. My answer is that their number is both infinite and finite; potentially

infinite but actually finite [infinite, in potenza; e finite, in atto]; that is to say,

potentially infinite before division and actually finite after division; because

parts cannot be said to exist in a body which is not yet divided or at least

marked out; if this is not done we say that they exist potentially.


Salv. So that a line which is, for instance, twenty spans long is not said to

contain actually twenty lines each one span in length except after division

into  twenty  equal  parts;  before  division  it  is  said  to  contain  them  only

potentially. Suppose the facts are as you say; tell me then whether, when the

division is once made, the size of the original quantity is thereby increased,

diminished, or unaffected.


Simp. It neither increases nor diminishes.

Salv. That is my opinion also. Therefore the finite parts [parti quante] in a

continuum, whether actually or potentially present, do not make the quantityeither larger or smaller; but it is perfectly clear that, if the number of finite

parts actually contained in the whole is infinite in number, they will make the

magnitude infinite. Hence the number of finite parts, although existing only

potentially,  cannot  be  infinite  unless  the  magnitude  containing  them  be

infinite; and conversely if the magnitude is finite it cannot contain an infinite

number of finite parts either actually or potentially.


Sagr. How then is it possible to divide a continuum without limit into parts

which are themselves always capable of subdivision?


Salv. This distinction of yours between actual and potential appears to render

easy  by  one  method  what  would  be  impossible  by  another.  But  I  shall

endeavor  to  reconcile  these  matters  in  another  way;  and  as  to  the  query

whether the finite parts of a limited continuum [continuo terminato] are finite

or infinite in number I will, contrary to the opinion of Simplicio, answer that

they are neither finite nor infinite.


Simp. This answer would never have occurred to me since I did not think that

there existed any intermediate step between the finite and the infinite, so that

the classification or distinction which assumes that a thing must be either

finite or infinite is faulty and defective.


Salv. So it seems to me. And if we consider discrete quantities I think there

is,  between  finite  and  infinite  quantities,  a  third  intermediate  term  which

corresponds to every assigned number; so that if asked, as in the present case,

whether the finite parts of a continuum are finite or infinite in number the best

reply  is  that  they  are  neither  finite  nor  infinite  but  correspond  to  every

assigned number. In order that this may be possible, it is necessary that those

parts should not be included within a limited number, for in that case they

would not correspond to a number which is greater; nor can they be infinite

in number since no assigned number is infinite; and thus at the pleasure of the

questioner  we  may,  to  any  given  line,  assign  a  hundred  finite  parts,  a

thousand, a hundred thousand, or indeed any number we may please so long

as it be not infinite. I grant, therefore, to the philosophers, that the continuum

contains as many finite parts as they please and I concede also that it contains

them, either actually or potentially, as they may like; but I must add that just

as a line ten fathoms [canne] in length contains ten lines each of one fathomand forty lines each of one cubit [braccia] and eighty lines each of half a

cubit, etc., so it contains an infinite number of points; call them actual or

potential, as you like, for as to this detail, Simplicio, I defer to your opinion

and to your judgment.

  I cannot help admiring your discussion; but I fear that this parallelism

between the points and the finite parts contained in a line will not prove

satisfactory, and that you will not find it so easy to divide a given line into an

infinite number of points as the philosophers do to cut it into ten fathoms or

forty cubits; not only so, but such a division is quite impossible to realize in

practice,  so  that  this  will  be  one  of  those  potentialities  which  cannot  be

reduced to actuality.


Salv. The fact that something can be done only with effort or diligence or

with great expenditure of time does not render it impossible; for I think that

you yourself could not easily divide a line into a thousand parts, and much

less if the number of parts were 937 or any other large prime number. But if I

were to accomplish this division which you deem impossible as readily as

another person would divide the line into forty parts would you then be more

willing, in our discussion, to concede the possibility of such a division?


Simp. In general I enjoy greatly your method; and replying to your query, I

answer that it would be more than sufficient if it prove not more difficult to

resolve a line into points than to divide it into a thousand parts.


Salv. I will now say something which may perhaps astonish you; it refers to

the  possibility  of  dividing  a  line  into  its  infinitely  small  elements  by

following the same order which one employs in dividing the same line into

forty, sixty, or a hundred parts, that is, by dividing it into two, four, etc. He

who thinks that, by following this method, he can reach an infinite number of

points is greatly mistaken; for if this process were followed to eternity there

would still remain finite parts which were undivided.

  Indeed  by  such  a  method  one  is  very  far  from  reaching  the  goal  of

indivisibility; on the contrary he recedes from it and while he thinks that, by

continuing this division and by multiplying the multitude of parts, he will

approach infinity, he is, in my opinion, getting farther and farther away from

it. My reason is this. In the preceding discussion we concluded that, in an

infinite  number,  it  is  necessary  that  the  squares  and  cubes  should  be  asnumerous as the totality of the natural numbers [tutti i numeri], because both

of these are as numerous as their roots which constitute the totality of the

natural numbers. Next we saw that the larger the numbers taken the more

sparsely  distributed  were  the  squares,  and  still  more  sparsely  the  cubes;

therefore it is clear that the larger the numbers to which we pass the farther

we recede from the infinite number; hence it follows that, since this process

carries us farther and farther from the end sought, if on turning back we shall

find that any number can be said to be infinite, it must be unity. Here indeed

are satisfied all those conditions which are requisite for an infinite number; I

mean that unity contains in itself as many squares as there are cubes and

natural numbers [tutti i numeri].


Simp. I do not quite grasp the meaning of this.


Salv. There is no difficulty in the matter because unity is at once a square, a

cube, a square of a square and all the other powers [dignitā]; nor is there any

essential peculiarity in squares or cubes which does not belong to unity; as,

for example, the property of two square numbers that they have between

them a mean proportional; take any square number you please as the first

term and unity for the other, then you will always find a number which is a

mean proportional. Consider the two square numbers, 9 and 4; then 3 is the

mean proportional between 9 and 1; while 2 is a mean proportional between 4

and 1; between 9 and 4 we have 6 as a mean proportional. A property of

cubes is that they must have between them two mean proportional numbers;

take 8 and 27; between them lie 12 and 18; while between 1 and 8 we have 2

and 4 intervening; and between 1 and 27 there lie 3 and 9. Therefore we

conclude  that  unity  is  the  only  infinite  number.  These  are  some  of  the

marvels  which  our  imagination  cannot  grasp  and  which  should  warn  us

against  the  serious  error  of  those  who  attempt  to  discuss  the  infinite  by

assigning to it the same properties which we employ for the finite, the natures

of the two having nothing in common.

  With regard to this subject I must tell you of a remarkable property which

just now occurs to me and which will explain the vast alteration and change

of character which a finite quantity would undergo in passing to infinity. Let

us draw the straight line AB of arbitrary length and let the point C divide it

into two unequal parts; then I say that, if pairs of lines be drawn, one from

each of the terminal points A and B, and if the ratio between the lengths ofthese  lines  is  the  same  as  that  between  AC  and  CB,  their  points  of

intersection will all lie upon the circumference of one and the same circle.

Thus, for example, AL and BL drawn from A and B, meeting at the point L,

bearing to one another the same ratio as AC to BC, and the pair AK and BK

meeting at K also bearing to one another the same ratio, and likewise the

pairs  AI,  BI,  AH,  BH,  AG,  BG,  AF,  BF,  AE,  BE,  have  their  points  of

intersection L, K, I, H, G, F, E, all lying upon the circumference of one and

the same circle. Accordingly if we imagine the point C to move continuously

in such a manner that the lines drawn from it to the fixed terminal points, A

and  B,  always  maintain  the  same  ratio  between  their  lengths  as  exists

between  the  original  parts,  AC  and  CB,  then  the  point  C  will,  as  I  shall

presently prove, describe a circle. And the circle thus described will increase

in size without limit as the point C approaches the middle point which we

may call O; but it will diminish in size as C approaches the end B. So that the

infinite number of points located in the line OB will, if the motion be as

explained above, describe circles of every size, some smaller than the pupil of

the eye of a flea, others larger than the celestial equator. Now if we move any

of the points lying between the two ends O and B they will all describe

circles, those nearest O, immense circles; but if we move the point O itself,

and continue to move it according to the aforesaid law, namely, that the lines

drawn from O to the terminal points, A and B, maintain the same ratio as the

original lines AO and OB, what kind of a line will be produced? A circle will

be drawn larger than the largest of the others, a circle which is therefore

infinite. But from the point O a straight line will also be drawn perpendicular

to BA and extending to infinity without ever turning, as did the others, to join

its last end with its first; for the point C, with its limited motion, having

described  the  upper  semi-circle,  CHE,  proceeds  to  describe  the  lower

semicircle EMC, thus returning to the starting point. But the point O having

started to describe its circle, as did all the other points in the line AB, (for the

points in the other portion OA describe their circles also, the largest being

those nearest the point O) is unable to return to its starting point because the

circle it describes, being the largest of all, is infinite; in fact, it describes an

infinite straight line as circumference of its infinite circle. Think now what a

difference  there  is  between  a  finite  and  an  infinite  circle  since  the  latter

changes character in such a manner that it loses not only its existence but also

its possibility of existence; indeed, we already clearly understand that there

can be no such thing as an infinite circle; similarly there can be no infinitesphere, no infinite body, and no infinite surface of any shape. Now what shall

we say concerning this metamorphosis in the transition from finite to infinite?

And why should we feel greater repugnance, seeing that, in our search after

the infinite among numbers we found it in unity? Having broken up a solid

into  many  parts,  having  reduced  it  to  the  finest  of  powder  and  having

resolved it into its infinitely small indivisible atoms why may we not say that

this solid has been reduced to a single continuum [un solo continuo] perhaps

a fluid like water or mercury or even a liquified metal? And do we not see

stones melt into glass and the glass itself under strong heat become more

fluid than water?





















Sagr. Are we then to believe that substances become fluid in virtue of being

resolved into their infinitely small indivisible components?


Salv. I  am  not  able  to  find  any  better  means  of  accounting  for  certain

phenomena of which the following is one. When I take a hard substance such

as stone or metal and when I reduce it by means of a hammer or fine file to

the most minute and impalpable powder, it is clear that its finest particles,

although  when  taken  one  by  one  are,  on  account  of  their  smallness,

imperceptible to our sight and touch, are nevertheless finite in size, possess

shape, and capability of being counted. It is also true that when once heapedup they remain in a heap; and if an excavation be made within limits the

cavity will remain and the surrounding particles will not rush in to fill it; if

shaken the particles come to rest immediately after the external disturbing

agent is removed; the same effects are observed in all piles of larger and

larger particles, of any shape, even if spherical, as is the case with piles of

millet,  wheat,  lead  shot,  and  every  other  material.  But  if  we  attempt  to

discover such properties in water we do not find them; for when once heaped

up it immediately flattens out unless held up by some vessel or other external

retaining body; when hollowed out it quickly rushes in to fill the cavity; and

when disturbed it fluctuates for a long time and sends out its waves through

great distances.

  Seeing that water has less firmness [consistenza] than the finest of powder,

in fact has no consistence whatever, we may, it seems to me, very reasonably

conclude that the smallest particles into which it can be resolved are quite

different from finite and divisible particles; indeed the only difference I am

able to discover is that the former are indivisible. The exquisite transparency

of water also favors this view; for the most transparent crystal when broken

and  ground  and  reduced  to  powder  loses  its  transparency;  the  finer  the

grinding the greater the loss; but in the case of water where the attrition is of

the  highest  degree  we  have  extreme  transparency.  Gold  and  silver  when

pulverized with acids [acque forti] more finely than is possible with any file
                        11
still remain powders, and do not become fluids until the finest particles [gl’

indivisibili] of fire or of the rays of the sun dissolve them, as I think, into

their ultimate, indivisible, and infinitely small components.

11
 It is not clear what Galileo here means by saying that gold and silver when treated with acids still
remain powders. [Trans.]


Sagr. This  phenomenon  of  light  which  you  mention  is  one  which  I  have

many  times  remarked  with  astonishment.  I  have,  for  instance,  seen  lead

melted instantly by means of a concave mirror only three hands [palmi] in

diameter. Hence I think that if the mirror were very large, well-polished and

of a parabolic figure, it would just as readily and quickly melt any other

metal, seeing that the small mirror, which was not well polished and had only

a  spherical  shape,  was  able  so  energetically  to  melt  lead  and  burn  every

combustible  substance.  Such  effects  as  these  render  credible  to  me  the

marvels accomplished by the mirrors of Archimedes.Salv. Speaking of the effects produced by the mirrors of Archimedes, it was

his  own  books  (which  I  had  already  read  and  studied  with  infinite

astonishment)  that  rendered  credible  to  me  all  the  miracles  described  by

various  writers.  And  if  any  doubt  had  remained  the  book  which  Father
                          12
Buonaventura Cavalieri has recently published on the subject of the burning

glass [specchio ustorio] and which I have read with admiration would have

removed the last difficulty.

12
 One of the most active investigators among Galileo’s contemporaries; born at Milan 1598; died at
Bologna 1647; a Jesuit father, first to introduce the use of logarithms into Italy and first to derive the
expression for the focal length of a lens having unequal radii of curvature. His “method of indivisibles”
is to be reckoned as a precursor of the infinitesimal calculus. [Trans.]


Sagr. I  also  have  seen  this  treatise  and  have  read  it  with  pleasure  and

astonishment; and knowing the author I was confirmed in the opinion which I

had already formed of him that he was destined to become one of the leading

mathematicians of our age. But now, with regard to the surprising effect of

solar rays in melting metals, must we believe that such a furious action is

devoid of motion or that it is accompanied by the most rapid of motions?


Salv. We observe that other combustions and resolutions are accompanied by

motion, and that, the most rapid; note the action of lightning and of powder

as used in mines and petards; note also how the charcoal flame, mixed as it is

with heavy and impure vapors, increases its power to liquify metals whenever

quickened by a pair of bellows. Hence I do not understand how the action of

light, although very pure, can be devoid of motion and that of the swiftest

type.


Sagr. But of what kind and how great must we consider this speed of light to

be? Is it instantaneous or momentary or does it like other motions require

time? Can we not decide this by experiment?


Simp. Everyday  experience  shows  that  the  propagation  of  light  is

instantaneous; for when we see a piece of artillery fired, at great distance, the

flash reaches our eyes without lapse of time; but the sound reaches the ear

only after a noticeable interval.Sagr. Well, Simplicio, the only thing I am able to infer from this familiar bit

of experience is that sound, in reaching our ear, travels more slowly than

light; it does not inform me whether the coming of the light is instantaneous

or whether, although extremely rapid, it still occupies time. An observation of

this kind tells us nothing more than one in which it is claimed that “As soon

as the sun reaches the horizon its light reaches our eyes”; but who will assure

me that these rays had not reached this limit earlier than they reached our

vision?


Salv. The small conclusiveness of these and other similar observations once

led me to devise a method by which one might accurately ascertain whether

illumination, i. e., the propagation of light, is really instantaneous. The fact

that the speed of sound is as high as it is, assures us that the motion of light

cannot fail to be extraordinarily swift. The experiment which I devised was as

follows:

  Let  each  of  two  persons  take  a  light  contained  in  a  lantern,  or  other

receptacle, such that by the interposition of the hand, the one can shut off or

admit the light to the vision of the other. Next let them stand opposite each

other at a distance of a few cubits and practice until they acquire such skill in

uncovering and occulting their lights that the instant one sees the light of his

companion he will uncover his own. After a few trials the response will be so

prompt that without sensible error [svario] the uncovering of one light is

immediately followed by the uncovering of the other, so that as soon as one

exposes his light he will instantly see that of the other. Having acquired skill

at this short distance let the two experimenters, equipped as before, take up

positions separated by a distance of two or three miles and let them perform

the same experiment at night, noting carefully whether the exposures and

occultations occur in the same manner as at short distances; if they do, we

may safely conclude that the propagation of light is instantaneous; but if time

is required at a distance of three miles which, considering the going of one

light and the coming of the other, really amounts to six, then the delay ought

to  be  easily  observable.  If  the  experiment  is  to  be  made  at  still  greater

distances, say eight or ten miles, telescopes may be employed, each observer

adjusting one for himself at the place where he is to make the experiment at

night; then although the lights are not large and are therefore invisible to the

naked eye at so great a distance, they can readily be covered and uncoveredsince by aid of the telescopes, once adjusted and fixed, they will become

easily visible.


Sagr. This experiment strikes me as a clever and reliable invention. But tell

us what you conclude from the results.


Salv. In fact I have tried the experiment only at a short distance, less than a

mile, from which I have not been able to ascertain with certainty whether the

appearance  of  the  opposite  light  was  instantaneous  or  not;  but  if  not

instantaneous it is extraordinarily rapid — I should call it momentary; and for

the present I should compare it to motion which we see in the lightning flash

between clouds eight or ten miles distant from us. We see the beginning of

this light — I might say its head and source — located at a particular place

among the clouds; but it immediately spreads to the surrounding ones, which

seems to be an argument that at least some time is required for propagation;

for if the illumination were instantaneous and not gradual, we should not be

able to distinguish its origin — its center, so to speak — from its outlying

portions. What a sea we are gradually slipping into without knowing it! With

vacua and infinities and indivisibles and instantaneous motions, shall we ever

be able, even by means of a thousand discussions, to reach dry land?

Sagr. Really these matters lie far beyond our grasp. Just think; when we seek

the infinite among numbers we find it in unity; that which is ever divisible is

derived from indivisibles; the vacuum is found inseparably connected with

the plenum; indeed the views commonly held concerning the nature of these

matters are so reversed that even the circumference of a circle turns out to be

an infinite straight line, a fact which, if my memory serves me correctly, you,

Salviati,  were  intending  to  demonstrate  geometrically.  Please  therefore

proceed without further digression.


Salv. I am at your service; but for the sake of greater clearness let me first

demonstrate the following problem:

  Given a straight line divided into unequal parts which bear to each other

any ratio whatever, to describe a circle such that two straight lines drawn

from the ends of the given line to any point on the circumference will bear to

each other the same ratio as the two parts of the given line, thus making those

lines which are drawn from the same terminal points homologous.  Let AB represent the given straight line divided into any two unequal parts

by the point C; the problem is to describe a circle such that two straight lines

drawn from the terminal points, A and B, to any point on the circumference

will bear to each other the same ratio as the part AC bears to BC, so that lines

drawn from the same terminal points are homologous. About C as center

describe  a  circle  having  the  shorter  part  CB  of  the  given  line,  as  radius.

Through A draw a straight line AD which shall be tangent to the circle at D

and  indefinitely  prolonged  toward  E.  Draw  the  radius  CD  which  will  be

perpendicular to AE. At B erect a perpendicular to AB; this perpendicular

will intersect AE at some point since the angle at A is acute; call this point of

intersection E, and from it draw a perpendicular to AE which will intersect

AB prolonged in F. Now I say the two straight lines FE and FC are equal. For

if we join E and C, we shall have two triangles, DEC and BEC, in which the

two sides of the one, DE and EC, are equal to the two sides of the other, BE

and EC, both DE and EB being tangents to the circle DB while the bases DC

and CB are likewise equal; hence the two angles, DEC and BEC, will be

equal. Now since the angle BCE differs from a right angle by the angle CEB,

and the angle CEF also differs from a right angle by the angle CED, and

since these differences are equal, it follows that the angle FCE is equal to

CEF; consequently the sides FE and FC are equal. If we describe a circle with

F as center and FE as radius it will pass through the point C; let CEG be such

a circle. This is the circle sought, for if we draw lines from the terminal

points A and B to any point on its circumference they will bear to each other

the same ratio as the two portions AC and BC which meet at the point C. This

is manifest in the case of the two lines AE and BE, meeting at the point E,

because the angle E of the triangle AEB is bisected by the line CE, and

therefore AC:CB=AE:BE. The same may be proved of the two lines AG and

BG terminating in the point G. For since the triangles AFE and EFB are

similar,  we  have  AF:FE=EF:FB,  or  AF:FC=CF:FB,  and dividendo

AC:CF=CB:BF,  or  AC:FG=CB:BF;  also componendo  we  have  both

AB:BG=CB:BF and AG:GB=CF:FB=AE:EB=AC:BC.

  q. e. d.  Besides, I may add, that it is impossible for lines which maintain this same

ratio and which are drawn from the terminal points, A and B, to meet at any

point either inside or outside the circle, CEG. For suppose this were possible;

let AL and BL be two such lines intersecting at the point L outside the circle:

prolong  LB  till  it  meets  the  circumference  at  M  and  join  MF.  If

  AL:BL=AC:BC=MF:FB, then we shall have two triangles ALB and MFB

which have the sides about the two angles proportional, the angles at the

vertex, B, equal, and the two remaining angles, FMB and LAB, less than

right angles (because the right angle at M has for its base the entire diameter

CG and not merely a part BF: and the other angle at the point A is acute

because  the  line  AL,  the  homologue  of  AC,  is  greater  than  BL,  the

homologue of BC). From this it follows that the triangles ABL and MBF are

similar and therefore AB:BL=MB:BF, making the rectangle AB.BF=MB.BL;

but it has been demonstrated that the rectangle AB.BF is equal to CB.BG;

whence it would follow that the rectangle MB.BL is equal to the rectangle

CB.BG which is impossible; therefore the intersection cannot fall outside thecircle. And in like manner we can show that it cannot fall inside; hence all

these intersections fall on the circumference.

  But now it is time for us to go back and grant the request of Simplicio by

showing him that it is not only not impossible to resolve a line into an infinite

number of points but that this is quite as easy as to divide it into its finite

parts.  This  I  will  do  under  the  following  condition  which  I  am  sure,

Simplicio, you will not deny me, namely, that you will not require me to

separate the points, one from the other, and show them to you, one by one, on

this paper; for I should be content that you, without separating the four or six

parts of a line from one another, should show me the marked divisions or at

most that you should fold them at angles forming a square or a hexagon: for,

then, I am certain you would consider the division distinctly and actually

accomplished.


Simp. I certainly should.


Salv. If now the change which takes place when you bend a line at angles so

as to form now a square, now an octagon, now a polygon of forty, a hundred

or a thousand angles, is sufficient to bring into actuality the four, eight, forty,

hundred, and thousand parts which, according to you, existed at first only

potentially in the straight line, may I not say, with equal right, that, when I

have bent the straight line into a polygon having an infinite number of sides,

i. e., into a circle, I have reduced to actuality that infinite number of parts

which  you  claimed,  while  it  was  straight,  were  contained  in  it  only

potentially? Nor can one deny that the division into an infinite number of

points is just as truly accomplished as the one into four parts when the square

is formed or into a thousand parts when the millagon is formed; for in such a

division the same conditions are satisfied as in the case of a polygon of a

thousand or a hundred thousand sides. Such a polygon laid upon a straight

line touches it with one of its sides, i. e., with one of its hundred thousand

parts;  while  the  circle  which  is  a  polygon  of  an  infinite  number  of  sides

touches the same straight line with one of its sides which is a single point

different from all its neighbors and therefore separate and distinct in no less

degree than is one side of a polygon from the other sides. And just as a

polygon,  when  rolled  along  a  plane,  marks  out  upon  this  plane,  by  the

successive contacts of its sides, a straight line equal to its perimeter, so the

circle  rolled  upon  such  a  plane  also  traces  by  its  infinite  succession  ofcontacts a straight line equal in length to its own circumference. I am willing,

Simplicio, at the outset, to grant to the Peripatetics the truth of their opinion

that a continuous quantity [il continuo] is divisible only into parts which are

still  further  divisible  so  that  however  far  the  division  and  subdivision  be

continued  no  end  will  be  reached;  but  I  am  not  so  certain  that  they  will

concede to me that none of these divisions of theirs can be a final one, as is

surely the fact, because there always remains “another”; the final and ultimate

division is rather one which resolves a continuous quantity into an infinite

number of indivisible quantities, a result which I grant can never be reached

by successive division into an ever-increasing number of parts. But if they

employ the method which I propose for separating and resolving the whole of

infinity [tutta la infinità], at a single stroke (an artifice which surely ought not

to  be  denied  me),  I  think  that  they  would  be  contented  to  admit  that  a

continuous quantity is built up out of absolutely indivisible atoms, especially

since this method, perhaps better than any other, enables us to avoid many

intricate labyrinths, such as cohesion in solids, already mentioned, and the

question  of  expansion  and  contraction,  without  forcing  upon  us  the

objectionable admission of empty spaces [in solids] which carries with it the

penetrability of bodies. Both of these objections, it appears to me, are avoided

if we accept the above-mentioned view of indivisible constituents.


Simp. I  hardly  know  what  the  Peripatetics  would  say  since  the  views

advanced by you would strike them as mostly new, and as such we must

consider them. It is however not unlikely that they would find answers and

solutions for these problems which I, for want of time and critical ability, am

at present unable to solve. Leaving this to one side for the moment, I should

like to hear how the introduction of these indivisible quantities helps us to

understand contraction and expansion avoiding at the same time the vacuum

and the penetrability of bodies.


Sagr. I also shall listen with keen interest to this same matter which is far

from clear in my mind; provided I am allowed to hear what, a moment ago,

Simplicio  suggested  we  omit,  namely,  the  reasons  which  Aristotle  offers

against  the  existence  of  the  vacuum  and  the  arguments  which  you  must

advance in rebuttal.Salv. I will do both. And first, just as, for the production of expansion, we

employ the line described by the small circle during one rotation of the large

one — a line greater than the circumference of the small circle — so, in order

to explain contraction, we point out that, during each rotation of the smaller

circle,  the  larger  one  describes  a  straight  line  which  is  shorter  than  its

circumference.

  For the better understanding of this we proceed to the consideration of

what  happens  in  the  case  of  polygons.  Employing  a  figure  similar  to  the

earlier one, construct the two hexagons, ABC and HIK, about the common

center  L,  and  let  them  roll  along  the  parallel  lines  HOM  and  ABc. Now

holding the vertex I fixed, allow the smaller polygon to rotate until the side

IK lies upon the parallel, during which motion the point K will describe the

arc  KM,  and  the  side  KI  will  coincide  with  IM.  Let  us  see  what,  in  the

meantime,  the  side  CB  of  the  larger  polygon  has  been  doing.  Since  the

rotation is about the point I, the terminal point B, of the line IB, moving

backwards, will describe the arc Bb underneath the parallel cA so that when

the side KI coincides with the line MI, the side BC will coincide with bc,

having advanced only through the distance Bc, but having retreated through a

portion of the line BA which subtends the arc Bb. If we allow the rotation of

the smaller polygon to go on it will traverse and describe along its parallel a

line equal to its perimeter; while the larger one will traverse and describe a

line less than its perimeter by as many times the length bB as there are sides

less one; this line is approximately equal to that described by the smaller

polygon exceeding it only by the distance bB. Here now we see, without any

difficulty, why the larger polygon, when carried by the smaller, does not

measure off with its sides a line longer than that traversed by the smaller one;

this is because a portion of each side is superposed upon its immediately

preceding neighbor.

  Let us next consider two circles, having a common center at A, and lying

upon their respective parallels, the smaller being tangent to its parallel at the

point B; the larger, at the point C. Here when the small circle commences to

roll the point B does not remain at rest for a while so as to allow BC to move

backward  and  carry  with  it  the  point  C,  as  happened  in  the  case  of  the

polygons, where the point I remained fixed until the side KI coincided with

MI and the line IB carried the terminal point B backward as far as b, so that

the side BC fell upon bc, thus superposing upon the line BA, the portion Bb,

and advancing by an amount Bc, equal to MI, that is, to one side of thesmaller polygon. On account of these superpositions, which are the excesses

of the sides of the larger over the smaller polygon, each net advance is equal

to one side of the smaller polygon and, during one complete rotation, these

amount  to  a  straight  line  equal  in  length  to  the  perimeter  of  the  smaller

polygon.





























  But  now  reasoning  in  the  same  way  concerning  the  circles,  we  must

observe that whereas the number of sides in any polygon is comprised within

a certain limit, the number of sides in a circle is infinite; the former are finite

and divisible; the latter infinite and indivisible. In the case of the polygon, the

vertices remain at rest during an interval of time which bears to the period of

one complete rotation the same ratio which one side bears to the perimeter;

likewise, in the case of the circles, the delay of each of the infinite number of

vertices is merely instantaneous, because an instant is such a fraction of a

finite interval as a point is of a line which contains an infinite number ofpoints. The retrogression of the sides of the larger polygon is not equal to the

length of one of its sides but merely to the excess of such a side over one side

of the smaller polygon, the net advance being equal to this smaller side; but

in the circle, the point or side C, during the instantaneous rest of B, recedes

by an amount equal to its excess over the side B, making a net progress equal

to B itself. In short the infinite number of indivisible sides of the greater

circle with their infinite number of indivisible retrogressions, made during the

infinite number of instantaneous delays of the infinite number of vertices of

the smaller circle, together with the infinite number of progressions, equal to

the infinite number of sides in the smaller circle — all these, I say, add up to

a line equal to that described by the smaller circle, a line which contains an

infinite  number  of  infinitely  small  superpositions,  thus  bringing  about  a

thickening or contraction without any overlapping or interpenetration of finite

parts. This result could not be obtained in the case of a line divided into finite

parts  such  as  is  the  perimeter  of  any  polygon,  which  when  laid  out  in  a

straight  line  cannot  be  shortened  except  by  the  overlapping  and

interpenetration  of  its  sides.  This  contraction  of  an  infinite  number  of

infinitely  small  parts  without  the  interpenetration  or  overlapping  of  finite

parts and the previously mentioned [p. 70, Nat. Ed.] expansion of an infinite

number of indivisible parts by the interposition of indivisible vacua is, in my

opinion, the most that can be said concerning the contraction and rarefaction

of  bodies,  unless  we  give  up  the  impenetrability  of  matter  and  introduce

empty spaces of finite size. If you find anything here that you consider worth

while, pray use it; if not regard it, together with my remarks, as idle talk; but

this remember, we are dealing with the infinite and the indivisible.


Sagr. I frankly confess that your idea is subtle and that it impresses me as

new and strange; but whether, as a matter of fact, nature actually behaves

according to such a law I am unable to determine; however, until I find a

more satisfactory explanation I shall hold fast to this one. Perhaps Simplicio

can tell us something which I have not yet heard, namely, how to explain the

explanation which the philosophers have given of this abstruse matter; for,

indeed, all that I have hitherto read concerning contraction is so dense and

that concerning expansion so thin that my poor brain can neither penetrate the

former nor grasp the latter.Simp. I am all at sea and find difficulties in following either path, especially

this new one; because according to this theory an ounce of gold might be

rarefied and expanded until its size would exceed that of the earth, while the

earth, in turn, might be condensed and reduced until it would become smaller

than a walnut, something which I do not believe; nor do I believe that you

believe it. The arguments and demonstrations which you have advanced are

mathematical, abstract, and far removed from concrete matter; and I do not

believe that when applied to the physical and natural world these laws will

hold.


Salv. I am not able to render the invisible visible, nor do I think that you will

ask this. But now that you mention gold, do not our senses tell us that that

metal  can  be  immensely  expanded?  I  do  not  know  whether  you  have

observed the method employed by those who are skilled in drawing gold

wire, of which really only the surface is gold, the inside material being silver.

The way they draw it is as follows: they take a cylinder or, if you please, a

rod of silver, about half a cubit long and three or four times as wide as one’s

thumb; this rod they cover with gold-leaf which is so thin that it almost floats

in air, putting on not more than eight or ten thicknesses. Once gilded they

begin to pull it, with great force, through the holes of a draw-plate; again and

again it is made to pass through smaller and smaller holes, until, after very

many passages, it is reduced to the fineness of a lady’s hair, or perhaps even

finer; yet the surface remains gilded. Imagine now how the substance of this

gold has been expanded and to what fineness it has been reduced.


Simp. I do not see that this process would produce, as a consequence, that

marvellous thinning of the substance of the gold which you suggest: first,

because  the  original  gilding  consisting  of  ten  layers  of  gold-leaf  has  a

sensible thickness; secondly, because in drawing out the silver it grows in

length but at the same time diminishes proportionally in thickness; and, since

one dimension thus compensates the other, the area will not be so increased

as to make it necessary during the process of gilding to reduce the thinness of

the gold beyond that of the original leaves.


Salv. You  are  greatly  mistaken,  Simplicio,  because  the  surface  increases

directly  as  the  square  root  of  the  length,  a  fact  which  I  can  demonstrate

geometrically.Sagr. Please give us the demonstration not only for my own sake but also for

Simplicio provided you think we can understand it.


Salv. I’ll see if I can recall it on the spur of the moment. At the outset, it is

clear  that  the  original  thick  rod  of  silver  and  the  wire  drawn  out  to  an

enormous length are two cylinders of the same volume, since they are the

same body of silver. So that, if I determine the ratio between the surfaces of

cylinders of the same volume, the problem will be solved. I say then,

  The areas of cylinders of equal volumes, neglecting the bases, bear to each

other a ratio which is the square root of the ratio of their lengths.

  Take  two  cylinders  of  equal  volume  having  the  altitudes  AB  and  CD,

between which the line E is a mean proportional. Then I claim that, omitting

the bases of each cylinder, the surface of the cylinder AB is to that of the

cylinder CD as the length AB is to the line E, that is, as the square root of AB

is to the square root of CD. Now cut off the cylinder AB at F so that the

altitude AF is equal to CD. Then since the bases of cylinders of equal volume

bear to one another the inverse ratio of their heights, it follows that the area of

the circular base of the cylinder CD will be to the area of the circular base of

AB as the altitude BA is to DC: moreover, since circles are to one another as

the squares of their diameters, the said squares will be to each other as BA is

to CD. But BA is to CD as the square of BA is to the square of E: and,

therefore, these four squares will form a proportion; and likewise their sides;

so the line AB is to E as the diameter of circle C is to the diameter of the

circle A. But the diameters are proportional to the circumferences and the

circumferences  are  proportional  to  the  areas  of  cylinders  of  equal  height;

hence the line AB is to E as the surface of the cylinder CD is to the surface of

the cylinder AF. Now since the height AF is to AB as the surface of AF is to

the surface of AB; and since the height AB is to the line E as the surface CD
                                                                  13
is to AF, it follows, ex œquali in proportione perturbata, that the height AF

is to E as the surface CD is to the surface AB, and convertendo, the surface of

the cylinder AB is to the surface of the cylinder CD as the line E is to AF, i.

e., to CD, or as AB is to E which is the square root of the ratio of AB to CD.

  q. e. d.

13
 See Euclid, Book V, Def. 20., Todhunter’s Ed., p. 137 (London, 1877.) [Trans.]  If now we apply these results to the case in hand, and assume that the

silver cylinder at the time of gilding had a length of only half a cubit and a

thickness three or four times that of one’s thumb, we shall find that, when the

wire has been reduced to the fineness of a hair and has been drawn out to a

length of twenty thousand cubits (and perhaps more), the area of its surface

will have been increased not less than two hundred times. Consequently the

ten leaves of gold which were laid on have been extended over a surface two

hundred times greater, assuring us that the thickness of the gold which now

covers  the  surface  of  so  many  cubits  of  wire  cannot  be  greater  than  one

twentieth that of an ordinary leaf of beaten gold. Consider now what degree

of fineness it must have and whether one could conceive it to happen in any

other way than by enormous expansion of parts; consider also whether this

experiment  does  not  suggest  that  physical  bodies  [materie  fisiche]  arecomposed of infinitely small indivisible particles, a view which is supported

by other more striking and conclusive examples.


Sagr. This demonstration is so beautiful that, even if it does not have the

cogency originally intended, — although to my mind, it is very forceful —

the short time devoted to it has nevertheless been most happily spent.


Salv. Since you are so fond of these geometrical demonstrations, which carry

with them distinct gain, I will give you a companion theorem which answers

an  extremely  interesting  query.  We  have  seen  above  what  relations  hold

between equal cylinders of different height or length; let us now see what

holds  when  the  cylinders  are  equal  in  area  but  unequal  in  height,

understanding area to include the curved surface, but not the upper and lower

bases. The theorem is:

  The volumes of right cylinders having equal curved surfaces are inversely

proportional to their altitudes.

  Let the surfaces of the two cylinders, AE and CF, be equal but let the

height of the latter, CD, be greater than that of the former, AB: then I say that

the volume of the cylinder AE is to that of the cylinder CF as the height CD

is to AB. Now since the surface of CF is equal to the surface of AE, it follows

that the volume of CF is less than that of AE; for, if they were equal, the

surface of CF would, by the preceding proposition, exceed that of AE, and

the excess would be so much the greater if the volume of the cylinder CF

were greater than that of AE. Let us now take a cylinder ID having a volume

equal to that of AE; then, according to the preceding theorem, the surface of

the cylinder ID is to the surface of AE as the altitude IF is to the mean

proportional between IF and AB. But since one datum of the problem is that

the surface of AE is equal to that of CF, and since the surface ID is to the

surface CF as the altitude IF is to the altitude CD, it follows that CD is a

mean proportional between IF and AB. Not only so, but since the volume of

the cylinder ID is equal to that of AE, each will bear the same ratio to the

volume of the cylinder CF; but the volume ID is to the volume CF as the

altitude IF is to the altitude CD; hence the volume of AE is to the volume of

CF as the length IF is to the length CD, that is, as the length CD is to the

length AB.

  q. e. d.  This explains a phenomenon upon which the common people always look

with wonder, namely, if we have a piece of stuff which has one side longer

than the other, we can make from it a cornsack, using the customary wooden

base, which will hold more when the short side of the cloth is used for the

height of the sack and the long side is wrapped around the wooden base, than

with the alternative arrangement. So that, for instance, from a piece of cloth

which is six cubits on one side and twelve on the other, a sack can be made

which will hold more when the side of twelve cubits is wrapped around the

wooden base, leaving the sack six cubits high than when the six cubit side is

put around the base making the sack twelve cubits high. From what has been

proven above we learn not only the general fact that one sack holds more

than the other, but we also get specific and particular information as to how

much more, namely, just in proportion as the altitude of the sack diminishes

the contents increase and vice versa. Thus if we use the figures given whichmake the cloth twice as long as wide and if we use the long side for the seam,

the volume of the sack will be just one-half as great as with the opposite

arrangement. Likewise if we have a piece of matting which measures 7 × 25

cubits and make from it a basket, the contents of the basket will, when the

seam is lengthwise, be seven as compared with twenty-five when the seam

runs endwise.


Sagr. It is with great pleasure that we continue thus to acquire new and useful

information. But as regards the subject just discussed, I really believe that,

among those who are not already familiar with geometry, you would scarcely

find four persons in a hundred who would not, at first sight, make the mistake

of  believing  that  bodies  having  equal  surfaces  would  be  equal  in  other

respects. Speaking of areas, the same error is made when one attempts, as

often happens, to determine the sizes of various cities by measuring their

boundary lines, forgetting that the circuit of one may be equal to the circuit of

another while the area of the one is much greater than that of the other. And

this is true not only in the case of irregular, but also of regular surfaces,

where  the  polygon  having  the  greater  number  of  sides  always  contains  a

larger area than the one with the less number of sides, so that finally the circle

which is a polygon of an infinite number of sides contains the largest area of

all polygons of equal perimeter. I remember with particular pleasure having
                                                                                    14
seen this demonstration when I was studying the sphere of Sacrobosco with

the aid of a learned commentary.

14
 See interesting biographical note on Sacrobosco [John Holywood] in Ency. Brit., 11th Ed. [Trans.]


Salv. Very true! I too came across the same passage which suggested to me a

method of showing how, by a single short demonstration, one can prove that

the circle has the largest content of all regular isoperimetric figures; and that,

of other figures, the one which has the larger number of sides contains a

greater area than that which has the smaller number.


Sagr. Being  exceedingly  fond  of  choice  and  uncommon  propositions,  I

beseech you to let us have your demonstration.


Salv. I can do this in a few words by proving the following theorem:

  The area of a circle is a mean proportional between any two regular and

similar polygons of which one circumscribes it and the other is isoperimetricwith it. In addition, the area of the circle is less than that of any circumscribed

polygon and greater than that of any isoperimetric polygon. And further, of

these circumscribed polygons, the one which has the greater number of sides

is smaller than the one which has a less number; but, on the other hand, that

isoperimetric polygon which has the greater number of sides is the larger.

  Let A and B be two similar polygons of which A circumscribes the given

circle and B is isoperimetric with it. The area of the circle will then be a mean

proportional between the areas of the polygons. For if we indicate the radius

of the circle by AC and if we remember that the area of the circle is equal to

that of a right-angled triangle in which one of the sides about the right angle

is equal to the radius, AC, and the other to the circumference; and if likewise

we remember that the area of the polygon A is equal to the area of a right-

angled triangle one of whose sides about the right angle has the same length

as AC and the other is equal to the perimeter of the polygon itself; it is then

manifest that the circumscribed polygon bears to the circle the same ratio

which  its  perimeter  bears  to  the  circumference  of  the  circle,  or  to  the

perimeter  of  the  polygon  B  which  is,  by  hypothesis,  equal  to  the

circumference of the circle. But since the polygons A and B are similar their

areas are to each other as the squares of their perimeters; hence the area of the

circle A is a mean proportional between the areas of the two polygons A and

B. And since the area of the polygon A is greater than that of the circle A, it

is clear that the area of the circle A is greater than that of the isoperimetric

polygon B, and is therefore the greatest of all regular polygons having the

same perimeter as the circle.











  We now demonstrate the remaining portion of the theorem, which is to

prove that, in the case of polygons circumscribing a given circle, the one

having the smaller number of sides has a larger area than one having a greater

number  of  sides;  but  that  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  case  of  isoperimetric

polygons, the one having the more sides has a larger area than the one withless sides. To the circle which has O for center and OA for radius draw the

tangent AD; and on this tangent lay off, say, AD which shall represent one-

half of the side of a circumscribed pentagon and AC which shall represent

one-half of the side of a heptagon; draw the straight lines OGC and OFD;

then with O as a center and OC as radius draw the arc ECI. Now since the

triangle DOC is greater than the sector EOC and since the sector COI is

greater than the triangle COA, it follows that the triangle DOC bears to the

triangle COA a greater ratio than the sector EOC bears to the sector COI, that

is, than the sector FOG bears to the sector GOA. Hence, componendo et

permutando, the triangle DOA bears to the sector FOA a greater ratio than

that  which  the  triangle  COA  bears  to  the  sector  GOA,  and  also  10  such

triangles DOA bear to 10 such sectors FOA a greater ratio than 14 such

triangles COA bear to 14 such sectors GOA, that is to say, the circumscribed

pentagon bears to the circle a greater ratio than does the heptagon. Hence the

pentagon exceeds the heptagon in area.

  But now let us assume that both the heptagon and the pentagon have the

same perimeter as that of a given circle. Then I say the heptagon will contain

a larger area than the pentagon. For since the area of the circle is a mean

proportional  between  areas  of  the  circumscribed  and  of  the  isoperimetric

pentagons,  and  since  likewise  it  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the

circumscribed and isoperimetric heptagons, and since also we have proved

that the circumscribed pentagon is larger than the circumscribed heptagon, it

follows that this circumscribed pentagon bears to the circle a larger ratio than

does the heptagon, that is, the circle will bear to its isoperimetric pentagon a

greater ratio than to its isoperimetric heptagon. Hence the pentagon is smaller

than its isoperimetric heptagon.

  q. e. d.


Sagr. A very clever and elegant demonstration! But how did we come to

plunge into geometry while discussing the objections urged by Simplicio,

objections of great moment, especially that one referring to density which

strikes me as particularly difficult?


Salv. If contraction and expansion [condensazione e rarefazzione] consist in

contrary  motions,  one  ought  to  find  for  each  great  expansion  a

correspondingly large contraction. But our surprise is increased when, every

day, we see enormous expansions taking place almost instantaneously. Thinkwhat a tremendous expansion occurs when a small quantity of gunpowder

flares  up  into  a  vast  volume  of  fire!  Think  too  of  the  almost  limitless

expansion  of  the  light  which  it  produces!  Imagine  the  contraction  which

would take place if this fire and this light were to reunite, which, indeed, is

not impossible since only a little while ago they were located together in this

small space. You will find, upon observation, a thousand such expansions for

they are more obvious than contractions since dense matter is more palpable

and accessible to our senses. We can take wood and see it go up in fire and

light, but we do not see them recombine to form wood; we see fruits and

flowers and a thousand other solid bodies dissolve largely into odors, but we

do not observe these fragrant atoms coming together to form fragrant solids.

But where the senses fail us reason must step in; for it will enable us to

understand the motion involved in the condensation of extremely rarefied and

tenuous  substances  just  as  clearly  as  that  involved  in  the  expansion  and

dissolution of solids. Moreover we are trying to find out how it is possible to

produce  expansion  and  contraction  in  bodies  which  are  capable  of  such

changes without introducing vacua and without giving up the impenetrability

of matter; but this does not exclude the possibility of there being materials

which  possess  no  such  properties  and  do  not,  therefore,  carry  with  them

consequences  which  you  call  inconvenient  and  impossible.  And  finally,

Simplicio, I have, for the sake of you philosophers, taken pains to find an

explanation of how expansion and contraction can take place without our

admitting the penetrability of matter and introducing vacua, properties which

you deny and dislike; if you were to admit them, I should not oppose you so

vigorously. Now either admit these difficulties or accept my views or suggest

something better.


Sagr. I  quite  agree  with  the  peripatetic  philosophers  in  denying  the

penetrability  of  matter.  As  to  the  vacua  I  should  like  to  hear  a  thorough

discussion of Aristotle’s demonstration in which he opposes them, and what

you, Salviati, have to say in reply. I beg of you, Simplicio, that you give us

the precise proof of the Philosopher and that you, Salviati, give us the reply.


Simp. So far as I remember, Aristotle inveighs against the ancient view that a

vacuum is a necessary prerequisite for motion and that the latter could not

occur without the former. In opposition to this view Aristotle shows that it is

precisely  the  phenomenon  of  motion,  as  we  shall  see,  which  rendersuntenable the idea of a vacuum. His method is to divide the argument into

two parts. He first supposes bodies of different weights to move in the same

medium; then supposes, one and the same body to move in different media.

In the first case, he supposes bodies of different weight to move in one and

the same medium with different speeds which stand to one another in the

same ratio as the weights; so that, for example, a body which is ten times as

heavy as another will move ten times as rapidly as the other. In the second

case he assumes that the speeds of one and the same body moving in different

media are in inverse ratio to the densities of these media; thus, for instance, if

the density of water were ten times that of air, the speed in air would be ten

times greater than in water. From this second supposition, he shows that,

since the tenuity of a vacuum differs infinitely from that of any medium filled

with matter however rare, any body which moves in a plenum through a

certain  space  in  a  certain  time  ought  to  move  through  a  vacuum

instantaneously; but instantaneous motion is an impossibility; it is therefore

impossible that a vacuum should be produced by motion.


Salv. The argument is, as you see, ad hominem, that is, it is directed against

those who thought the vacuum a prerequisite for motion. Now if I admit the

argument to be conclusive and concede also that motion cannot take place in

a vacuum, the assumption of a vacuum considered absolutely and not with

reference  to  motion,  is  not  thereby  invalidated.  But  to  tell  you  what  the

ancients might possibly have replied and in order to better understand just

how conclusive Aristotle’s demonstration is, we may, in my opinion, deny

both of his assumptions. And as to the first, I greatly doubt that Aristotle ever

tested by experiment whether it be true that two stones, one weighing ten

times as much as the other, if allowed to fall, at the same instant, from a

height of, say, 100 cubits, would so differ in speed that when the heavier had

reached the ground, the other would not have fallen more than 10 cubits.


Simp. His language would seem to indicate that he had tried the experiment,

because he says: We see the heavier; now the word see shows that he had

made the experiment.


Sagr. But I, Simplicio, who have made the test can assure you that a cannon

ball weighing one or two hundred pounds, or even more, will not reach theground by as much as a span ahead of a musket ball weighing only half a

pound, provided both are dropped from a height of 200 cubits.


Salv. But, even without further experiment, it is possible to prove clearly, by

means of a short and conclusive argument, that a heavier body does not move

more rapidly than a lighter one provided both bodies are of the same material

and in short such as those mentioned by Aristotle. But tell me, Simplicio,

whether you admit that each falling body acquires a definite speed fixed by

nature, a velocity which cannot be increased or diminished except by the use

of force [violenza] or resistance.


Simp. There can be no doubt but that one and the same body moving in a

single medium has a fixed velocity which is determined by nature and which

cannot  be  increased  except  by  the  addition  of  momentum  [impeto]  or

diminished except by some resistance which retards it.


Salv. If then we take two bodies whose natural speeds are different, it is clear

that on uniting the two, the more rapid one will be partly retarded by the

slower, and the slower will be somewhat hastened by the swifter. Do you not

agree with me in this opinion?


Simp. You are unquestionably right.


Salv. But if this is true, and if a large stone moves with a speed of, say, eight

while a smaller moves with a speed of four, then when they are united, the

system will move with a speed less than eight; but the two stones when tied

together make a stone larger than that which before moved with a speed of

eight. Hence the heavier body moves with less speed than the lighter; an

effect which is contrary to your supposition. Thus you see how, from your

assumption that the heavier body moves more rapidly than the lighter one, I

infer that the heavier body moves more slowly.

Simp. I am all at sea because it appears to me that the smaller stone when

added to the larger increases its weight and by adding weight I do not see

how it can fail to increase its speed or, at least, not to diminish it.


Salv. Here again you are in error, Simplicio, because it is not true that the

smaller stone adds weight to the larger.Simp. This is, indeed, quite beyond my comprehension.


Salv. It will not be beyond you when I have once shown you the mistake

under which you are laboring. Note that it is necessary to distinguish between

heavy bodies in motion and the same bodies at rest. A large stone placed in a

balance not only acquires additional weight by having another stone placed

upon  it,  but  even  by  the  addition  of  a  handful  of  hemp  its  weight  is

augmented six to ten ounces according to the quantity of hemp. But if you tie

the hemp to the stone and allow them to fall freely from some height, do you

believe that the hemp will press down upon the stone and thus accelerate its

motion  or  do  you  think  the  motion  will  be  retarded  by  a  partial  upward

pressure? One always feels the pressure upon his shoulders when he prevents

the motion of a load resting upon him; but if one descends just as rapidly as

the load would fall how can it gravitate or press upon him? Do you not see

that this would be the same as trying to strike a man with a lance when he is

running away from you with a speed which is equal to, or even greater, than

that with which you are following him? You must therefore conclude that,

during free and natural fall, the small stone does not press upon the larger and

consequently does not increase its weight as it does when at rest.


Simp. But what if we should place the larger stone upon the smaller?

  Its weight would be increased if the larger stone moved more rapidly; but

we have already concluded that when the small stone moves more slowly it

retards to some extent the speed of the larger, so that the combination of the

two, which is a heavier body than the larger of the two stones, would move

less rapidly, a conclusion which is contrary to your hypothesis. We infer

therefore that large and small bodies move with the same speed provided they

are of the same specific gravity.


Simp. Your discussion is really admirable; yet I do not find it easy to believe

that a bird-shot falls as swiftly as a cannon ball.


Salv. Why not say a grain of sand as rapidly as a grindstone? But, Simplicio,

I  trust  you  will  not  follow  the  example  of  many  others  who  divert  the

discussion  from  its  main  intent  and  fasten  upon  some  statement  of  mine

which lacks a hair’s-breadth of the truth and, under this hair, hide the fault of

another which is as big as a ship’s cable. Aristotle says that “an iron ball ofone hundred pounds falling from a height of one hundred cubits reaches the

ground before a one-pound ball has fallen a single cubit.” I say that they

arrive at the same time. You find, on making the experiment, that the larger

outstrips  the  smaller  by  two  finger-breadths,  that  is,  when  the  larger  has

reached the ground, the other is short of it by two finger-breadths; now you

would not hide behind these two fingers the ninety-nine cubits of Aristotle,

nor would you mention my small error and at the same time pass over in

silence his very large one. Aristotle declares that bodies of different weights,

in the same medium, travel (in so far as their motion depends upon gravity)

with speeds which are proportional to their weights; this he illustrates by use

of bodies in which it is possible to perceive the pure and unadulterated effect

of gravity, eliminating other considerations, for example, figure as being of

small importance [minimi momenti], influences which are greatly dependent

upon the medium which modifies the single effect of gravity alone. Thus we

observe that gold, the densest of all substances, when beaten out into a very

thin leaf, goes floating through the air; the same thing happens with stone

when ground into a very fine powder. But if you wish to maintain the general

proposition you will have to show that the same ratio of speeds is preserved

in the case of all heavy bodies, and that a stone of twenty pounds moves ten

times as rapidly as one of two; but I claim that this is false and that, if they

fall from a height of fifty or a hundred cubits, they will reach the earth at the

same moment.


Simp. Perhaps the result would be different if the fall took place not from a

few cubits but from some thousands of cubits.


Salv. If this were what Aristotle meant you would burden him with another

error which would amount to a falsehood; because, since there is no such

sheer height available on earth, it is clear that Aristotle could not have made

the  experiment;  yet  he  wishes  to  give  us  the  impression  of  his  having

performed it when he speaks of such an effect as one which we see.


Simp. In fact, Aristotle does not employ this principle, but uses the other one

which is not, I believe, subject to these same difficulties.


Salv. But the one is as false as the other; and I am surprised that you yourself

do not see the fallacy and that you do not perceive that if it were true that, inmedia of different densities and different resistances, such as water and air,

one and the same body moved in air more rapidly than in water, in proportion

as the density of water is greater than that of air, then it would follow that any

body  which  falls  through  air  ought  also  to  fall  through  water.  But  this

conclusion is false inasmuch as many bodies which descend in air not only do

not descend in water, but actually rise.


Simp. I do not understand the necessity of your inference; and in addition I

will say that Aristotle discusses only those bodies which fall in both media,

not those which fall in air but rise in water.


Salv. The arguments which you advance for the Philosopher are such as he

himself would have certainly avoided so as not to aggravate his first mistake.

But tell me now whether the density [corpulenza] of the water, or whatever it

may be that retards the motion, bears a definite ratio to the density of air

which is less retardative; and if so fix a value for it at your pleasure.


Simp. Such a ratio does exist; let us assume it to be ten; then, for a body

which falls in both these media, the speed in water will be ten times slower

than in air.


Salv. I shall now take one of those bodies which fall in air but not in water,

say a wooden ball, and I shall ask you to assign to it any speed you please for

its descent through air.

Simp. Let us suppose it moves with a speed of twenty.


Salv. Very well. Then it is clear that this speed bears to some smaller speed

the same ratio as the density of water bears to that of air; and the value of this

smaller speed is two. So that really if we follow exactly the assumption of

Aristotle we ought to infer that the wooden ball which falls in air, a substance

ten times less-resisting than water, with a speed of twenty would fall in water

with a speed of two, instead of coming to the surface from the bottom as it

does; unless perhaps you wish to reply, which I do not believe you will, that

the rising of the wood through the water is the same as its falling with a speed

of two. But since the wooden ball does not go to the bottom, I think you will

agree with me that we can find a ball of another material, not wood, which

does fall in water with a speed of two.Simp. Undoubtedly  we  can;  but  it  must  be  of  a  substance  considerably

heavier than wood.


Salv. That is it exactly. But if this second ball falls in water with a speed of

two,  what  will  be  its  speed  of  descent  in  air?  If  you  hold  to  the  rule  of

Aristotle you must reply that it will move at the rate of twenty; but twenty is

the  speed  which  you  yourself  have  already  assigned  to  the  wooden  ball;

hence this and the other heavier ball will each move through air with the

same speed. But now how does the Philosopher harmonize this result with his

other,  namely,  that  bodies  of  different  weight  move  through  the  same

medium  with  different  speeds  —  speeds  which  are  proportional  to  their

weights? But without going into the matter more deeply, how have these

common and obvious properties escaped your notice? Have you not observed

that two bodies which fall in water, one with a speed a hundred times as great

as that of the other, will fall in air with speeds so nearly equal that one will

not surpass the other by as much as one hundredth part? Thus, for example,

an egg made of marble will descend in water one hundred times more rapidly

than a hen’s egg, while in air falling from a height of twenty cubits the one

will fall short of the other by less than four finger-breadths. In short, a heavy

body which sinks through ten cubits of water in three hours will traverse ten

cubits of air in one or two pulse-beats; and if the heavy body be a ball of lead

it will easily traverse the ten cubits of water in less than double the time

required for ten cubits of air. And here, I am sure, Simplicio, you find no

ground for difference or objection. We conclude, therefore, that the argument

does not bear against the existence of a vacuum; but if it did, it would only do

away with vacua of considerable size which neither I nor, in my opinion, the

ancients ever believed to exist in nature, although they might possibly be

produced by force [violenza] as may be gathered from various experiments

whose description would here occupy too much time.


Sagr. Seeing that Simplicio is silent, I will take the opportunity of saying

something.  Since  you  have  clearly  demonstrated  that  bodies  of  different

weights  do  not  move  in  one  and  the  same  medium  with  velocities

proportional to their weights, but that they all move with the same speed,

understanding of course that they are of the same substance or at least of the

same specific gravity; certainly not of different specific gravities, for I hardly

think you would have us believe a ball of cork moves with the same speed asone of lead; and again since you have clearly demonstrated that one and the

same  body  moving  through  differently  resisting  media  does  not  acquire

speeds which are inversely proportional to the resistances, I am curious to

learn what are the ratios actually observed in these cases.


Salv. These are interesting questions and I have thought much concerning

them. I will give you the method of approach and the result which I finally

reached. Having once established the falsity of the proposition that one and

the same body moving through differently resisting media acquires speeds

which are inversely proportional to the resistances of these media, and having

also disproved the statement that in the same medium bodies of different

weight acquire velocities proportional to their weights (understanding that

this applies also to bodies which differ merely in specific gravity), I then

began  to  combine  these  two  facts  and  to  consider  what  would  happen  if

bodies of different weight were placed in media of different resistances; and I

found that the differences in speed were greater in those media which were

more resistant, that is, less yielding. This difference was such that two bodies

which differed scarcely at all in their speed through air would, in water, fall

the one with a speed ten times as great as that of the other. Further, there are

bodies which will fall rapidly in air, whereas if placed in water not only will

not sink but will remain at rest or will even rise to the top: for it is possible to

find some kinds of wood, such as knots and roots, which remain at rest in

water but fall rapidly in air.


Sagr. I have often tried with the utmost patience to add grains of sand to a

ball of wax until it should acquire the same specific gravity as water and

would therefore remain at rest in this medium. But with all my care I was

never able to accomplish this. Indeed, I do not know whether there is any

solid substance whose specific gravity is, by nature, so nearly equal to that of

water that if placed anywhere in water it will remain at rest.


Salv. In this, as in a thousand other operations, men are surpassed by animals.

In this problem of yours one may learn much from the fish which are very

skillful in maintaining their equilibrium not only in one kind of water, but

also in waters which are notably different either by their own nature or by

some accidental muddiness or through salinity, each of which produces a

marked change. So perfectly indeed can fish keep their equilibrium that theyare  able  to  remain  motionless  in  any  position.  This  they  accomplish,  I

believe, by means of an apparatus especially provided by nature, namely, a

bladder located in the body and communicating with the mouth by means of a

narrow tube through which they are able, at will, to expel a portion of the air

contained in the bladder: by rising to the surface they can take in more air;

thus they make themselves heavier or lighter than water at will and maintain

equilibrium.


Sagr. By means of another device I was able to deceive some friends to

whom I had boasted that I could make up a ball of wax that would be in

equilibrium in water. In the bottom of a vessel I placed some salt water and

upon this some fresh water; then I showed them that the ball stopped in the

middle of the water, and that, when pushed to the bottom or lifted to the top,

would not remain in either of these places but would return to the middle.


Salv. This experiment is not without usefulness. For when physicians are

testing the various qualities of waters, especially their specific gravities, they

employ a ball of this kind so adjusted that, in certain water, it will neither rise

nor fall. Then in testing another water, differing ever so slightly in specific

gravity [peso],  the  ball  will  sink  if  this  water  be  lighter  and  rise  if  it  be

heavier. And so exact is this experiment that the addition of two grains of salt

to six pounds of water is sufficient to make the ball rise to the surface from

the  bottom  to  which  it  had  fallen.  To  illustrate  the  precision  of  this

experiment and also to clearly demonstrate the non-resistance of water to

division, I wish to add that this notable difference in specific gravity can be

produced not only by solution of some heavier substance, but also by merely

heating or cooling; and so sensitive is water to this process that by simply

adding four drops of another water which is slightly warmer or cooler than

the six pounds one can cause the ball to sink or rise; it will sink when the

warm water is poured in and will rise upon the addition of cold water. Now

you  can  see  how  mistaken  are  those  philosophers  who  ascribe  to  water

viscosity  or  some  other  coherence  of  parts  which  offers  resistance  to

separation of parts and to penetration.


Sagr. With regard to this question I have found many convincing arguments

in a treatise by our Academician; but there is one great difficulty of which I

have not been able to rid myself, namely, if there be no tenacity or coherencebetween the particles of water how is it possible for those large drops of

water  to  stand  out  in  relief  upon  cabbage  leaves  without  scattering  or

spreading out?


Salv. Although those who are in possession of the truth are able to solve all

objections raised, I would not arrogate to myself such power; nevertheless

my inability should not be allowed to becloud the truth. To begin with let me

confess that I do not understand how these large globules of water stand out

and hold themselves up, although I know for a certainty, that it is not owing

to any internal tenacity acting between the particles of water; whence it must

follow that the cause of this effect is external. Beside the experiments already

shown to prove that the cause is not internal, I can offer another which is very

convincing.  If  the  particles  of  water  which  sustain  themselves  in  a  heap,

while surrounded by air, did so in virtue of an internal cause then they would

sustain themselves much more easily when surrounded by a medium in which

they exhibit less tendency to fall than they do in air; such a medium would be

any fluid heavier than air, as, for instance, wine: and therefore if some wine

be poured about such a drop of water, the wine might rise until the drop was

entirely covered, without the particles of water, held together by this internal

coherence, ever parting company. But this is not the fact; for as soon as the

wine touches the water, the latter without waiting to be covered scatters and

spreads  out  underneath  the  wine  if  it  be  red.  The  cause  of  this  effect  is

therefore external and is possibly to be found in the surrounding air. Indeed

there appears to be a considerable antagonism between air and water as I

have observed in the following experiment. Having taken a glass globe which

had a mouth of about the same diameter as a straw, I filled it with water and

turned it mouth downwards; nevertheless, the water, although quite heavy

and prone to descend, and the air, which is very light and disposed to rise

through  the  water,  refused,  the  one  to  descend  and  the  other  to  ascend

through the opening, but both remained stubborn and defiant. On the other

hand, as soon as I apply to this opening a glass of red wine, which is almost

inappreciably  lighter  than  water,  red  streaks  are  immediately  observed  to

ascend  slowly  through  the  water  while  the  water  with  equal  slowness

descends  through  the  wine  without  mixing,  until  finally  the  globe  is

completely filled with wine and the water has all gone down into the vessel

below. What then can we say except that there exists, between water and air,

a certain incompatibility which I do not understand, but perhaps.. ..Simp. I feel almost like laughing at the great antipathy which Salviati exhibits

against the use of the word antipathy; and yet it is excellently adapted to

explain the difficulty.


Salv. Alright, if it please Simplicio, let this word antipathy be the solution of

our  difficulty.  Returning  from  this  digression,  let  us  again  take  up  our

problem. We have already seen that the difference of speed between bodies

of different specific gravities is most marked in those media which are the

most resistant: thus, in a medium of quicksilver, gold not merely sinks to the

bottom more rapidly than lead but it is the only substance that will descend at

all; all other metals and stones rise to the surface and float. On the other hand

the variation of speed in air between balls of gold, lead, copper, porphyry,

and other heavy materials is so slight that in a fall of 100 cubits a ball of gold

would surely not outstrip one of copper by as much as four fingers. Having

observed this I came to the conclusion that in a medium totally devoid of

resistance all bodies would fall with the same speed.


Simp. This is a remarkable statement, Salviati. But I shall never believe that

even in a vacuum, if motion in such a place were possible, a lock of wool and

a bit of lead can fall with the same velocity.


Salv. A little more slowly, Simplicio. Your difficulty is not so recondite nor

am I so imprudent as to warrant you in believing that I have not already

considered  this  matter  and  found  the  proper  solution.  Hence  for  my

justification and for your enlightenment hear what I have to say. Our problem

is to find out what happens to bodies of different weight moving in a medium

devoid of resistance, so that the only difference in speed is that which arises

from inequality of weight. Since no medium except one entirely free from air

and other bodies, be it ever so tenuous and yielding, can furnish our senses

with  the  evidence  we  are  looking  for,  and  since  such  a  medium  is  not

available,  we  shall  observe  what  happens  in  the  rarest  and  least  resistant

media as compared with what happens in denser and more resistant media.

Because if we find as a fact that the variation of speed among bodies of

different specific gravities is less and less according as the medium becomes

more  and  more  yielding,  and  if  finally  in  a  medium  of  extreme  tenuity,

though  not  a  perfect  vacuum,  we  find  that,  in  spite  of  great  diversity  of

specific  gravity  [peso],  the  difference  in  speed  is  very  small  and  almostinappreciable, then we are justified in believing it highly probable that in a

vacuum all bodies would fall with the same speed. Let us, in view of this,

consider what takes place in air, where for the sake of a definite figure and

light  material  imagine  an  inflated  bladder.  The  air  in  this  bladder  when

surrounded by air will weigh little or nothing, since it can be only slightly

compressed; its weight then is small being merely that of the skin which does

not amount to the thousandth part of a mass of lead having the same size as

the inflated bladder. Now, Simplicio, if we allow these two bodies to fall

from a height of four or six cubits, by what distance do you imagine the lead

will anticipate the bladder? You may be sure that the lead will not travel three

times, or even twice, as swiftly as the bladder, although vou would have

made it move a thousand times as rapidly.

Simp. It may be as you say during the first four or six cubits of the fall; but

after the motion has continued a long while, I believe that the lead will have

left the bladder behind not only six out of twelve parts of the distance but

even eight or ten.


Salv. I quite agree with you and doubt not that, in very long distances, the

lead might cover one hundred miles while the bladder was traversing one;

but,  my  dear  Simplicio,  this  phenomenon  which  you  adduce  against  my

proposition is precisely the one which confirms it. Let me once more explain

that the variation of speed observed in bodies of different specific gravities is

not caused by the difference of specific gravity but depends upon external

circumstances and, in particular, upon the resistance of the medium, so that if

this is removed all bodies would fall with the same velocity; and this result I

deduce mainly from the fact which you have just admitted and which is very

true, namely, that, in the case of bodies which differ widely in weight, their

velocities differ more and more as the spaces traversed increase, something

which would not occur if the effect depended upon differences of specific

gravity. For since these specific gravities remain constant, the ratio between

the distances traversed ought to remain constant whereas the fact is that this

ratio keeps on increasing as the motion continues. Thus a very heavy body in

a fall of one cubit will not anticipate a very light one by so much as the tenth

part of this space; but in a fall of twelve cubits the heavy body would outstrip

the other by one-third, and in a fall of one hundred cubits by 90/100, etc.Simp. Very well: but, following your own line of argument, if differences of

weight in bodies of different specific gravities cannot produce a change in the

ratio of their speeds, on the ground that their specific gravities do not change,

how is it possible for the medium, which also we suppose to remain constant,

to bring about any change in the ratio of these velocities?


Salv. This objection with which you oppose my statement is clever; and I

must meet it. I begin by saying that a heavy body has an inherent tendency to

move  with  a  constantly  and  uniformly  accelerated  motion  toward  the

common center of gravity, that is, toward the center of our earth, so that

during equal intervals of time it receives equal increments of momentum and

velocity.  This,  you  must  understand,  holds  whenever  all  external  and

accidental hindrances have been removed; but of these there is one which we

can never remove, namely, the medium which must be penetrated and thrust

aside by the falling body. This quiet, yielding, fluid medium opposes motion

through it with a resistance which is proportional to the rapidity with which

the medium must give way to the passage of the body; which body, as I have

said, is by nature continuously accelerated so that it meets with more and

more resistance in the medium and hence a diminution in its rate of gain of

speed until finally the speed reaches such a point and the resistance of the

medium becomes so great that, balancing each other, they prevent any further

acceleration and reduce the motion of the body to one which is uniform and

which  will  thereafter  maintain  a  constant  value.  There  is,  therefore,  an

increase in the resistance of the medium, not on account of any change in its

essential properties, but on account of the change in rapidity with which it

must yield and give way laterally to the passage of the falling body which is

being constantly accelerated.

  Now seeing how great is the resistance which the air offers to the slight

momentum [momento] of the bladder and how small that which it offers to

the large weight [peso] of the lead, I am convinced that, if the medium were

entirely removed, the advantage received by the bladder would be so great

and that coming to the lead so small that their speeds would be equalized.

Assuming  this  principle,  that  all  falling  bodies  acquire  equal  speeds  in  a

medium  which,  on  account  of  a  vacuum  or  something  else,  offers  no

resistance  to  the  speed  of  the  motion,  we  shall  be  able  accordingly  to

determine  the  ratios  of  the  speeds  of  both  similar  and  dissimilar  bodies

moving either through one and the same medium or through different space-filling, and therefore resistant, media. This result we may obtain by observing

how much the weight of the medium detracts from the weight of the moving

body, which weight is the means employed by the falling body to open a path

for itself and to push aside the parts of the medium, something which does

not happen in a vacuum where, therefore, no difference [of speed] is to be

expected from a difference of specific gravity. And since it is known that the

effect of the medium is to diminish the weight of the body by the weight of

the medium displaced, we may accomplish our purpose by diminishing in

just this proportion the speeds of the falling bodies, which in a non-resisting

medium we have assumed to be equal.

  Thus, for example, imagine lead to be ten thousand times as heavy as air

while  ebony  is  only  one  thousand  times  as  heavy.  Here  we  have  two

substances whose speeds of fall in a medium devoid of resistance are equal:

but, when air is the medium, it will subtract from the speed of the lead one

part  in  ten  thousand,  and  from  the  speed  of  the  ebony  one  part  in  one

thousand,  i.  e.  ten  parts  in  ten  thousand.  While  therefore  lead  and  ebony

would fall from any given height in the same interval of time, provided the

retarding effect of the air were removed, the lead will, in air, lose in speed

one part in ten thousand; and the ebony, ten parts in ten thousand. In other

words,  if  the  elevation  from  which  the  bodies  start  be  divided  into  ten

thousand parts, the lead will reach the ground leaving the ebony behind by as

much as ten, or at least nine, of these parts. Is it not clear then that a leaden

ball allowed to fall from a tower two hundred cubits high will outstrip an

ebony ball by less than four inches? Now ebony weighs a thousand times as

much as air but this inflated bladder only four times as much; therefore air

diminishes the inherent and natural speed of ebony by one part in a thousand;

while that of the bladder which, if free from hindrance, would be the same,

experiences a diminution in air amounting to one part in four. So that when

the ebony ball, falling from the tower, has reached the earth, the bladder will

have traversed only three-quarters of this distance. Lead is twelve times as

heavy as water; but ivory is only twice as heavy. The speeds of these two

substances which, when entirely unhindered, are equal will be diminished in

water, that of lead by one part in twelve, that of ivory by half. Accordingly

when the lead has fallen through eleven cubits of water the ivory will have

fallen through only six. Employing this principle we shall, I believe, find a

much closer agreement of experiment with our computation than with that of

Aristotle.  In a similar manner we may find the ratio of the speeds of one and the

same body in different fluid media, not by comparing the different resistances

of the media, but by considering the excess of the specific gravity of the body

above  those  of  the  media.  Thus,  for  example,  tin  is  one  thousand  times

heavier than air and ten times heavier than water; hence, if we divide its

unhindered speed into 1000 parts, air will rob it of one of these parts so that it

will fall with a speed of 999, while in water its speed will be 900, seeing that

water diminishes its weight by one part in ten while air by only one part in a

thousand.

  Again take a solid a little heavier than water, such as oak, a ball of which

will weigh let us say 1000 drachms; suppose an equal volume of water to

weigh  950,  and  an  equal  volume  of  air,  2;  then  it  is  clear  that  if  the

unhindered speed of the ball is 1000, its speed in air will be 998, but in water

only 50, seeing that the water removes 950 of the 1000 parts which the body

weighs, leaving only 50.

  Such a solid would therefore move almost twenty times as fast in air as in

water, since its specific gravity exceeds that of water by one part in twenty.

And here we must consider the fact that only those substances which have a

specific gravity greater than water can fall through it — substances which

must, therefore, be hundreds of times heavier than air; hence when we try to

obtain  the  ratio  of  the  speed  in  air  to  that  in  water,  we  may,  without

appreciable  error,  assume  that  air  does  not,  to  any  considerable  extent,

diminish the free weight [assoluta gravità], and consequently the unhindered

speed [assoluta velocità] of such substances. Having thus easily found the

excess of the weight of these substances over that of water, we can say that

their speed in air is to their speed in water as their free weight [totale gravità]

is to the excess of this weight over that of water. For example, a ball of ivory

weighs 20 ounces; an equal volume of water weighs 17 ounces; hence the

speed of ivory in air bears to its speed in water the approximate ratio of 20:3.


Sagr. I have made a great step forward in this truly interesting subject upon

which I have long labored in vain. In order to put these theories into practice

we need only discover a method of determining the specific gravity of air

with reference to water and hence with reference to other heavy substances.


Simp. But if we find that air has levity instead of gravity what then shall we

say of the foregoing discussion which, in other respects, is very clever?Salv. I should say that it was empty, vain, and trifling. But can you doubt that

air has weight when you have the clear testimony of Aristotle affirming that

all  the  elements  have  weight  including  air,  and  excepting  only  fire?  As

evidence of this he cites the fact that a leather bottle weighs more when

inflated than when collapsed.

  I am inclined to believe that the increase of weight observed in the inflated

leather bottle or bladder arises, not from the gravity of the air, but from the

many thick vapors mingled with it in these lower regions. To this I would

attribute the increase of weight in the leather bottle.


Salv. I would not have you say this, and much less attribute it to Aristotle;

because,  if  speaking  of  the  elements,  he  wished  to  persuade  me  by

experiment that air has weight and were to say to me: “Take a leather bottle,

fill it with heavy vapors and observe how its weight increases,” I would reply

that the bottle would weigh still more if filled with bran; and would then add

that this merely proves that bran and thick vapors are heavy, but in regard to

air I should still remain in the same doubt as before. However, the experiment

of Aristotle is good and the proposition is true. But I cannot say as much of a

certain other consideration, taken at face value; this consideration was offered

by a philosopher whose name slips me; but I know I have read his argument

which is that air exhibits greater gravity than levity, because it carries heavy

bodies downward more easily than it does light ones upward.

Sagr. Fine indeed! So according to this theory air is much heavier than water,

since all heavy bodies are carried downward more easily through air than

through water, and all light bodies buoyed up more easily through water than

through air; further there is an infinite number of heavy bodies which fall

through air but ascend in water and there is an infinite number of substances

which rise in water and fall in air. But, Simplicio, the question as to whether

the weight of the leather bottle is owing to thick vapors or to pure air does not

affect our problem which is to discover how bodies move through this vapor-

laden atmosphere of ours. Returning now to the question which interests me

more, I should like, for the sake of more complete and thorough knowledge

of this matter, not only to be strengthened in my belief that air has weight but

also to learn, if possible, how great its specific gravity is. Therefore, Salviati,

if you can satisfy my curiosity on this point pray do so.Salv. The  experiment  with  the  inflated  leather  bottle  of  Aristotle  proves

conclusively  that  air  possesses  positive  gravity  and  not,  as  some  have

believed, levity, a property possessed possibly by no substance whatever; for

if air did possess this quality of absolute and positive levity, it should on

compression exhibit greater levity and, hence, a greater tendency to rise; but

experiment shows precisely the opposite.

  As to the other question, namely, how to determine the specific gravity of

air, I have employed the following method. I took a rather large glass bottle

with a narrow neck and attached to it a leather cover, binding it tightly about

the neck of the bottle: in the top of this cover I inserted and firmly fastened

the valve of a leather bottle, through which I forced into the glass bottle, by

means of a syringe, a large quantity of air. And since air is easily condensed

one can pump into the bottle two or three times its own volume of air. After

this I took an accurate balance and weighed this bottle of compressed air with

the utmost precision, adjusting the weight with fine sand. I next opened the

valve and allowed the compressed air to escape; then replaced the flask upon

the balance and found it perceptibly lighter: from the sand which had been

used  as  a  counterweight  I  now  removed  and  laid  aside  as  much  as  was

necessary to again secure balance. Under these conditions there can be no

doubt but that the weight of the sand thus laid aside represents the weight of

the air which had been forced into the flask and had afterwards escaped. But

after all this experiment tells me merely that the weight of the compressed air

is the same as that of the sand removed from the balance; when however it

comes to knowing certainly and definitely the weight of air as compared with

that of water or any other heavy substance this I cannot hope to do without

first  measuring  the  volume  [quantità]  of  compressed  air;  for  this

measurement I have devised the two following methods.

  According  to  the  first  method  one  takes  a  bottle  with  a  narrow  neck

similar to the previous one; over the mouth of this bottle is slipped a leather

tube which is bound tightly about the neck of the flask; the other end of this

tube embraces the valve attached to the first flask and is tightly bound about

it. This second flask is provided with a hole in the bottom through which an

iron rod can be placed so as to open, at will, the valve above mentioned and

thus  permit  the  surplus  air  of  the  first  to  escape  after  it  has  once  been

weighed: but his second bottle must be filled with water. Having prepared

everything in the manner above described, open the valve with the rod; the

air will rush into the flask containing the water and will drive it through thehole at the bottom, it being clear that the volume [quantità] of water thus

displaced is equal to the volume [mole e quantità] of air escaped from the

other vessel. Having set aside this displaced water, weigh the vessel from

which  the  air  has  escaped  (which  is  supposed  to  have  been  weighed

previously while containing the compressed air), and remove the surplus of

sand as described above; it is then manifest that the weight of this sand is

precisely the weight of a volume [mole] of air equal to the volume of water

displaced and set aside; this water we can weigh and find how many times its

weight contains the weight of the removed sand, thus determining definitely

how many times heavier water is than air; and we shall find, contrary to the

opinion of Aristotle, that this is not 10 times, but, as our experiment shows,

more nearly 400 times.

  The second method is more expeditious and can be carried out with a

single vessel fitted up as the first was. Here no air is added to that which the

vessel naturally contains but water is forced into it without allowing any air

to escape; the water thus introduced necessarily compresses the air. Having

forced into the vessel as much water as possible, filling it, say, three-fourths

full,  which  does  not  require  any  extraordinary  effort,  place  it  upon  the

balance and weigh it accurately; next hold the vessel mouth up, open the

valve, and allow the air to escape; the volume of the air thus escaping is

precisely equal to the volume of water contained in the flask. Again weigh

the vessel which will have diminished in weight on account of the escaped

air; this loss in weight represents the weight of a volume of air equal to the

volume of water contained in the vessel.


Simp. No one can deny the cleverness and ingenuity of your devices; but

while they appear to give complete intellectual satisfaction they confuse me

in another direction. For since it is undoubtedly true that the elements when

in their proper places have neither weight nor levity, I cannot understand how

it is possible for that portion of air, which appeared to weigh, say, 4 drachms

of  sand,  should  really  have  such  a  weight  in  air  as  the  sand  which

counterbalances it. It seems to me, therefore, that the experiment should be

carried out, not in air, but in a medium in which the air could exhibit its

property of weight if such it really has.


Salv. The objection of Simplicio is certainly to the point and must therefore

either be unanswerable or demand an equally clear solution. It is perfectlyevident that that air which, under compression, weighed as much as the sand,

loses this weight when once allowed to escape into its own element, while,

indeed, the sand retains its weight. Hence for this experiment it becomes

necessary to select a place where air as well as sand can gravitate; because, as

has been often remarked, the medium diminishes the weight of any substance

immersed in it by an amount equal to the weight of the displaced medium; so

that air in air loses all its weight. If therefore this experiment is to be made

with accuracy it should be performed in a vacuum where every heavy body

exhibits its momentum without the slightest diminution. If then, Simplicio,

we were to weigh a portion of air in a vacuum would you then be satisfied

and assured of the fact?


Simp. Yes truly: but this is to wish or ask the impossible.


Salv. Your obligation will then be very great if, for your sake, I accomplish

the impossible. But I do not want to sell you something which I have already

given you; for in the previous experiment we weighed the air in vacuum and

not in air or other medium. The fact that any fluid medium diminishes the

weight of a mass immersed in it, is due, Simplicio, to the resistance which

this medium offers to its being opened up, driven aside, and finally lifted up.

The evidence for this is seen in the readiness with which the fluid rushes to

fill up any space formerly occupied by the mass; if the medium were not

affected by such an immersion then it would not react against the immersed

body. Tell me now, when you have a flask, in air, filled with its natural

amount of air and then proceed to pump into the vessel more air, does this

extra charge in any way separate or divide or change the circumambient air?

Does the vessel perhaps expand so that the surrounding medium is displaced

in order to give more room? Certainly not. Therefore one is able to say that

this extra charge of air is not immersed in the surrounding medium for it

occupies no space in it, but is, as it were, in a vacuum. Indeed, it is really in a

vacuum; for it diffuses into the vacuities which are not completely filled by

the original and uncondensed air. In fact I do not see any difference between

the enclosed and the surrounding media: for the surrounding medium does

not press upon the enclosed medium and, vice versa, the enclosed medium

exerts no pressure against the surrounding one; this same relationship exists

in the case of any matter in a vacuum, as well as in the case of the extra

charge of air compressed into the flask. The weight of this condensed air istherefore the same as that which it would have if set free in a vacuum. It is

true of course that the weight of the sand used as a counterpoise would be a

little greater in vacuo than in free air. We must, then, say that the air is

slightly lighter than the sand required to counterbalance it, that is to say, by

an  amount  equal  to  the  weight in vacuo  of  a  volume  of  air  equal  to  the

volume of the sand.

  At this point in an annotated copy of the original edition the following

note by Galileo is found.


Sagr. A  very  clever  discussion,  solving  a  wonderful  problem,  because  it

demonstrates briefly and concisely the manner in which one may find the

weight of a body in vacuo by simply weighing it in air. The explanation is as

follows: when a heavy body is immersed in air it loses in weight an amount

equal to the weight of a volume [mole] of air equivalent to the volume [mole]

of  the  body  itself.  Hence  if  one  adds  to  a  body,  without  expanding  it,  a

quantity of air equal to that which it displaces and weighs it, he will obtain its

absolute weight in vacuo, since, without increasing it in size, he has increased

its weight by just the amount which it lost through immersion in air.

  When therefore we force a quantity of water into a vessel which already

contains its normal amount of air, without allowing any of this air to escape it

is clear that this normal quantity of air will be compressed and condensed

into a smaller space in order to make room for the water which is forced in: it

is also clear that the volume of air thus compressed is equal to the volume of

water  added.  If  now  the  vessel  be  weighed  in  air  in  this  condition,  it  is

manifest that the weight of the water will be increased by that of an equal

volume of air; the total weight of water and air thus obtained is equal to the

weight of the water alone in vacuo.

  Now record the weight of the entire vessel and then allow the compressed

air to escape; weigh the remainder; the difference of these two weights will

be the weight of the compressed air which, in volume, is equal to that of the

water.  Next  find  the  weight  of  the  water  alone  and  add  to  it  that  of  the

compressed air; we shall then have the water alone in vacuo. To find the

weight of the water we shall have to remove it from the vessel and weigh the

vessel alone; subtract this weight from that of the vessel and water together. It

is clear that the remainder will be the weight of the water alone in air.

  The previous experiments, in my opinion, left something to be desired: but

now I am fully satisfied.Salv. The facts set forth by me up to this point and, in particular, the one

which  shows  that  difference  of  weight,  even  when  very  great,  is  without

effect in changing the speed of falling bodies, so that as far as weight is

concerned they all fall with equal speed: this idea is, I say, so new, and at first

glance so remote from fact, that if we do not have the means of making it just

as clear as sunlight, it had better not be mentioned; but having once allowed it

to pass my lips I must neglect no experiment or argument to establish it.


Sagr. Not only this but also many other of your views are so far removed

from  the  commonly  accepted  opinions  and  doctrines  that  if  you  were  to

publish them you would stir up a large number of antagonists; for human

nature is such that men do not look with favor upon discoveries — either of

truth or fallacy — in their own field, when made by others than themselves.

They call him an innovator of doctrine, an unpleasant title, by which they

hope to cut those knots which they cannot untie, and by subterranean mines

they  seek  to  destroy  structures  which  patient  artisans  have  built  with

customary  tools.  But  as  for  ourselves  who  have  no  such  thoughts,  the

experiments  and  arguments  which  you  have  thus  far  adduced  are  fully

satisfactory; however if you have any experiments which are more direct or

any arguments which are more convincing we will hear them with pleasure.


Salv. The experiment made to ascertain whether two bodies, differing greatly

in  weight  will  fall  from  a  given  height  with  the  same  speed  offers  some

difficulty; because, if the height is considerable, the retarding effect of the

medium, which must be penetrated and thrust aside by the falling body, will

be greater in the case of the small momentum of the very light body than in

the case of the great force [violenza] of the heavy body; so that, in a long

distance, the light body will be left behind; if the height be small, one may

well doubt whether there is any difference; and if there be a difference it will

be inappreciable.

  It occurred to me therefore to repeat many times the fall through a small

height in such a way that I might accumulate all those small intervals of time

that elapse between the arrival of the heavy and light bodies respectively at

their common terminus, so that this sum makes an interval of time which is

not only observable, but easily observable. In order to employ the slowest

speeds  possible  and  thus  reduce  the  change  which  the  resisting  medium

produces upon the simple effect of gravity it occurred to me to allow thebodies to fall along a plane slightly inclined to the horizontal. For in such a

plane, just as well as in a vertical plane, one may discover how bodies of

different weight behave: and besides this, I also wished to rid myself of the

resistance  which  might  arise  from  contact  of  the  moving  body  with  the

aforesaid inclined plane. Accordingly I took two balls, one of lead and one of

cork,  the  former  more  than  a  hundred  times  heavier  than  the  latter,  and

suspended them by means of two equal fine threads, each four or five cubits

long. Pulling each ball aside from the perpendicular, I let them go at the same

instant, and they, falling along the circumferences of circles having these

equal  strings  for  semi-diameters,  passed  beyond  the  perpendicular  and

returned along the same path. This free vibration [per lor medesime le andate

e le tornate] repeated a hundred times showed clearly that the heavy body

maintains so nearly the period of the light body that neither in a hundred

swings nor even in a thousand will the former anticipate the latter by as much

as a single moment [minimo momento], so perfectly do they keep step. We

can also observe the effect of the medium which, by the resistance which it

offers to motion, diminishes the vibration of the cork more than that of the

lead, but without altering the frequency of either; even when the arc traversed

by the cork did not exceed five or six degrees while that of the lead was fifty

or sixty, the swings were performed in equal times.


Simp. If this be so, why is not the speed of the lead greater than that of the

cork, seeing that the former traverses sixty degrees in the same interval in

which the latter covers scarcely six?


Salv. But what would you say, Simplicio, if both covered their paths in the

same time when the cork, drawn aside through thirty degrees, traverses an arc

of sixty, while the lead pulled aside only two degrees traverses an arc of four?

Would  not  then  the  cork  be  proportionately  swifter?  And  yet  such  is  the

experimental  fact.  But  observe  this:  having  pulled  aside  the  pendulum  of

lead, say through an arc of fifty degrees, and set it free, it swings beyond the

perpendicular  almost  fifty  degrees,  thus  describing  an  arc  of  nearly  one

hundred degrees; on the return swing it describes a little smaller arc; and after

a large number of such vibrations it finally comes to rest. Each vibration,

whether of ninety, fifty, twenty, ten, or four degrees occupies the same time:

accordingly the speed of the moving body keeps on diminishing since in

equal intervals of time, it traverses arcs which grow smaller and smaller.  Precisely the same things happen with the pendulum of cork, suspended

by a string of equal length, except that a smaller number of vibrations is

required to bring it to rest, since on account of its lightness it is less able to

overcome the resistance of the air; nevertheless the vibrations, whether large

or small, are all performed in time-intervals which are not only equal among

themselves, but also equal to the period of the lead pendulum. Hence it is true

that, if while the lead is traversing an arc of fifty degrees the cork covers one

of only ten, the cork moves more slowly than the lead; but on the other hand

it is also true that the cork may cover an arc of fifty while the lead passes

over one of only ten or six; thus, at different times, we have now the cork,

now the lead, moving more rapidly. But if these same bodies traverse equal

arcs in equal times we may rest assured that their speeds are equal.


Simp. I hesitate to admit the conclusiveness of this argument because of the

confusion which arises from your making both bodies move now rapidly,

now slowly and now very slowly, which leaves me in doubt as to whether

their velocities are always equal.


Sagr. Allow me, if you please, Salviati, to say just a few words. Now tell me,

Simplicio, whether you admit that one can say with certainty that the speeds

of the cork and the lead are equal whenever both, starting from rest at the

same moment and descending the same slopes, always traverse equal spaces

in equal times?


Simp. This can neither be doubted nor gainsaid.


Sagr. Now  it  happens,  in  the  case  of  the  pendulums,  that  each  of  them

traverses now an arc of sixty degrees, now one of fifty, or thirty or ten or

eight or four or two, etc.; and when they both swing through an arc of sixty

degrees they do so in equal intervals of time; the same thing happens when

the arc is fifty degrees or thirty or ten or any other number; and therefore we

conclude that the speed of the lead in an arc of sixty degrees is equal to the

speed of the cork when the latter also swings through an arc of sixty degrees;

in the case of a fifty-degree arc these speeds are also equal to each other; so

also in the case of other arcs. But this is not saying that the speed which

occurs in an arc of sixty is the same as that which occurs in an arc of fifty;

nor is the speed in an arc of fifty equal to that in one of thirty, etc.; but thesmaller the arcs, the smaller the speeds; the fact observed is that one and the

same moving body requires the same time for traversing a large arc of sixty

degrees as for a small arc of fifty or even a very small arc of ten; all these

arcs, indeed, are covered in the same interval of time. It is true therefore that

the lead and the cork each diminish their speed [moto] in proportion as their

arcs diminish; but this does not contradict the fact that they maintain equal

speeds in equal arcs.

  My reason for saying these things has been rather because I wanted to

learn  whether  I  had  correctly  understood  Salviati,  than  because  I  thought

Simplicio had any need of a clearer explanation than that given by Salviati

which like everything else of his is extremely lucid, so lucid, indeed, that

when he solves questions which are difficult not merely in appearance, but in

reality and in fact, he does so with reasons, observations and experiments

which are common and familiar to everyone.

  In  this  manner  he  has,  as  I  have  learned  from  various  sources,  given

occasion to a highly esteemed professor for undervaluing his discoveries on

the ground that they are commonplace, and established upon a mean and

vulgar basis; as if it were not a most admirable and praiseworthy feature of

demonstrative science that it springs from and grows out of principles well-

known, understood and conceded by all.

  But let us continue with this light diet; and if Simplicio is satisfied to

understand and admit that the gravity inherent [interna gravità] in various

falling bodies has nothing to do with the difference of speed observed among

them, and that all bodies, in so far as their speeds depend upon it, would

move  with  the  same  velocity,  pray  tell  us,  Salviati,  how  you  explain  the

appreciable  and  evident  inequality  of  motion;  please  reply  also  to  the

objection urged by Simplicio — an objection in which I concur — namely,

that a cannon ball falls more rapidly than a bird-shot. From my point of view,

one might expect the difference of speed to be small in the case of bodies of

the same substance moving through any single medium, whereas the larger

ones will descend, during a single pulse-beat, a distance which the smaller

ones will not traverse in an hour, or in four, or even in twenty hours; as for

instance in the case of stones and fine sand and especially that very fine sand

which produces muddy water and which in many hours will not fall through

as much as two cubits, a distance which stones not much larger will traverse

in a single pulse-beat.Salv. The action of the medium in producing a greater retardation upon those

bodies  which  have  a  less  specific  gravity  has  already  been  explained  by

showing that they experience a diminution of weight. But to explain how one

and the same medium produces such different retardations in bodies which

are made of the same material and have the same shape, but differ only in

size, requires a discussion more clever than that by which one explains how a

more expanded shape or an opposing motion of the medium retards the speed

of the moving body. The solution of the present problem lies, I think, in the

roughness and porosity which are generally and almost necessarily found in

the surfaces of solid bodies. When the body is in motion these rough places

strike the air or other ambient medium. The evidence for this is found in the

humming which accompanies the rapid motion of a body through air, even

when that body is as round as possible. One hears not only humming, but also

hissing and whistling, whenever there is any appreciable cavity or elevation

upon the body. We observe also that a round solid body rotating in a lathe

produces a current of air. But what more do we need? When a top spins on

the ground at its greatest speed do we not hear a distinct buzzing of high

pitch? This sibilant note diminishes in pitch as the speed of rotation slackens,

which is evidence that these small rugosities on the surface meet resistance in

the air. There can be no doubt, therefore, that in the motion of falling bodies

these rugosities strike the surrounding fluid and retard the speed; and this

they do so much the more in proportion as the surface is larger, which is the

case of small bodies as compared with greater.


Simp. Stop  a  moment  please,  I  am  getting  confused.  For  although  I

understand and admit that friction of the medium upon the surface of the

body  retards  its  motion  and  that,  if  other  things  are  the  same,  the  larger

surface suffers greater retardation, I do not see on what ground you say that

the surface of the smaller body is larger. Besides if, as you say, the larger

surface suffers greater retardation the larger solid should move more slowly,

which is not the fact. But this objection can be easily met by saying that,

although the larger body has a larger surface, it has also a greater weight, in

comparison with which the resistance of the larger surface is no more than

the resistance of the small surface in comparison with its smaller weight; so

that the speed of the larger solid does not become less. I therefore see no

reason for expecting any difference of speed so long as the driving weight[gravità movente] diminishes in the same proportion as the retarding power

[facoltà ritardante] of the surface.


Salv. I shall answer all your objections at once. You will admit, of course,

Simplicio, that if one takes two equal bodies, of the same material and same

figure,  bodies  which  would  therefore  fall  with  equal  speeds,  and  if  he

diminishes the weight of one of them in the same proportion as its surface

(maintaining the similarity of shape) he would not thereby diminish the speed

of this body.


Simp. This inference seems to be in harmony with your theory which states

that the weight of a body has no effect in either accelerating or retarding its

motion.


Salv. I quite agree with you in this opinion from which it appears to follow

that,  if  the  weight  of  a  body  is  diminished  in  greater  proportion  than  its

surface,  the  motion  is  retarded  to  a  certain  extent;  and  this  retardation  is

greater and greater in proportion as the diminution of weight exceeds that of

the surface.


Simp. This I admit without hesitation.


Salv. Now you must know, Simplicio, that it is not possible to diminish the

surface of a solid body in the same ratio as the weight, and at the same time

maintain  similarity  of  figure.  For  since  it  is  clear  that  in  the  case  of  a

diminishing solid the weight grows less in proportion to the volume, and

since the volume always diminishes more rapidly than the surface, when the

same shape is maintained, the weight must therefore diminish more rapidly

than the surface. But geometry teaches us that, in the case of similar solids,

the ratio of two volumes is greater than the ratio of their surfaces; which, for

the sake of better understanding, I shall illustrate by a particular case.

  Take, for example, a cube two inches on a side so that each face has an

area of four square inches and the total area, i. e., the sum of the six faces,

amounts to twenty-four square inches; now imagine this cube to be sawed

through three times so as to divide it into eight smaller cubes, each one inch

on the side, each face one inch square, and the total surface of each cube six

square inches instead of twenty-four as in the case of the larger cube. It isevident therefore that the surface of the little cube is only one-fourth that of

the larger, namely, the ratio of six to twenty-four; but the volume of the solid

cube  itself  is  only  one-eighth;  the  volume,  and  hence  also  the  weight,

diminishes therefore much more rapidly than the surface. If we again divide

the little cube into eight others we shall have, for the total surface of one of

these, one and one-half square inches, which is one-sixteenth of the surface

of the original cube; but its volume is only one-sixty-fourth part. Thus, by

two divisions, you see that the volume is diminished four times as much as

the surface. And, if the subdivision be continued until the original solid be

reduced  to  a  fine  powder,  we  shall  find  that  the  weight  of  one  of  these

smallest particles has diminished hundreds and hundreds of times as much as

its surface. And this which I have illustrated in the case of cubes holds also in

the case of all similar solids, where the volumes stand in sesquialteral ratio to

their surfaces. Observe then how much greater the resistance, arising from

contact of the surface of the moving body with the medium, in the case of

small  bodies  than  in  the  case  of  large;  and  when  one  considers  that  the

rugosities on the very small surfaces of fine dust particles are perhaps no

smaller than those on the surfaces of larger solids which have been carefully

polished, he will see how important it is that the medium should be very fluid

and offer no resistance to being thrust aside, easily yielding to a small force.

You see, therefore, Simplicio, that I was not mistaken when, not long ago, I

said that the surface of a small solid is comparatively greater than that of a

large one.


Simp. I am quite convinced; and, believe me, if I were again beginning my

studies, I should follow the advice of Plato and start with mathematics, a

science which proceeds very cautiously and admits nothing as established

until it has been rigidly demonstrated.


Sagr. This discussion has afforded me great pleasure; but before proceeding

further I should like to hear the explanation of a phrase of yours which is new

to me, namely, that similar solids are to each other in the sesquialteral ratio of

their surfaces; for although I have seen and understood the proposition in

which it is demonstrated that the surfaces of similar solids are in the duplicate

ratio of their sides and also the proposition which proves that the volumes are

in the triplicate ratio of their sides, yet I have not so much as heard mentioned

the ratio of the volume of a solid to its surface.Salv. You  yourself  have  suggested  the  answer  to  your  question  and  have

removed every doubt. For if one quantity is the cube of something of which

another  quantity  is  the  square  does  it  not  follow  that  the  cube  is  the

sesquialteral of the square? Surely. Now if the surface varies as the square of

its linear dimensions while the volume varies as the cube of these dimensions

may we not say that the volume stands in sesquialteral ratio to the surface?

Sagr. Quite so. And now although there are still some details, in connection

with the subject under discussion, concerning which I might ask questions

yet, if we keep making one digression after another, it will be long before we

reach the main topic which has to do with the variety of properties found in

the  resistance  which  solid  bodies  offer  to  fracture;  and,  therefore,  if  you

please, let us return to the subject which we originally proposed to discuss.


Salv. Very well; but the questions which we have already considered are so

numerous and so varied, and have taken up so much time that there is not

much  of  this  day  left  to  spend  upon  our  main  topic  which  abounds  in

geometrical  demonstrations  calling  for  careful  consideration.  May  I,

therefore, suggest that we postpone the meeting until to-morrow, not only for

the reason just mentioned but also in order that I may bring with me some

papers  in  which  I  have  set  down  in  an  orderly  way  the  theorems  and

propositions dealing with the various phases of this subject, matters which,

from memory alone, I could not present in the proper order.


Sagr. I fully concur in your opinion and all the more willingly because this

will leave time to-day to take up some of my difficulties with the subject

which  we  have  just  been  discussing.  One  question  is  whether  we  are  to

consider the resistance of the medium as sufficient to destroy the acceleration

of a body of very heavy material, very large volume, and spherical figure. I

say spherical  in  order  to  select  a  volume  which  is  contained  within  a

minimum surface and therefore less subject to retardation.

  Another question deals with the vibrations of pendulums which may be

regarded from several viewpoints; the first is whether all vibrations, large,

medium,  and  small,  are  performed  in  exactly  and  precisely  equal  times:

another is to find the ratio of the times of vibration of pendulums supported

by threads of unequal length.Salv. These are interesting questions: but I fear that here, as in the case of all

other facts, if we take up for discussion any one of them, it will carry in its

wake so many other facts and curious consequences that time will not remain

to-day for the discussion of all.


Sagr. If these are as full of interest as the foregoing, I would gladly spend as

many days as there remain hours between now and nightfall; and I dare say

that Simplicio would not be wearied by these discussions.


Simp. Certainly not; especially when the questions pertain to natural science

and have not been treated by other philosophers.


Salv. Now taking up the first question, I can assert without hesitation that

there is no sphere so large, or composed of material so dense but that the

resistance of the medium, although very slight, would check its acceleration

and would, in time reduce its motion to uniformity; a statement which is

strongly supported by experiment. For if a falling body, as time goes on, were

to  acquire  a  speed  as  great  as  you  please,  no  such  speed,  impressed  by

external forces [motore esterno], can be so great but that the body will first

acquire it and then, owing to the resisting medium, lose it. Thus, for instance,

if a cannon ball, having fallen a distance of four cubits through the air and

having acquired a speed of, say, ten units [gradi] were to strike the surface of

the  water,  and  if  the  resistance  of  the  water  were  not  able  to  check  the

momentum [impeto] of the shot, it would either increase in speed or maintain

a uniform motion until the bottom were reached: but such is not the observed

fact; on the contrary, the water when only a few cubits deep hinders and

diminishes the motion in such a way that the shot delivers to the bed of the

river or lake a very slight impulse. Clearly then if a short fall through the

water is sufficient to deprive a cannon ball of its speed, this speed cannot be

regained by a fall of even a thousand cubits. How could a body acquire, in a

fall of a thousand cubits, that which it loses in a fall of four? But what more

is needed? Do we not observe that the enormous momentum, delivered to a

shot by a cannon, is so deadened by passing through a few cubits of water

that the ball, so far from injuring the ship, barely strikes it? Even the air,

although a very yielding medium, can also diminish the speed of a falling

body, as may be easily understood from similar experiments. For if a gun be

fired downwards from the top of a very high tower the shot will make asmaller impression upon the ground than if the gun had been fired from an

elevation of only four or six cubits; this is clear evidence that the momentum

of the ball, fired from the top of the tower, diminishes continually from the

instant it leaves the barrel until it reaches the ground. Therefore a fall from

ever so great an altitude will not suffice to give to a body that momentum

which it has once lost through the resistance of the air, no matter how it was

originally acquired. In like manner, the destructive effect produced upon a

wall by a shot fired from a gun at a distance of twenty cubits cannot be

duplicated by the fall of the same shot from any altitude however great. My

opinion is, therefore, that under the circumstances which occur in nature, the

acceleration  of  any  body  falling  from  rest  reaches  an  end  and  that  the

resistance of the medium finally reduces its speed to a constant value which

is thereafter maintained.


Sagr. These experiments are in my opinion much to the purpose; the only

question is whether an opponent might not make bold to deny the fact in the

case of bodies [moli]  which  are  very  large  and  heavy  or  to  assert  that  a

cannon ball, falling from the distance of the moon or from the upper regions

of  the  atmosphere,  would  deliver  a  heavier  blow  than  if  just  leaving  the

muzzle of the gun.


Salv. No doubt many objections may be raised not all of which can be refuted

by experiment: however in this particular case the following consideration

must be taken into account, namely, that it is very likely that a heavy body

falling from a height will, on reaching the ground, have acquired just as much

momentum as was necessary to carry it to that height; as may be clearly seen

in the case of a rather heavy pendulum which, when pulled aside fifty or sixty

degrees from the vertical, will acquire precisely that speed and force which

are sufficient to carry it to an equal elevation save only that small portion

which it loses through friction on the air. In order to place a cannon ball at

such  a  height  as  might  suffice  to  give  it  just  that  momentum  which  the

powder  imparted  to  it  on  leaving  the  gun  we  need  only  fire  it  vertically

upwards from the same gun; and we can then observe whether on falling back

it delivers a blow equal to that of the gun fired at close range; in my opinion

it would be much weaker. The resistance of the air would, therefore, I think,

prevent the muzzle velocity from being equalled by a natural fall from rest at

any height whatsoever.  We come now to the other questions, relating to pendulums, a subject

which may appear to many exceedingly arid, especially to those philosophers

who are continually occupied with the more profound questions of nature.

Nevertheless, the problem is one which I do not scorn. I am encouraged by

the example of Aristotle whom I admire especially because he did not fail to

discuss  every  subject  which  he  thought  in  any  degree  worthy  of

consideration.

  Impelled by your queries I may give you some of my ideas concerning

certain problems in music, a splendid subject, upon which so many eminent

men  have  written:  among  these  is  Aristotle  himself  who  has  discussed

numerous interesting accoustical questions. Accordingly, if on the basis of

some easy and tangible experiments, I shall explain some striking phenomena

in the domain of sound, I trust my explanations will meet your approval.


Sagr. I shall receive them not only gratefully but eagerly. For, although I take

pleasure  in  every  kind  of  musical  instrument  and  have  paid  considerable

attention to harmony, I have never been able to fully understand why some

combinations  of  tones  are  more  pleasing  than  others,  or  why  certain

combinations not only fail to please but are even highly offensive. Then there

is the old problem of two stretched strings in unison; when one of them is

sounded, the other begins to vibrate and to emit its note; nor do I understand

the  different  ratios  of  harmony  [forme delle consonanze]  and  some  other

details.


Salv. Let us see whether we cannot derive from the pendulum a satisfactory

solution of all these difficulties. And first, as to the question whether one and

the same pendulum really performs its vibrations, large, medium, and small,

all in exactly the same time, I shall rely upon what I have already heard from

our Academician. He has clearly shown that the time of descent is the same

along all chords, whatever the arcs which subtend them, as well along an arc

of 180° (i. e., the whole diameter) as along one of 100°, 60°, 10°, 2°, ½°, or

4′. It is understood, of course, that these arcs all terminate at the lowest point

of the circle, where it touches the horizontal plane.

  If  now  we  consider  descent  along  arcs  instead  of  their  chords  then,

provided  these  do  not  exceed  90°,  experiment  shows  that  they  are  all

traversed in equal times; but these times are greater for the chord than for the

arc, an effect which is all the more remarkable because at first glance one