resistance shown by her distribution of libido to the upheaval of the

first  sexual  act,  and  the  less  overpowering  will  be  the  effect  which

bodily  possession  of  her  can  produce.  Frigidity  may  then  become

established as a neurotic inhibition or provide the foundation for the

development of other neuroses and even a moderate diminution of

potency in the man will greatly contribute to help this process.

 


                                The Taboo Of Virginity

                                                                                      2359

 

   The customs of primitive peoples seem to take account of this motif

of the early sexual wish by handing over the task of defloration to an

elder, priest or holy man, that is, to a substitute for the father (see

above).  There  seems  to  me  to  be  a  direct  path  leading  from  this

custom to the highly vexed question of the jus primae noctis of the

mediaeval lord of the manor. A. J. Storfer (1911) has put forward the

same  view  and  has  in  addition,  as  Jung  (1909)  had  already  done

before him, interpreted the widespread tradition of the ‘Tobias nights’

(the custom of continence during the first three nights of marriage) as

an acknowledgement of the privilege of the patriarch. It agrees with

our expectations, therefore, when we find the images of gods included

among  the  father-surrogates  entrusted  with  defloration.  In  some

districts of India, the newly-married woman was obliged to sacrifice

her hymen to the wooden lingam, and, according to St. Augustine’s

account, the same custom existed in the Roman marriage ceremony

(of his time?), but modified so that the young wife only had to seat

herself on the gigantic stone phallus of Priapus.¹

      There  is  another  motive,  reaching  down  into  still  deeper  layers,

which  can  be  shown  to  bear  the  chief  blame  for  the  paradoxical

reaction towards the man, and which, in my view, further makes its

influence felt in female frigidity. The first act of intercourse activates in

a woman other impulses of long standing as well as those already

described, and these are in complete opposition to her womanly role

and function.

   We have learnt from the analysis of many neurotic women that they

go through an early age in which they envy their brothers their sign ofmasculinity and feel at a disadvantage and humiliated because of the

lack of it (actually because of its diminished size) in themselves. We

include  this  ‘envy  for  the  penis’  in  the  ‘castration  complex’.  If  we

understand  ‘masculine’  as  including  the  idea  of  wishing  to  be

masculine, then the designation ‘masculine protest’ fits this behaviour;

the phrase was coined by Adler with the intention of proclaiming this

factor as being responsible for neurosis in general. During this phase,

little  girls  often  make  no  secret  of  their  envy,  nor  of  the  hostility

towards their favoured brothers which arises from it. They even try to

urinate  standing  upright  like  their  brothers  in  order  to  prove  the

equality  which  they  lay  claim  to.  In  the  case  already  described  in

which  the  woman  used  to  show  uncontrolled  aggression  after

intercourse towards her husband, whom otherwise she loved, I was

able  to  establish  that  this  phase  had  existed  before  that  of  object-

choice. Only later was the little girl’s libido directed towards her father,

and then, instead of wanting to have a penis, she wanted - a child.²

 

   ¹ Ploss and Bartels (1891, 1, xii) and Dulaure (1905, 142).

   ² Cf. ‘On Transformations of Instinct as Exemplified in Anal Erotism’ (1917c).

 


                                The Taboo Of Virginity

                                                                                      2360

 

   I should not be surprised if in other cases the order in which these

impulses  occurred  were  reversed  and  this  part  of  the  castration

complex  only  became  effective  after  a  choice  of  object  had  been

successfully made. But the masculine phase in the girl in which she

envies the boy for his penis is in any case developmentally the earlier,

and it is closer to the original narcissism than it is to object-love.

   Some time ago I chanced to have an opportunity of obtaining insight

into a dream of a newly-married woman which was recognizable as a

reaction  to  the  loss  of  her  virginity.  It  betrayed  spontaneously  the

woman’s wish to castrate her young husband and to keep his penis for

herself.  Certainly  there  was  also  room  for  the  more  innocent

interpretation  that  what  she  wished  for  was  the  prolongation  and

repetition of the act, but several details of the dream did not fit into this

meaning and the character as well as the subsequent behaviour of thewoman  who  had  the  dream  gave  evidence  in  favour  of  the  more

serious view. Behind this envy for the penis, there comes to light the

woman’s hostile bitterness against the man, which never completely

disappears in the relations between the sexes, and which is clearly

indicated  in  the  strivings  and  in  the  literary  productions  of

‘emancipated’  women.  In  a  palaeo-biological  speculation,  Ferenczi

has traced back this hostility of women - I do not know if he is the first

to do so - to the period in time when the sexes became differentiated.

At  first,  in  his  opinion,  copulation  took  place  between  two  similar

individuals, one of which, however, developed into the stronger and

forced  the  weaker  one  to  submit  to  sexual  union.  The  feelings  of

bitterness arising from this subjection still persist in the present-day

disposition of women. I do not think there is any harm in employing

such speculations, so long as one avoids setting too much value on

them.

 


                                The Taboo Of Virginity

                                                                                      2361

 

   After this enumeration of the motives for the paradoxical reaction of

women to defloration, traces of which persist in frigidity, we may sum

up by saying that a woman’s immature sexuality, is discharged on to

the  man  who  first  makes  her  acquainted  with  the  sexual  act.  This

being  so,  the  taboo  of  virginity  is  reasonable  enough  and  we  can

understand the rule which decrees that precisely the man who is to

enter upon a life shared with this woman shall avoid these dangers. At

higher stages of civilization the importance attributed to this danger

diminishes in face of her promise of bondage and no doubt of other

motives and inducements; virginity is looked upon as a possession

which the husband is not called upon to renounce. But analysis of

disturbed marriages teaches us that the motives which seek to drive a

woman  to  take  vengeance  for  her  defloration  are  not  completely

extinguished even in the mental life of civilized women. I think it must

strike the observer in how uncommonly large a number of cases the

woman remains frigid and feels unhappy in a first marriage, whereas

after it has been dissolved she becomes a tender wife, able to makeher second husband happy. The archaic reaction has, so to speak,

exhausted itself on the first object.

   The taboo of virginity, however, even apart from this has not died

out  in  our  civilized  existence.  It  is  known  to  the  popular  mind  and

writers  have  on  occasion  made  use  of  this  material.  A  comedy  by

Anzengruber  shows  how  a  simple  peasant  lad  is  deterred  from

marrying his intended bride be cause she is ‘a wench who’ll cost her

first his life’. For this reason he agrees to her marrying another man

and  is  ready  to  take  her  when  she  is  a  widow  and  no  longer

dangerous. The title of the play, Das Jungferngift [‘Virgin’s Venom’],

reminds  us  of  the  habit  of  snake-charmers,  who  make  poisonous

snakes first bite a piece of cloth in order to handle them afterwards

without danger.¹

 

   ¹ A masterly short story by Arthur Schnitzler (Das Schicksal des Freiherrn von Leisenbogh)

[‘The Fate of Freiherr von Leisenbogh’] deserves to be included here, in spite of the rather
different situation. The lover of an actress who is very experienced in love is dying as the
result of an accident. He creates a sort of new virginity for her, by putting a curse of death on
the man who is the first to possess her after himself. For a time the woman with this taboo
upon her does not venture on any love-affair. However, after she has fallen in love with a
singer, she hits on the solution of first granting a night to the Freiherr von Leisenbogh, who
has been pursuing her for years. And the curse falls on him: he has a stroke as soon as he
learns the motive behind his unexpected good fortune in love.
 


                                The Taboo Of Virginity

                                                                                      2362

 

      The  taboo  of  virginity  and  something  of  its  motivation  has  been

depicted  most  powerfully  of  all  in  a  well-known  dramatic  character,

that of Judith in Hebbel’s tragedy Judith und Holofernes. Judith is one

of  those  women  whose  virginity  is  protected  by  a  taboo.  Her  first

husband was paralysed on the bridal night by a mysterious anxiety,

and never again dared to touch her, ‘My beauty is like belladonna,’

she  says.  ‘Enjoyment  of  it  brings  madness  and  death.’  When  the

Assyrian  general  is  besieging  her  city,  she  conceives  the  plan  of

seducing him by her beauty and of destroying him, thus employing a

patriotic  motive  to  conceal  a  sexual  one.  After  she  has  been

deflowered  by  this  powerful  man,  who  boasts  of  his  strength  and

ruthlessness, she finds the strength in her fury to strike off his head,and  thus  becomes  the  liberator  of  her  people.  Beheading  is  well

known  to  us  as  a  symbolic  substitute  for  castrating;  Judith  is

accordingly the woman who castrates the man who has deflowered

her, which was just the wish of the newly-married woman expressed in

the  dream  I  reported.  It  is  clear  that  Hebbel  has  intentionally

sexualized  the  patriotic  narrative  from  the  Apocrypha  of  the  Old

Testament, for there Judith is able to boast after her return that she

has not been defiled, nor is there in the Biblical text any mention of her

uncanny wedding night. But probably, with the fine perception of a

poet,  he  sensed  the  ancient  motive,  which  had  been  lost  in  the

tendentious narrative, and has merely restored its earlier content to

the material.

   Sadger (1912) has shown in a penetrating analysis how Hebbel was

determined in his choice of material by his own parental complex, and

how he came to take the part of the woman so regularly in the struggle

between the sexes, and to feel his way into the most hidden impulses

of her mind. He also quotes the motives which the poet himself gives

for the alteration he has made in the material, and he rightly finds

them artificial and as though intended to justify outwardly something

the poet himself is unconscious of, while at bottom concealing it. I will

not dispute Sadger’s explanation of why Judith, who according to the

Biblical narrative is a widow, has to become a virgin widow. He refers

to  the  purpose  found  in  childish  phantasies  of  denying  the  sexual

intercourse of the parents and of turning the mother into an untouched

virgin.  But  I  will  add:  after  the  poet  has  established  his  heroine’s

virginity,  his  sensitive  imagination  dwells  on  the  hostile  reaction

released by the violation of her maidenhood.

 


                                The Taboo Of Virginity

                                                                                      2363

 

   We may say, then, in conclusion that defloration has not only the

one, civilized consequence of binding the woman lastingly to the man;

it also unleashes an archaic reaction of hostility towards him, which

can assume pathological forms that are frequently enough expressed

in the appearance of inhibitions in the erotic side of married life, and towhich we may ascribe the fact that second marriages so often turn out

better than first. The taboo of virginity, which seems so strange to us,

the horror with which, among primitive peoples, the husband avoids

the act of defloration, are fully justified by this hostile reaction.

   It is interesting that in one’s capacity as analyst one can meet with

women in whom the opposed reactions of bondage and hostility both

find  expression  and  remain  intimately  associated  with  each  other.

There are women of this kind who seem to have fallen out with their

husbands completely and who all the same can only make vain efforts

to free themselves. As often as they try to direct their love towards

some other man, the image of the first, although he is no longer loved,

intervenes with inhibiting effect. Analysis then teaches us that these

women,  it  is  true,  still  cling  to  their  first  husbands  in  a  state  of

bondage, but no longer through affection. They cannot get away from

them, because they have not completed their revenge upon them, and

in  pronounced  cases  they  have  not  even  brought  the  impulses  for

vengeance to consciousness.

                                                                                       2364

 

            THE PSYCHO-ANALYTIC VIEW OF PSYCHOGENIC

                            DISTURBANCE OF VISION

                                        (1910)

 


                                                                                      2365

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2366

 

            THE PSYCHO-ANALYTIC VIEW OF PSYCHOGENIC

                            DISTURBANCE OF VISION

 

GENTLEMEN,  -  I  propose  to  take  the  example  of  psychogenic

disturbance of vision, in order to show you the modifications which

have taken place in our view of the genesis of disorders of this kind

under  the  influence  of  psycho-analytic  methods  of  investigation.  As

you know, hysterical blindness is taken as the type of a psychogenic

visual  disturbance.  It  is  generally  believed,  as  a  result  of  the

researches  of  the  French  School  (including  such  men  as  Charcot,

Janet and Binet), that the genesis of these cases is understood. For

we are in a position to produce blindness of this kind experimentally if

we  have  at  our  disposal  someone  who  is  susceptible  to

somnambulism. If we put him into deep hypnosis and suggest the idea

to him that he sees nothing with one of his eyes, he will in fact behave

as though he had become blind in that eye, like a hysteric who has

developed a visual disturbance spontaneously. We may thus construct

the mechanism of spontaneous hysterical disturbances of vision on

the model of suggested hypnotic ones. In a hysteric the idea of being

blind arises, not from the prompting of a hypnotist, but spontaneously -

by autosuggestion, as people say; and in both cases this idea is so

powerful that it turns into reality, exactly like a suggested hallucination,

paralysis, etc.   This seems perfectly sound and will satisfy anyone who can ignore

the many enigmas that lie concealed behind the concepts of hypnosis,

suggestion  and  autosuggestion.  Autosuggestion  in  particular  raises

further  questions.  When  and  under  what  conditions  does  an  idea

become so powerful that it is able to behave like a suggestion and turn

into reality without more ado? Closer investigation has taught us that

we  cannot  answer  this  question  without  calling  the  concept  of  the

‘unconscious’ to our assistance. Many philosophers rebel against the

assumption of a mental unconscious of this kind, because they have

not concerned themselves with the phenomena which compel us to

make  that  assumption.  Psychopathologists  have  found  that  they

cannot  avoid  working  with  such  things  as  unconscious  mental

processes, unconscious ideas, and so on.

 


    The Psycho-Analytic View Of Psychogenic Disturbance Of Vision

                                                                                      2367

 

      Appropriate  experiments  have  shown  that  people  who  are

hysterically blind do nevertheless see in some sense, though not in

the full sense. Excitations of the blind eye may have certain psychical

consequences (for instance, they may produce affects) even though

they do not become conscious. Thus hysterically blind people are only

blind as far as consciousness is concerned; in their unconscious they

see.  It  is  precisely  observations  such  as  this  that  compel  us  to

distinguish between conscious and unconscious mental processes.

      How  does  it  happen  that  such  people  develop  the  unconscious

‘autosuggestion’  that  they  are  blind,  while  nevertheless  they  see  in

their unconscious?  The reply given by the French researches is to

explain that in patients predisposed to hysteria there is an inherent

tendency to dissociation - to a falling apart of the connections in their

mental  field  -  as  a  consequence  of  which  some  unconscious

processes do not continue as far as into the conscious. Let us leave

entirely  on  one  side  the  value  that  this  attempted  explanation  may

have as regards an understanding of the phenomena in question, and

let us look at the matter from another angle. As you see, Gentlemen,

the  identity  of  hysterical  blindness  with  the  blindness  provoked  bysuggestion, on which so much stress was laid to begin with, has now

been given up. The hysterical patient is blind, not as the result of an

autosuggestive  idea  that  he  cannot  see,  but  as  the  result  of  a

dissociation between unconscious and conscious processes in the act

of seeing; his idea that he does not see is the well-founded expression

of the psychical state of affairs and not its cause.

   If, Gentlemen, you complain of the obscurity of this exposition I shall

not find it easy to defend. I have tried to give you a synthesis of the

views  of  different  investigators,  and  in  doing  so  I  have  probably

coupled them together too closely. I wanted to condense into a single

composite whole the concepts that have been brought up to make

psychogenic  disturbances  intelligible  -  their  origin  from  excessively

powerful  ideas,  the  distinction  between  conscious  and  unconscious

mental processes and the assumption of mental dissociation. And I

have  been  no  more  successful  in  this  than  the  French  writers,  at

whose  head  stands  Pierre  Janet.  I  hope,  therefore,  that  you  will

excuse not only the obscurity but the inaccuracy of my exposition, and

will allow me to tell you how psycho-analysis has led us to a view of

psychogenic disturbances of vision which is more self-consistent and

probably closer to the facts.

 


    The Psycho-Analytic View Of Psychogenic Disturbance Of Vision

                                                                                      2368

 

   Psycho-analysis, too, accepts the assumptions of dissociation and

the unconscious, but relates them differently to each other. Its view is

a dynamic one, which traces mental life back to an interplay between

forces that favour or inhibit one another. If in any instance one group

of ideas remains in the unconscious, psycho-analysis does not infer

that there is a constitutional incapacity for synthesis which is showing

itself in this particular dissociation, but maintains that the isolation and

state of unconsciousness of this group of ideas have been caused by

an active opposition on the part of other groups. The process owing to

which it has met with this fate is known as ‘repression’ and we regard

it as something analogous to a condemnatory judgement in the field of

logic. Psycho-analysis points out that repressions of this kind play anextraordinarily important part in our mental life, but that they may also

frequently fail and that such failures of repression are the precondition

of the formation of symptoms.

      If,  then,  as  we  have  learnt,  psychogenic  disturbances  of  vision

depend  on  certain  ideas  connected  with  seeing  being  cut  off  from

consciousness, we must, on the psycho-analytic view, assume that

these ideas have come into opposition to other, more powerful ones,

for  which  we  use  the  collective  concept  of  the  ‘ego’-  a  compound

which  is  made  up  variously  at  different  times  -  and  have  for  that

reason  come  under  repression.  But  what  can  be  the  origin  of  this

opposition, which makes for repression, between the ego and various

groups of ideas? You will no doubt notice that it was not possible to

frame  such  a  question  before  the  advent  of  psycho-analysis,  for

nothing was known earlier of psychical conflict and repression. Our

researches, however, have put us in a position to give us the desired

answer.  Our  attention  has  been  drawn  to  the  importance  of  the

instincts in ideational life. We have discovered that every instinct tries

to make itself effective by activating ideas that are in keeping with its

aims.  These  instincts  are  not  always  compatible  with  one  another;

their interests often come into conflict. Opposition between ideas is

only an expression of struggles between the various instincts. From

the  point  of  view  of  our  attempted  explanation,  a  quite  specially

important  part  is  played  by  the  undeniable  opposition  between  the

instincts which subserve sexuality, the attainment of sexual pleasure,

and those other instincts, which have as their aim the self-preservation

of  the  individual  -  the  ego-instincts.  As  the  poet  has  said,  all  the

organic instincts that operate in our mind may be classified as ‘hunger’

or  ‘love’.  We  have  traced  the  ‘sexual  instinct’  from  its  first

manifestations  in  children  to  its  final  form,  which  is  described  as

‘normal’.  We  have  found  that  it  is  put  together  from  numerous

‘component instincts’ which are attached to excitations of regions of

the body; and we have come to see that these separate instincts have

to  pass  through  a  complicated  development  before  they  can  be

brought effectively to serve the aims of reproduction. The light thrown

by psychology on the evolution of our civilization has shown us that it

originates mainly at the cost of the sexual component instincts, and

that these must be suppressed, restricted, transformed and directed tohigher aims, in order that the mental constructions of civilization may

be  established.  We  have  been  able  to  recognize  as  a  valuable

outcome of these researches something that our colleagues have not

yet been willing to believe, namely that the human ailments known as

‘neuroses’ are derived from the many different ways in which these

processes  of  transformation  in  the  sexual  component  instincts  may

miscarry.  The  ‘ego’  feels  threatened  by  the  claims  of  the  sexual

instincts and fends them off by repressions; these, however, do not

always have the desired result, but lead to the formation of dangerous

substitutes for the repressed and to burdensome reactions on the part

of  the  ego.  From  these  two  classes  of  phenomena  taken  together

there emerge what we call the symptoms of neuroses.

 


    The Psycho-Analytic View Of Psychogenic Disturbance Of Vision

                                                                                      2369

 

   We have apparently digressed widely from our problem, though in

doing  so  we  have  touched  on  the  manner  in  which  neurotic

pathological conditions are related to our mental life as a whole. But

let  us  now  return  to  the  narrower  question.  The  sexual  and  ego-

instincts alike have in general the same organs and systems of organs

at  their  disposal.  Sexual  pleasure  is  not  attached  merely  to  the

function of the genitals. The mouth serves for kissing as well as for

eating  and  communication  by  speech;  the  eyes  perceive  not  only

alterations  in  the  external  world  which  are  important  for  the

preservation of life, but also characteristics of objects which lead to

their being chosen as objects of love - their charms. The saying that it

is not easy for anyone to serve two masters is thus confirmed. The

closer the relation into which an organ with a dual function of this kind

enters with one of the major instincts, the more it with holds itself from

the other. This principle is bound to lead to pathological consequences

if the two fundamental instincts are disunited and if the ego maintains

a repression of the sexual component instinct concerned. It is easy to

apply this to the eye and to seeing. Let us suppose that the sexual

component instinct which makes use of looking - sexual pleasure in

looking - has drawn upon itself defensive action by the ego-instincts inconsequence of its excessive demands, so that the ideas in which its

desires are expressed succumb to repression and are prevented from

becoming conscious; in that case there will be a general disturbance

of  the  relation  of  the  eye  and  of  the  act  of  seeing  to  the  ego  and

consciousness. The ego will have lost its dominance over the organ,

which  will  now  be  wholly  at  the  disposal  of  the  repressed  sexual

instinct. It looks as though the repression had been carried too far by

the ego, as though it had emptied the baby out with the bath-water:

the ego refuses to see anything at all any more, now that the sexual

interest in seeing has made itself so prominent. But the alternative

picture seems more to the point. This attributes the active role instead

to the repressed pleasure in looking. The repressed instinct takes its

revenge  for  being  held  back  from  further  psychical  expansion,  by

becoming able to extend its dominance over the organ that is in its

service.  The  loss  of  conscious  dominance  over  the  organ  is  the

detrimental  substitute  for  the  repression  which  had  miscarried  and

was only made possible at that price.

 


    The Psycho-Analytic View Of Psychogenic Disturbance Of Vision

                                                                                      2370

 

   This relation of an organ with a double claim on it - its relation to the

conscious ego and to repressed sexuality - is to be seen even more

clearly in motor organs than in the eye: as when, for instance, a hand

which  has  tried  to  carry  out  an  act  of  sexual  aggression,  and  has

become  paralysed  hysterically,  is  unable,  after  that  act  has  been

inhibited, to do anything else as though it were obstinately insisting on

carrying out a repressed innervation; or as when the fingers of people

who  have  given  up  masturbation  refuse  to  learn  the  delicate

movements required for playing the piano or the violin. As regards the

eye, we are in the habit of translating the obscure psychical processes

concerned  in  the  repression  of  sexual  scopophilia  and  in  the

development  of  the  psychogenic  disturbance  of  vision  as  though  a

punishing  voice  was  speaking  from  within  the  subject,  and  saying:

‘Because you sought to misuse your organ of sight for evil sensual

pleasures, it is fitting that you should not see anything at all any more’,and  as  though  it  was  in  this  way  approving  the  outcome  of  the

process. The idea of talion punishment is involved in this, and in fact

our explanation of psychogenic visual disturbance coincides with what

is  suggested  by  myths  and  legends.  The  beautiful  legend  of  Lady

Godiva tells how all the town’s inhabitants hid behind their shuttered

windows, so as to make easier the lady’s task of riding naked through

the  streets  in  broad  daylight,  and  how  the  only  man  who  peeped

through the shutters at her revealed loveliness was punished by going

blind. Nor is this the only example which suggests that neurotic illness

holds the hidden key to mythology as well.

   Psycho-analysis is unjustly reproached, Gentlemen, for leading to

purely psychological theories of pathological problems. The emphasis

which it lays on the pathogenic role of sexuality, which, after all, is

certainly  not  an  exclusively  psychical  factor  should  alone  protect  it

from this reproach. Psycho-analysts never forget that the mental is

based on the organic, although their work can only carry them as far

as  this  basis  and  no  beyond  it.  Thus  psycho-analysis  is  ready  to

admit, and indeed to postulate, that not all disturbances of vision need

be psychogenic, like those that are evoked by the repression of erotic

scopophilia.  If  an  organ  which  serves  the  two  sorts  of  instinct

increases its erotogenic role, it is in general to be expected that this

will  not  occur  without  the  excitability  and  innervation  of  the  organ

undergoing changes which will manifest themselves as disturbances

of its function in the service of the ego. Indeed, if we find that an organ

normally serving the purpose of sense-perception begins to behave

like an actual genital when its erotogenic role is increased, we shall

not regard it as improbable that toxic changes are also occurring in it.

For lack of a better name we must retain the old unsuitable term of

‘neurotic’  disturbances  for  both  classes  of  functional  disturbances  -

those of physiological as well as those of toxic origin - which follow

from  an  increase  in  the  erotogenic  factor.  Generally  speaking,  the

neurotic  disturbances  of  vision  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  the

psychogenic ones as the ‘actual neuroses’ do to the psychoneuroses:

psychogenic  visual  disturbances  can  no  doubt  hardly  ever  appear

without neurotic ones, but the latter can appear without the former.

These  neurotic  symptoms  are  unfortunately  little  appreciated  and

understood even today; for they are not directly accessible to psycho-analysis, and other methods of research have left the standpoint of

sexuality out of account.

 


    The Psycho-Analytic View Of Psychogenic Disturbance Of Vision

                                                                                      2371

 

   Yet another line of thought extending into organic research branches

off  from  psycho-analysis.  We  may  ask  ourselves  whether  the

suppression of sexual component instincts which is brought about by

environmental  influences  is  sufficient  in  itself  to  call  up  functional

disturbances  in  organs,  or  whether  special  constitutional  conditions

must  be  present  in  order  that  the  organs  may  be  led  to  an

exaggeration  of  their  erotogenic  role  and  consequently  provoke

repression of the instincts. We should have to see in those conditions

the constitutional part of the disposition to fall ill of psychogenic and

neurotic disorders. This is the factor to which, as applied to hysteria, I

gave the provisional name of ‘somatic compliance’.

  2372

 

                            ‘WILD’ PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

                                        (1910)

 


                                                                                      2373

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2374

 

                            ‘WILD’ PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

A few days ago a middle-aged lady, under the protection of a female

friend,  called  upon  me  for  a  consultation,  complaining  of  anxiety-

states. She was in the second half of her forties, fairly well preserved,

and  had  obviously  not  yet  finished  with  her  womanhood.  The

precipitating cause of the outbreak of her anxiety-states had been a

divorce  from  her  last  husband;  but  the  anxiety  had  become

considerably  intensified,  according  to  her  account,  since  she  had

consulted a young physician in the suburb she lived in, for he had

informed  her  that  the  cause  of  her  anxiety  was  her  lack  of  sexual

satisfaction. He said that she could not tolerate the loss of intercourse

with her husband, and so there were only three ways by which she

could recover her health - she must either return to her husband, or

take a lover, or obtain satisfaction from herself. Since then she had

been convinced that she was incurable, for she would not return to her

husband, and the other two alternatives were repugnant to her moral

and religious feelings. She had come to me, however, because the

doctor  had  said  that  this  was  a  new  discovery  for  which  I  was

responsible, and that she had only to come and ask me to confirm

what he said, and I should tell her that this and nothing else was the

truth. The friend who was with her, an older, dried-up and unhealthy-

looking woman, then implored me to assure the patient that the doctorwas mistaken; it could not possibly be true, for she herself had been a

widow for many years, and had nevertheless remained respectable

without suffering from anxiety.

   I will not dwell on the awkward predicament in which I was placed by

this visit, but instead will consider the conduct of the practitioner who

sent this lady to me. First, however, let us bear a reservation in mind

which may possibly not be superfluous - indeed we will hope so. Long

years of experience have taught me - as they could teach everyone

else - not to accept straight away as true what patients, especially

nervous patients, relate about their physician. Not only does a nerve-

specialist  easily  become  the  object  of  many  of  his  patients’  hostile

feelings,  whatever  method  of  treatment  he  employs;  he  must  also

sometimes  resign  himself  to  accepting  responsibility,  by  a  kind  of

projection, for the buried repressed wishes of his nervous patients. It

is a melancholy but significant fact that such accusations nowhere find

credence more readily than among other physicians.

 


                                'Wild' Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2375

 

      I  therefore  have  reason  to  hope  that  this  lady  gave  me  a

tendentiously distorted account of what her doctor had said and that I

do  a  man  who  is  unknown  to  me  an  injustice  by  connecting  my

remarks about ‘wild’ psycho-analysis with this incident. But by doing

so I may perhaps prevent others from doing harm to their patients.

      Let  us  suppose,  therefore,  that  her  doctor  spoke  to  the  patient

exactly as she reported. Everyone will at once bring us the criticism

that  if  a  physician  thinks  it  necessary  to  discuss  the  question  of

sexuality with a woman he must do so with tact and consideration.

Compliance with this demand, however, coincides with carrying out

certain technical rules of psycho-analysis. Moreover, the physician in

question was ignorant of a number of the scientific theories of psycho-

analysis or had misapprehended them, and thus showed how little he

had penetrated into an understanding of its nature and purposes.

   Let us start with the latter, the scientific errors. The doctor’s advice

to  the  lady  shows  clearly  in  what  sense  he  understands  theexpression ‘sexual life’ - in the popular sense, namely, in which by

sexual needs nothing is meant but the need for coitus or analogous

acts producing orgasm and emission of the sexual substances. He

cannot  have  remained  unaware,  however,  that  psycho-analysis  is

commonly reproached with having extended the concept of what is

sexual far beyond its usual range. The fact is undisputed; I shall not

discuss here whether it may justly be used as a reproach. In psycho-

analysis the concept of what is sexual comprises far more; it goes

lower  and  also  higher  than  its  popular  sense.  This  extension  is

justified  genetically;  we  reckon  as  belonging  to  ‘sexual  life’  all  the

activities of the tender feelings which have primitive sexual impulses

as their source, even when those impulses have become inhibited in

regard  to  their  original  sexual  aim  or  have  exchanged  this  aim  for

another which is no longer sexual. For this reason we prefer to speak

of psychosexuality,  thus  laying  stress  on  the  point  that  the  mental

factor in sexual life should not be overlooked or underestimated. We

use the word ‘sexuality’ in the same comprehensive sense as that in

which the German language uses the word lieben [‘to love’]. We have

long  known,  too,  that  mental  absence  of  satisfaction  with  all  its

consequences  can  exist  where  there  is  no  lack  of  normal  sexual

intercourse;  and  as  therapists  we  always  bear  in  mind  that  the

unsatisfied sexual trends (whose substitutive satisfactions in the form

of nervous symptoms we combat) can often find only very inadequate

outlet in coitus or other sexual acts.

 


                                'Wild' Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2376

 

   Anyone not sharing this view of psychosexuality has no right to

adduce  psycho-analytic  theses  dealing  with  the  aetiological

importance of sexuality. By emphasizing exclusively the somatic factor

in  sexuality  he  undoubtedly  simplifies  the  problem  greatly,  but  he

alone must bear the responsibility for what he does.

   A second and equally gross misunderstanding is discernible behind

the physician’s advice.

      It  is  true  that  psycho-analysis  puts  forward  absence  of  sexualsatisfaction as the cause of nervous disorders. But does it not say

more than this? Is its teaching to be ignored as too complicated when

it declares that nervous symptoms arise from a conflict between two

forces  -  on  the  one  hand,  the  libido  (which  has  as  a  rule  become

excessive), and on the other, a rejection of sexuality, or a repression

which  is  over-severe?  No  one  who  remembers  this  second  factor,

which is by no means secondary in importance, can ever believe that

sexual satisfaction in itself constitutes a remedy of general reliability

for the sufferings of neurotics. A good number of these people are,

indeed, either in their actual circumstances or in general incapable of

satisfaction. If they were capable of it, if they were without their inner

resistances, the strength of the instinct itself would point the way to

satisfaction for them even though no doctor advised it. What is the

good,  therefore,  of  medical  advice  such  as  that  supposed  to  have

been given to this lady?

   Even if it could be justified scientifically, it is not advice that she can

carry out. If she had had no inner resistances against masturbation or

against  a  liaison  she  would  of  course  have  adopted  one  of  these

measures long before. Or does the physician think that a woman of

over  forty  is  unaware  that  one  can  take  a  lover,  or  does  he  over-

estimate his influence so much as to think that she could never decide

upon such a step without medical approval?

 


                                'Wild' Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2377

 

   All this seems very clear, and yet it must be admitted the there is

one factor which often makes it difficult to form a judgement. Some

nervous states which we call the ‘actual neuroses’, such as typical

neurasthenia  and  pure  anxiety  neurosis,  obviously  depend  on  the

somatic factor in sexual life, while we have no certain picture as yet of

the part played in them by the psychical factor and by repression. In

such cases it is natural that the physician should first consider some

‘actual’  therapy,  some  alteration  in  the  patient’s  somatic  sexual

activity,  and  he  does  so  with  perfect  justification  if  his  diagnosis  is

correct. The lady who consulted the young doctor complained chieflyof anxiety-states, and so he probably assumed that she was suffering

from an anxiety neurosis, and felt justified in recommending a somatic

therapy  to  her.  Again  a  convenient  misapprehension!    A  person

suffering from anxiety is not for that reason necessarily suffering from

anxiety neurosis; such a diagnosis of it cannot be based on the name;

one has to know what signs constitute an anxiety neurosis, and be

able  to  distinguish  it  from  other  pathological  states  which  are  also

manifested by anxiety. My impression was that the lady in question

was  suffering  from  anxiety hysteria,  and  the  whole  value  of  such

nosographical distinctions, one which quite justifies them, lies in the

fact that they indicate a different aetiology and a different treatment.

No one who took into consideration the possibility of anxiety hysteria

in this case would have fallen into the error of neglecting the mental

factors, as this physician did with his three alternatives.

 


                                'Wild' Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2378

 

   Oddly enough, the three therapeutic alternatives of this so-called

psycho-analyst  leave  no  room  for  -  psycho-analysis!  This  woman

could  apparently  only  be  cured  of  her  anxiety  by  returning  to  her

husband, or by satisfying her needs by masturbation or with a lover.

And where does analytic treatment come in, the treatment which we

regard as the main remedy in anxiety-states?

   This brings us to the technical errors which are to be seen in the

doctor’s procedure in this alleged case. It is a long superseded idea,

and one derived from superficial appearances, that the patient suffers

from a sort of ignorance, and that if one removes this ignorance by

giving him information (about the causal connection of his illness with

his life, about his experiences in childhood, and so on) he is bound to

recover. The pathological factor is not his ignorance in itself, but the

root of this ignorance in his inner resistances; it was they that first

called this ignorance into being, and they still maintain it now. The task

of  the  treatment  lies  in  combating  these  resistances.  Informing  the

patient of what he does not know because he has repressed it is only

one  of  the  necessary  preliminaries  to  the  treatment.  If  knowledgeabout the unconscious were as important for the patient as people

inexperienced  in  psycho-analysis  imagine,  listening  to  lectures  or

reading  books  would  be  enough  to  cure  him.  Such  measures,

however, have as much influence on the symptoms of nervous illness

as a distribution of menu-cards in a time of famine has upon hunger.

The  analogy  goes  even  further  than  its  immediate  application;  for

informing  the  patient  of  his  unconscious  regularly  results  in  an

intensification  of  the  conflict  in  him  and  an  exacerbation  of  his

troubles.

 


                                'Wild' Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2379

 

   Since, however, psycho-analysis cannot dispense with giving this

information,  it  lays  down  that  this  shall  not  be  done  before  two

conditions  have  been  fulfilled.  First,  the  patient  must,  through

preparation, himself have reached the neighbourhood of what he has

repressed, and secondly, he must have formed a sufficient attachment

(transference) to the physician for his emotional relationship to him to

make a fresh flight impossible.

      Only  when  these  conditions  have  been  fulfilled  is  it  possible  to

recognize  and  to  master  the  resistances  which  have  led  to  the

repression and the ignorance. Psycho-analytic intervention, therefore,

absolutely  requires  a  fairly  long  period  of  contact  with  the  patient.

Attempts to ‘rush’ him at first consultation, by brusquely telling him the

secrets which have been discovered by the physician, are technically

objectionable. And they mostly bring their own punishment by inspiring

a hearty enmity towards the physician on the patient’s part and cutting

him off from having any further influence.

   Besides all this, one may sometimes make a wrong surmise, and

one is never in a position to discover the whole truth. Psycho-analysis

provides  these  definite  technical  rules  to  replace  the  indefinable

‘medical tact’ which is looked upon as some special gift.

   It is not enough, therefore, for a physician to know a few of the

findings  of  psycho-analysis;  he  must  also  have  familiarized  himself

with its technique if he wishes his medical procedure to be guided by apsycho-analytic point of view. This technique cannot yet be learnt from

books,  and  it  certainly  cannot  be  discovered  independently  without

great  sacrifices  of  time,  labour  and  success.  Like  other  medical

techniques, it is to be learnt from those who are already proficient in it.

It is a matter of some significance, therefore, in forming a judgement

on the incident which I took as a starting-point for these remarks, that I

am not acquainted with the physician who is said to have given the

lady such advice and have never heard his name.

 


                                'Wild' Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2380

 

   Neither I myself nor my friends and co-workers find it agreeable to

claim a monopoly in this way in the use of a medical technique. But in

face of the dangers to patients and to the cause of psycho-analysis

which are inherent in the practice that is to be foreseen of a ‘wild’

psycho-analysis, we have had no other choice. In the spring of 1910

we founded an International Psycho-Analytical Association, to which

its members declare their adherence by the publication of their names,

in order to be able to repudiate responsibility for what is done by those

who do not belong to us and yet call their medical procedure ‘psycho-

analysis’. For as a matter of fact ‘wild’ analysts of this kind do more

harm  to  the  cause  of  psycho-analysis  than  to  individual  patients.  I

have often found that a clumsy procedure like this, even if at first it

produced an exacerbation of the patient’s condition, led to a recovery

in  the  end.  Not  always  but  still  often.  When  he  has  abused  the

physician enough and feels far enough away from his influence, his

symptoms  give  way,  or  he  decides  to  take  some  step  which  leads

along the path to recovery. The final improvement then comes about

‘of itself’, or is ascribed to some totally indifferent treatment by some

other doctor to whom the patient has later turned. In the case of the

lady whose complaint against her physician we have heard, I should

say that, despite everything, the ‘wild’ psycho-analyst did more for her

than some highly respected authority who might have told her she was

suffering from a ‘vasomotor neurosis’. He forced her attention to the

real cause of her trouble, or in that direction, and in spite of all heropposition this intervention of his cannot be without some favourable

results.  But  he  has  done  himself  harm  and  helped  to  intensify  the

prejudices  which  patients  feel,  owing  to  their  natural  affective

resistances, against the methods of psycho-analysis. And this can be

avoided.

                                                                                       2381

 

              CONTRIBUTIONS TO A DISCUSSION ON SUICIDE

 

I. INTRODUCTORY REMARKS

 

   Gentlemen, - You have all listened with much satisfaction to the plea

put  forward  by  an  educationalist  who  will  not  allow  an  unjustified

charge to be levelled against the institution that is so dear to him. But I

know that in any case you were not inclined to give easy credence to

the accusation that schools drive their pupils to suicide. Do not let us

be carried too far, however, by our sympathy with the party which has

been  unjustly  treated  in  this  instance.  Not  all  the  arguments  put

forward by the opener of the discussion seem to me to hold water. If it

is  the  case  that  youthful  suicide  occurs  not  only  among  pupils  in

secondary schools but also among apprentices and others, this fact

does not acquit the secondary schools; it must perhaps be interpreted

as meaning that as regards its pupils the secondary school takes the

place of the traumas with which other adolescents meet in other walks

of life. But a secondary school should achieve more than not driving

its pupils to suicide. It should give them a desire to live and should

offer them support and backing at a time of life at which the conditions

of their development compel them to relax their ties with their parental

home and their family. It seems to me indisputable that schools fail in

this,  and  in  many  respects  fall  short  of  their  duty  of  providing  a

substitute for the family and of arousing interest in life in the world

outside. This is not a suitable occasion for a criticism of secondary

schools in their present shape; but perhaps I may emphasize a single

point. The school must never forget that it has to deal with immature

individuals who cannot be denied a right to linger at certain stages of

development and even at certain disagreeable ones. The school must

not take on itself the inexorable character of life: it must not seek to be

more than a game of life.

 

II. CONCLUDING REMARKS

 

   Gentlemen, - I have an impression that, in spite of all the valuablematerial that has been brought before us in this discussion, we have

not  reached  a  decision  on  the  problem  that  interests  us.  We  were

anxious  above  all  to  know  how  it  becomes  possible  for  the

extraordinarily powerful life instinct to be overcome: whether this can

only come about with the help of a disappointed libido or whether the

ego can renounce its self-preservation for its own egoistic motives. It

may  be  that  we  have  failed  to  answer  this  psychological  question

because we have no adequate means of approaching it. We can, I

think,  only  take  as  our  starting-point  the  condition  of  melancholia,

which is so familiar to us clinically, and a comparison between it and

the  affect  of  mourning.  The  affective  processes  in  melancholia,

however,  and  the  vicissitudes  undergone  by  the  libido  in  that

condition, are totally unknown to us. Nor have we arrived at a psycho-

analytic  understanding  of  the  chronic  affect  of  mourning.  Let  us

suspend our judgement till experience has solved this problem.

                                                                                       2382

 

                  LETTER TO DR. FRIEDRICH S. KRAUS ON

                                ANTHROPOPHYTEIA

 

My Dear Dr. Krauss,

      You  have  asked  me  what  scientific  value  can  in  my  opinion  be

claimed by collections of erotic jokes, witticisms, funny stories, etc. I

know you have not felt any doubt of being able to justify the making of

such  collections.  You  merely  wanted  me  to  bear  witness  from  the

standpoint of a psychologist to the fact that material of this kind is not

only useful but indispensable.

    There are two points upon which I should principally like to insist.

When all is said and done, the erotic quips and comic anecdotes that

you have collected and published in Anthropophyteia have only been

produced  and  repeated  because  they  gave  pleasure  both  to  their

narrators  and  their  hearers.  It  is  not  difficult  to  guess  which

components of the sexual instinct (compounded as it is from so many

elements) find satisfaction in this manner. These tales give us direct

information  as  to  which  of  the  component  instincts  of  sexuality  are

retained  in  a  given  group  of  people  as  particularly  efficient  in

producing pleasure; and in this way they give the neatest confirmation

of  the  findings  reached  by  the  psycho-analytic  examination  of

neurotics.  Allow  me  to  indicate  the  most  important  example  of  this

kind.  Psycho-analysis  has  led  us  to  assert  that  the  anal  region  -

normally  and  not  only  in  perverse  individuals  -  is  the  site  of  an

erotogenic sensitivity, and that in certain ways it behaves exactly like a

genital organ. Doctors and psychologists, when told of there being an

anal erotism and an anal character derived from it, have been highly

indignant. At this point Anthropophyteia comes to the help of psycho-

analysis by showing how universally people dwell with pleasure upon

this part of the body, its performances and indeed the product of its

function. If this were not so, all these anecdotes would be bound to

give  rise  to  disgust  in  their  hearers  or  else  the  whole  mass  of  the

population would have to be ‘perverse’ in the sense in which the word

is used in works dealing with ‘psychopathia sexualis’ in a moralizingtone. It would not be hard to give other instances of how the material

collected by the authors of Anthropophyteia has been of value for the

researches of sexual psychology. Its value may even be increased,

perhaps,  by  the  circumstance  (not  in  itself  an  advantage)  that  the

collectors know nothing of the theoretical findings of psycho-analysis

and have brought together the material without any guiding principles.

   Another advantage of a wider character is presented in particular by

erotic jokes, in the strict sense, just as it is by jokes in general. I have

shown in my study of jokes that the revelation of what is normally the

repressed  unconscious  element  in  the  mind  can,  under  certain

provisions, become a source of pleasure and thus a technique for the

construction  of  jokes.  In  psycho-analysis  to-day  we  describe  a

congeries of ideas and its associated affect as a ‘complex’; and we

are  prepared  to  assert  that  many  of  the  most  admired  jokes  are

‘complexive jokes’ and that they owe their exhilarating and cheerful

effect to the ingenious uncovering of what are as a rule repressed

complexes. It would carry me too far afield if I were to bring forward

instances here in proof of this thesis, but I can assert that the outcome

of such an examination of the evidence is that the jokes, both erotic

and  of  other  sorts,  which  are  in  popular  circulation  provide  an

excellent  auxiliary  means  of  investigating  the  unconscious  human

mind - in the same way as do dreams, myths and legends, with the

exploitation of which psycho-analysis is already actively

engaged.

   It is therefore safe to hope that the psychological importance of

folklore  will  be  more  and  more  clearly  recognized,  and  that  the

relations between that branch of study and psycho-analysis will soon

become more intimate.

   I remain, dear Dr. Krauss, yours very sincerely,

                                                                                    FREUD

June 26,1910

                                                                                       2383

 

            TWO INSTANCES OF PATHOGENIC PHANTASIES

                REVEALED BY THE PATIENTS THEMSELVES

 

                                            A

 

A short while ago I saw a patient, about twenty years of age, who

gave  an  unmistakable  picture  (confirmed  by  other  opinions)  of  a

dementia praecox (hebephrenia). During the initial stages of his illness

he  had  exhibited  periodic  changes  of  mood  and  had  made  a

considerable improvement. While he was in this favourable condition

he was removed from the institution by his parents and for about a

week he was regaled with entertainments of every kind to celebrate

his  supposed  recovery.  His  relapse  followed  immediately  upon  this

week of festivities. When he was brought back to the institution, he

said  that  the  consulting  physician  had  advised  him  ‘to  flirt  with  his

mother  a  little’.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  this  delusory

paramnesia  he  was  giving  expression  to  the  excitement  which  had

been provoked in him by being in his mother’s company and which

had been the immediate provocation of his relapse.

 

                                            B

 

      More  than  ten  years  ago,  at  a  time  when  the  findings  and

hypotheses of psycho-analysis were known to only a few people, the

following events were reported to me from a trustworthy source. A girl,

who was the daughter of a medical man, fell ill of hysteria with local

symptoms.  Her  father  denied  that  it  was  hysteria  and  arranged  for

various  somatic  treatments  to  be  initiated,  which  brought  little

improvement. One day a woman friend of the patient’s said to her:

‘Have you never thought of consulting Dr. F.?’ To which the patient

replied: ‘What good would that be? I know he’d say to me: "Have you

ever had the idea of having sexual intercourse with your father?"' - It

seems unnecessary for me to say explicitly that it has never been my

practice and is not my practice to-day to ask such questions. But it isworth remarking that much of what patients report of the words and

actions of their physicians may be understood as revelations of their

own pathogenic phantasies.

                                                                                       2384

 

      REVIEW OF WILHELM NEUTRA’S LETTERS TO NEUROTIC

                                        WOMEN

 

It should be taken as an encouraging sign of the awakening interest in

psychotherapy that a second edition of this book has been called for

so quickly. Unluckily we cannot hail the book itself as an encouraging

phenomenon.  The  author,  who  is  an  assistant  physician  in  the

Gainfarn hydropathic institute near Vienna, has borrowed the form of

Oppenheim’s Psychotherapeutische Briefe and has given that form a

psycho-analytic content. This is in a sense ill-judged, since psycho-

analysis  cannot  be  satisfactorily  combined  with  Oppenheim’s  (or,  if

that  is  preferred,  Dubois’)  technique  of  ‘persuasion’;  it  looks  for  it

therapeutic results along quite other paths. What is more important,

however,  is  the  fact  that  the  author  fails  to  attain  the  merits  of  his

model - tact and moral seriousness - and that in his presentation of

psycho-analytic theory he often drops into empty rhetoric and is also

guilty of some misstatements. Nevertheless much of what he writes is

neatly and aptly expressed; and the book may pass muster as a work

for popular consumption. In a more serious, scientific exposition of the

subject the author would have had to indicate the sources of his views

and assertions with greater conscientiousness.

                                                                                       2385

 

          PSYCHO-ANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL

                                      ACCOUNT

                            OF A CASE OF PARANOIA

                              (DEMENTIA PARANOIDES)

                                        (1911)

 


                                                                                      2386

 

Intentionally left blank

 


 2387

 

          PSYCHO-ANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL

                                      ACCOUNT

                            OF A CASE OF PARANOIA

                              (DEMENTIA PARANOIDES)

 

The analytic investigation of paranoia presents difficulties of a peculiar

nature  to  physicians  who,  like  myself,  are  not  attached  to  public

institutions. We cannot accept patients suffering from this complaint,

or, at all events, we cannot keep them for long, since we cannot offer

treatment unless there is some prospect of therapeutic success. It is

only in exceptional circumstances, therefore, that I succeed in getting

more than a superficial view of the structure of paranoia - when, for

instance,  the  diagnosis  (which  is  not  always  an  easy  matter)  is

uncertain enough to justify an attempt at influencing the patient, or

when, in spite of an assured diagnosis, I yield to the entreaties of the

patient’s relatives and undertake to treat him for a time. Apart from

this,  of  course,  I  see  plenty  of  cases  of  paranoia  and  of  dementia

praecox, and I learn as much about them as other psychiatrists do

about their cases; but that is not enough, as a rule, to lead to any

analytic conclusions.   The psycho-analytic investigation of paranoia would be altogether

impossible if the patients themselves did not possess the peculiarity of

betraying (in a distorted form, it is true) precisely those things which

other neurotics keep hidden as a secret. Since paranoics cannot be

compelled  to  overcome  their  internal  resistances,  and  since  in  any

case  they  only  say  what  they  choose  to  say,  it  follows  that  this  is

precisely a disorder in which a written report or a printed case history

can take the place of personal acquaintance with the patient. For this

reason I think it is legitimate to base analytic interpretations upon the

case history of a patient suffering from paranoia (or, more precisely,

from  dementia  paranoides)  whom  I  have  never  seen,  but  who  has

written his own case history and brought it before the public in print.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2388

 

   I refer to Dr. jur. Daniel Paul Schreber, formerly Senatspräsident in

Dresden,  whose  book, Denkwürdigkeiten  eines  Nervenkranken

[Memoirs  of  a  Nerve  Patient],  was  published  in  1903,  and,  if  I  am

rightly informed, aroused considerable interest among psychiatrists. It

is possible that Dr. Schreber may still be living to-day and that he may

have dissociated himself so far from the delusional system which he

put forward in 1903 as to be pained by these notes upon his book. In

so  far,  however,  as  he  still  retains  his  identity  with  his  former

personality, I can rely upon the arguments with which he himself - ‘a

man of superior mental gifts and endowed with an unusual keenness

alike of intellect and of observation’¹ - countered the efforts that were

made to restrain him from publishing his memoirs: ‘I have been at no

pains’, he writes, ‘to close my eyes to the difficulties that would appear

to lie in the path of publication, and in particular to the problem of

paying due regard to the susceptibilities of certain persons still living.

On  the  other  hand,  I  am  of  opinion  that  it  might  well  be  to  the

advantage both of science and of the recognition of religious truths if,

during  my  life-time,  qualified  authorities  were  enabled  to  undertake

some  examination  of  my  body  and  to  hold  some  enquiry  into  mypersonal experiences. To this consideration all feelings of a personal

character must yield.’² He declares in another passage that he has

decided to keep to his intention of publishing the book, even if the

consequence were to be that his physician, Geheimrat Dr. Flechsig of

Leipzig, brought an action against him. He urges upon Dr. Flechsig,

however,  the  same  considerations  that  I  am  now  urging  upon  him

himself: ‘I trust’, he says, ‘that even in the case of Geheimrat Prof. Dr.

Flechsig  any  personal  susceptibilities  that  he  may  feel  will  be

outweighed  by  a  scientific  interest  in  the  subject-matter  of  my

memoirs.’ (446.)³

   Though all the passages from the Denkwürdigkeiten upon which my

interpretations  are  based  will  be  quoted  verbatim  in  the  following

pages, I would ask my readers to make themselves acquainted with

the book by reading it through at least once beforehand.

 

   ¹ This piece of self-portraiture, which is certainly not unjustified, will be found on page 35 of

his book.

   ² Preface, iii.

   ³ [Throughout this paper figures in brackets with no preceding ‘p.’ are page references to

the original German edition of Schreber’s memoirs - Denkwürdigkeiten eines Nervenkranken,
Leipzig, Oswald Mutze.]

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2389

 

                                            I

 

                                  CASE HISTORY

 

‘I have suffered twice from nervous disorders’, writes Dr. Schreber,

‘and each time as a result of mental overstrain. This was due on the

first  occasion  to  my  standing  as  a  candidate  for  election  to  the

Reichstag while I was Landgerichtsdirektor at Chemnitz, and on the

second occasion to the very heavy burden of work that fell upon my

shoulders when I entered on my new duties as Senatspräsident in the

Oberlandesgericht in Dresden.’ (34.)   Dr. Schreber’s first illness began in the autumn of 1884, and by the

end of 1885 he had completely recovered. During this period he spent

six months in Flechsig’s clinic, and the latter, in a formal report which

he  drew  up  at  a  later  date,  described  the  disorder  as  an  attack  of

severe hypochondria. Dr. Schreber assures us that this illness ran its

course ‘without the occurrence of any incidents bordering upon the

sphere of the supernatural’. (35.)

   Neither the patient’s own account, nor the reports of the physicians

which are reprinted at the end of his book, tell us enough about his

previous history or his personal circumstances. I am not even in a

position to give the patient’s age at the time of his illness, though the

high judicial position which he had attained before his second illness

establishes some sort of lower limit. We learn that Dr. Schreber had

been married long before the time of his ‘hypochondria’. ‘The gratitude

of  my  wife’,  he  writes,  ‘was  perhaps  even  more  heartfelt;  for  she

revered Professor Flechsig as the man who had restored her husband

to her, and hence it was that for years she kept his portrait standing

upon  her  writing-table.’  (36.)  And  in  the  same  place:  ‘After  my

recovery from my first illness I spent eight years with my wife - years,

upon the whole, of great happiness, rich in outward honours, and only

clouded from time to time by the oft repeated disappointment of our

hope that we might be blessed with children.’

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2390

 

   In June, 1893, he was notified of his prospective appointment as

Senatspräsident, and he took up his duties on the first of October of

the  same  year.  Between  these  two  dates¹  he  had  some  dreams,

though it was not until later that he came to attach any importance to

them. He dreamt two or three times that his old nervous disorder had

come  back;  and  this  made  him  as  miserable  in  the  dream  as  the

discovery that it was only a dream made him happy when he woke up.

Once, in the early hours of the morning, moreover, while he was in a

state  between  sleeping  and  waking,  the  idea  occurred  to  him  ‘thatafter all it really must be very nice to be a woman submitting to the act

of copulation’. (36.) This idea was one which he would have rejected

with the greatest indignation if he had been fully conscious.

   The second illness set in at the end of October 1893 with a torturing

bout of sleeplessness. This forced him to return to the Flechsig clinic,

where, however, his condition grew rapidly worse. The further course

of the illness is described in a Report drawn up subsequently by the

director  of  the  Sonnenstein  Asylum:  ‘At  the  commencement  of  his

residence  there²  he  expressed  more  hypochondriacal  ideas,

complained that he had softening of the brain, that he would soon be

dead, etc. But ideas of persecution were already finding their way into

the  clinical  picture,  based  upon  sensory  illusions  which,  however,

seemed  only  to  appear  sporadically  at  first;  while  simultaneously  a

high degree of hyperaesthesia was observable - great sensitiveness

to light and noise. - Later, the visual and auditory illusions became

much  more  frequent,  and,  in  conjunction  with  coenaesthetic

disturbances,  dominated  the  whole  of  his  feeling  and  thought.  He

believed that he was dead and decomposing, that he was suffering

from the plague; he asserted that his body was being handled in all

kinds of revolting ways; and, as he himself declares to this day, he

went through worse horrors than any one could have imagined, and all

on behalf of a holy purpose. The patient was so much pre-occupied

with these pathological experiences that he was inaccessible to any

other impression and would sit perfectly rigid and motionless for hours

(hallucinatory stupor). On the other hand, they tortured him to such a

degree  that  he  longed  for  death.  He  made  repeated  attempts  at

drowning himself in his bath, and asked to be given the "cyanide that

was  intended  for  him".  His  delusional  ideas  gradually  assumed  a

mystical and religious character; he was in direct communication with

God, he was the plaything of devils, he saw "miraculous apparitions",

he heard "holy music", and in the end he even came to believe that he

was living in another world.’ (380.)

 

   ¹ And therefore before he could have been affected by the overwork caused by his new

post, to which he attributes his illness.

   ² In Professor Flechsig’s clinic at Leipzig.

     Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2391

 

   It may be added that there were certain people by whom he thought

he  was  being  persecuted  and  injured,  and  upon  whom  he  poured

abuse.  The  most  prominent  of  these  was  his  former  physician,

Flechsig, whom he called a ‘soul-murderer’; and he used to call out

over and over again: ‘Little Flechsig!’ putting a sharp stress upon the

first word (383). He was moved from Leipzig, and, after a short interval

spent  in  another  institution,  was  brought  in  June  1894  to  the

Sonnenstein Asylum, near Pirna, where he remained until his disorder

assumed  its  final  shape.  In  the  course  of  the  next  few  years  the

clinical picture altered in a manner which can best be described in the

words of Dr. Weber, the director of the asylum.

   ‘I need not enter any further into the details of the course of the

disease. I must, however, draw attention to the manner in which, as

time  went  on,  the  initial  comparatively  acute  psychosis,  which  had

directly involved the patient’s entire mental life and deserved the name

of  "hallucinatory  insanity",  developed  more  and  more  clearly  (one

might almost say crystallized out) into the paranoic clinical picture that

we have before us to-day.’ (385.) The fact was that, on the one hand,

he had developed an ingenious delusional structure, in which we have

every reason to be interested, while, on the other hand, his personality

had  been  reconstructed  and  now  showed  itself,  except  for  a  few

isolated disturbances, capable of meeting the demands of everyday

life.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2392

 

   Dr. Weber, in his Report of 1899, makes the following remarks: ‘It

thus  appears  that  at  the  present  time,  apart  from  certain  obvious

psychomotor symptoms which cannot fail to strike even the superficial

observer  as  being  pathological,  Herr  Senatspräsident  Dr.  Schreber

shows  no  signs  of  confusion  or  of  psychical  inhibition,  nor  is  hisintelligence noticeably impaired. His mind is collected, his memory is

excellent,  he  has  at  his  disposal  a  very  considerable  store  of

knowledge (not merely upon legal questions, but in many other fields),

and he is able to reproduce it in a connected train of thought. He takes

an interest in following events in the world of politics, science and art,

etc., and is constantly occupied with such matters . . . and an observer

who  was  uninstructed  upon  his  general  condition  would  scarcely

notice  anything  peculiar  in  these  directions.  In  spite  of  all  this,

however, the patient is full of ideas of pathological origin, which have

formed  themselves  into  a  complete  system;  they  are  more  or  less

fixed,  and  seem  to  be  inaccessible  to  correction  by  means  of  any

objective appreciation and judgement of the external facts.’ (305-6.)

   Thus the patient’s condition had undergone a great change, and he

now  considered  himself  capable  of  carrying  on  an  independent

existence.  He  accordingly  took  appropriate  steps  with  a  view  to

regaining control over his own affairs and to securing his discharge

from the asylum. Dr. Weber set himself to prevent the fulfilment of

these  intentions  and  drew  up  reports  in  opposition  to  them.

Nevertheless, in his Report dated 1900, he felt obliged to give this

appreciative account of the patient’s character and conduct: ‘Since for

the  last  nine  months  Herr  Präsident  Schreber  has  taken  his  meals

daily at my family board, I have had the most ample opportunities of

conversing  with  him  upon  every  imaginable  topic,  Whatever  the

subject was that came up for discussion (apart, of course, from his

delusional  ideas),  whether  it  concerned  events  in  the  field  of

administration and law, of politics, art, literature or social life - in short,

whatever the topic, Dr. Schreber gave evidence of a lively interest, a

well-informed  mind,  a  good  memory,  and  a  sound  judgement;  his

ethical  outlook,  moreover,  was  one  which  it  was  impossible  not  to

endorse. So, too, in his lighter talk with the ladies of the party, he was

both courteous and affable, and when he touched upon matters in a

more humorous vein he invariably displayed tact and decorum. Never

once,  during  these  innocent  talks  round  the  dining-table,  did  he

introduce subjects which should more properly have been raised at a

medical  consultation.’  (397-8.)  Indeed,  on  one  occasion  during  this

period when a business question arose which involved the interests of

his whole family, he entered into it in a manner which showed both histechnical knowledge and his common sense (401 and 510).

   In the numerous applications to the courts, by which Dr. Schreber

endeavoured to regain his liberty, he did not in the least disavow his

delusions  or  make  any  secret  of  his  intention  of  publishing  the

Denkwürdigkeiten. On the contrary, he dwelt upon the importance of

his  ideas  to  religious  thought,  and  upon  their  invulnerability  to  the

attacks of modern science; but at the same time he laid stress upon

the ‘absolute harmlessness’ (430) of all the actions which, as he was

aware, his delusions obliged him to perform. Such, indeed, were his

acumen and the cogency of his logic that finally, and in spite of his

being  an  acknowledged  paranoic,  his  efforts  were  crowned  with

success. In July, 1902, Dr. Schreber’s civil rights were restored, and in

the  following  year  his Denkwürdigkeiten  eines  Nervenkranken

appeared, though in a censored form and with many valuable portions

omitted.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2393

 

 

      The  Court  Judgement  that  gave  Dr.  Schreber  back  his  liberty

summarizes the content of his delusional system in a few sentences:

‘He believed that he had a mission to redeem the world and to restore

it to its lost state of bliss. This, however, he could only bring about if

he were first transformed from a man into a woman.’ (475.)

   For a more detailed account of his delusions as they appeared in

their final shape we may turn to Dr. Weber’s Report of 1899: ‘The

culminating point of the patient’s delusional system is his belief that he

has a mission to redeem the world, and to restore mankind to their lost

state  of  bliss.  He  was  called  to  this  task,  so  he  asserts,  by  direct

inspiration from God, just as we are taught that the Prophets were; for

nerves in a condition of great excitement, as his were for a long time,

have  precisely  the  property  of  exerting  an  attraction  upon  God  -

though this is touching on matters which human speech is scarcely, if

at all, capable of expressing, since they lie entirely outside the scopeof human experience and, indeed, have been revealed to him alone.

The most essential part of his mission of redemption is that it must be

preceded by his transformation into a woman. It is not to be supposed

that he wishes to be transformed into a woman; it is rather a question

of  a  "must"  based  upon  the  Order  of  Things,  which  there  is  no

possibility  of  his  evading,  much  as  he  would  personally  prefer  to

remain in his own honourable and masculine station in life. But neither

he nor the rest or mankind can regain the life beyond except by his

being transformed into a woman (a process which may occupy many

years or even decades) by means of divine miracles. He himself, of

this he is convinced, is the only object upon which divine miracles are

worked, and he is thus the most remarkable human being who has

ever lived upon earth. Every hour and every minute for years he has

experienced  these  miracles  in  his  body,  and  he  has  had  them

confirmed by the voices that have conversed with him. During the first

years  of  his  illness  certain  of  his  bodily  organs  suffered  such

destructive injuries as would inevitably have led to the death of any

other  man:  he  lived  for  a  long  time  without  a  stomach,  without

intestines,  almost  without  lungs,  with  a  torn  oesophagus,  without  a

bladder, and with shattered ribs, he used sometimes to swallow part of

his own larynx with his food, etc. But divine miracles ("rays") always

restored  what  had  been  destroyed,  and  therefore,  as  long  as  he

remains a man, he is altogether immortal. These alarming phenomena

have ceased long ago, and his "femaleness" has become prominent

instead.  This  is  a  matter  of  a  process  of  development  which  will

probably require decades, if not centuries, for its completion, and it is

unlikely that anyone now living will survive to see the end of it. He has

a  feeling  that  enormous  numbers  of  "female  nerves"  have  already

passed over into his body, and out of them a new race of men will

proceed, through a process of direct impregnation by God. Not until

then, it seems, will he be able to die a natural death, and, along with

the rest of mankind, will he regain a state of bliss. In the meantime not

only  the  sun,  but  trees  and  birds,  which  are  in  the  nature  of

"bemiracled residues of former human souls", speak to him in human

accents, and miraculous things happen everywhere around him.’ (386-

8.)

     Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2394

 

      The  interest  felt  by  the  practical  psychiatrist  in  such  delusional

formations  as  these  is,  as  a  rule,  exhausted  when  once  he  has

ascertained  the  character  of  the  products  of  the  delusion  and  has

formed  an  estimate  of  their  influence  on  the  patient’s  general

behaviour:  in  his  case  marvelling  is  not  the  beginning  of

understanding. The psycho-analyst, in the light of his knowledge of the

psychoneuroses, approaches the subject with a suspicion that even

thought-structures so extraordinary as these and so remote from our

common modes of thinking are nevertheless derived from the most

general  and  comprehensible  impulses  of  the  human  mind;  and  he

would be glad to discover the motives of such a transformation as well

as the manner in which it has been accomplished. With this aim in

view, he will wish to go more deeply into the details of the delusion

and into the history of its development.

 

   (a) The medical officer lays stress upon two points as being of chief

importance: the patient’s assumption of the role of Redeemer, and his

transformation into a woman. The Redeemer delusion is a phantasy

that  is  familiar  to  us  through  the  frequency  with  which  it  forms  the

nucleus of religious paranoia. The additional factor, which makes the

redemption  dependent  upon  the  man  being  previously  transformed

into a woman, is unusual and in itself bewildering, since it shows such

a  wide  divergence  from  the  historical  myth  which  the  patient’s

phantasy is setting out to reproduce. It is natural to follow the medical

report in assuming that the motive force of this delusional complex

was the patient’s ambition to play the part of Redeemer, and that his

emasculation  was  only  entitled  to  be  regarded  as  a  means  for

achieving that end. Even though this may appear to be true of his

delusion in its final form, a study of the Denkwürdigkeiten compels us

to take a very different view of the matter. For we learn that the idea of

being transformed into a woman (that is, of being emasculated) was

the  primary  delusion,  that  he  began  by  regarding  that  act  as

constituting a serious injury and persecution, and that it only becamerelated to his playing the part of Redeemer in a secondary way. There

can  be  no  doubt,  moreover,  that  originally  he  believed  that  the

transformation was to be effected for the purpose of sexual abuse and

not so as to serve higher designs. The position may be formulated by

saying that a sexual delusion of persecution was later on converted in

the patient’s mind into a religious delusion of grandeur. The part of

persecutor was at first assigned to Professor Flechsig, the physician in

whose charge he was; later, his place was taken by God Himself.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2395

 

   I will quote the relevant passages from the Denkwürdigkeiten in full:

‘In this way a conspiracy against me was brought to a head (in about

March or April, 1894). Its object was to contrive that, when once my

nervous complaint had been recognized as incurable or assumed to

be  so,  I  should  be  handed  over  to  a  certain  person  in  a  particular

manner: my soul was to be delivered up to him, but my body - owing

to a misapprehension of what I have described above as the purpose

underlying the Order of Things - was to be transformed into a female

body: and as such surrendered to the person in question¹ with a view

to sexual abuse, and was then simply to be "left on one side" - that is

to say, no doubt, given over to corruption.’ (56.)

   ‘It was, moreover, perfectly natural that from the human standpoint

(which was the one by which at that time I was still chiefly governed) I

should regard Professor Flechsig or his soul as my only true enemy -

at a later date there was also the von W. soul, about which I shall

have more to say presently - and that I should look upon God Almighty

as my natural ally. I merely fancied that He was in great straits as

regards  Professor  Flechsig,  and  consequently  felt  myself  bound  to

support  him  by  every  conceivable  means,  even  to  the  length  of

sacrificing myself. It was not until very much later that the idea forced

itself  upon  my  mind  that  God  Himself  had  played  the  part  of

accomplice, if not of instigator, in the plot whereby my soul was to be

murdered and my body used like a strumpet. I may say, in fact, thatthis  idea  has  in  part  become  clearly  conscious  to  me  only  in  the

course of writing the present work.’ (59.)

   ‘Every attempt at murdering my soul, or at emasculating me for

purposes contrary to the Order of Things (that is, for the gratification of

the sexual appetites of a human individual), or later at destroying my

understanding - every such attempt has come to nothing. From this

apparently unequal struggle between one weak man and God Himself,

I have emerged as the victor - though not without undergoing much

bitter  suffering  and  privation  -  because  the  Order  of  Things  stands

upon my side.’ (61.)

   In a footnote attached to the words ‘contrary to the Order of Things’

in  the  above  passage,  the  author  foreshadows  the  subsequent

transformation in his delusion of emasculation and in his relation to

God: ‘I shall show later on that emasculation for quite another purpose

- a purpose in consonance with the Order of Things - is within the

bounds of possibility, and, indeed, that it may quite probably afford the

solution of the conflict.’

 

   ¹ It is shown from the context in this and other passages that ‘the person in question’ who

was to practise this abuse was none other than Flechsig. (See below.)
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2396

 

      These  statements  are  of  decisive  importance  in  determining  the

view we are to take of the delusion of emasculation and in thus giving

us  a  general  understanding  of  the  case.  It  may  be  added  that  the

‘voices’ which the patient heard never treated his transformation into a

woman  as  anything  but  a  sexual  disgrace,  which  gave  them  an

excuse  for  jeering  at  him.  ‘Rays  of  God¹  not  infrequently  thought

themselves entitled to mock at me by calling me "Miss² Schreber", in

allusion  to  the  emasculation  which,  it  was  alleged,  I  was  about  to

undergo.’ (127.) Or they would say: ‘So this sets up to have been a

Senatspräsident,  this  person  who  lets  himself  be  f--d!’³  Or  again:

‘Don’t you feel ashamed in front of your wife?’

      That  the  emasculation  phantasy  was  of  a  primary  nature  andoriginally  independent  of  the  Redeemer motif  becomes  still  more

probable when we recollect the ‘idea’ which, as I mentioned on an

earlier page, occurred to him while he was half asleep, to the effect

that it must be nice to be a woman submitting to the act of copulation

(36.)  This  phantasy  appeared  during  the  incubation  period  of  his

illness, and before he had begun to feel the effects of overwork in

Dresden.

   Schreber himself gives the month of November, 1895, as the date at

which  the  connection  was  established  between  the  emasculation

phantasy  and  the  Redeemer  idea  and  the  way  thus  paved  for  his

becoming  reconciled  to  the  former.  ‘Now,  however,’  he  writes,  ‘I

became clearly aware that the Order of Things imperatively demanded

my  emasculation,  whether  I  personally  liked  it  or  no,  and  that  no

reasonable  course  lay  open  to  me  but  to  reconcile  myself  to  the

thought of being transformed into a woman. The further consequence

of  my  emasculation  could,  of  course,  only  be  my  impregnation  by

divine rays to the end that a new race of men might be created.’ (177.)

 

   ¹ The ‘rays of God’, as we shall see, are identical with the voices which talked the ‘basic

language’.

   ² [In English in the original.]

   ³ I reproduce this omission from the Denkwürdigkeiten, just as I do all the peculiarities of

their author’s way of writing. I myself should have found no reason for being so shamefaced
over a serious matter.
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2397

 

   The idea of being transformed into a woman was the salient feature

and the earliest germ of his delusional system. It also proved to be the

one part of it that persisted after his cure, and the one part that was

able  to  retain  a  place  in  his  behaviour  in  real  life  after  he  had

recovered. ‘The only thing which could appear unreasonable in the

eyes of other people is the fact, already touched upon in the expert’s

report, that I am sometimes to be found standing before the mirror or

elsewhere  with  the  upper  portion  of  my  body  bared,  and  wearingsundry feminine adornments, such as ribbons, false necklaces, and

the like. This only occurs, I may add, when I am by myself; and never,

at least so far as I am able to avoid it, in the presence of other people.’

(429.) The Herr Senatspräsident confesses to this frivolity at a date

(July, 1901) at which he was already in a position to express very

aptly the completeness of his recovery in the region of practical life: ‘I

have now long been aware that the persons I see about me are not

"cursorily improvised men" but real people, and that I must therefore

behave towards them as a reasonable man is used to behave towards

his  fellows.’  (409.)  In  contrast  to  the  way  in  which  he  put  his

emasculation phantasy into action, the patient never took any steps

towards  inducing  people  to  recognize  his  mission  as  Redeemer,

beyond the publication of his Denkwürdigkeiten.

 

   (b) The attitude of our patient towards God is so singular and so full

of  internal  contradictions  that  it  requires  more  than  a  little  faith  to

persist  in  the  belief  that  there  is  nevertheless  ‘method’  in  his

‘madness’.  With  the  help  of  what  Dr.  Schreber  tells  us  in  the

Denkwürdigkeiten, we must now endeavour to arrive at a more exact

view of his theologico-psychological system, and we must expound his

opinions concerning nerves, the state of bliss, the divine hierarchy,

and the  attributes  of  God,  in  their  manifest  (delusional)  nexus.  At

every point in his theory we shall be struck by the astonishing mixture

of the commonplace and the clever, of what has been borrowed and

what is original.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2398

 

   The human soul is comprised in the nerves of the body. These are

to be conceived of as structures of extraordinary fineness, comparable

to  the  finest  thread.  Some  of  these  nerves  are  suited  only  for  the

reception  of  sense-perceptions,  while  others  (the  nerves  of

understanding)  carry  out  all  the  functions  of  the  mind;  and  in  this

connection it is to be noticed that each single nerve of understandingrepresents  a  person’s  entire  mental  individuality,  and  that  the

presence of a greater or lesser number of nerves of understanding

has no influence except upon the length of time during which the mind

can retain its impressions.¹

   Whereas men consist of bodies and nerves, God is from His very

nature nothing but nerve. But the nerves of God are not, as is the case

with  human  bodies,  present  in  limited  numbers,  but  are  infinite  or

eternal.  They  possess  all  the  properties  of  human  nerves  to  an

enormously intensified degree. In their creative capacity - that is, their

power  of  turning  themselves  into  every  imaginable  object  in  the

created world - they are known as rays. There is an intimate relation

between God and the starry heaven and the sun.²

 

   ¹ The words in which Schreber states this theory are italicized by him, and he adds a

footnote, in which he insists that it can be used as an explanation of heredity: ‘The male
semen’, he declares, ‘contains a nerve belonging to the father, and it unites with a nerve taken
from the mother’s body to form a new entity.’ (7.) Here, therefore, we find a quality properly
belonging to the spermatozoon transferred on to the nerves, which makes it probable that
Schreber’s  ‘nerves’  are  derived  from  the  sphere  of  ideas  connected  with  sexuality.  It  not
infrequently happens in the Denkwürdigkeiten that an incidental note upon some piece of
delusional theory gives us the desired indication of the genesis of the delusion and so of its
meaning.

    ² In  this  connection  see  my  discussion  below  on  the  significance  of  the  sun.  -  The

comparison between (or rather the condensation of) nerves and rays may well have been
based on the linear extension which they have in common. The ray-nerves, by the way, are
no less creative than the spermatozoon-nerves.
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2399

 

      When  the  work  of  creation  was  finished,  God  withdrew  to  an

immense distance (10-11 and 252) and, in general, resigned the world

to its own laws. He limited His activities to drawing up to Himself the

souls of the dead. It was only in exceptional instances that He would

enter  into  relations  with  particular,  highly  gifted  persons,¹  or  would

intervene by means of a miracle in the destinies of the world. God

does  not  have  any  regular  communication  with  human  souls,  in

accordance with the Order of Things, till after death.² When a mandies,  his  spiritual  parts  (that  is,  his  nerves)  undergo  a  process  of

purification  before  being  finally  reunited  with  God  Himself  as  ‘fore-

courts of Heaven’. Thus it comes about that everything moves in an

eternal  round,  which  lies  at  the  basis  of  the  Order  of  Things.  In

creating anything, God is parting with a portion of Himself, or is giving

a portion of His nerves a different shape. The apparent loss which He

thus sustains is made good when, after hundreds and thousands of

years, the nerves of dead men, that have entered the state of bliss,

once more accrue to Him as ‘fore-courts of Heaven’ (18 and 19 n.).

   Souls that have passed through the process of purification enter into

the  enjoyment  of  a state  of  bliss.³  In  the  meantime  they  have  lost

some  of  their  individual  consciousness,  and  have  become  fused

together with other souls into higher unities. Important souls, such as

those  of  men  like  Goethe,  Bismarck,  etc.,  may  have  to  retain  their

sense of identity for hundreds of years to come, before they too can

become resolved into higher soul-complexes, such as ‘Jehovah rays’

in the case of ancient Jewry: or ‘Zoroaster rays’ in the case of ancient

Persia.  In  the  course  of  their  purification  ‘souls  learn  the  language

which  is  spoken  by  God  himself,  the  so-called  "basic  language",  a

vigorous  though  somewhat  antiquated  German,  which  is  especially

                                                                4
characterized by its great wealth of euphemisms’. (13.)

 

   ¹ In the ‘basic language’ (see below) this is described as ‘making a nerve-connection with

them’.

   ² We shall find later that certain criticisms against God are based on this fact.

   ³ This consists essentially in a feeling of voluptuousness (see below).

4
    On one single occasion during his illness the patient was vouchsafed the privilege of

seeing,  with  his  spiritual  eyes,  God  Almighty  clear  and  undisguised  before  him.  On  that
occasion God uttered what was a very current word in the basic language, and a forcible
though not an amiable one - the word ‘Slut!’ (136). [In German ‘Luder’. This term of abuse is
occasionally applied to males, though much more often to females.]
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2400

 

      God  Himself  is  not  a  simple  entity.  ‘Above  the  "fore-courts  of

Heaven"  hovered  God  Himself,  who,  in  contradistinction  to  these"anterior realms of God", was also described as the "posterior realms

of God". The posterior realms of God were, and still are, divided in a

strange manner into two parts, so that a lower God (Ahriman) was

differentiated  from  an  upper  God  (Ormuzd).’  (19.)  As  regards  the

significance of this division Schreber can tell us no more than that the

lower God was more especially attached to the peoples of a dark race

(the Semites) and the upper God to those of a fair race (the Aryans);

nor would it be reasonable, in such sublime matters, to expect more of

human knowledge. Nevertheless, we are also told that ‘in spite of the

fact that in certain respects God Almighty forms a unity, the lower and

the upper God must be regarded as separate Beings, each of which

possesses its own particular egoism and its own particular instinct of

self-preservation, even in relation to the other, and each of which is

therefore constantly endeavouring to thrust itself in front of the other’

(140 n.). Moreover, the two divine Beings behaved in quite different

ways  towards  the  unlucky  Schreber  during  the  acute  stage  of  his

illness.¹

   In the days before his illness Senatspräsident Schreber had been a

doubter in religious matters (29 and 64); he had never been able to

persuade himself into a firm belief in the existence of a personal God.

Indeed, he adduces this fact about his earlier life as an argument in

favour of the complete reality of his delusions.² But any one who reads

the account which follows of the character-traits of Schreber’s God will

have to allow that the transformation effected by the paranoic disorder

was no very fundamental one, and that in the Redeemer of to-day

much remains of the doubter of yesterday.

 

   ¹ A footnote on page 20 leads us to suppose that a passage in Byron’s Manfred may have

determined Schreber’s choice of the names of Persian divinities. We shall later come upon.
further evidence of the influence of this poem on him.

   ² ‘That it was simply a matter of illusions seems to me to be in my case, from the very

nature of things, psychologically unthinkable. For illusions of holding communication with God
or with departed souls can properly only arise in the minds of persons who, before falling into
their condition of pathological nervous excitement, already have a firm belief in God and in the
immortality of the soul. This was not by any means so, however, in my case, as has been
explained at the beginning of this chapter.’ (79.)
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2401

 

   For there is a flaw in the Order of Things, as a result of which the

existence  of  God  Himself  seems  to  be  endangered.  Owing  to

circumstances which are incapable of further explanation, the nerves

of living men, especially when in a condition of intense excitement,

may exercise such a powerful attraction upon the nerves of God that

He cannot get free from them again, and thus His own existence may

be threatened (11). This exceedingly rare occurrence took place in

Schreber’s  case  and  involved  him  in  the  greatest  sufferings.  The

instinct  of  self-preservation  was  aroused  in  God  (30),  and  it  then

became  evident  that  God  was  far  removed  from  the  perfection

ascribed to him by religions. Through the whole of Schreber’s book

there runs the bitter complaint that God, being only accustomed to

communication with the dead, does not understand living men.

      ‘In  this  connection,  however,  a fundamental  misunderstanding

prevails,  which  has  since  run  through  my  whole  life  like  a  scarlet

thread. It is based precisely upon the fact that, in accordance with the

Order of Things, God really knows nothing about living men and did

not need to know; consonantly with the Order of Things, He needed

only to have communication with corpses.’ (55.) - ‘This state of things .

. . I am convinced, is once more to be brought into connection with the

fact that God was, if I may so express it, quite incapable of dealing

with  living  men,  and  was  only  accustomed  to  communicate  with

corpses,  or  at  most  with  men  as  they  lay  asleep  (that  is,  in  their

dreams).’  (141.)  -  ‘I  myself  feel  inclined  to  exclaim:  "Incredibile

scriptu!" Yet it is all literally true, however difficult it may be for other

people to grasp the idea of God’s complete inability to judge living

men correctly, and however long I myself took to accustom myself to

this idea after my innumerable observations upon the subject.’ (246.)

      But  as  a  result  of  God’s  misunderstanding  of  living  men  it  was

possible for Him Himself to become the instigator of the plot against

Schreber, to take him for an idiot, and to subject him to these severe

ordeals  (264).  To  avoid  being  set  down  as  an  idiot,  he  submitted

himself to an extremely burdensome system of ‘enforced thinking’. For

‘every time that my intellectual activities ceased, God jumped to theconclusion  that  my  mental  faculties  were  extinct  and  that  the

destruction of my understanding (the idiocy), for which He was hoping,

had actually set in, and that a withdrawal had now become possible’

(206).

   The behaviour of God in the matter of the urge to evacuate (or ‘sh--’)

rouses him to a specially high pitch of indignation. The passage is so

characteristic that I will quote it in full. But to make it clear I must first

explain that both the miracles and the voices proceed from God, that

is, from the divine rays.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2402

 

   ‘Although it will necessitate my touching upon an unsavoury subject,

I must devote a few more words to the question that I have just quoted

("Why  don’t  you  sh--?")  on  account  of  the  typical  character  of  the

whole business. The need for evacuation, like all else that has to do

with my body, is evoked by a miracle. It is brought about by my faeces

being  forced  forwards  (and  sometimes  backwards  again)  in  my

intestines; and if, owing to there having already been an evacuation,

enough material is not present, then such small remains as there may

still be of the contents of my intestines are smeared over my anal

orifice. This occurrence is a miracle performed by the upper God, and

it  is  repeated  several  dozens  of  times  at  the  least  every  day.  It  is

associated with an idea which is utterly incomprehensible to human

beings and can only be accounted for by God’s complete ignorance of

living  man  as  an  organism.  According  to  this  idea  "sh--ing"  is  in  a

certain sense the final act; that is to say, when once the urge to sh--

has  been  miracled  up,  the  aim  of  destroying  the  understanding  is

achieved and a final withdrawal of the rays becomes possible. To get

to the bottom of the origin of this idea, we must suppose, as it seems

to me, that there is a misapprehension in connection with the symbolic

meaning of the act of evacuation, a notion, in fact, that any one who

has  been  in  such  a  relation  as  I  have  with  divine  rays  is  to  some

extent entitled to sh-- upon the whole world.   ‘But now what follows reveals the full perfidy¹ of the policy that has

been pursued towards me. Almost every time the need for evacuation

was miracled up in me, some other person in my vicinity was sent (by

having his nerves stimulated for that purpose) to the lavatory, in order

to  prevent  my  evacuating.  This  is  a  phenomenon  which  I  have

observed for years and upon such countless occasions - thousands of

them - and with such regularity, as to exclude any possibility of its

being  attributable  to  chance.  And  thereupon  comes  the  question:

"Why don’t you sh--?" to which the brilliant repartee is made that I am

"so stupid or something". The pen well-nigh shrinks from recording so

monumental  a  piece  of  absurdity  as  that  God,  blinded  by  His

ignorance of human nature, can positively go to such lengths as to

suppose that there can exist a man too stupid to do what every animal

can do - too stupid to be able to sh--. When, upon the occasion of

such an urge, I actually succeed in evacuating - and as a rule, since I

nearly always find the lavatory engaged, I use a pail for the purpose -

the  process  is  always  accompanied  by  the  generation  of  an

exceedingly strong feeling of spiritual voluptuousness. For the relief

from  the  pressure  caused  by  the  presence  of  the  faeces  in  the

intestines  produces  a  sense  of  intense  well-being  in  the  nerves  of

voluptuousness; and the same is equally true of making water. For

this reason, even down to the present day, while I am passing stool or

making water, all the rays are always without exception united; for this

very reason, whenever I address myself to these natural functions, an

attempt  is  invariably  made,  though  as  a  rule  in  vain,  to  miracle

backwards the urge to pass stool and to make water.’² (225-7.)

 

   ¹ In a footnote at this point the author endeavours to mitigate the harshness of the word

‘perfidy’ by a reference to one of his arguments in justification of God. These will be discussed
presently.

   ² This  confession  to  a  pleasure  in  the  excretory  processes,  which  we  have  learnt  to

recognize as one of the auto-erotic components of infantile sexuality, may be compared with
the remarks made by little Hans in my ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-year-old Boy’.
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2403

    Furthermore, this singular God of Schreber’s is incapable of learning

anything by experience: ‘Owing to some quality or other inherent in his

nature, it seems to be impossible for God to derive any lessons for the

future from the experience thus gained.’ (186.) He can therefore go on

repeating  the  same  tormenting  ordeals  and  miracles  and  voices,

without  alteration,  year  after  year,  until  He  inevitably  becomes  a

laughing-stock to the victim of His persecutions.

   ‘The consequence is that, now that the miracles have to a great

extent  lost  the  power  which  they  formerly  possessed  of  producing

terrifying effects, God strikes me above all, in almost everything that

happens to me, as being ridiculous or childish. As regards my own

behaviour, this often results in my being obliged in self-defence to play

the part of a scoffer at God, and even, on occasion, to scoff at Him

aloud.’ (333.)¹

      This  critical  and  rebellious  attitude  towards  God  is,  however,

opposed in Schreber’s mind by an energetic counter-current, which

finds  expression  in  many  places:  ‘But  here  again  I  must  most

emphatically declare that this is nothing more than an episode, which

will, I hope, terminate at the latest with my decease, and that the right

of scoffing at God belongs in consequence to me alone and not to

other men. For them He remains the almighty creator of Heaven and

earth, the first cause of all things, and the salvation of their future, to

whom - not withstanding that a few of the conventional religious ideas

may require revision - worship and the deepest reverence are due.’

(333-4.)

      Repeated  attempts  are  therefore  made  to  find  a  justification  for

God’s behaviour to the patient. In these attempts, which display as

much ingenuity as every other theodicy, the explanation is based now

upon the general nature of souls, and now upon the necessity for self-

preservation under which God lay, and upon the misleading influence

of the Flechsig soul (60-1 and 160). In general, however, the illness is

looked upon as a struggle between Schreber the man and God, in

which victory lies with the man, weak though he is, because the Order

of Things is on his side (61).

   The medical report might easily lead us to suppose that Schreber

exhibited  the  everyday  form  of  Redeemer  phantasy,  in  which  the

patient believes he is the son of God, destined to save the world fromits misery or from the destruction that is threatening it, and so on. It is

for  this  reason  that  I  have  been  careful  to  present  in  detail  the

peculiarities  of  Schreber’s  relation  to  God.  The  significance  of  this

relation  for  the  rest  of  mankind  is  only  rarely  alluded  to  in  the

Denkwürdigkeiten  and  not  until  the  last  phase  of  his  delusional

formation. It consists essentially in the fact that no one who dies can

enter the state of bliss so long as the greater part of the rays of God

are  absorbed  in  his  (Schreber’s)  person,  owing  to  his  powers  of

attraction (32). It is only at a very late stage, too, that his identification

with Jesus Christ makes an undisguised appearance (338 and 431).

   No attempt at explaining Schreber’s case will have any chance of

being correct which does not take into account these peculiarities in

his conception of God, this mixture of reverence and rebelliousness in

his attitude towards Him.

 

   ¹ Even in the basic language it occasionally happened that God was not the abuser but the

abused. For instance: ‘Deuce take it! What a thing to have to say - that God lets himself be f--
d!’ (194.)
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2404

 

 

   I will now turn to another subject, which is closely related to God,

namely, the state of bliss. This is also spoken of by Schreber as ‘the

life  beyond’  to  which  the  human  soul  is  raised  after  death  by  the

process  of  purification.  He  describes  it  as  a  state  of  uninterrupted

enjoyment, bound up with the contemplation of God. This is not very

original, but on the other hand it is surprising to learn that Schreber

makes a distinction between a male and a female state of bliss.¹ ‘The

male state of bliss was superior to the female, which seems to have

consisted chiefly in an uninterrupted feeling of voluptuousness.’ (18.)

In  other  passages  this  coincidence  between  the  state  of  bliss  and

voluptuousness  is  expressed  in  plainer  language  and  without

reference to sex-distinction; and moreover that element of the state of

bliss  which  consists  in  the  contemplation  of  God  is  not  furtherdiscussed. Thus, for instance: ‘The nature of the nerves of God, is

such  that  the  state  of  bliss  .  .  .  is  accompanied  by  a  very  intense

sensation  of  voluptuousness,  even  though  it  does  not  consist

exclusively of it.’ (51.) And again: ‘Voluptuousness may be regarded

as a fragment of the state of bliss given in advance, as it were, to men

and other living creatures.’ (281.) So the state of heavenly bliss is to

be understood as being in its essence an intensified continuation of

sensual pleasure upon earth!

   This view of the state of bliss was far from being an element in

Schreber’s delusion that originated in the first stages of his illness and

was later eliminated as being incompatible with the rest. So late as in

the Statement of his Case, drawn up by the patient for the Appeal

Court in July, 1901, he emphasizes as one of his greatest discoveries

the  fact  ‘that  voluptuousness  stands  in  a  close  relationship  (not

hitherto perceptible to the rest of mankind) to the state of bliss enjoyed

by departed spirits’.²

 

   ¹ It would be much more in keeping with the wish-fulfilment offered by the life beyond that in

it we shall at last be free from the difference between the sexes.
 
                                                Und jene himmlischen Gestalten
                                                sie fragen nicht nach Mann und Weib.
 
                                                [And those calm shining sons of morn
                                                They ask not who is maid or boy.]
 

   ² The possibility of this discovery of Schreber’s having a deeper meaning is discussed

below.
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2405

 

   We shall find, indeed, that this ‘close relationship’ is the rock upon

which the patient builds his hopes of an eventual reconciliation with

God and of his sufferings being brought to an end. The rays of God

abandon their hostility as soon as they are certain that in becoming

absorbed into his body they will experience spiritual voluptuousness

(133);  God  Himself  demands  that  He  shall  be  able  to  findvoluptuousness in him (283), and threatens him with the withdrawal of

His rays if he neglects to cultivate voluptuousness and cannot offer

God what He demands (320).

   This surprising sexualization of the state of heavenly bliss suggests

the possibility that Schreber’s concept of the state of bliss is derived

from  a  condensation  of  the  two  principal  meanings  of  the  German

word ‘selig’ - namely, ‘dead’ and ‘sensually happy’.¹ But this instance

of sexualization will also give us occasion to examine the patient’s

general attitude to the erotic side of life and to questions of sexual

indulgence. For we psycho-analysts have hitherto supported the view

that the roots of every nervous and mental disorder are chiefly to be

found in the patient’s sexual life - some of us merely upon empirical

grounds, others influenced in addition by theoretical considerations.

 

   ¹ Extreme instances of the two uses of the word are to be found in the phrase ‘mein seliger

Vater’ [‘my late father’] and in these lines from the duet in Don Giovanni:
 
                                                                Ja, dein zu sein auf ewig,
                                                                wie selig werd’ ich sein.
 
                                                                [Ah, to be thine for ever -
                                                                How blissful I should be!]
 
But  the  fact  that  the  same  word  should  be  used  in  our  language  in  two  such  different
situations cannot be without significance.
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2406

 

   The samples of Schreber’s delusions that have already been given

enable us without more ado to dismiss the suspicion that it might be

precisely  this  paranoid  disorder  which  would  turn  out  to  be  the

‘negative case’ which has so long been sought for - a case in which

sexuality plays only a very minor part. Schreber himself speaks again

and again as though he shared our prejudice. He is constantly talking

in the same breath of ‘nervous disorder’ and erotic lapses, as though

the two things were inseparable.¹

   Before his illness Senatspräsident Schreber had been a man ofstrict morals: ‘Few people’, he declares, and I see no reason to doubt

his  assertion,  ‘can  have  been  brought  up  upon  such  strict  moral

principles as I was, and few people, all through their lives, can have

exercised (especially in sexual matters) a self-restraint conforming so

closely to those principles as I may say of myself that I have done.’

(281.) After the severe spiritual struggle, of which the phenomena of

his illness were the outward signs, his attitude towards the erotic side

of  life  was  altered.  He  had  come  to  see  that  the  cultivation  of

voluptuousness was incumbent upon him as a duty, and that it was

only by discharging this duty that he could end the grave conflict which

had  broken  out  within  him  -  or,  as  he  thought,  about  him.

Voluptuousness,  so  the  voices  assured  him,  had  become  ‘God-

fearing’  and  he  could  only  regret  that  he  was  not  able  to  devote

himself to its cultivation the whole day long.² (285.)

 

   ¹ ‘When moral corruption ("voluptuous excesses") or perhaps nervous disorder had taken a

strong enough hold upon the whole population of any terrestrial body’, then, thinks Schreber,
bearing in mind the Biblical stories of Sodom and Gomorrah, the Deluge, etc., the world in
question might come to a catastrophic end (52). - ‘[A rumour] sowed fear and terror among
men, wrecked the foundations of religion, and spread abroad general nervous disorders and
immorality, so that devastating pestilences have descended upon mankind.’ (91.) - ‘Thus it
seems probable that by a "Prince of Hell" the souls meant the uncanny Power that was able to
develop in a sense hostile to God as a result of moral depravity among men or of a general
state of excessive nervous excitement following upon over-civilization.’ (163.)

   ² In connection with his delusions he writes: ‘This attraction, however, lost its terrors for the

nerves in question, if, and in so far as, upon entering my body, they encountered a feeling of
spiritual voluptuousness in which they themselves shared. For, if this happened, they found
an equivalent or approximately equivalent substitute in my body for the state of heavenly bliss
which they had lost, and which itself consisted in a kind of voluptuous enjoyment.’ (179-80.)
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2407

 

 

   Such then, was the result of the changes produced in Schreber by

his illness, as we find them expressed in the two main features of his

delusional system. Before it he had been inclined to sexual asceticism

and  had  been  a  doubter  in  regard  to  God;  while  after  it  he  was  a

believer in God and a devotee of voluptuousness. But just as his re-conquered  belief  in  God  was  of  a  peculiar  kind,  so  too  the  sexual

enjoyment  which  he  had  won  for  himself  was  of  a  most  unusual

character.  It  was  not  the  sexual  liberty  of  a  man,  but  the  sexual

feelings of a woman. He took up a feminine attitude towards God; he

felt that he was God’s wife.¹

      No  other  part  of  his  delusions  is  treated  by  the  patient  so

exhaustively,  one  might  almost  say  so  insistently,  as  his  alleged

transformation into a woman. The nerves absorbed by him have, so

he  says,  assumed  in  his  body  the  character  of  female  nerves  of

voluptuousness, and have given to his body a more or less female

stamp,  and  more  particularly  to  his  skin  a  softness  peculiar  to  the

female sex (87). If he presses lightly with his fingers upon any part of

his body, he can feel these nerves, under the surface of the skin, as a

tissue of a thread-like or stringy texture; they are especially present in

the region of the chest, where, in a woman, her breasts would be. ‘By

applying pressure to this tissue, I am able to evoke a sensation of

voluptuousness such as women experience, and especially in I think

of  something  feminine  at  the  same  time.’  (277.)  He  knows  with

certainty  that  this  tissue  was  originally  nothing  else  than  nerves  of

God,  which  could  hardly  have  lost  the  character  of  nerves  merely

through having passed over into his body (279). By means of what he

calls ‘drawing’ (that is, by calling up visual images) he is able to give

both himself and the rays an impression that his body is fitted out with

female breasts and genitals: ‘It has become so much a habit with me

to draw female buttocks on to my body - honi soit qui mal y pense -

that I do it almost involuntarily every time I stoop.’ (233.) He is ‘bold

enough to assert that anyone who should happen to see me before

the mirror with the upper portion of my torso bared - especially if the

illusion  is  assisted  by  my  wearing  a  little  feminine  finery  -  would

receive an unmistakable impression of a female bust’. (280.) He calls

for a medical examination, in order to establish the fact that his whole

body has nerves of voluptuousness dispersed over it from head to

foot, a state of things which is only to be found, in his opinion, in the

female  body,  whereas,  in  the  male,  to  the  best  of  his  knowledge,

nerves of voluptuousness exist only in the sexual organs and their

immediate vicinity (274). The spiritual voluptuousness which has been

developed  owing  to  this  accumulation  of  nerves  in  his  body  is  sointense that it only requires a slight effort of his imagination (especially

when he is lying in bed) to procure him a feeling of sensual well-being

that  affords  a  tolerably  clear  adumbration  of  the  sexual  pleasure

enjoyed by a woman during copulation (269).

 

   ¹ ‘Something occurred in my own body similar to the conception of Jesus Christ in an

immaculate virgin, that is, in a woman who had never had intercourse with a man. On two
separate occasions (and while I was still in Professor Flechsig’s institution) I have possessed
female genitals, though somewhat imperfectly developed ones, and have felt a stirring in my
body,  such  as  would  arise  from  the  quickening  of  a  human  embryo.  Nerves  of  God
corresponding to male semen had, by a divine miracle, been projected into my body, and
impregnation had thus taken place.’ (Introduction, 4.)
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2408

 

      If  we  now  recall  the  dream  which  the  patient  had  during  the

incubation period of his illness, before he had moved to Dresden, it

will  become  clear  beyond  a  doubt  that  his  delusion  of  being

transformed into a woman was nothing else than a realization of the

content of that dream. At that time he had rebelled against the dream

with masculine indignation, and in the same way he began by striving

against its fulfilment in his illness and looked upon his transformation

into a woman as a disgrace with which he was threatened with hostile

intention. But there came a time (it was in November, 1895) when he

began  to  reconcile  himself  to  the  transformation  and  bring  it  into

harmony with the higher purposes of God: ‘Since then, and with a full

consciousness  of  what  I  did,  I  have  inscribed  upon  my  banner  the

cultivation of femaleness.’ (177-8.)

   He then arrived at the firm conviction that it was God Himself who,

for His own satisfaction, was demanding femaleness from him:

   ‘No sooner, however, am I alone with God (if I may so express it),

than it becomes a necessity for me to employ every imaginable device

and to summon up the whole of my mental faculties, and especially

my imagination, in order to bring it about that the divine rays may have

the impression as continuously as possible (or, since this is beyond

mortal  power  at  least  at  certain  times  of  day)  that  I  am  a  womanluxuriating in voluptuous sensations.’ (281.)

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2409

 

   ‘On the other hand, God demands a constant state of enjoyment,

such as would be in keeping with the conditions of existence imposed

upon souls by the Order of Things; and it is my duty to provide Him

with  this  .  .  .  in  the  shape  of  the  greatest  possible  generation  of

spiritual  voluptuousness.  And  if,  in  this  process,  a  little  sensual

pleasure falls to my share, I feel justified in accepting it as some slight

compensation  for  the  inordinate  measure  of  suffering  and  privation

that has been mine for so many past years . . .’ (283.)

   ‘. . . I think I may even venture to advance the view based upon

impressions I have received, that God would never take any steps

towards effecting a withdrawal - the first result of which is invariably to

alter my physical condition markedly for the worse - but would quietly

and permanently yield to my powers of attraction, if it were possible for

me always to be playing the part of a woman lying in my own amorous

embraces, always to be casting my looks upon female forms, always

to be gazing at pictures of women, and so on.’ (284-5.)

   In Schreber’s system the two principal elements of his delusions (his

transformation  into  a  woman  and  his  favoured  relation  to  God)  are

linked in his assumption of a feminine attitude towards God. It will be

an  unavoidable  part  of  our  task  to  show  that  there  is  an  essential

genetic relation between these two elements. Otherwise our attempts

at elucidating Schreber’s delusions will leave us in the absurd position

described in Kant’s famous simile in the Critique of Pure Reason - we

shall be like a man holding a sieve under a he-goat while some one

else milks it.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2410

                                             II

 

                      ATTEMPTS AT INTERPRETATION

 

There  are  two  angles  from  which  we  could  attempt  to  reach  an

understanding of this history of a case of paranoia and to lay bare in it

the familiar complexes and motive forces of mental life. We might start

either from the patient’s own delusional utterances or from the exciting

causes of his illness.

   The former method must seem enticing since the brilliant example

given us by Jung in his interpretation of a case of dementia praecox

which was far severer than this one and which exhibited symptoms far

more remote from the normal. The high level of our present patient’s

intelligence, too, and his communicativeness, seem likely to facilitate

the accomplishment of our task along these lines. He himself not in

frequently  presses  the  key  into  our  hands,  by  adding  a  gloss,  a

quotation  or  an  example  to  some  delusional  proposition  in  an

apparently  incidental  manner,  or  even  by  expressly  denying  some

parallel to it that has arisen in his own mind. For when this happens,

we have only to follow our usual psycho-analytic technique - to strip

his sentence of its negative form, to take his example as being the

actual thing, or his quotation or gloss as being the original source -

and  we  find  ourselves  in  possession  of  what  we  are  looking  for,

namely  a  translation  of  the  paranoid  mode  of  expression  into  the

normal one.

      It  is  perhaps  worth  giving  a  more  detailed  illustration  of  this

procedure.  Schreber  complains  of  the  nuisance  created  by  the  so-

called ‘miracled birds’ or ‘talking birds’, to which he ascribes a number

of  very  remarkable  qualities  (208-14).  It  is  his  belief  that  they  are

composed of former ‘fore-courts of Heaven’, that is, of human souls

which  have  entered  into  a  state  of  bliss,  and  that  they  have  been

loaded  with  ptomaine¹  poison  and  set  on  to  him.  They  have  been

brought to the condition of repeating ‘meaningless phrases which they

have learnt by heart’ and which have been ‘dinned into them’. Each

time that they have discharged their load of ptomaine poison on to him

- that is each time that they have ‘reeled off the phrases which have

been  dinned  into  them,  as  it  were’  -  they  become  to  some  extentabsorbed  into  his  soul,  with  the  words  ‘The  deuce  of  a  fellow!’  or

‘Deuce take it!’ which are the only words they are still capable of using

to express a genuine feeling. They cannot understand the meaning of

the words they speak, but they are by nature susceptible to similarity

of sounds, though the similarity need not necessarily be a complete

one. Thus it is immaterial to them whether one says:

 

                                                                ‘Santiago’ or ‘Karthago’,
                                                                ‘Chinesentum’ or ‘Jesum Christum’,
                                                                ‘Abendrot’ or ‘Atemnot’,

                                                                ‘Ariman’ or ‘Ackermann’ etc.² (210.)

 

As  we  read  this  description,  we  cannot  avoid  the  idea  that  what  it

really refers to must be young girls. In a carping mood people often

compare them to geese, ungallantly accuse then of having ‘the brains

of a bird’ and declare that they can say nothing but phrases learnt by

rote and they betray their lack of education by confusing foreign words

that sound alike. The phrase ‘The deuce of a fellow!’, which is the only

thing that they are serious about, would in that case be an allusion to

the triumph of the young man who has succeeded in impressing them.

And, sure enough, a few pages later we come upon a passage in

which  Schreber  confirms  this  interpretation:  ‘For  purposes  of

distinction, I have as a joke given girls’ names to a great number of

the  remaining  bird-souls;  since  by  their  inquisitiveness,  their

voluptuous  bent,  etc.,  they  one  and  all  most  readily  suggest  a

comparison  with  little  girls.  Some  of  these  girls’  names  have  since

been  adopted  by  the  rays  of  God  and  have  been  retained  as  a

designation  of  the  bird-souls  in  question.’  (214.)  This  easy

interpretation of the ‘miracled birds’ gives us a hint which may help us

towards understanding the enigmatic ‘fore-courts of Heaven’.

 

   ¹ [German ‘Leichengift’, literally ‘corpse poison’.]

   ² [ Santiago’ or ‘Carthage’,

      ‘Chinese-dom’ or ‘Jesus Christ’,
      ‘Sunset’ or ‘Breathlessness’,
      ‘Ahriman’ or ‘Farmer’.]

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2411

 

   I am quite aware that a psycho-analyst needs no small amount of

tact and restraint whenever in the course of his work he goes beyond

the typical instances of interpretation and that his listeners or readers

will only follow him as far a their own familiarity with analytic technique

will allow them. He has every reason, therefore, to guard against the

risk  that  an  increased  display  of  acumen  on  his  part  may  be

accompanied by a diminution in the certainty and trustworthiness of

his results. It is thus only natural that one analyst will tend too much in

the  direction  of  caution  and  another  too  much  in  the  direction  of

boldness. It will not be possible to define the proper limits of justifiable

interpretation until many experiments have been made and until the

subject  has  become  more  familiar.  In  working  upon  the  case  of

Schreber  I  have  had  a  policy  of  restraint  forced  on  me  by  the

circumstance  that  the  opposition  to  his  publishing  the

Denkwürdigkeiten was so far effective as to withhold a considerable

portion of the material from our knowledge - the portion, too, which

would in all probability have thrown the most important light upon the

case.¹ Thus, for instance, the third chapter of the book opens with this

promising  announcement:  ‘I  shall  now  proceed  to  describe  certain

events which occurred to other members of my family and which may

conceivably  have  been  connected  with  the  soul-murder  I  have

postulated;  for  there  is  at  any  rate  something  more  or  less

problematical about all of them, something not easily explicable upon

the lines of ordinary human experience.’ (33.) But the next sentence,

which is also the last of the chapter, is as follows: ‘The remainder of

this  chapter  has  been  withheld  from  print  as  being  unsuitable  for

publication.’ I shall therefore have to be satisfied if I can succeed in

tracing back at any rate the nucleus of the delusional structure with

some degree of certainty to familiar human motives.

 

   ¹ ‘When we survey the contents of this document’, writes Dr. Weber in his report, ‘and

consider the mass of indiscretions in regard to himself and other persons which it contains,
when we observe the unblushing manner in which he describes situations and events which
are of the most delicate nature and indeed, in an aesthetic sense, utterly impossible, when we
reflect upon his use of strong language of the most offensive kind, and so forth, we shall find it
quite  impossible  to  understand  how  a  man,  distinguished  apart  from  this  by  his  tact  andrefinement, could contemplate taking a step so compromising to himself in the public eye,
unless we bear in mind the fact that . . .’ etc. etc. (402.) Surely we can hardly expect that a
case  history  which  sets  out  to  give  a  picture  of  deranged  humanity  and  its  struggles  to
rehabilitate itself should exhibit ‘discretion’ and ‘aesthetic’ charm.
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2412

 

   With this object in view I shall now mention a further small piece of

the case history to which sufficient weight is not given in the reports,

although  the  patient  himself  has  done  all  he  can  to  put  it  in  the

foreground.  I  refer  to  Schreber’s  relations  to  his  first  physician,

Geheimrat Prof. Flechsig of Leipzig.

      As  we  already  know,  Schreber’s  case  at  first  took  the  form  of

delusions of persecution, and did not begin to lose it until the turning-

point  of  his  illness  (the  time  of  his  ‘reconciliation’).  From  that  time

onwards the persecutions became less and less intolerable, and the

ignominious  purpose  which  at  first  underlay  his  threatened

emasculation began to be superseded by a purpose in consonance

with  the  Order  of  Things.  But  the  first  author  of  all  these  acts  of

persecution was Flechsig, and he remains their instigator throughout

the whole course of the illness.¹

      Of  the  actual  nature  of  Flechsig’s  enormity  and  its  motives  the

patient speaks with the characteristic vagueness and obscurity which

may be regarded as marks of an especially intense work of delusion-

formation, if it is legitimate to judge paranoia on the model of a far

more familiar mental phenomenon - the dream. Flechsig, according to

the  patient,  committed,  or  attempted  to  commit,  ‘soul-murder’  upon

him - an act which, he thought, was comparable with the effort made

by the devil or by demons to gain possession of a soul and may have

had its prototype in events which occurred between members of the

Flechsig  and  Schreber  families  long  since  deceased  (22  ff.).  We

should be glad to learn more of the meaning of this ‘soul-murder’, but

at this point our sources relapse once more into a tendentious silence:

‘As to what constitutes the true essence of soul-murder, and as to its

technique, if I may so describe it, I am able to say nothing beyond

what has already been indicated. There is only this, perhaps, to beadded . . . (The passage which follows is unsuitable for publication.)’

(28.) As a result of this omission we are left in the dark on the question

of what is meant by ‘soul-murder’. We shall refer later on to the only

hint upon the subject which has evaded censorship.

 

   ¹ ‘Even now the voices that talk with me call out your name to me hundreds of times each

day. They name you in certain constantly recurring connections, and especially as being the
first  author  of  the  injuries  I  have  suffered.  And  yet  the  personal  relations  which  existed
between us for a time have, so far as I am concerned, long since faded into the background;
so that I myself could have little enough reason to be for ever recalling you to my mind, and
still less for doing so with any feelings of resentment.’ (‘Open Letter to Professor Flechsig’,
viii.)
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2413

 

   However this may be, a further development of Schreber’s delusions

soon took place, which affected his relations to God without altering

his relations to Flechsig. Hitherto he had regarded Flechsig (or rather

his soul) as his only true enemy and had looked upon God Almighty

as his ally; but now he could not avoid the thought that God Himself

had played the part of accessory, if not of instigator, in the plot against

him.  (59.)  Flechsig,  however,  remained  the  first  seducer,  to  whose

influence God had yielded (60). He had succeeded in making his way

up to heaven with his whole soul or a part of it and in becoming a

‘leader  of  rays’,  without  dying  or  undergoing  any  preliminary

purification.¹ (56.) The Flechsig soul continued to play this role even

after  the  patient  had  been  moved  from  the  Leipzig  clinic  to  Dr.

Pierson’s asylum. The influence of the new environment was shown

by the Flechsig soul being joined by the soul of the chief attendant,

whom the patient recognized as a person who had formerly lived in

the same block of flats as himself. This was represented as being the

von W. soul.² The Flechsig soul then introduced the system of ‘soul-

division’, which assumed large proportions. At one time there were as

many as forty to sixty sub-divisions of the Flechsig soul; two of its

larger divisions were known as the ‘upper Flechsig’ and the ‘middle

Flechsig’. The von W. soul (the chief attendant’s) behaved in just thesame fashion (111). It was sometimes most entertaining to notice the

way in which these two souls, in spite of their alliance, carried on a

feud with one another, the aristocratic pride of the one pitted against

the  professorial  vanity  of  the  other  (113).  During  his  first  weeks  at

Sonnenstein (to which hr, was finally moved in the summer of 1894)

the soul of his new physician, Dr. Weber, came into play; and shortly

afterwards  the  change-over  took  place  in  the  development  of  his

delusions which we have come to know as his ‘reconciliation’.

 

     ¹ According  to  another  and  significant  version,  which,  however,  was  soon  rejected,

Professor Flechsig had shot himself either at Weissenburg in Alsace or in a police cell at
Leipzig.  The  patient  saw  his  funeral  go  past,  though  not  in  the  direction  that  was  to  be
expected in view of the relative positions of the University Clinic and the cemetery. On other
occasions Flechsig appeared to him in the company of a policeman, or in conversation with
his wife. Schreber was a witness of this conversation by the method of ‘nerve-connection’,
and in the course of it Professor Flechsig called himself ‘God Flechsig’ to his wife, so that she
was inclined to think he had gone mad. (82.)

   ² The voices informed him that in the course of an official enquiry this von W. had made

some untrue statements about him, either deliberately or out of carelessness, and in particular
had accused him of masturbation. As a punishment for this he was now obliged to wait on the
patient (108).
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2414

 

      During  this  later  stay  at  Sonnenstein,  when  God  had  begun  to

appreciate him better, a raid was made upon the souls, which had

been multiplied so much as to become a nuisance. As a result of this,

the Flechsig soul survived in only one or two shapes, and the von W.

soul in only a single one. The latter soon disappeared altogether. The

divisions of the Flechsig soul, which slowly lost both their intelligence

and their power, then came to be described as the ‘posterior Flechsig’

and  the  ‘"Oh  well!"  Party’.  That  the  Flechsig  soul  retained  its

importance to the last, is made clear by Schreber’s prefatory ‘Open

Letter to Herr Geheimrat Prof. Dr. Flechsig’.

   In this remarkable document Schreber expresses his firm conviction

that  the  physician  who  influenced  him  had  the  same  visions  and

received the same disclosures upon supernatural things as he himself.He  protests  on  the  very  first  page  that  the  author  of  the

Denkwürdigkeiten has not the remotest intention of making an attack

upon  the  doctor’s  honour,  and  the  same  point  is  earnestly  and

emphatically  repeated  in  the  patient’s  presentations  of  his  position

(343, 445). It is evident that he is endeavouring to distinguish the ‘soul

Flechsig’ from the living man of the same name, the Flechsig of his

delusions from the real Flechsig.¹

 

   ¹ ‘I am accordingly obliged to admit as a possibility that everything in the first chapters of my

Denkwürdigkeiten which is connected with the name of Flechsig may only refer to the soul
Flechsig as distinguished from the living man. For that his soul has a separate existence is a
certain fact, though it cannot be explained upon any natural basis.’ (342-3.)
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2415

 

 

   The study of a number of cases of delusions of persecution has led

me as well as other investigators to the view that the relation between

the patient and his persecutor can be reduced to a simple formula.¹ It

appears  that  the  person  to  whom  the  delusion  ascribes  so  much

power and influence, in whose hands all the threads of the conspiracy

converge, is, if he is definitely named, either identical with some one

who played an equally important part in the patient’s emotional life

before his illness, or is easily recognizable as a substitute for him. The

intensity of the emotion is projected in the shape of external power,

while its quality is changed into the opposite. The person who is now

hated and feared for being a persecutor was at one time loved and

honoured.  The  main  purpose  of  the  persecution  asserted  by  the

patient’s delusion is to justify the change in his emotional attitude.

   Bearing this point of view in mind, let us now examine the relations

which had formerly existed between Schreber and his physician and

persecutor, Flechsig. We have already heard that, in the years 1884

and 1885, Schreber suffered from a first attack of nervous disorder,

which ran its course ‘without the occurrence of any incidents bordering

upon  the  sphere  of  the  supernatural’  (35).  While  he  was  in  thiscondition, which was described as ‘hypochondria’ and seems not to

have  overstepped  the  limits  of  a  neurosis,  Flechsig  acted  as  his

doctor. At that time Schreber spent six months in the University Clinic

at Leipzig. We learn that after his recovery he had cordial feelings

towards his doctor. ‘The main thing was that, after a fairly long period

of convalescence which I spent in travelling, I was finally cured; and it

was therefore impossible that I should feel anything at that time but

the  liveliest  gratitude  towards  Professor  Flechsig.  I  gave  a  marked

expression to this feeling both in a personal visit which I subsequently

paid him and in what I deemed to be an appropriate honorarium.’ (35-

6.) It is true that Schreber’s encomium in the Denkwürdigkeiten upon

this first treatment of Flechsig’s is not entirely with out reservations;

but that can easily be understood if we consider that his attitude had in

the meantime been reversed. The passage immediately following the

one that has just been quoted bears witness to the original warmth of

his  feelings  towards  the  physician  who  had  treated  him  so

successfully:  ‘The  gratitude  of  my  wife  was  perhaps  even  more

heartfelt;  for  she  revered  Professor  Flechsig  as  the  man  who  had

restored her husband to her, and hence it was that for years she kept

his portrait standing upon her writing-table.’ (36.)

 

   ¹ Cf. Abraham, 1908. In the course of this paper its author, referring to a correspondence

between us, scrupulously attributes to myself an influence upon the development of his views.
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2416

 

   Since we cannot obtain any insight into the causes of the first illness

(a  knowledge  of  which  is  undoubtedly  indispensable  for  properly

elucidating the second and severer illness) we must now plunge at

random into an unknown concatenation of circumstances. During the

incubation  period  of  his  illness,  as  we  are  aware  (that  is,  between

June 1893, when he was appointed to his new post, and the following

October, when he took up his duties), he repeatedly dreamt that his

old nervous disorder had returned. Once, moreover, when he was half

asleep, he had a feeling that after all it must be nice to be a womansubmitting to the act of copulation. The dreams and the phantasy are

reported by Schreber in immediate succession; and if we also bring

together  their  subject-matter,  we  shall  be  able  to  infer  that,  at  the

same time as his recollection of his illness, a recollection of his doctor

was also aroused in his mind, and that the feminine attitude which he

assumed  in  the  phantasy  was  from  the  first  directed  towards  the

doctor.  Or  it  may  be  that  the  dream  of  his  illness  having  returned

simply expressed some such longing as: ‘I wish I could see Flechsig

again!’ Our ignorance of the mental content of the first illness bars our

way  in  this  direction.  Perhaps  that  illness  had  left  behind  in  him  a

feeling of affectionate dependence upon his doctor, which had now,

for some unknown reason, become intensified to the pitch of an erotic

desire. This feminine phantasy which was still kept impersonal, was

met at once by an indignant repudiation - a true ‘masculine protest’, to

use Adler’s expression, but in a sense different from his.¹ But in the

severe  psychosis  which  broke  out  soon  afterwards  the  feminine

phantasy  carried  everything  before  it;  and  it  only  requires  a  slight

correction of the characteristic paranoic indefiniteness of Schreber’s

mode of expression to enable us to divine the fact that the patient was

in fear of sexual abuse at the hands of his doctor himself. The exciting

cause of his illness, then, was an outburst of homosexual libido; the

object  of  this  libido  was  probably  from  the  very  first  his  doctor,

Flechsig; and his struggles against the libidinal impulse produced the

conflict which gave rise to the symptoms.

 

   ¹ Adler (1910). According to Adler the masculine protest has a share in the production of

the symptom, whereas in the present instance the patient is protesting against a symptom that
is already fully fledged.
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2417

 

   I will pause here for a moment to meet a storm of remonstrances

and  objections.  Any  one  acquainted  with  the  present  state  of

psychiatry must be prepared to face trouble.

   ‘Is it not an act of irresponsible levity, an indiscretion and a calumny,to  charge  a  man  of  such  high  ethical  standing  as  the  former

Senatspräsident Schreber with homosexuality?’ - No. The patient has

himself  informed  the  world  at  large  of  his  phantasy  of  being

transformed  into  a  woman,  and  he  has  allowed  all  personal

considerations to be outweighed by interests of a higher nature. Thus

he  has  himself  given  us  the  right  to  occupy  ourselves  with  his

phantasy,  and  in  translating  it  into  the  technical  terminology  of

medicine we have not made the slightest addition to its content.

   ‘Yes, but he was not in his right mind when he did it. His delusion

that he was being transformed into a woman was a pathological idea.’

-  We  have  not  forgotten  that.  Indeed  our  only  concern  is  with  the

meaning and origin of this pathological idea. We will appeal to the

distinction  he  himself  draws  between  the  man  Flechsig  and  the

‘Flechsig soul’. We are not making reproaches of any kind against him

-  whether  for  having  had  homosexual  impulses  or  for  having

endeavoured  to  suppress  them.  Psychiatrists  should  at  last  take  a

lesson  from  this  patient,  when  they  see  him  trying,  in  spite  of  his

delusions, not to confuse the world of the unconscious with the world

of reality.

   ‘But it is nowhere expressly stated that the transformation into a

woman  which  he  so  much  dreaded  was  to  be  carried  out  for  the

benefit of Flechsig.’ - That is true; and it is not difficult to understand

why, in preparing his memoirs for publication, since he was anxious

not to insult the ‘man Flechsig’, he should have avoided so gross an

accusation.  But  the  toning-down  of  his  language  owing  to  these

considerations  did  not  go  so  far  as  to  be  able  to  conceal  the  true

meaning of his accusation. Indeed, it may be maintained that after all

it is expressed openly in such a passage as the following: ‘In this way

a conspiracy against me was brought to a head (in about March or

April, 1894). Its object was to contrive that, when once my nervous

complaint had been recognized as incurable or assumed to be so, I

should be handed over to a certain person in such a manner that my

soul  should  be  delivered  up  to  him,  but  my  body  .  .  .  should  be

transformed  into  a  female  body,  and as  such  surrendered  to  the

person  in  question  with  a  view  to  sexual  abuse  .  .  .’¹  (56).  It  is

unnecessary to remark that no other individual is ever named who

could be put in Flechsig’s place. Towards the end of Schreber’s stayin the clinic at Leipzig, a fear occurred to his mind that he ‘was to be

thrown to the attendants’ for the purpose of sexual abuse (98). Any

remaining doubts that we have upon the nature of the part originally

attributed to the doctor are dispelled when, in the later stages of his

delusion, we find Schreber outspokenly admitting his feminine attitude

towards  God.  The  other  accusation  against  Flechsig  echoes  over-

loudly  through  the  book.  Flechsig,  he  says,  tried  to  commit  soul-

murder upon him. As we already know, the patient was himself not

clear as to the actual nature of that crime, but it was connected with

matters of discretion which precluded their publication (as we see from

the suppressed third chapter). From this point a single thread takes us

further. Schreber illustrates the nature of soul-murder by referring to

the legends embodied in Goethe’s Faust, Byron’s Manfred, Weber’s

Freischütz,  etc.  (22),  and  one  of  these  instances  is  further  cited  in

another passage. In discussing the division of God into two persons,

Schreber identifies his ‘lower God’ and ‘upper God’ with Ahriman and

Ormuzd respectively (19); and a little later a casual footnote occurs:

‘Moreover, the name of Ahriman also appears in connection with a

soul-murder in, for example, Lord Byron’s Manfred.’ (20.) In the play

which is thus referred to there is scarcely anything comparable to the

bartering  of  Faust’s  soul,  and  I  have  searched  it  in  vain  for  the

expression ‘soul-murder’. But the essence and the secret of the whole

work lies in - an incestuous relation between a brother and a sister.

And here our thread breaks off short.²

 

   ¹ The italics in this passage are mine.

   ² By way of substantiating the above assertion I will quote a passage from the last scene of

the play, in which Manfred says to the demon who has come to fetch him away:
 
                                                                . . . my past power
                                                Was purchased by no compact with thy crew.
 
There  is  thus  a  direct  contradiction  of  a  soul  having  been  bartered.  This  mistake  on
Schreber’s  part  was  probably  not  without  its  significance.  -  It  is  plausible,  by  the  way,  to
connect  the  plot  of Manfred  with  the  incestuous  relations  which  have  repeatedly  been
asserted to exist between the poet and his half-sister. And it is not a little striking that the
action of Byron’s other play, his celebrated Cain, should be laid in the primal family, where no
objections could exist to incest between brother and sister. - Finally, we cannot leave the
subject of soul-murder without quoting one more passage from the Denkwürdigkeiten: ‘in this
connection Flechsig used formerly to be named as the first author of soul-murder, whereas for
some time past the facts have been deliberately inverted and an attempt has been made to"represent" myself as being the one who practises soul-murder . . .’ (23.)
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2418

 

   At a later stage in this paper I intend to return to a discussion of

some further objections; but in the meantime I shall consider myself

justified in maintaining the view that the basis of Schreber’s illness

was  the  outburst  of  a  homosexual  impulse.  This  hypothesis

harmonizes  with  a  noteworthy  detail  of  the  case  history,  which

remains  otherwise  inexplicable.  The  patient  had  a  fresh  ‘nervous

collapse’,  which  exercised  a  decisive  effect  upon  the  course  of  his

illness, at a time when his wife was taking a short holiday on account

of her own health. Up till then she had spent several hours with him

every day and had taken her mid-day meal with him. But when she

returned  after  an  absence  of  four  days,  she  found  him  most  sadly

altered: so much so, indeed, that he himself no longer wished to see

her.  ‘What  especially  determined  my  mental  break-down  was  a

particular night, during which I had a quite extraordinary number of

emissions - quite half a dozen, all in that one night.’ (44.) It is easy to

understand that the mere presence of his wife must have acted as a

protection against the attractive power of the men about him; and if we

are  prepared  to  admit  that  an  emission  cannot  occur  in  an  adult

without some mental concomitant, we shall be able to supplement the

patient’s  emissions  that  night  by  assuming  that  they  were

accompanied  by  homosexual  phantasies  which  remained

unconscious.

   The question of why this outburst of homosexual libido overtook the

patient  precisely  at  this  period  (that  is,  between  the  dates  of  his

appointment and of his move to Dresden) cannot be answered in the

absence of more precise knowledge of the story of his life. Generally

speaking, every human being oscillates all through his life between

heterosexual  and  homosexual  feelings,  and  any  frustration  or

disappointment in the one direction is apt to drive him over into the

other. We know nothing of these factors in Schreber’s case, but we

must not omit to draw attention to a somatic factor which may verywell have been relevant. At the time of this illness Dr. Schreber was

fifty-one years old, and he had therefore reached an age which is of

critical importance in sexual life. It is a period at which in women the

sexual  function,  after  a  phase  of  intensified  activity,  enters  upon  a

process of far-reaching involution; nor do men appear to be exempt

from  its  influence,  for  men  as  well  as  women  are  subject  to  a

‘climacteric’ and to the susceptibilities to disease which go along with

it.¹

 

   ¹ I owe my knowledge of Schreber’s age at the time of his illness to some information which

was kindly given me by one of his relatives, through the agency of Dr. Stegmann of Dresden.
Apart from this one fact, however, I have made use of no material in this paper that is not
derived from the actual text of the Denkwürdigkeiten.
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2419

 

   I can well imagine what a dubious hypothesis it must appear to be to

suppose that a man’s friendly feeling towards his doctor can suddenly

break  out  in  an  intensified  form  after  a  lapse  of  eight  years¹  and

become the occasion of such a severe mental disorder. But I do not

think we should be justified in dismissing such a hypothesis merely on

account of its inherent improbability, if it recommends itself to us on

other grounds; we ought rather to inquire how far we shall get if we

follow it up. For the improbability may be of a passing kind and may be

due  to  the  fact  that  the  doubtful  hypothesis  has  not  as  yet  been

brought into relation with any other pieces of knowledge and that it is

the first hypothesis with which the problem has been approached. But

for  the  benefit  of  those  who  are  unable  to  hold  their  judgement  in

suspense and who regard our hypothesis as altogether untenable, it is

easy  to  suggest  a  possibility  which  would  rob  it  of  its  bewildering

character. The patient’s friendly feeling towards his doctor may very

well have been due to a process of ‘transference’, by means of which

an  emotional  cathexis  became  transposed  from  some  person  who

was important to him on to the doctor who was in reality indifferent to

him; so that the doctor will have been chosen as a deputy or surrogatefor  some  one  much  closer  to  him.  To  put  the  matter  in  a  more

concrete form: the patient was reminded of his brother or father by the

figure of the doctor, he rediscovered them in him; there will then be

nothing  to  wonder  at  if,  in  certain  circumstances,  a  longing  for  the

surrogate figure reappeared in him and operated with a violence that

is only to be explained in the light of its origin and primary significance.

   With a view to following up this attempt at an explanation, I naturally

thought it worth while discovering whether the patient’s father was still

alive at the time at which he fell ill, whether he had had a brother, and

if so whether he was then living or among the ‘blest’. I was pleased,

therefore, when, after a prolonged search through the pages of the

Denkwürdigkeiten, I came at last upon a passage in which the patient

sets  these  doubts  at  rest:  ‘The  memory  of  my  father  and  my

brother . . . is as sacred to me as . . .’ etc. (442.) So that both of them

were dead at the time of the onset of his second illness (and, it may

be, of his first illness as well).

        We  shall  therefore,  I  think,  raise  no  further  objections  to  the

hypothesis that the exciting cause of the illness was the appearance in

him of a feminine (that is, a passive homosexual) wishful phantasy,

which took as its object the figure of his doctor. An intense resistance

to this phantasy arose on the part of Schreber’s personality, and the

ensuing  defensive  struggle,  which  might  perhaps  just  as  well  have

assumed some other shape, took on, for reasons unknown to us, that

of a delusion of persecution. The person he longed for now became

his persecutor, and the content of his wishful phantasy became the

content  of  his  persecution.  It  may  be  presumed  that  the  same

schematic  outline  will  turn  out  to  be  applicable  to  other  cases  of

delusions  of  persecution.  What  distinguishes  Schreber’s  case  from

others, however, is its further development and the transformation it

underwent in the course of it.

 

   ¹ This was the length of the interval between Schreber’s first and second illnesses.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2420

    One such change was the replacement of Flechsig by the superior

figure  of  God.  This  seems  at  first  as  though  it  were  a  sign  of

aggravation  of  the  conflict,  an  intensification  of  the  unbearable

persecution, but it soon becomes evident that it was preparing the way

for the second change and, with it, the solution of the conflict. It was

impossible for Schreber to become reconciled to playing the part of a

female  wanton  towards  his  doctor;  but  the  task  of  providing  God

Himself with the voluptuous sensations that He required called up no

such  resistance  on  the  part  of  his  ego.  Emasculation  was  now  no

longer a disgrace; it became ‘consonant with the Order of Things’, it

took its place in a great cosmic chain of events, and was instrumental

in the re-creation of humanity after its extinction. ‘A new race of men,

born from the spirit of Schreber’ would, so he thought, revere as their

ancestor this man who believed himself the victim of persecution. By

this  means  an  outlet  was  provided  which  would  satisfy  both  of  the

contending forces. His ego found compensation in his megalomania,

while his feminine wishful phantasy made its way through and became

acceptable. The struggle and the illness could cease. The patient’s

sense  of  reality,  however,  which  had  in  the  meantime  become

stronger, compelled him to postpone the solution from the present to

the remote future, and to content himself with what might be described

as an asymptotic wish-fulfilment.¹ Some time or other, he anticipated,

his  transformation  into  a  woman  would  come  about;  until  then  the

personality of Dr. Schreber would remain indestructible.

   In textbooks of psychiatry we frequently come across statements to

the  effect  that  megalomania  can  develop  out  of  delusions  of

persecution. The process is supposed to be as follows. The patient is

primarily  the  victim  of  a  delusion  that  he  is  being  persecuted  by

powers  of  the  greatest  might.  He  then  feels  a  need  to  account  to

himself for this, and in that way hits on the idea that he himself is a

very  exalted  personage  and  worthy  of  such  persecution.  The

development of megalomania is thus attributed by the textbooks to a

process which (borrowing a useful word from Ernest Jones) we may

describe  as  ‘rationalization’.  But  to  ascribe  such  important  affective

consequences to a rationalization is, as it seems to us, an entirely

unpsychological  proceeding;  and  we  would  consequently  draw  a

sharp  distinction  between  our  opinion  and  the  one  which  we  havequoted from the textbooks. We are making no claim, for the moment,

to knowing the origin of the megalomania.

 

   ¹ ‘It is only, he writes towards the end of the book, ‘as possibilities which must be taken into

account, that I mention that my emasculation may even yet be accomplished and may result
in a new generation issuing from my womb by divine impregnation.’ (293.)
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2421

 

   Turning once more to the case of Schreber, we are bound to admit

that  any  attempt  at  throwing  light  upon  the  transformation  in  his

delusion brings us up against extraordinary difficulties. In what manner

and  by  what  means  was  the  ascent  from  Flechsig  to  God  brought

about? From what source did he derive the megalomania which so

fortunately enabled him to become reconciled to his persecution, or, in

analytical phraseology, to accept the wishful phantasy which had had

to be repressed? The Denkwürdigkeiten give us a first clue; for they

show us that in the patient’s mind ‘Flechsig’ and ‘God’ belonged to the

same  class.  In  one  of  his  phantasies  he  overheard  a  conversation

between Flechsig and his wife, in which the former asserted that he

was ‘God Flechsig’, so that his wife thought he had gone mad (82).

But  there  is  another  feature  in  the  development  of  Schreber’s

delusions  which  claims  our  attention.  If  we  take  a  survey  of  the

delusions  as  a  whole  we  see  that  the  persecutor  is  divided  into

Flechsig and God; in just the same way Flechsig himself subsequently

splits up into two personalities, the ‘upper’ and the ‘middle’ Flechsig,

and God into the ‘lower’ and the ‘upper’ God. In the later stages of the

illness  the  decomposition  of  Flechsig  goes  further  still  (193).  A

process  of  decomposition  of  this  kind  is  very  characteristic  of

paranoia.  Paranoia  decomposes  just  as  hysteria  condenses.  Or

rather, paranoia resolves once more into their elements the products

of  the  condensations  and  identifications  which  are  effected  in  the

unconscious. The frequent repetition of the decomposing process in

Schreber’s case would, according to Jung, be an expression of the

importance which the person in question possessed for him.¹ All ofthis dividing up of Flechsig and God into a number of persons thus

had the same meaning as the splitting of the persecutor into Flechsig

and God. They were all duplications of one and the same important

relationship.² But, in order to interpret all these details, we must further

draw attention to our view of this decomposition of the persecutor into

Flechsig and God as a paranoid reaction to a previously established

identification of the two figures or their belonging to the same class. If

the persecutor Flechsig was originally a person whom Schreber loved,

then God must also simply be the reappearance of some one else

whom he loved, and probably some one of greater importance.

 

   ¹ Jung (1910a). Jung is probably right when he goes on to say that the decomposition

follows the general lines taken by schizophrenia in that it uses a process of analysis in order
to produce a watering-down effect, and is thus designed to prevent the occurrence of unduly
powerful impressions. When, however, one of his patients said to him: ‘Oh, are you Dr. J. too?
There was some one here this morning who said he was Dr. J.’, we must interpret it as being
an admission to this effect: ‘You remind me now of a different member of the class of my
transferences from the one you reminded me of when you visited me last.’

   ² Otto Rank (1909) has found the same process at work in the formation of myths.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2422

 

   If we pursue this train of thought, which seems to be a legitimate

one, we shall be driven to the conclusion that the other person must

have been his father; this makes it all the clearer that Flechsig must

have stood for his brother - who, let us hope, may have been older

than  himself.¹  The  feminine  phantasy,  which  aroused  such  violent

opposition in the patient, thus had its root in a longing, intensified to an

erotic pitch, for his father and brother. This feeling, so far as it referred

to his brother, passed, by a process of transference, on to his doctor,

Flechsig; and when it was carried back on to his father a settlement of

the conflict was reached.

   We shall not feel that we have been justified in thus introducing

Schreber’s father into his delusions, unless the new hypothesis shows

itself of some use to us in understanding the case and in elucidating

details  of  the  delusions  which  are  as  yet  unintelligible.  It  will  berecalled that Schreber’s God and his relations to Him exhibited the

most  curious  features:  how  they  showed  the  strangest  mixture  of

blasphemous criticism and mutinous insubordination on the one hand

and  of  reverent  devotion  on  the  other.  God,  according  to  him,  had

succumbed to the misleading influence of Flechsig: He was incapable

of learning anything by experience, and did not understand living men

because He only knew how to deal with corpses; and He manifested

His  power  in  a  succession  of  miracles  which,  striking  though  they

might be, were none the less futile and silly.

 

    ¹ No information on this point is to be found in the Denkwürdigkeiten.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2423

 

   Now the father of Senatspräsident Dr. Schreber was no insignificant

person.  He  was  the  Dr.  Daniel  Gottlob  Moritz  Schreber  whose

memory  is  kept  green  to  this  day  by  the  numerous  Schreber

Associations which flourish especially in Saxony; and, moreover, he

was a physician. His activities in favour of promoting the harmonious

upbringing of the young, of securing co-ordination between education

in  the  home  and  in  the  school,  of  introducing  physical  culture  and

manual work with a view to raising the standards of health - all this

exerted  a  lasting  influence  upon  his  contemporaries.¹  His  great

reputation as the founder of therapeutic gymnastics in Germany is still

shown  by  the  wide  circulation  of  his Ärtzliche  Zimmergymnastik  in

medical  circles  and  the  numerous  editions  through  which  it  has

passed.

   Such a father as this was by no means unsuitable for transfiguration

into a God in the affectionate memory of the son from whom he had

been so early separated by death. It is true that we cannot help feeling

that there is an impassable gulf between the personality of God and

that of any human being, however eminent he may be. But we must

remember that this has not always been so. The gods of the peoples

of antiquity stood in a closer human relationship to them. The Romans

used  to  deify  their  dead  emperors  as  a  matter  of  routine;  and  theEmperor Vespasian, a sensible and competent man, exclaimed when

he was first taken ill: ‘Alas! Methinks I am becoming a God!’²

 

   ¹ I have to thank my colleague Dr. Stegmann of Dresden for his kindness in letting me see

a copy of a journal entitled Der Freund der Schreber-Vereine [The Friend of the Schreber
Associations]. This number (Vol. II. No. 10) celebrates the centenary of Dr. Schreber’s birth,
and some biographical data are contained in it. Dr. Schreber senior was born in 1808 and
died in 1861, at the age of only fifty-three. From the source which I have already mentioned I
know that our patient was at that time nineteen years old.
   ² Suetonius, Lives of the Caesars, Book VIII, Chapter 23. This practice of deification began
with Julius Caesar. Augustus styled himself ‘Divi filius’ [‘the son of the God’] in his inscriptions.
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2424

 

   We are perfectly familiar with the infantile attitude of boys towards

their father; it is composed of the same mixture of reverent submission

and  mutinous  insubordination  that  we  have  found  in  Schreber’s

relation to his God, and is the unmistakable prototype of that relation,

which is faithfully copied from it. But the circumstance that Schreber’s

father was a physician, and a most eminent physician, and one who

was no doubt highly respected by his patients, is what explains the

most  striking  characteristics  of  his  God  and  those  upon  which  he

dwells in such a critical fashion. Could more bitter scorn be shown for

such a physician than by declaring that he understands nothing about

living men and only knows how to deal with corpses? No doubt it is an

essential  attribute  of  God  to  perform  miracles;  but  a  physician

performs miracles too; he effects miraculous cures, as his enthusiastic

clients proclaim. So that when we see that these very miracles (the

material for which was provided by the patient’s hypochondria) turn

out to be incredible, absurd, and to some extent positively silly, we are

reminded  of  the  assertion  in  my Interpretation  of  Dreams  that

absurdity  in  dreams  expresses  ridicule  and  derision.¹  Evidently,

therefore, it is used for the same purposes in paranoia. As regards

some of the other reproaches which he levelled against God, such, for

instance, as that He learned nothing by experience, it is natural to

suppose that they are examples of the tu quoque mechanism used bychildren,² which, when they receive a reproof, flings it back unchanged

upon  the  person  who  originated  it.  Similarly,  the  voices  give  us

grounds  for  suspecting  that  the  accusation  of  soul-murder  brought

against Flechsig was in the first instance a self-accusation.³

 

   ¹ p. 891.

   ² It looks remarkably like a revanche of this sort when we find the patient writing out the

following memorandum one day: ‘Any attempt at exercising an educative influence must be
abandoned as hopeless.’ (188.) The uneducable one was God.

   ³ ‘Whereas for some time past the facts have been deliberately inverted and an attempt has

been made to "represent" myself as being the one who practises soul-murder . . .’ etc. (23).
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2425

 

   Emboldened by the discovery that his father’s profession helps to

explain the peculiarities of Schreber’s God, we shall now venture upon

an  interpretation  which  may  throw  some  light  upon  the  remarkable

structure of that Being. The heavenly world consisted, as we know, of

the ‘anterior realms of God’ which were also called the ‘fore-courts of

Heaven’ and which contained the souls of the dead, and of the ‘lower’

and the ‘upper’ God, who together constituted the ‘posterior realms of

God’  (19).  Although  we  must  be  prepared  to  find  that  there  is  a

condensation  here  which  we  shall  not  be  able  to  resolve,  it  is

nevertheless  worth  while  referring  to  a  clue  that  is  already  in  our

hands. If the ‘miracled’ birds, which have been shown to be girls, were

originally fore-courts of Heaven, may it not be that the anterior realms

of God and the fore-courts¹ of Heaven are to be regarded as a symbol

of what is female, and the posterior realms of God as a symbol of

what is male? If we knew for certain that Schreber’s dead brother was

older than himself, we might suppose that the decomposition of God

into  the  lower  and  the  upper  God  gave  expression  to  the  patient’s

recollection  that  after  his  father’s  early  death  his  elder  brother  had

stepped into his place.

      In  this  connection,  finally,  I  should  like  to  draw  attention  to  the

subject of the sun, which, through its ‘rays’, came to have so muchimportance in the expression of his delusions. Schreber has a quite

peculiar relation to the sun. It speaks to him in human language, and

thus reveals itself to him as a living being, or as the organ of a yet

higher being lying behind it (9). We learn from a medical report that at

one  time  he  ‘used  to  shout  threats  and  abuse  at  it  and  positively

bellow at it’ (382)² and used to call out to it that it must crawl away

from him and hide. He himself tells us that the sun turns pale before

him.³ The manner in which it is bound up with his fate is shown by the

important alterations it undergoes as soon as changes begin to occur

in him, as, for instance, during his first weeks at Sonnenstein (135).

Schreber makes it easy for us to interpret this solar myth of his. He

identifies  the  sun  directly  with  God,  sometimes  with  the  lower  God

            4
(Ahriman), and sometimes with the upper. ‘On the following day . . . I

saw the upper God (Ormuzd), and this time not with my spiritual eyes

but with my bodily ones. It was the sun, but not the sun in its ordinary

aspect, as it is known to all men; it was . . .’ etc. (137-8.) It is therefore

no more than consistent of him to treat it in the same way as he treats

God Himself.

 

   ¹ [The German word ‘Vorhof’ besides having the literal meaning of ‘fore-court’, is used in

anatomy as a synonym for the ‘vestibulum’, a region of the female genitals.]

   ² ‘The sun is a whore’, he used to exclaim (384).

   ³ ‘To some extent, moreover, even to this day the sun presents a different picture to my

eyes from what it did before my illness. When I stand facing it and speak aloud, its rays turn
pale before me. I can gaze at it without any difficulty and without being more than slightly
dazzled by it; whereas in my healthy days it would have been as impossible for me as for
anyone else to gaze at it for a minute at a time.’ (139, footnote.)
4
    ‘Since July, 1894, the voices that talk to me have identified him directly with the sun.’ (88.)

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2426

 

   The sun, therefore, is nothing but another sublimated symbol for the

father; and in pointing this out I must disclaim all responsibility for the

monotony  of  the  solutions  provided  by  psycho-analysis.  In  this

instance symbolism overrides grammatical gender - at least so far as

German goes,¹ for in most other languages the sun is masculine. Itscounterpart in this picture of the two parents is ‘Mother Earth’ as she is

generally  called.  We  frequently  come  upon  confirmations  of  this

assertion  in  resolving  the  pathogenic  phantasies  of  neurotics  by

psycho-analysis. I can make no more than the barest allusion to the

relation of all this to cosmic myths. One of my patients, who had lost

his father at a very early age, was always seeking to rediscover him in

what was grand and sublime in Nature. Since I have known this, it has

seemed to me probable that Nietzsche’s hymn ‘Vor Sonnenaufgang’

[‘Before  Sunrise’]  is  an  expression  of  the  same  longing.²  Another

patient, who became neurotic after his father’s death, was seized with

his first attack of anxiety and giddiness while the sun shone upon him

as he was working in the garden with a spade. He spontaneously put

forward as an interpretation that he had become frightened because

his father had looked at him while he was at work upon his mother

with a sharp instrument. When I ventured upon a mild remonstrance,

he gave an air of greater plausibility to his view by telling me that even

in his father’s lifetime he had compared him with the sun, though then

it had been in a satirical sense. Whenever he had been asked where

his father was going to spend the summer he had replied in these

sonorous words from the ‘Prologue in Heaven’:

 

                                                                Und seine vorgeschrieb’ne Reise

                                                                Vollendet er mit Donnergang.³

 

His father, acting on medical advice, had been in the habit of paying

an annual visit to Marienbad. This patient’s infantile attitude towards

his father took effect in two successive phases. As long as his father

was  alive  it  showed  itself  in  unmitigated  rebelliousness  and  open

discord, but immediately after his death it took the form of a neurosis

based upon abject submission and deferred obedience to him.

 

   ¹ [The German word for ‘sun’ is feminine: ‘die Sonne’.]

   ² Also Sprach Zarathustra, Part III. It was only as a child that Nietzsche too knew his father.

   ³ [’And with a tread of thunder he accomplishes his prescribed journey.’]

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia                                                                                      2427

 

   Thus in the case of Schreber we find ourselves once again on the

familiar  ground  of  the  father-complex.¹  The  patient’s  struggle  with

Flechsig became revealed to him as a conflict with God, and we must

therefore construe it as an infantile conflict with the father whom he

loved; the details of that conflict (of which we know nothing) are what

determined the content of his delusions. None of the material which in

other cases of the sort is brought to light by analysis is absent in the

present  one:  every  element  is  hinted  at  in  one  way  or  another.  In

infantile experiences such as this the father appears as an interferer

with the satisfaction which the child is trying to obtain; this is usually of

an auto-erotic character, though at a later date it is often replaced in

phantasy by some other satisfaction of a less inglorious kind.² In the

final stage of Schreber’s delusion a magnificent victory was scored by

the infantile sexual urge; for voluptuousness became God-fearing, and

God  Himself  (his  father)  never  tired  of  demanding  it  from  him.  His

father’s most dreaded threat, castration, actually provided the material

for his wishful phantasy (at first resisted but later accepted) of being

transformed into a woman. His allusion to an offence covered by the

surrogate idea ‘soul-murder’ could not be more transparent. The chief

attendant was discovered to be identical with his neighbour von W.,

who, according to the voices, had falsely accused him of masturbation

(108).  The  voices  said,  as  though  giving  grounds  for  the  threat  of

castration:  ‘For  you  are  to  be represented  as  being  given  over  to

voluptuous  excesses.’³  (127-8.)  Finally,  we  come  to  the  enforced

thinking  (47)  to  which  the  patient  submitted  himself  because  he

supposed that God would believe he had become an idiot and would

withdraw  from  him  if  he  ceased  thinking  for  a  moment.  This  is  a

reaction (with which we are also familiar in other connections) to the

                                              4
threat or fear of losing one’s reason as a result of indulging in sexual

practices and especially in masturbation. Considering the enormous

                                                                            5
number of delusional ideas of a hypochondriacal nature which the

patient developed, no great importance should perhaps be attached to

the  fact  that  some  of  them  coincide  word  for  word  with  the

                                                  6
hypochondriacal fears of masturbators.

    ¹ In the same way, Schreber’s ‘feminine wishful phantasy’ is simply one of the typical forms

taken by the infantile nuclear complex.

   ² See some remarks on this subject in my analysis of the ‘Rat Man’.

   ³ The systems of ‘representing’ and of ‘noting down’ (126), taken in conjunction with the

‘proved souls’, point back to experiences in the patient’s school days.
4
    ‘This was the end in view, as was frankly admitted at an earlier date in the phrase "We

want  to  destroy  your  reason",  which  I  have  heard  proceeding  from  the  upper  God  upon
countless occasions.’ (206 n.)
5
    I must not omit to remark at this point that I shall not consider any theory of paranoia

trustworthy unless it also covers the hypochondriacal symptoms by which that disorder is
almost invariably accompanied. It seems to me that hypochondria stands in the same relation
to paranoia as anxiety neurosis does to hysteria.
6
    ‘For this reason attempts were made to pump out my spinal cord. This was done by

means of so-called "little men" who were placed in my feet. I shall have more to say presently
on the subject of these "little men", who showed some resemblance to the phenomena of the
same name which I have already discussed in Chapter VI. There used as a rule to be two of
them - a "little Flechsig" and a "little von W." - And I used to hear their voices, too, in my feet.’
(154.) Von W. was the man who was supposed to have accused Schreber of masturbation.
The ‘little men’ are described by Schreber himself as being among the most remarkable and,
in some respects, the most puzzling phenomena of his illness (157). It looks as though they
were the product of a condensation of children and - spermatozoa.
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2428

 

   Any one who was more daring than I am in making interpretations,

or who was in touch with Schreber’s family and consequently better

acquainted with the society in which he moved and the small events of

his life, would find it an easy matter to trace back innumerable details

of his delusions to their sources and so discover their meaning, and

this in spite of the censorship to which the Denkwürdigkeiten have

been subjected. But as it is, we must necessarily content ourselves

with this shadowy sketch of the infantile material which was used by

the paranoic disorder in portraying the current conflict.

      Perhaps  I  may  be  allowed  to  add  a  few  words  with  a  view  to

establishing the causes of this conflict that broke out it relation to the

feminine  wishful  phantasy.  As  we  know,  when  a  wishful  phantasy

makes its appearance, our business is to bring it into connection with

some frustration,  some  privation  in  real  life.  Now  Schreber  admitshaving  suffered  a  privation  of  the  kind.  His  marriage,  which  he

describes as being in other respects a happy one, brought him no

children;  and  in  particular  it  brought  him  no  son  who  might  have

consoled him for the loss of his father and brother and upon whom he

might  have  drained  off  his  unsatisfied  homosexual  affections.¹  His

family line threatened to die out, and it seems that he felt no little pride

in his birth and lineage. ‘Both the Flechsigs and the Schrebers were

members of "the highest nobility of Heaven", as the phrase went. The

Schrebers in particular bore the title of "Margraves of Tuscany and

Tasmania"; for souls, urged by some sort of personal vanity, have a

custom  of  adorning  themselves  with  somewhat  high-sounding  titles

borrowed  from  this  world.’²  (24.)  The  great  Napoleon  obtained  a

divorce from Josephine (though only after severe internal struggles)

because  she  could  not  propagate  the  dynasty.³  Dr.  Schreber  may

have formed a phantasy that if he were a woman he would manage

the business of having children more successfully; and he may thus

have found his way back into the feminine attitude towards his father

which he had exhibited in the earliest years of his childhood. If that

were so, then his delusion that as a result of his emasculation the

world was to be peopled with ‘a new race of men, born from the spirit

of  Schreber’  (288)  -  a  delusion  the  realization  of  which  he  was

continually postponing to a more and more remote future - would also

be designed to offer him an escape from his childlessness. If the ‘little

men’ whom Schreber himself finds so puzzling were children, then we

should have no difficulty in understanding why they were collected in

such great numbers on his head (158): they were in truth the ‘children

              4
of his spirit’.

 

   ¹ ‘After my recovery from my first illness I spent eight years with my wife - years, upon the

whole, of great happiness, rich in outward honours, and only clouded from time to time by the
oft-repeated disappointment of our hope that we might be blessed with children.’ (36).

   ² He goes on from this remark, which preserves in his delusions the good-natured irony of

his saner days, to trace back through former centuries the relations between the Flechsig and
Schreber families. In just the same way a young man who is newly engaged, and cannot
understand how he can have lived so many years without knowing the girl he is now in love
with, will insist that he really made her acquaintance at some earlier time.

   ³ In this connection it is worth mentioning a protest entered by the patient against some

statements  made  in  the  medical  report:  ‘I  have  never  trifled  with  the  idea  of  obtaining  a
divorce, nor have I displayed any indifference to the maintenance of our marriage tie, such asmight be inferred from the expression used in the report to the effect that "I am always ready
with the rejoinder that my wife can get a divorce if she likes".’ (436.)
4
    Cf. what I have said about the method of representing patrilineal descent and about the

birth of Athena in my analysis of the ‘Rat Man’ (1909d), p. 2183 n.
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2429

 

                                            III

 

                  ON THE MECHANISM OF PARANOIA

 

We have hitherto been dealing with the father-complex, which was the

dominant element in Schreber’s case and with the wishful phantasy

round  which  the  illness  centred.  But  in  all  of  this  there  is  nothing

characteristic of the form of disease known as paranoia, nothing that

might not be found (and that has not in fact been found) in other kinds

of  neuroses.  The  distinctive  character  of  paranoia  (or  of  dementia

paranoides) must be sought for elsewhere - namely, in the particular

form assumed by the symptoms; and we shall expect to find that this

is determined, not by the nature of the complexes themselves, but by

the  mechanism  by  which  the  symptoms  are  formed  or  by  which

repression is brought about. We should be inclined to say that what

was characteristically paranoic about the illness was the fact that the

patient, as a means of warding off a homosexual wishful phantasy,

reacted precisely with delusions of persecution of this kind.

      These  considerations  therefore  lend  an  added  weight  to  the

circumstance  that  we  are  in  point  of  fact  driven  by  experience  to

attribute to homosexual wishful phantasies an intimate (perhaps an

invariable) relation to this particular form of disease. Distrusting my

own experience on the subject, I have during the last few years joined

with my friends C. G. Jung of Zurich and Sándor Ferenczi of Budapest

in investigating upon this single point a number of cases of paranoid

disorder  which  have  come  under  observation.  The  patients  whose

histories provided the material for this enquiry included both men and

women, and varied in race, occupation, and social standing. Yet wewere astonished to find that in all of these cases defence against a

homosexual wish was clearly recognizable at the very centre of the

conflict which underlay the disease and that it was in an attempt to

master an unconsciously reinforced current of homosexuality that they

had all of them come to grief.¹ This was certainly not what we had

expected. Paranoia is precisely a disorder in which a sexual aetiology

is by no means obvious; far from this, the strikingly prominent features

in  the  causation  of  paranoia,  especially  among  males,  are  social

humiliations and slights. But if we go into the matter only a little more

deeply, we shall be able to see that the really operative factor in these

social  injuries  lies  in  the  part  played  in  them  by  the  homosexual

components of emotional life. So long as the individual is functioning

normally and it is consequently impossible to see into the depths of his

mental  life,  we  may  doubt  whether  his  emotional  relations  to  his

neighbours  in  society  have  anything  to  do  with  sexuality,  either

actually or in their genesis. But delusions never fail to uncover these

relations and to trace back the social feelings to their roots in a directly

sensual erotic wish. So long as he was healthy, Dr. Schreber, too,

whose delusions culminated in a wishful phantasy of an unmistakably

homosexual  nature,  had,  by  all  accounts,  shown  no  signs  of

homosexuality in the ordinary sense of the word.

 

   ¹ Further confirmation is afforded by Maeder’s analysis of a paranoid patient J. B. (1910).

The present paper, I regret to say, was completed before I had an opportunity of reading
Maeder’s work.
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2430

 

      I  shall  now  endeavour  (and  I  think  the  attempt  is  neither

unnecessary  nor  unjustifiable)  to  show  that  the  knowledge  of

psychological processes, which, thanks to psycho-analysis, we now

possess,  already  enables  us  to  understand  the  part  played  by  a

homosexual  wish  in  the  development  of  paranoia.  Recent

investigations¹  have  directed  our  attention  to  a  stage  in  the

development of the libido which it passes through on the way fromauto-erotism to object-love.² This stage has been given the name of

narcissism.  What  happens  is  this.  There  comes  a  time  in  the

development of the individual at which he unifies his sexual instincts

(which have hitherto been engaged in auto-erotic activities) in order to

obtain a love-object; and he begins by taking himself, his own body,

as his love-object, and only subsequently proceeds from this to the

choice of some person other than himself as his object. This half-way

phase  between  auto-erotism  and  object-love  may  perhaps  be

indispensable  normally;  but  it  appears  that  many  people  linger

unusually  long  in  this  condition,  and  that  many  of  its  features  are

carried over by them into the later stages of their development. What

is of chief importance in the subject’s self thus chosen as a love object

may already be the genitals. The line of development then leads on to

the  choice  of  an  external  object  with  similar  genitals  -  that  is,  to

homosexual  object-choice  -  and  thence  to  heterosexuality.  People

who are manifest homosexuals in later life have, it may be presumed,

never  emancipated  themselves  from  the  binding  condition  that  the

object of their choice must possess genitals like their own; and in this

connection the infantile sexual theories which attribute the same kind

of genitals to both sexes exert much influence.

 

   ¹ Sadger (1910) and Freud (1910c).

   ² Freud, Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d).

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2431

 

   After the stage of heterosexual object-choice has been reached, the

homosexual tendencies are not, as might be supposed, done away

with or brought to a stop; they are merely deflected from their sexual

aim and applied to fresh uses. They now combine with portions of the

ego-instincts  and,  as  ‘attached’  components,  help  to  constitute  the

social  instincts,  thus  contributing  an  erotic  factor  to  friendship  and

comradeship, to esprit de corps and to the love of mankind in general.

How large a contribution is in fact derived from erotic sources (with the

sexual  aim  inhibited)  could  scarcely  be  guessed  from  the  normalsocial relations of mankind. But it is not irrelevant to note that it is

precisely  manifest  homosexuals,  and  among  them  again  precisely

those that set themselves against an indulgence in sensual acts, who

are distinguished by taking a particularly active share in the general

interests of humanity - interests which have themselves sprung from a

sublimation of erotic instincts.

   In my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality I have expressed the

opinion that each stage in the development of psychosexuality affords

a possibility of ‘fixation, and thus of a dispositional point. People who

have not freed themselves completely from the stage of narcissism -

who, that is to say, have at that point a fixation which may operate as

a disposition to a later illness - are exposed to the danger that some

unusually intense wave of libido, finding no other outlet, may lead to a

sexualization  of  their  social  instincts  and  so  undo  the  sublimations

which  they  had  achieved  in  the  course  of  their  development.  This

result  may  be  produced  by  anything  that  causes  the  libido  to  flow

backwards (i.e. that causes a ‘regression’): whether, on the one hand,

the  libido  becomes  collaterally  reinforced  owing  to  some

disappointment over a woman, or is directly dammed up owing to a

mishap  in  social  relations  with  other  men  -  both  of  these  being

instances  of  ‘frustration’;  or  whether,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  a

general intensification of the libido, so that it becomes too powerful to

find an outlet along the channels which are already open to it, and

consequently bursts through its banks at the weakest spot. Since our

analyses  show  that  paranoics endeavour  to  protect  themselves

against any such sexualization of their social instinctual cathexes, we

are driven to suppose that the weak spot in their development is to be

looked for somewhere between the stages of auto-erotism, narcissism

and  homosexuality,  and  that  their  disposition  to  illness  (which  may

perhaps be susceptible of more precise definition) must be located in

that region. A similar disposition would have to be assigned to patients

suffering from Kraepelin’s dementia praecox or (as Bleuler has named

it) schizophrenia; and we shall hope later on to find clues which will

enable us to trace back the differences between the two disorders (as

regards  both  the  form  they  take  and  the  course  they  run)  to

corresponding differences in the patients’ dispositional fixations.

     Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2432

 

 

   In taking the view, then, that what lies at the core of the conflict in

cases of paranoia among males is a homosexual wishful phantasy of

loving a man, we shall certainly not forget that the confirmation of such

an important hypothesis can only follow upon the investigation of a

large number of instances of every variety of paranoic disorder. We

must  therefore  be  prepared,  if  need  be,  to  limit  our  assertion  to  a

single type of paranoia. Nevertheless, it is a remarkable fact that the

familiar  principal  forms  of  paranoia  can  all  be  represented  as

contradictions of the single proposition: ‘I (a man) love him (a man)’;

and  indeed  that  they  exhaust  all  the  possible  ways  in  which  such

contradictions could be formulated.

   The proposition ‘I (a man) love him’ is contradicted by:

   (a) Delusions of persecution; for they loudly assert:

   ‘I do not love him - I hate him.’

   This contradiction, which must have run thus in the unconscious,¹

cannot, however, become conscious to a paranoiac in this form. The

mechanism  of  symptom-formation  in  paranoia  requires  that  internal

perceptions  -  feelings  -  shall  be  replaced  by  external  perceptions.

Consequently  the  proposition  ‘I  hate  him’  becomes  transformed  by

projection  into  another  one:  ‘He  hates  (persecutes) me,  which  will

justify me in hating him.’ And thus the impelling unconscious feeling

makes  its  appearance  as  though  it  were  the  consequence  of  an

external perception:

   ‘I do not love him - I hate him, because HE PERSECUTES ME.’

   Observation leaves room for no doubt that the persecutor is some

one who was once loved.

   (b) Another element is chosen for contradiction in erotomania, which

remains totally unintelligible on any other view:

   ‘I do not love him - I love her.’

   And in obedience to the same need for projection, the proposition is

transformed into: ‘I observe that she loves me.’

   ‘I do not love him - I love her, because SHE LOVES ME.’   Many cases of erotomania might give an impression that they could

be  satisfactorily  explained  as  being  exaggerated  or  distorted

heterosexual  fixations,  if  our  attention  were  not  attracted  by  the

circumstance  that  these  infatuations  invariably  begin,  not  with  any

internal perception of loving, but with an external perception of being

loved. But in this form of paranoia the intermediate proposition ‘I love

her’ can also become conscious, because the contradiction between it

and  the  original  proposition  is  not  a  diametrical  one,  not  so

irreconcilable as that between love and hate: it is, after all, possible to

love her as well as him. It can thus come about that the proposition

which has been substituted by projection (‘she loves me’) may make

way again for the ‘basic language’ proposition ‘I love her’.

 

   ¹ Or in the ‘basic language’, as Schreber would say.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2433

 

      (c)  The  third  way  in  which  the  original  proposition  can  be

contradicted would be by delusions of jealousy, which we can study in

the characteristic forms in which they appear in each sex.

   (α) Alcoholic delusions of jealousy. The part played by alcohol in this

disorder  is  intelligible  in  every  way.  We  know  that  that  source  of

pleasure  removes  inhibitions  and  undoes  sublimations.  It  is  not

infrequently disappointment over a woman that drives a man to drink -

but this means, as a rule, that he resorts to the public-house and to

the company of men, who afford him the emotional satisfaction which

he has failed to get from his wife at home. If now these men become

the objects of a strong libidinal cathexis in his unconscious, he will

ward it off with the third kind of contradiction:

   ‘It is not I who love the man - she loves him’, and he suspects the

woman in relation to all the men whom he himself is tempted to love.

      Distortion  by  means  of  projection  is  necessarily  absent  in  this

instance, since, with the change of the subject who loves, the whole

process  is  in  any  case  thrown  outside  the  self.  The  fact  that  the

woman  loves  the  men  is  a  matter  of  external  perception  to  him;whereas the facts that he himself does not love but hates, or that he

himself  loves  not  this  but  that  person,  are  matters  of  internal

perception.

   (β) Delusions of jealousy in women are exactly analogous.

   ‘It is not I who love the women - he loves them.’ The jealous woman

suspects her husband in relation to all the women by whom she is

herself  attracted  owing  to  her  homosexuality  and  the  dispositional

effect of her excessive narcissism. The influence of the time of life at

which her fixation occurred is clearly shown by the selection of the

love-objects which she imputes to her husband; they are often old and

quite inappropriate for a real love relation - revivals of the nurses and

servants and girls who were her friends in childhood, or sisters who

were her actual rivals.

   [(d)] Now it might be supposed that a proposition consisting of three

terms, such as ‘I love him’, could only be contradicted in three different

ways.  Delusions  of  jealousy  contradict  the  subject,  delusions  of

persecution contradict the verb, and erotomania contradicts the object.

But  in  fact  a  fourth  kind  of  contradiction  is  possible  -  namely,  one

which rejects the proposition as a whole:

   ‘I do not love at all - I do not love any one.’ And since, after all, one’s

libido  must  go  somewhere,  this  proposition  seems  to  be  the

psychological equivalent of the proposition: ‘I love only myself.’ So that

this kind of contradiction would give us megalomania, which we may

regard as a sexual overvaluation of the ego and may thus set beside

the  overvaluation  of  the  love-object  with  which  we  are  already

familiar.¹

   It is of some importance in connection with other parts of the theory

of paranoia to notice that we can detect an element of megalomania in

most other forms of paranoic disorder. We are justified in assuming

that  megalomania  is  essentially  of  an  infantile  nature  and  that,  as

development  proceeds,  it  is  sacrificed  to  social  considerations.

Similarly,  an  individual’s  megalomania  is  never  so  vehemently

suppressed as when he is in the grip of an overpowering love:

 

                                                Denn wo die Lieb’ erwachet, stirbt

                                                das Ich, der finstere Despot.²

    After this discussion of the unexpectedly important part played by

homosexual wishful phantasies in paranoia, let us return to the two

factors in which we expected from the first to find the distinguishing

marks of paranoia, namely, the mechanism by which the symptoms

are formed and the mechanism by which repression is brought about.

   We certainly have no right to begin by assuming that these two

mechanisms  are  identical,  and  that  symptom-formation  follows  the

same path as repression, each proceeding along it, perhaps, in an

opposite direction. Nor does there seem to be any great probability

that  such  an  identity  exists.  Nevertheless,  we  shall  refrain  from

expressing any opinion on the subject until we have completed our

investigation.

 

   ¹ Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality. The same view and the same formulation will be

found in the papers by Abraham and Maeder to which I have already referred.

   ² From the Ghazals  of  Muhammad  ibn  Muhammad  (Jãlal  al-Din) Rumi,  translated  by

Rückert.
 
                                                [For when the flames of love arise,
                                                Then Self, the gloomy tyrant, dies.]
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2434

 

   The most striking characteristic of symptom-formation in paranoia is

the  process  which  deserves  the  name  of projection.  An  internal

perception is suppressed, and, instead, its content, after undergoing a

certain  kind  of  distortion,  enters  consciousness  in  the  form  of  an

external perception. In delusions of persecution the distortion consists

in a transformation of affect; what should have been felt internally as

love is perceived externally as hate. We should feel tempted to regard

this remarkable process as the most important element in paranoia

and  as  being  absolutely  pathognomonic  for  it,  if  we  were  not

opportunely reminded of two things. In the first place, projection does

not play the same part in all forms of paranoia; and, in the second

place, it makes its appearance not only in paranoia but under other

psychological  conditions  as  well,  and  in  fact  it  has  a  regular  shareassigned to it in our attitude towards the external world. For when we

refer the causes of certain sensations to the external world, instead of

looking for them (as we do in the case of others) inside ourselves, this

normal proceeding, too, deserves to be called projection. Having thus

been  made  aware  that  more  general  psychological  problems  are

involved in the question of the nature of projection, let us make up our

minds  to  postpone  the  investigation  of  it  (and  with  it  that  of  the

mechanism  of  paranoic  symptom-formation  in  general)  until  some

other occasion; and let up now turn to consider what ideas we can

collect on the subject of the mechanism of repression in paranoia. I

should  like  to  say  at  once,  in  justification  of  this  temporary

renunciation, that we shall find that the manner in which the process of

repression  occurs  is  far  more  intimately  connected  with  the

developmental history of the libido and with the disposition to which it

gives rise than is the manner in which symptoms are formed.

      In  psycho-analysis  we  have  been  accustomed  to  look  upon

pathological  phenomena  as  being  derived  in  a  general  way  from

repression.  If  we  examine  what  is  spoken  of  as  ‘repression’  more

closely, we shall find reason to split the process up into three phases

which are easily distinguishable from one another conceptually.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2435

 

   (1) The first phase consists in fixation, which is the precursor and

necessary condition of every ‘repression’. Fixation can be described in

this way. One instinct or instinctual component fails to accompany the

rest  along  the  anticipated  normal  path  of  development,  and,  in

consequence of this inhibition in its development, it is left behind at a

more infantile stage. The libidinal current in question then behaves in

relation  to  later  psychological  structures  like  one  belonging  to  the

system  of  the  unconscious,  like  one  that  is  repressed.  We  have

already shown that these instinctual fixations constitute the basis for

the disposition to subsequent illness, and we may now add that they

constitute above all the basis for the determination of the outcome ofthe third phase of repression.

   (2) The second phase of repression is that of repression proper - the

phase to which most attention has hitherto been given. It emanates

from the more highly developed systems of the ego - systems which

are capable of being conscious - and may in fact be described as a

process  of  ‘after-pressure’.  It  gives  an  impression  of  being  an

essentially  active  process,  while  fixation  appears  in  fact  to  be  a

passive lagging behind. What undergo repression may either be the

psychical derivatives of the original lagging instincts, when these have

become reinforced and so come into conflict with the ego (or ego-

syntonic instincts), or they may be psychical trends which have for

other reasons aroused strong aversion. But this aversion would not in

itself  lead  to  repression,  unless  some  connection  had  been

established  between  the  unwelcome  trends  which  have  to  be

repressed and those which have been repressed already. Where this

is  so,  the  repulsion  exercised  by  the  conscious  system  and  the

attraction exercised by the unconscious one tend in the same direction

towards  bringing  about  repression.  The  two  possibilities  which  are

here  treated  separately  may  in  practice,  perhaps,  be  less  sharply

differentiated, and the distinction between them may merely depend

upon the greater or lesser degree in which the primarily repressed

instincts contribute to the result.

   (3) The third phase, and the most important as regards pathological

phenomena, is that of failure of repression, of irruption, of return of the

repressed. This irruption takes its start from the point of fixation, and it

implies a regression of the libidinal development to that point.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2436

 

   We have already alluded to the multiplicity of the possible points of

fixation;  there  are,  in  fact,  as  many  as  there  are  stages  in  the

development  of  the  libido.  We  must  be  prepared  to  find  a  similar

multiplicity  of  the  mechanisms  of  repression  proper  and  of  the

mechanisms  of  irruption  (or  of  symptom-formation),  and  we  mayalready begin to suspect that it will not be possible to trace back all of

these multiplicities to the developmental history of the libido alone.

   It is easy to see that this discussion is beginning to trench upon the

problem of ‘choice of neurosis’, which, however, cannot be taken in

hand until preliminary work of another kind has been accomplished.

Let us bear in mind for the present that we have already dealt with

fixation,  and  that  we  have  postponed  the  subject  of  symptom-

formation; and let us restrict ourselves to the question of whether the

analysis of Schreber’s case throws any light upon the mechanism of

repression proper which predominates in paranoia.

   At the climax of his illness, under the influence of visions which were

‘partly  of  a  terrifying  character,  but  partly,  too,  of  an  indescribable

grandeur’  (73),  Schreber  became  convinced  of  the  imminence  of  a

great catastrophe, of the end of the world. Voices told him that the

work of the past 14,000 years had now come to nothing, and that the

earth’s allotted span was only 212 years more (71); and during the last

part of his stay in Flechsig’s clinic he believed that that period had

already elapsed. He himself was ‘the only real man left alive’, and the

few human shapes that he still saw - the doctor, the attendants, the

other  patients  -  he  explained  as  being  ‘miracled  up,  cursorily

improvised  men’.  Occasionally  the  converse  current  of  feeling  also

made itself apparent: a newspaper was put into his hands in which

there  was  a  report  of  his  own  death  (81);  he  himself  existed  in  a

second, inferior shape, and in this second shape he one day quietly

passed away (73). But the form of his delusion in which his ego was

retained  and  the  world  sacrificed  proved  itself  by  far  the  more

powerful. He had various theories of the cause of the catastrophe. At

one  time  he  had  in  mind  a  process  of  glaciation  owing  to  the

withdrawal  of  the  sun;  at  another  it  was  to  be  destruction  by  an

earthquake, in the occurrence of which he, in his capacity of ‘seer of

spirits’, was to act a leading part, just as another seer was alleged to

have done in the Lisbon earthquake of 1755 (91). Or again, Flechsig

was the culprit, since through his magic arts he had sown fear and

terror  among  men,  had  wrecked  the  foundations  of  religion,  and

spread  abroad  general  nervous  disorders  and  immorality,  so  that

devastating  pestilences  had  descended  upon  mankind  (91).  In  any

case the end of the world was the consequence of the conflict whichhad  broken  out  between  him  and  Flechsig,  or,  according  to  the

aetiology  adopted  in  the  second  phase  of  his  delusion,  of  the

indissoluble bond which had been formed between him and God; it

was, in fact, the inevitable result of his illness. Years afterwards, when

Dr. Schreber had returned to human society, and could find no trace in

the books, the musical scores, or the other articles of daily use which

fell into his hands once more, of anything to bear out his theory that

there had been a gap of vast duration in the history of mankind, he

admitted that his view was no longer tenable: ’. . . I can no longer

avoid recognizing that, externally considered, everything is as it used

to be. Whether, nevertheless, there may not have been a profound

internal change is a question to which I shall recur later.’ (84-5.) He

could not bring himself to doubt that during his illness the world had

come to an end and that, in spite of everything, the one that he now

saw before him was a different one.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2437

 

   A world-catastrophe of this kind is not infrequent during the agitated

stage in other cases of paranoia.¹ If we base ourselves on our theory

of libidinal cathexis, and if we follow the hint given by Schreber’s view

of other people as being ‘cursorily improvised men’, we shall not find it

difficult  to  explain  these  catastrophes.²  The  patient  has  withdrawn

from  the  people  in  his  environment  and  from  the  external  world

generally the libidinal cathexis which he has hitherto directed on to

them. Thus everything has become indifferent and irrelevant to him,

and has to be explained by means of a secondary rationalization as

being ‘miracled up, cursorily improvised’. The end of the world is the

projection of this internal catastrophe; his subjective world has come

to an end since his withdrawal of his love from it.³

   After Faust has uttered the curses which free him from the world, the

Chorus of Spirits sings:

 

                                                                Weh! Weh!
                                                                Du hast sie zerstört,                                                                die schöne Welt,
                                                                mit mächtiger Faust!
                                                                sie stürzt, sie zerfällt!
                                                                Ein Halbgott hat sie zerschlagen!
                                                                                .    .    .    .    .    .
                                                                Mächtiger
                                                                der Erdensöhne,
                                                                Prächtiger
                                                                baue sie wieder,
                                                                    4
                                                                in deinem Busen baue sie auf!

 

And the paranoic builds it again, not more splendid, it is true, but at

least so that he can once more live in it. He builds it up by the world of

his  delusions. The  delusional  formation,  which  we  take  to  be  the

pathological product, is in reality an attempt at recovery, a process of

reconstruction.  Such  a  reconstruction  after  the  catastrophe  is

successful  to  a  greater  or  lesser  extent,  but  never  wholly  so;  in

Schreber’s words, there has been a ‘profound internal change’ in the

world. But the human subject has recaptured a relation, and often a

very intense one, to the people and things in the world, even though

the  relation  is  a  hostile  one  now,  where  formerly  it  was  hopefully

affectionate. We may say, then, that the process of repression proper

consists in a detachment of the libido from people - and things - that

were previously loved. It happens silently; we receive no intelligence

of it, but can only infer it from subsequent events. What forces itself so

noisily upon our attention is the process of recovery, which undoes the

work of repression and brings back the libido again on to the people it

had abandoned. In paranoia this process is carried out by the method

of projection. It was incorrect to say that the perception which was

suppressed internally is projected outwards; the truth is rather, as we

now see, that what was abolished internally returns from without. The

thorough  examination  of  the  process  of  projection  which  we  have

postponed to another occasion will clear up our remaining doubts on

this subject.

 

   ¹ An ‘end of the world’ based upon other motives is to be found at the climax of the ecstasy

of love (cf. Wagner’s Tristan und Isolde); in this case it is not the ego but the single love-object
which absorbs all the cathexes directed upon the external world.

   ² Cf. Abraham (1908) and Jung (1907). Abraham’s short paper contains almost all the

essential views put forward in the present study of the case of Schreber.   ³ He has perhaps withdrawn from it not only his libidinal cathexis, but his interest in general

- that is, the cathexes that proceed from his ego as well. This question is discussed below.
4
    [Woe! Woe!

       Thou hast it destroyed,
       The beautiful world,
       With powerful fist!
       In ruins 'tis hurled,
       By the blow of a demigod shattered!
        .    .    .    .    .
       Mightier
       For the children of men,
       More splendid
       Build it again,
       In thine own bosom build it anew!]
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2438

 

 

   In the meantime, however, it is a source of some satisfaction to find

that our newly acquired knowledge involves us in a number of further

discussions.

   (1) Our first reflection will tell us that it cannot be the case that this

detachment of the libido occurs exclusively in paranoia; nor can it be

that, where it occurs elsewhere, it has such disastrous consequences.

It is quite possible that a detachment of the libido is the essential and

regular  mechanism  of  every  repression.  We  can  have  no  positive

knowledge on that point until the other disorders that are based upon

repression  have  been  similarly  examined.  But  it  is  certain  that  in

normal  mental  life  (and  not  only  in  periods  of  mourning)  we  are

constantly detaching our libido in this way from people or from other

objects without falling ill. When Faust freed himself from the world by

uttering his curses, the result was not a paranoia or any other neurosis

but simply a certain general frame of mind. The detachment of the

libido, therefore, cannot in itself be the pathogenic factor in paranoia;

there  must  be  some  special  characteristic  which  distinguishes  a

paranoic detachment of the libido from other kinds. It is not difficult to

suggest  what  that  characteristic  may  be.  What  use  is  made  of  the

libido  after  it  has  been  set  free  by  the  process  of  detachment?  Anormal person will at once begin looking about for a substitute for the

lost attachment; and until that substitute has been found the liberated

libido will be kept in suspension within his mind, and will there give

rise to tensions and colour his mood. In hysteria the liberated libido

becomes transformed into somatic innervations or into anxiety. But in

paranoia the clinical evidence goes to show that the libido, after it has

been  withdrawn  from  the  object,  is  put  to  a  special  use.  It  will  be

remembered that the majority of cases of paranoia exhibit traces of

megalomania,  and  that  megalomania  can  by  itself  constitute  a

paranoia. From this it may be concluded that in paranoia the liberated

libido  becomes  attached  to  the  ego,  and  is  used  for  the

aggrandizement  of  the  ego.  A  return  is  thus  made  to  the  stage  of

narcissism (known to us from the development of the libido), in which

a  person’s  only  sexual  object  is  his  own  ego.  On  the  basis  of  this

clinical evidence we can suppose that paranoics have brought along

with them a fixation at the stage of narcissism, and we can assert that

the  length  of the  step  back  from  sublimated  homosexuality  to

narcissism is a measure of the amount of regression characteristic of

paranoia.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2439

 

   (2) An equally plausible objection can be based upon Schreber’s

case history, as well as upon many others. For it can be urged that the

delusions  of  persecution  (which  were  directed  against  Flechsig  )

unquestionably  made  their  appearance  at  an  earlier  date  than  the

phantasy of the end of the world; so that what is supposed to have

been a return of the repressed actually preceded the repression itself -

and this is patent nonsense. In order to meet this objection we must

leave the high ground of generalization and descend to the detailed

consideration  of  actual  circumstances,  which  are  undoubtedly  very

much  more  complicated.  We  must  admit  the  possibility  that  a

detachment  of  the  libido  such  as  we  are  discussing  might  just  as

easily be a partial one, a drawing back from some single complex, asa general one. A partial detachment should be by far the commoner of

the two, and should precede a general one, since to begin with it is

only  for  a  partial  detachment  that  the  influences  of  life  provide  a

motive.  The  process  may  then  stop  at  the  stage  of  a  partial

detachment  or  it  may  spread  to  a  general  one,  which  will  loudly

proclaim  its  presence  in  the  symptoms  of  megalomania.  Thus  the

detachment of the libido from the figure of Flechsig may nevertheless

have  been  what  was  primary  in  the  case  of  Schreber;  it  was

immediately  followed  by  the  appearance  of  the  delusion,  which

brought back the libido on to Flechsig again (though with a negative

sign  to  mark  the  fact  that  repression  had  taken  place)  and  thus

annulled  the  work  of  repression.  And  now  the  battle  of  repression

broke  out  anew,  but  this  time  with  more  powerful  weapons.  In

proportion  as  the  object  of  contention  became  the  most  important

thing in the external world, trying on the one hand to draw the whole of

the  libido  on  to  itself,  and  on  the  other  hand  mobilizing  all  the

resistances  against  itself,  so  the  struggle  raging  around  this  single

object became more and more comparable to a general engagement;

till at length a victory for the forces of repression found expression in a

conviction that the world had come to an end and that the self alone

survived. If we review the ingenious constructions which were raised

by  Schreber’s  delusion  in  the  domain  of  religion  -  the  hierarchy  of

God, the proved souls, the fore-courts of Heaven, the lower and the

upper God - we can gauge in retrospect the wealth of sublimations

which were brought down in ruin by the catastrophe of the general

detachment of his libido.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2440

 

   (3) A third consideration which arises from the views that have been

developed  in  these  pages  is  as  follows.  Are  we  to  suppose  that  a

general detachment of the libido from the external world would be an

effective enough agent to account for the ‘end of the world’? Or would

not  the  ego-cathexes  which  still  remained  in  existence  have  beensufficient to maintain rapport  with  the  external  world?  To  meet  this

difficulty we should either have to assume that what we call libidinal

cathexis  (that  is,  interest  emanating  from  erotic  sources)  coincides

with interest in general, or we should have to consider the possibility

that a very widespread disturbance in the distribution of libido may

bring  about  a  corresponding  disturbance  in  the  ego-cathexes.  But

these are problems which we are still quite helpless and incompetent

to solve. It would be otherwise if we could start out from some well-

grounded theory of instincts; but in fact we have nothing of the kind at

our disposal. We regard instinct as being the concept on the frontier-

line between the somatic and the mental, and see in it the psychical

representative  of  organic  forces.  Further,  we  accept  the  popular

distinction  between  ego-instincts  and  a  sexual  instinct;  for  such  a

distinction  seems  to  agree  with  the  biological  conception  that  the

individual has a double orientation, aiming on the one hand at self-

preservation and on the other at the preservation of the species. But

beyond this are only hypotheses, which we have taken up - and are

quite ready to drop again - in order to help us to find our bearings in

the chaos of the obscurer processes of the mind. What we expect

from psycho-analytic investigations of pathological mental processes

is precisely that they shall drive us to some conclusions on questions

connected with the theory of instincts. These investigations, however,

are in their infancy and are only being carried out by isolated workers,

so that the hopes we place in them must still remain unfulfilled. We

can no more dismiss the possibility that disturbances of the libido may

react  upon  the  ego-cathexes  than  we  can  overlook  the  converse

possibility - namely, that a secondary or induced disturbance of the

libidinal  processes  may  result  from  abnormal  changes  in  the  ego.

Indeed,  it  is  probable  that  processes  of  this  kind  constitute  the

distinctive characteristic of psychoses. How much of all this may apply

to  paranoia  it  is  impossible  at  present  to  say.  There  is  one

consideration, however, on which I should like to lay stress. It cannot

be  asserted  that  a  paranoic,  even  at  the  height  of  the  repression,

withdraws his interest from the external world completely - as must be

considered to occur in certain other kinds of hallucinatory psychosis

(such a Meynert’s amentia). The paranoic perceives the external world

and takes into account any alterations that may happen in it, and theeffect it makes upon him stimulates him to invent explanatory theories

(such as Schreber’s ‘cursorily improvised men’). It therefore appears

to  me  far  more  probable  that  the  paranoic’s  altered  relation  to  the

world  is  to  be  explained  entirely  or  in  the  main  by  the  loss  of  his

libidinal interest.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2441

 

   (4) It is impossible to avoid asking, in view of the close connection

between the two disorders, how far this conception of paranoia will

affect  our  conception  of  dementia  praecox.  I  am  of  opinion  that

Kraepelin was entirely justified in taking the step of separating off a

large part of what had hitherto been called paranoia and merging it,

together with catatonia and certain other forms of disease, into a new

clinical unit - though ‘dementia praecox’ was a particularly unhappy

name to choose for it. The designation chosen by Bleuler for the same

group of forms - ‘schizophrenia’ - is also open to the objection that the

name  appears  appropriate  only  so  long  as  we  forget  its  literal

meaning. For otherwise it prejudices the issue, since it is based on a

characteristic  of  the  disease  which  is  theoretically  postulated  -  a

characteristic,  moreover,  which  does  not  belong  exclusively  to  that

disease,  and  which,  in  the  light  of  other  considerations,  cannot  be

regarded as the essential one. However, it is not on the whole of very

great importance what names we give to clinical pictures. What seems

to  me  more  essential  is  that  paranoia  should  be  maintained  as  an

independent clinical type, however frequently the picture it offers may

be complicated by the presence of schizophrenic features. For, from

the standpoint of the libido theory, while it would resemble dementia

praecox in so far as the repression proper would in both disorders

have the same principal feature - detachment of the libido, together

with  its  regression  on  to  the  ego  -  it  would  be  distinguished  from

dementia praecox by having its dispositional fixation differently located

and by having a different mechanism for the return of the repressed

(that is, for the formation of symptoms). It would seem to me the mostconvenient plan to give dementia praecox the name of paraphrenia.

This term has no special connotation, and it would serve to indicate a

relationship  with  paranoia  (a  name  which  cannot  be  changed)  and

would further recall hebephrenia, an entity which is now merged in

dementia praecox. It is true that the name has already been proposed

for other purposes; but this need not concern us, since the alternative

applications have not passed into general use.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2442

 

   Abraham has very convincingly shown ¹ that the turning away of the

libido from the external world is a particularly clearly-marked feature in

dementia praecox. From this feature we infer that the repression is

effected by means of detachment of the libido. Here once more we

may regard the phase of violent hallucinations as a struggle between

repression  and  an  attempt  at  recovery  by  bringing  the  libido  back

again on to its objects. Jung, with extraordinary analytic acumen, has

perceived  that  the  deliria²  and  motor  stereotypes  occurring  in  this

disorder  are  the  residues  of  former  object-cathexes,  clung  to  with

great persistence. This attempt at recovery, which observers mistake

for the disease itself, does not, as in paranoia, make use of projection,

but employs a hallucinatory (hysterical) mechanism. This is one of the

two major respects in which dementia praecox differs from paranoia;

and  this  difference  can  be  explained  genetically  from  another

direction.  The  second  difference  is  shown  by  the  outcome  of  the

disease  in  those  cases  where  the  process  has  not  remained  too

restricted. The prognosis is on the whole more unfavourable than in

paranoia. The victory lies with repression and not, as in the former,

with reconstruction. The regression extends not merely to narcissism

(manifesting  itself  in  the  shape  of  megalomania)  but  to  a  complete

abandonment of object-love and a return to infantile auto-erotism. The

dispositional fixation must therefore be situated further back than in

paranoia, and must lie some where at the beginning of the course of

development from auto-erotism to object-love. Moreover, it is not at alllikely that homosexual impulsions, which are so frequently - perhaps

invariably - to be found in paranoia, play an equally important part in

the  aetiology  of  that  far  more  comprehensive  disorder,  dementia

praecox.

 

   ¹ In the paper already quoted.

   ² [In French and German psychiatry the word ‘delirium’ is often used of delusional states.]

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2443

 

   Our hypotheses as to the dispositional fixations in paranoia and

paraphrenia make it easy to see that a case may begin with paranoic

symptoms and may yet develop into a dementia praecox, and that

paranoid  and  schizophrenic  phenomena  may  be  combined  in  any

proportion.  And  we  can  understand  how  a  clinical  picture  such  as

Schreber’s  can  come  about,  and  merit  the  name  of  a  paranoid

dementia, from the fact that in its production of a wishful phantasy and

of hallucinations it shows paraphrenic traits, while in its exciting cause,

in its use of the mechanism of projection, and in its outcome it exhibits

a paranoid character. For it is possible for several fixations to be left

behind in the course of development, and each of these in succession

may  allow  an  irruption  of  the  libido  that  has  been  pushed  off  -

beginning, perhaps, with the later acquired fixations, and going on, as

the illness develops, to the original ones that lie nearer the starting-

point.  We  should  be  glad  to  know  to  what  conditions  the  relatively

favourable issue of the present case is due; for we cannot willingly

attribute the whole responsibility for the outcome to anything so casual

as the ‘improvement due to change in domicile’,¹ which set in after the

patient’s  removal  from  Flechsig’s  clinic.  But  our  insufficient

acquaintance  with  the  intimate  circumstances  of  the  history  of  the

case  makes  it  impossible  to  give  an  answer  to  this  interesting

question. It may be suspected, however, that what enabled Schreber

to  reconcile  himself  to  his  homosexual  phantasy,  and  so  made  it

possible for his illness to terminate in something approximating to a

recovery, may have been the fact that his father-complex was in themain  positively  toned  and  that  in  real  life  the  later  years  of  his

relationship with an excellent father had probably been unclouded.

 

   ¹ Cf. Riklin (1905).

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2444

 

 

   Since I neither fear the criticism of others nor shrink from criticizing

myself, I have no motive for avoiding the mention of a similarity which

may possibly damage our libido theory in the estimation of many of my

readers.  Schreber’s  ‘rays  of  God’,  which  are  made  up  of  a

condensation of the sun’s rays, of nerve fibres, and of spermatozoa,

are  in  reality  nothing  else  than  a  concrete  representation  and

projection  outwards  of  libidinal  cathexes;  and  they  thus  lend  his

delusions a striking conformity with our theory. His belief that the world

must come to an end because his ego was attracting all the rays to

itself,  his  anxious  concern  at  a  later  period,  during  the  process  of

reconstruction, lest God should sever His ray-connection with him, -

these and many other details of Schreber’s delusional structure sound

almost  like  endopsychic  perceptions  of  the  processes  whose

existence  I  have  assumed  in  these  page  as  the  basis  of  our

explanation of paranoia. I can nevertheless call a friend and fellow-

specialist  to  witness  that  I  had  developed  my  theory  of  paranoia

before I became acquainted with the contents of Schreber’s book. It

remains for the future to decide whether there is more delusion in my

theory than I should like to admit, or whether there is more truth in

Schreber’s delusion than other people are as yet prepared to believe.

   Lastly, I cannot conclude the present work, which is once again only

a  fragment  of  a  larger  whole,  without  foreshadowing  the  two  chief

theses  towards  the  establishment  of  which  the  libido  theory  of  the

neuroses  and  psychoses  is  advancing:  namely,  that  the  neuroses

arise  in  the  main  from  a  conflict  between  the  ego  and  the  sexual

instinct,  and  that  the  forms  which  the  neuroses  assume  retain  the

imprint of the course of development followed by the libido - and bythe ego.

 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2445

 

                                    POSTSCRIPT

                                        (1912)

 

      In  dealing  with  the  case  history  of  Senatspräsident  Schreber  I

purposely restricted myself to a minimum of interpretation and I feel

confident that every reader with a knowledge of psycho-analysis will

have  learned  from  the  material  which  I  presented  more  than  was

explicitly  stated  by  me,  and  that  he  will  have  found  no  difficulty  in

drawing the threads closer and in reaching conclusions at which I no

more than hinted. By a happy chance the same issue of this periodical

as that in which my own paper appeared showed that the attention of

some  other  contributors  had  been  directed  to  Schreber’s

autobiography, and made it easy to guess how much more material

remains to be gathered from the symbolic content of the phantasies

and delusions of this gifted paranoic.¹

   Since I published my work upon Schreber, a chance acquisition of

knowledge has put me in a position to appreciate one of his delusional

beliefs more adequately, and to recognize the wealth of its bearing

upon mythology. I mentioned on p. 2425 the patient’s peculiar relation

to the sun, and I was led to explain the sun as a sublimated ‘father-

symbol’. The sun used to speak to him in human language and thus

revealed itself to him as a living being. Schreber was in the habit of

abusing it and shouting threats at it; he declares, moreover, that when

he stood facing it and spoke aloud, its rays would turn pale before

him. After his ‘recovery’ he boasts that he can gaze at it without any

difficulty and without being more than slightly dazzled by it, a thing

which would naturally have been impossible for him formerly.²

   It is to this delusional privilege of being able to gaze at the sun

without being dazzled that the mythological interest attaches. We read

in Reinach³ that the natural historians of antiquity attributed this powerto the eagle alone, who, as a dweller in the highest regions of the air,

was brought into especially intimate relation with the heavens, with the

                            4
sun, and with lightning. We learn from the same sources, moreover,

that the eagle puts his young to a test before recognizing them as his

legitimate offspring. Unless they can succeed in looking into the sun

without blinking they are thrown out of the eyrie.

 

   ¹ Cf. Jung (1911, 164 and 207); and Spielrein (1911, 350).

   ² See the footnote to page 139 of Schreber’s book.

   ³ Reinach (1905-12, 3, 80), quoting Keller (1887).

4
    Representations of eagles were set up at the highest points of temples, so as to serve as

‘magical’ lightning-conductors. (Cf. Reinach, loc. cit.)
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2446

 

   There can be no doubt about the meaning of this animal myth. It is

certain  that  this  is  merely  ascribing  to  animals  something  that  is  a

hallowed  custom  among  men.  The  procedure  gone  through  by  the

eagle with his young is an ordeal, a test of lineage, such as is reported

of the most various races of antiquity. Thus the Celts living on the

banks of the Rhine used to entrust their new-born babies to the waters

of the river, in order to ascertain whether they were truly of their own

blood. The clan of Psylli, who inhabited what is now Tripoli, boasted

that  they  were  descended  from  snakes,  and  used  to  expose  their

infants to contact with them; those who were true-born children of the

clan were either not bitten or recovered rapidly from the effects of the

bite.¹ The assumption underlying these trials leads us deep into the

totemic habits of thought of primitive peoples. The totem - an animal,

or  a  natural  force  animistically  conceived,  to  which  the  tribe  traces

back  its  origin  -  spares  the  members  of  the  tribe  as  being  its  own

children, just as it itself is honoured by them as being their ancestor

and is spared by them. We have here arrived at the consideration of

matters which, as it seems to me, may make it possible to arrive at a

psycho-analytic explanation of the origins of religion.

      The  eagle,  then,  who  makes  his  young  look  into  the  sun  andrequires of them that they shall not be dazzled by its light, is behaving

as  though  he  were  himself  a  descendant  of  the  sun  and  were

submitting his children to a test of their ancestry. And when Schreber

boasts that he can look into the sun unscathed and undazzled, he has

rediscovered the mythological method of expressing his filial relation

to the sun, and has confirmed us once again in our view that the sun

is a symbol of the father. It will be remembered that during his illness

Schreber  gave  free  expression  to  his  family  pride,²  and  that  we

discovered  in  the  fact  of  his  childlessness  a  human  motive  for  his

having fallen ill with a feminine wishful phantasy. Thus the connection

between his delusional privilege and the basis of his illness becomes

evident.

 

   ¹ For lists of references see Reinach, loc. cit. and ibid., 1, 74.

   ² The Schrebers are ‘members of the highest nobility of Heaven’ (24). - ‘Adel’ is the attribute

of an ‘Adler’. [‘Adel’ means ‘nobility’ or ‘noble’. ‘Adler’ means ‘eagle’ or ‘noble (person)’.]
 


    Psycho-Analytic Notes On An Autobiographical Account Of A Case

                                    Of Paranoia

                                                                                      2447

 

   This short postscript to my analysis of a paranoid patient may serve

to  show  that  Jung  had  excellent  grounds  for  his  assertion  that  the

mythopoeic forces of mankind are not extinct, but that to this very day

they give rise in the neuroses to the same psychical products as in the

remotest past ages. I should like to take up a suggestion that I myself

made some time ago,¹ and add that the same holds good of the forces

that construct religions. And I am of opinion that the time will soon be

ripe  for  us  to  make  an  extension  of  a  thesis  which  has  long  been

asserted by psycho-analysts, and to complete what has hitherto had

only an individual and ontogenetic application by the addition of its

anthropological counterpart, which is to be conceived phylogenetically.

‘In dreams and in neuroses’, so our thesis has run, ‘ we come once

more  upon  the child  and  the  peculiarities  which  characterize  his

modes  of  thought  and  his  emotional  life.’  ‘And  we  come  upon  the

savage too,’ we may now add, ‘upon the primitive man, as he stands

revealed to us in the light of the researches of archaeology and ofethnology.’

 

   ¹ ‘Obsessive Acts and Religious Practices’ (1907b).

                                                                                       2448

 

      THE HANDLING OF DREAM-INTERPRETATION IN PSYCHO-

                                      ANALYSIS

                                        (1911)

 


                                                                                      2449

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2450

 

      THE HANDLING OF DREAM-INTERPRETATION IN PSYCHO-

                                      ANALYSIS

 

The Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse was not designed solely to keep its

readers  informed  of  the  advances  made  in  psycho-analytic

knowledge, and itself to publish comparatively short contributions to

the  subject;  it  aims  also  at  accomplishing  the  further  tasks  of

presenting to the student a clear outline of what is already known, and

of economizing the time and effort of beginners in analytic practice by

offering them suitable instructions. Henceforward, therefore, articles of

a didactic nature and on technical subjects, not necessarily containing

new matter, will appear as well in this journal.

      The  question  with  which  I  now  intend  to  deal  is  not  that  of  the

technique  of  dream-interpretation:  neither  the  methods  by  which

dreams should be interpreted nor the use of such interpretations when

made will be considered, but only the way in which the analyst should

employ  the  art  of  interpretation  in  the  psycho-analytic  treatment  of

patients. There are undoubtedly different ways of going to work in the

matter, but then the answer to questions of technique in analysis is

never a matter of course. Although there may perhaps be more than

one good road to follow, still there are very many bad ones, and a

comparison of the various methods cannot fail to be illuminating, even

if it should not lead to a decision in favour of any particular one.   Anyone coming from dream-interpretation to analytic practice will

retain his interest in the content of dreams, and his inclination will be

to interpret as fully as possible every dream related by the patient. But

he  will  soon  remark  that  he  is  now  working  under  quite  different

conditions, and that if he attempts to carry out his intention he will

come into collision with the most immediate tasks of the treatment.

Even if a patient’s first dream proves to be admirably suited for the

introduction  of  the  first  explanations  to  be  given,  other  dreams  will

promptly appear, so long and so obscure that the full meaning cannot

be extracted from them in the limited session of one day’s work. If the

doctor continues the work of interpretation during the following days,

fresh dreams will be produced in the meantime and these will have to

be put aside until he can regard the first dream as finally resolved. The

production  of  dreams  is  at  times  so  copious,  and  the  patient’s

progress towards comprehension of them so hesitant, that a suspicion

will force itself on the analyst that the appearance of the material in

this manner may be simply a manifestation of the patient’s resistance

taking advantage of the discovery that the method is unable to master

what is so presented. Moreover, the treatment will meanwhile have

fallen quite a distance behind the present and have lost touch with

actuality. In opposition to such a technique stands the rule that it is of

the  greatest  importance  for  the  treatment  that  the  analyst  should

always  be  aware  of  the  surface  of  the  patient’s  mind  at  any  given

moment, that he should know what complexes and resistances are

active  in  him  at  the  time  and  what  conscious  reaction  to  them  will

govern  his  behaviour.  It  is  scarcely  ever  right  to  sacrifice  this

therapeutic aim to an interest in dream-interpretation.

 


        The Handling Of Dream-Interpretation In Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2451

 

      What  then,  if  we  bear  this  rule  in  mind,  is  to  be  our  attitude  to

interpreting dreams in analysis? More or less as follows: The amount

of  interpretation  which  can  be  achieved  in  one  session  should  be

taken as sufficient and it is not to be regarded as a loss if the content

of  the  dream  is  not  fully  discovered.  On  the  following  day,  theinterpretation of the dream is not to be taken up again as a matter of

course, until it has become evident that nothing else has meanwhile

forced its way into the foreground of the patient’s thoughts. Thus no

exception  in  favour  of  an  interrupted  dream-interpretation  is  to  be

made to the rule that the first thing that comes into the patient’s head

is  the  first  thing  to  be  dealt  with.  If  fresh  dreams  occur  before  the

earlier ones have been disposed of, the more recent productions are

to be attended to, and no uneasiness need be felt about neglecting

the  older  ones.  If  the  dreams  become  altogether  too  diffuse  and

voluminous, all hope of completely unravelling them should tacitly be

given up from the start. One must in general guard against displaying

very special interest in the interpretation of dreams, or arousing an

idea in the patient that the work would come to a standstill if he were

to bring up no dreams; otherwise there is a danger of the resistance

being  directed  to  the  production  of  dreams,  with  a  consequent

cessation  of  them.  The  patient  must  be  brought  to  believe,  on  the

contrary, that the analysis invariably finds material for its continuation,

regardless of whether or no he brings up dreams or what amount of

attention is devoted to them.

   It will now be asked whether we shall not be giving up too much

valuable material which might throw light on the unconscious if dream-

interpretation is only to be carried out subject to such restrictions of

method. The answer to this is that the loss is by no means so great as

might appear from a superficial view of the matter. To begin with, it

must be recognized that in cases of severe neurosis any elaborate

dream-productions  must  from  the  nature  of  things  be  regarded  as

incapable of complete solution. A dream of this kind is often based on

the entire pathogenic material of the case, as yet unknown to both

doctor  and  patient  (so  called  ‘programme-dreams’  and  biographical

dreams),  and  is  sometimes  equivalent  to  a  translation  into  dream-

Ianguage  of  the  whole  content  of  the  neurosis.  In  the  attempt  to

interpret such a dream all the latent, as yet untouched, resistances will

be roused to activity and soon set a limit to its understanding. The full

interpretation of such a dream will coincide with the completion of the

whole  analysis;  if  a  note  is  made  of  it  at  the  beginning,  it  may  be

possible to understand it at the end, many months later. It is the same

as  with  the  elucidation  of  a  single  symptom  (the  main  symptom,perhaps). The whole analysis is needed to explain it; in the course of

the treatment one must endeavour to lay hold first of this, then of that,

fragment of the symptom’s meaning, one after another, until they can

all be pieced together. Similarly, no more can be expected of a dream

occurring in the early stages of the analysis; one must be content if

the attempt at interpretation brings a single pathogenic wishful impulse

to light.

 


        The Handling Of Dream-Interpretation In Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2452

 

   Thus nothing attainable is renounced if one gives up the idea of a

complete  dream-interpretation;  nor  is  anything  lost  as  a  rule  if  one

breaks off the interpretation of a comparatively old dream and turns to

a  more  recent  one.  We  have  found  from  fine  examples  of  fully

analysed dreams that several successive scenes of one dream may

have  the  same  content,  which  may  find  expression  in  them  with

increasing  clarity;  and  we  have  learnt,  too,  that  several  dreams

occurring  in  the  same  night  need  be  nothing  more  than  attempts,

expressed in various forms, to represent one meaning. In general, we

may rest assured that every wishful impulse which creates a dream to-

day  will  re-appear  in  other  dreams  as  long  as  it  has  not  been

understood and withdrawn from the domination of the unconscious. It

often  happens,  therefore,  that  the  best  way  to  complete  the

interpretation of a dream is to leave it and to devote one’s attention to

a new dream, which may contain the same material in a possibly more

accessible form. I know that it is asking a great deal, not only of the

patient  but  also  of  the  doctor,  to  expect  them  to  give  up  their

conscious  purposive  aims  during  the  treatment,  and  to  abandon

themselves to a guidance which, in spite of everything, still seems to

us ‘accidental’. But I can answer for it that one is rewarded every time

one  resolves  to  have  faith  in  one’s  own  theoretical  principles,  and

prevails upon oneself not to dispute the guidance of the unconscious

in establishing connecting links.

   I submit, therefore, that dream-interpretation should not be pursued

in analytic treatment as an art for its own sake, but that its handlingshould be subject to those technical rules that govern the conduct of

the  treatment  as  a  whole.  Occasionally,  of  course,  one  can  act

otherwise and allow a little free play to one’s theoretical interest; but

one should always be aware of what one is doing. Another situation to

be considered is one which has arisen since we have acquired more

confidence  in  our  understanding  of  dream-symbolism,  and  know

ourselves to be more independent of the patient’s associations. An

unusually skilful dream-interpreter will sometimes find himself in the

position of being able to see through every one of a patient’s dreams

without requiring him to go through the tedious and time-absorbing

process of working over them. Such an analyst is thus exempt from

any conflict between the demands of dream-interpretation and those

of  the  treatment.  Moreover  he  will(be  tempted  to  make  full  use  of

dream-interpretation  on  every  occasion,  by  telling  the  patient

everything he has detected in his dreams. In doing so, however, he

will have adopted a method of treatment which departs considerably

from the established one, as I shall point out in another connection.

Beginners in psycho-analytic practice, at any rate, are advised not to

take this exceptional case as a model.

 


        The Handling Of Dream-Interpretation In Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2453

 

   Every analyst is in the position of the superior dream-interpreter,

whom we have been imagining, in regard to the very first dreams that

his patients bring, before they have learnt anything of the technique of

translating  dreams.  These  initial  dreams  may  be  described  as

unsophisticated:  they  betray  a  great  deal  to  the  listener,  like  the

dreams of so-called healthy people. The question then arises whether

the analyst is at once to translate to the patient all that he himself

reads from them. This, however, is not the place for answering this

question, for it evidently forms part of a wider one: at what stage in the

treatment and how rapidly should the analyst introduce the patient to

the knowledge of what lies veiled in his mind?  The more the patient

has learnt of the practice of dream-interpretation, the more obscure do

his later dreams as a rule become. All the knowledge acquired aboutdreams  serves  also  to  put  the  dream-constructing  process  on  its

guard.

      In  the  ‘scientific’  works  about  dreams,  which  in  spite  of  their

repudiation of dream-interpretation have received a new stimulus from

psycho-analysis,  one  constantly  finds  that  scrupulous  care  is  most

unnecessarily attached to the accurate preservation of the text of the

dream.  This  is  supposed  to  need  protection  from  distortions  and

attritions  in  the  hours  immediately  after  waking.  Some  psycho-

analysts, even, in giving the patient instructions to write down every

dream immediately upon waking, seem not to rely consistently enough

upon  their  knowledge  of  the  conditions  of  dream-formation.  In

therapeutic  work  this  rule  is  superfluous;  and  patients  are  glad  to

make use of it to disturb their sleep and to display great zeal where it

can serve no useful purpose. For even if the text of a dream is in this

way laboriously rescued from oblivion, it is easy enough to convince

oneself that nothing has been achieved for the patient. Associations

will not come to the text, and the result is the same as if the dream

had  not  been  preserved.  No  doubt  the  doctor  has  acquired  some

knowledge which he would not have done otherwise. But it is not the

same thing whether the analyst knows something or the patient knows

it;  the  importance  of  this  distinction  for  the  technique  of  psycho-

analysis will be more fully considered elsewhere.

 


        The Handling Of Dream-Interpretation In Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2454

 

   In conclusion, I will mention a particular type of dream which, in the

nature  of  the  case,  occurs  only  in  the  course  of  psycho-analytic

treatment,  and  may  bewilder  or  mislead  beginners.  These  are  the

corroborative dreams which, as it were ‘tag along behind’; they are

easily  accessible  to  analysis,  and  their  translation  merely  presents

what  the  treatment  has  inferred  during  the  last  new  days  from  the

material  of  the  daily  associations.  When  this  happens,  it  looks  as

though the patient has been amiable enough to bring us in dream-

form  exactly  what  we  had  been  ‘suggesting’  to  him  immediately

before.  The  more  experienced  analyst  will  no  doubt  have  somedifficulty in attributing any such amiability to the patient; he accepts

such dreams as hoped-for confirmations, and recognizes that they are

only observed under certain conditions brought about by the influence

of  the  treatment.  The  great  majority  of  dreams  forge  ahead  of  the

analysis;  so  that,  after  subtraction  of  everything  in  them  which  is

already known and understood, there still remains a more or less clear

hint at something which has hitherto been hidden.

                                                                                       2455

 

                    THE DYNAMICS OF TRANSFERENCE

                                        (1912)

 


                                                                                      2456

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2457

 

                    THE DYNAMICS OF TRANSFERENCE

 

The almost inexhaustible topic of transference has recently been dealt

with by Wilhelm Stekel in this journal on descriptive lines. I should like

in the following pages to add a few remarks to explain how it is that

transference  is  necessarily  brought  about  during  a  psycho-analytic

treatment, and how it comes to play its familiar part in it.

   It must be understood that each individual, through the combined

operation of his innate disposition and the influences brought to bear

on him during his early years, has acquired a specific method of his

own in his conduct of his erotic life - that is, in the preconditions to

falling in love which he lays down, in the instincts he satisfies and the

aims he sets himself in the course of it.¹ This produces what might be

described as a stereotype plate (or several such), which is constantly

repeated - constantly reprinted afresh - in the course of the person’s

life,  so  far  as  external  circumstances  and  the  nature  of  the  love

objects accessible to him permit, and which is certainly not entirely

insusceptible to change in the face of recent experiences. Now, our

observations have shown that only a portion of these impulses which

determine  the  course  of  erotic  life  have  passed  through  the  full

process  of  psychical  development.  That  portion  is  directed  towards

reality, is at the disposal of the conscious personality, and forms a part

of it. Another portion of the libidinal impulses has been held up in the

course  of  development;  it  has  been  kept  away  from  the  consciouspersonality  and  from  reality,  and  has  either  been  prevented  from

further expansion except in phantasy or has remained wholly in the

unconscious so that it is unknown to the personality’s consciousness.

If someone’s need for love is not entirely satisfied by reality, he is

bound to approach every new person whom he meets with libidinal

anticipatory ideas; and it is highly probable that both portions of his

libido, the portion that is capable of becoming conscious as well as the

unconscious one, have a share in forming that attitude.

 

   ¹ I take this opportunity of defending myself against the mistaken charge of having denied

the  importance  of  innate  (constitutional)  factors  because  I  have  stressed  that  of  infantile
impressions. A charge such as this arises from the restricted nature of what men look for in
the field of causation: in contrast to what ordinarily holds good in the real world, people prefer
to  be  satisfied  with  a  single  causative  factor.  Psycho-analysis  has  talked  a  lot  about  the
accidental factors in aetiology and little about the constitutional ones; but that is only because
it was able to contribute something fresh to the former, while, to begin with, it knew no more
than  was  commonly  known  about  the  latter.  We  refuse  to  posit  any  contrast  in  principle
between the two sets of aetiological factors; on the contrary, we assume that the two sets

regularly act jointly in bringing about the observed result. Δαίμωυ καì Τύχη [Endowment

and Chance] determine a man’s fate - rarely or never one of these powers alone. The amount
of aetiological effectiveness to be attributed to each of them can only be arrived at in every
individual case separately. These cases may be arranged in a series according to the varying
proportion in which the two factors are present, and this series will no doubt have its extreme
cases. We shall estimate the share taken by constitution or experience differently in individual
cases according to the stage reached by our knowledge; and we shall retain the right to
modify  our  judgement  along  with  changes  in  our  understanding.  Incidentally,  one  might
venture to regard constitution itself as a precipitate from the accidental effects produced on
the endlessly long chain of our ancestors.
 


                          The Dynamics Of Transference

                                                                                      2458

 

   Thus it is a perfectly normal and intelligible thing that the libidinal

cathexis of someone who is partly unsatisfied, a cathexis which is held

ready in anticipation, should be directed as well to the figure of the

doctor. It follows from our earlier hypothesis that this cathexis will have

recourse to prototypes, will attach itself to one of the stereotype plates

which are present in the subject; or, to put the position in another way,

the cathexis will introduce the doctor into one of the psychical ‘series’

which the patient has already formed. If the ‘father-imago’, to use the

apt  term  introduced  by  Jung  (1911,  164)  is  the  decisive  factor  inbringing this about, the outcome will tally with the real relations of the

subject to his doctor. But the transference is not tied to this particular

prototype: it may also come about on the lines of the mother-imago or

brother-imago.  The  peculiarities  of  the  transference  to  the  doctor,

thanks to which it exceeds, both in amount and nature, anything that

could be justified on sensible or rational grounds, are made intelligible

if we bear in mind that this transference has precisely been set up not

only by the conscious anticipatory ideas but also by those that have

been held back or are unconscious.

      There  would  be  nothing  more  to  discuss  or  worry  about  in  this

behaviour  of  transference,  if  it  were  not  that  two  points  remain

unexplained  about  it  which  are  of  particular  interest  to  psycho-

analysis. Firstly, we do not understand why transference is so much

more intense with neurotic subjects in analysis than it is with other

such people who are not being analysed; and secondly, it remains a

puzzle why in analysis transference emerges as the most powerful

resistance  to  the  treatment,  whereas  outside  analysis  it  must  be

regarded as the vehicle of cure and the condition of success. For our

experience has shown us - and the fact can be confirmed as often as

we please - that if a patient’s free associations fail¹ the stoppage can

invariably be removed by an assurance that he is being dominated at

the  moment  by  an  association  which  is  concerned  with  the  doctor

himself  or  with  something  connected  with  him.  As  soon  as  this

explanation  is  given,  the  stoppage  is  removed,  or  the  situation  is

changed from one in which the associations fail into one in which they

are  being  kept  back.  At  first  sight  it  appears  to  be  an  immense

disadvantage in psycho-analysis as a method that what is elsewhere

the strongest factor towards success is changed in it into the most

powerful medium of resistance. If, however, we examine the situation

more closely, we can at least clear away the first of our two problems.

It is not a fact that transference emerges with greater intensity and

lack of restraint during psycho-analysis than outside it. In institutions in

which  nerve  patients  are  treated  non-analytically,  we  can  observe

transference  occurring  with  the  greatest  intensity  and  in  the  most

unworthy forms, extending to nothing less than mental bondage, and

moreover showing the plainest erotic colouring. Gabriele Reuter, with

her sharp powers of observation, described this at a time when therewas no such thing as psycho-analysis, in a remarkable book which

betrays  in  every  respect  the  clearest  insight  into  the  nature  and

genesis  of  neuroses.²  These  characteristics  of  transference  are

therefore to be attributed not to psycho-analysis but to neurosis itself.

 

   ¹ I mean when they really cease, and not when, for instance, the patient keeps them back

owing to ordinary feelings of unpleasure.

   ² Aus guter Familie, Berlin, 1895.

 


                          The Dynamics Of Transference

                                                                                      2459

 

   Our second problem - the problem of why transference appears in

psycho-analysis  as  resistance  -  has  been  left  for  the  moment

untouched; and we must now approach it more closely. Let us picture

the  psychological  situation  during  the  treatment.  An  invariable  and

indispensable precondition of every onset of a psychoneurosis is the

process  to  which  Jung  has  given  the  appropriate  name  of

‘introversion’.¹ That is to say: the portion of libido which is capable of

becoming conscious and is directed towards reality is diminished, and

the portion which is directed away from reality and is unconscious,

and  which,  though  it  may  still  feed  the  subject’s  phantasies,

nevertheless belongs to the unconscious, is proportionately increased.

The  libido  (whether  wholly  or  in  part)  has  entered  on  a  regressive

course and has revived the subject’s infantile imagos.² The analytic

treatment now proceeds to follow it; it seeks to track down the libido,

to make it accessible to consciousness and, in the end, serviceable for

reality.  Where  the  investigations  of  analysis  come  upon  the  libido

withdrawn into its hiding-place, a struggle is bound to break out; all the

forces  which  have  caused  the  libido  to  regress  will  rise  up  as

‘resistances’  against  the  work  of  analysis,  in  order  to  conserve  the

new state of things. For if the libido’s introversion or regression had

not been justified by a particular relation between the subject and the

external world - stated in the most general terms, by the frustration of

satisfaction - and if it had not for the moment even become expedient,

it could never have taken place at all. But the resistances from this

source are not the only ones or indeed the most powerful. The libidoat the disposal of the subject’s personality had always been under the

influence  of  the  attraction  of  his  unconscious  complexes  (or  more

correctly,  of  the  portions  of  those  complexes  belonging  to  the

unconscious),  and  it  entered  on  a  regressive  course  because  the

attraction of reality had diminished. In order to liberate it, this attraction

of the unconscious has to be overcome; that is, the repression of the

unconscious instincts and of their productions, which has meanwhile

been set up in the subject, must be removed. This is responsible for

by far the largest part of the resistance, which so often causes the

illness to persist even after the turning away from reality has lost its

temporary  justification.  The  analysis  has  to  struggle  against  the

resistances from both these sources. The resistance accompanies the

treatment  step  by  step.  Every  single  association,  every  act  of  the

person  under  treatment  must  reckon  with  the  resistance  and

represents a compromise between the forces that are striving towards

recovery and the opposing ones which I have described.

 

   ¹ Even though some of Jung’s remarks give the impression that he regards this introversion

as something which is characteristic of dementia praecox and does not come into account in
the same way in other neuroses.

   ² It would be convenient if we could say ‘it has recathected his infantile complexes’. But this

would be incorrect: the only justifiable way of putting it would be ‘the unconscious portions of
those complexes’. The topics dealt with in this paper are so extraordinarily involved that it is
tempting to embark on a number of contiguous problems whose clarification would in point of
fact be necessary before it would be possible to speak in unambiguous terms of the psychical
processes that are to be described here. These problems include the drawing of a line of
distinction between introversion and regression, the fitting of the theory of complexes into the
libido theory, the relations of phantasying to the conscious and the unconscious as well as to
reality - and others besides. I need not apologize for having resisted this temptation in the
present paper.
 


                          The Dynamics Of Transference

                                                                                      2460

 

   If now we follow a pathogenic complex from its representation in the

conscious (whether this is an obvious one in the form of a symptom or

something quite inconspicuous) to its root in the unconscious, we shall

soon enter a region in which the resistance makes itself felt so clearly

that  the  next  association  must  take  account  of  it  and  appear  as  acompromise  between  its  demands  and  those  of  the  work  of

investigation. It is at this point, on the evidence of our experience, that

transference enters on the scene. When anything in the complexive

material (in the subject-matter of the complex) is suitable for being

transferred on to the figure of the doctor, that transference is carried

out;  it  produces  the  next  association,  and  announces  itself  by

indications of a resistance - by a stoppage, for instance. We infer from

this  experience  that  the  transference-idea  has  penetrated  into

consciousness in front of any other possible associations because it

satisfies the resistance. An event of this sort is repeated on countless

occasions in the course of an analysis. Over and over again, when we

come near to a pathogenic complex, the portion of that complex which

is capable of transference is first pushed forward into consciousness

and defended with the greatest obstinacy.¹

 

   ¹ This, however, should not lead us to conclude in general that the element selected for

transference-resistance is of peculiar pathogenic importance. If in the course of a battle there
is  a  particularly  embittered  struggle  over  the  possession  of  some  little  church  or  some
individual farm, there is no need to suppose that the church is a national shrine perhaps, or
that the house shelters the army’s pay-chest. The value to the object may be a purely tactical
one and may perhaps emerge only in this one battle.
 


                          The Dynamics Of Transference

                                                                                      2461

 

   After it has been overcome, the overcoming of the other portions of

the  complex  raises  few  further  difficulties.  The  longer  an  analytic

treatment  lasts  and  the  more  clearly  the  patient  realizes  that

distortions of the pathogenic material cannot by themselves offer any

protection against its being uncovered, the more consistently does he

make use of the one sort of distortion which obviously affords him the

greatest  advantages  -  distortion  through  transference.  These

circumstances tend towards a situation in which finally every conflict

has to be fought out in the sphere of transference.

   Thus transference in the analytic treatment invariably appears to us

in the first instance as the strongest weapon of the resistance, and we

may conclude that the intensity and persistence of the transference

are an effect and an expression of the resistance. The mechanism oftransference is, it is true, dealt with when we have traced it back to the

state of readiness of the libido, which has remained in possession of

infantile imagos; but the part transference plays in the treatment can

only be explained if we enter into its relations with resistance.

   How does it come about that transference is so admirably suited to

be a means of resistance? It might be thought that the answer can be

given without difficulty. For it is evident that it becomes particularly

hard to admit to any proscribed wishful impulse if it has to be revealed

in  front  of  the  very  person  to  whom  the  impulse  relates.  Such  a

necessity gives rise to situations which in the real world seem scarcely

possible. But it is precisely this that the patient is aiming at when he

makes the object of his emotional impulses coincide with the doctor.

Further consideration, however, shows that this apparent gain cannot

provide the solution of the problem. Indeed, a relation of affectionate

and devoted dependence can, on the contrary help a person over all

the  difficulties  of  making  an  admission  In  analogous  real  situations

people will usually say: ‘I feel no shame in front of you: I can say

anything to you.’ Thus the transference to the doctor might just as

easily serve to facilitate admissions, and it is not clear why it should

make things more difficult.

 


                          The Dynamics Of Transference

                                                                                      2462

 

   The answer to the question which has been repeated so often in

these pages is not to be reached by further reflection but by what we

discover  when  we  examine  individual  transference  resistances

occurring  during  treatment.  We  find  in  the  end  that  we  cannot

understand the employment of transference as resistance so long as

we  think  simply  of  ‘transference’.  We  must  make  up  our  minds  to

distinguish  a  ‘positive’  transference  from  a  ‘negative’  one,  the

transference of affectionate feelings from that of hostile ones, and to

treat the two sorts of transference to the doctor separately. Positive

transference  is  then  further  divisible  into  transference  of  friendly  or

affectionate  feelings  which  are  admissible  to  consciousness  and

transference of prolongations of those feelings into the unconscious.As regards the latter, analysis shows that they invariably go back to

erotic  sources.  And  we  are  thus  led  to  the  discovery  that  all  the

emotional relations of sympathy, friendship, trust, and the like, which

can be turned to good account in our lives, are genetically linked with

sexuality and have developed from purely sexual desires through a

softening of their sexual aim, however pure and unsensual they may

appear  to  our  conscious  self-perception.  Originally  we  knew  only

sexual objects; and psycho-analysis shows us that people who in our

real life are merely admired or respected may still be sexual objects

for our unconscious.

   Thus the solution of the puzzle is that transference to the doctor is

suitable for resistance to the treatment only in so far as it is a negative

transference or a positive transference of repressed erotic impulses. If

we  ‘remove’  the  transference  by  making  it  conscious,  we  are

detaching only these two components of the emotional act from the

person  of  the  doctor;  the  other  component,  which  is  admissible  to

consciousness  and  unobjectionable,  persists  and  is  the  vehicle  of

success  in  psycho-analysis  exactly  as  it  is  in  other  methods  of

treatment. To this extent we readily admit that the results of psycho-

analysis  rest  upon  suggestion;  by  suggestion,  however,  we  must

understand, as Ferenczi (1909) does, the influencing of a person by

means of the transference phenomena which are possible in his case.

We  take  care  of  the  patient’s  final  independence  by  employing

suggestion in order to get him to accomplish a piece of psychical work

which has as its necessary result a permanent improvement in his

psychical situation.

 


                          The Dynamics Of Transference

                                                                                      2463

 

   The further question may be raised of why it is that the resistance

phenomena of transference only appear in psycho-analysis and not in

indifferent forms of treatment (e.g. in institutions) as well. The reply is

that they do show themselves in these other situations too, but they

have  to  be  recognized  as  such.  The  breaking  out  of  a  negative

transference is actually quite a common event in institutions. As soonas a patient comes under the dominance of the negative transference

he leaves the institution in an unchanged or relapsed condition. The

erotic  transference  does  not  have  such  an  inhibiting  effect  in

institutions, since in them, just as in ordinary life, it is glossed over

instead  of  being  uncovered.  But  it  is  manifested  quite  clearly  as  a

resistance to recovery, not, it is true, by driving the patient out of the

institution - on the contrary, it holds him back in it - but by keeping him

at a distance from life. For, from the point of view of recovery, it is a

matter of complete indifference whether the patient overcomes this or

that anxiety or inhibition in the institution; what matters is that he shall

be free of it in his real life as well.

   The negative transference deserves a detailed examination, which it

cannot be given within the limits of the present paper. In the curable

forms of psychoneurosis it is found side by side with the affectionate

transference, often directed simultaneously towards the same person.

Bleuler has coined the excellent term ‘ambivalence’ to describe this

phenomenon.¹ Up to a point, ambivalence of feeling of this sort seems

to be normal; but a high degree of it is certainly a special peculiarity of

neurotic people. In obsessional neurotics an early separation of the

‘pairs of opposites’ seems to be characteristic of their instinctual life

and to be one of their constitutional preconditions. Ambivalence in the

emotional trends of neurotics is the best explanation of their ability to

enlist  their  transferences  in  the  service  of  resistance.  Where  the

capacity for transference has become essentially limited to a negative

one, as is the case with paranoics, there ceases to be any possibility

of influence or cure.

 

   ¹ Bleuler, 1911, 43-4 and 305-6. - Cf. a lecture on ambivalence delivered by him in Berne in

1910, reported in the Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse, 1, 266. - Stekel has proposed the term
‘bipolarity’ for the same phenomenon.
 


                          The Dynamics Of Transference

                                                                                      2464

 

   In all these reflections, however, we have hitherto dealt only with

one  side  of  the  phenomenon  of  transference;  we  must  turn  our

attention to another aspect of the same subject. Anyone who forms acorrect appreciation of the way in which a person in analysis, as soon

as he comes under the dominance of any considerable transference-

resistance, is flung out of his real relation to the doctor, how he feels

at liberty then to disregard the fundamental rule of psycho-analysis

which  lays  it  down  that  whatever  comes  into  one’s  head  must  be

reported without criticizing it, how he forgets the intentions with which

he started the treatment, and how he regards with indifference logical

arguments and conclusions which only a short time before had made

a great impression on him - anyone who has observed all this will feel

it  necessary  to  look  for  an  explanation  of  his  impression  in  other

factors besides those that have already been adduced. Nor are such

factors  far  to  seek:  they  arise  once  again  from  the  psychological

situation in which the treatment places the patient.

   In the process of seeking out the libido which has escaped from the

patient’s  conscious,  we  have  penetrated  into  the  realm  of  the

unconscious. The reactions which we bring about reveal at the same

time some of the characteristics which we have come to know from

the study of dreams. The unconscious impulses do not want to be

remembered  in  the  way  the  treatment  desires  them  to  be,  but

endeavour  to  reproduce  themselves  in  accordance  with  the

timelessness  of  the  unconscious  and  its  capacity  for  hallucination.

Just as happens in dreams, the patient regards the products of the

awakening  of  his  unconscious  impulses  as  contemporaneous  and

real;  he  seeks  to  put  his  passions  into  action  without  taking  any

account of the real situation. The doctor tries to compel him to fit these

emotional  impulses  into  the  nexus  of  the  treatment  and  of  his  life-

history, to submit them to intellectual consideration and to understand

them in the light of their psychical value. This struggle between the

doctor and the patient, between intellect and instinctual life, between

understanding and seeking to act, is played out almost exclusively in

the phenomena of transference. It is on that field that the victory must

be won - the victory whose expression is the permanent cure of the

neurosis.  It  cannot  be  disputed  that  controlling  the  phenomena  of

transference presents the psycho-analyst with the greatest difficulties.

But it should not be forgotten that it is precisely they that do us the

inestimable service of making the patient’s hidden and forgotten erotic

impulses immediate and manifest. For when all is said and done, it isimpossible to destroy anyone in absentia or in effigie.

                                                                                       2465

 

      RECOMMENDATIONS TO PHYSICIANS PRACTISING PSYCHO-

                                      ANALYSIS

                                        (1912)

 


                                                                                      2466

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2467

 

      RECOMMENDATIONS TO PHYSICIANS PRACTISING PSYCHO-

                                      ANALYSIS

 

The technical rules which I am putting forward here have been arrived

at  from  my  own  experience  in  the  course  of  many  years  after

unfortunate results had led me to abandon other methods. It will easily

be seen that they (or at least many of them) may be summed up in a

single  precept.  My  hope  is  that  observance  of  them  will  spare

physicians  practising  analysis  much  unnecessary  effort  and  guard

them against some oversights. I must however make it clear that what

I  am  asserting  is  that  this  technique  is  the  only  one  suited  to  my

individuality; I do not venture to deny that a physician quite differently

constituted might find himself driven to adopt a different attitude to his

patients and to the task before him.

 

   (a) The first problem confronting an analyst who is treating more

than one patient in the day will seem to him the hardest. It is the task

of  keeping  in  mind  all  the  innumerable  names,  dates,  detailed

memories  and  pathological  products  which  each  patient

communicates in the course of months and years of treatment, and of

not confusing them with similar material produced by other patients

under  treatment  simultaneously  or  previously.  If  one  is  required  to

analyse six, eight, or even more patients daily, the feat of memoryinvolved  in  achieving  this  will  provoke  incredulity,  astonishment  or

even  commiseration  in  uninformed  observers.  Curiosity  will  in  any

case be felt about the technique which makes it possible to master

such an abundance of material, and the expectation will be that some

special expedients are required for the purpose.

   The technique, however, is a very simple one. As we shall see, it

rejects the use of any special expedient (even that of taking notes). It

consists simply in not directing one’s notice to anything in particular

and in maintaining the same ‘evenly-suspended attention’ (as I have

called  it)  in  the  face  of  all  that  one  hears.  In  this  way  we  spare

ourselves a strain on our attention which could not in any case be kept

up for several hours daily, and we avoid a danger which is inseparable

from  the  exercise  of  deliberate  attention.  For  as  soon  as  anyone

deliberately concentrates his attention to a certain degree, he begins

to select from the material before him; one point will be fixed in his

mind with particular clearness and some other will be correspondingly

disregarded,  and  in  making  this  selection  he  will  be  following  his

expectations or inclinations. This, however, is precisely what must not

be done. In making the selection, if he follows his expectations he is in

danger of never finding anything but what he already knows; and if he

follows his inclinations he will certainly falsify what he may perceive. It

must not be forgotten that the things one hears are for the most part

things whose meaning is only recognized later on.

 


        Recommendations To Physicians Practising Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2468

 

   It will be seen that the rule of giving equal notice to everything is the

necessary  counterpart  to  the  demand  made  on  the  patient  that  he

should communicate everything that occurs to him without criticism or

selection. If the doctor behaves otherwise, he is throwing away most

of  the  advantage  which  results  from  the  patient’s  obeying  the

‘fundamental rule of psycho- analysis’. The rule for the doctor may be

expressed:  ‘He  should  withhold  all  conscious  influences  from  his

capacity  to  attend,  and  give  himself  over  completely  to  his

"unconscious memory".’ Or, to put it purely in terms of technique: ‘Heshould  simply  listen,  and  not  bother  about  whether  he  is  keeping

anything in mind.’

   What is achieved in this manner will be sufficient for all requirements

during the treatment. Those elements of the material which already

form a connected context will be at the doctor’s conscious disposal;

the rest, as yet unconnected and in chaotic disorder, seems at first to

be  submerged,  but  rises  readily  into  recollection  as  soon  as  the

patient brings up something new to which it can be related and by

which it can be continued. The undeserved compliment of having ‘a

remarkably  good  memory’  which  the  patient  pays  one  when  one

reproduces some detail after a year and a day can then be accepted

with a smile, whereas a conscious determination to recollect the point

would probably have resulted in failure. Mistakes in this process of

remembering occur only at times and places at which one is disturbed

by some personal consideration (see below) - that is, when one has

fallen seriously below the standard of an ideal analyst. Confusion with

material brought up by other patients occurs very rarely. Where there

is a dispute with the patient as to whether or how he has said some

particular thing, the doctor is usually in the right.¹

 

   ¹ A patient will often assert that he has already told the doctor something on a previous

occasion, while the doctor can assure him with a quiet feeling of superiority that it has come
up now for the first time. It then turns out that the patient had previously had the intention of
saying it, but had been prevented from performing his intention by a resistance which was still
present. His recollection of his intention is indistinguishable to him from a recollection of its
performance.
 


        Recommendations To Physicians Practising Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2469

 

 

      (b)  I  cannot  advise  the  taking  of  full  notes,  the  keeping  of  a

shorthand  record,  etc.,  during  analytic  sessions.  Apart  from  the

unfavourable  impression  which  this  makes  on  some  patients,  the

same considerations as have been advanced with regard to attention

apply  here  too.  A  detrimental  selection  from  the  material  will

necessarily be made as one writes the notes or shorthand, and part of

one’s own mental activity is tied up in this way, which would be betteremployed  in  interpreting  what  one  has  heard.  No  objection  can  be

raised to making exceptions to this rule in the case of dates, the text of

dreams, or particular noteworthy events which can easily be detached

from their context and are suitable for independent use as instances.

But I am not in the habit of doing this either. As regards instances, I

write them down from memory in the evening after work is over; as

regards texts of dreams to which I attach importance, I get the patient

to repeat them to me after he has related them so that I can fix them in

my mind.

 

   (c) Taking notes during the session with the patient might be justified

by an intention of publishing a scientific study of the case. On general

grounds this can scarcely be denied. Nevertheless it must be borne in

mind that exact reports of analytic case histories are of less value than

might be expected. Strictly speaking, they only possess the ostensible

exactness  of  which  ‘modern’  psychiatry  affords  us  some  striking

examples. They are, as a rule, fatiguing to the reader and yet do not

succeed in being a substitute for his actual presence at an analysis.

Experience invariably shows that if readers are willing to believe an

analyst they will have confidence in any slight revision to which he has

submitted his material; if, on the other hand, they are unwilling to take

analysis  and  the  analyst  seriously,  they  will  pay  no  attention  to

accurate verbatim records of the treatment either. This is not the way,

it seems, to remedy the lack of convincing evidence to be found in

psycho-analytic reports.

 

   (d) One of the claims of psycho-analysis to distinction is, no doubt,

that in its execution research and treatment coincide; nevertheless,

after a certain point, the technique required for the one opposes that

required  for  the  other.  It  is  not  a  good  thing  to  work  on  a  case

scientifically while treatment is still proceeding - to piece together its

structure, to try to foretell its further progress, and to get a picture from

time to time of the current state of affairs, as scientific interest would

demand. Cases which are devoted from the first to scientific purposes

and are treated accordingly suffer in their outcome; while the most

successful cases are those in which one proceeds, as it were, without

any purpose in view, allows oneself to be taken by surprise by anynew turn in them, and always meets them with an open mind, free

from any presuppositions. The correct behaviour for an analyst lies in

swinging over according to need from the one mental attitude to the

other, in avoiding speculation or brooding over cases while they are in

analysis,  and  in  submitting  the  material  obtained  to  a  synthetic

process of thought only after the analysis is concluded. The distinction

between  the  two  attitudes  would  be  meaningless  if  we  already

possessed  all  the  knowledge  (or  at  least  the  essential  knowledge)

about the psychology of the unconscious and about the structure of

the neuroses that we can obtain from psycho-analytic work. At present

we are still far from that goal and we ought not to cut ourselves off

from  the  possibility  of  testing  what  we  have  already  learnt  and  of

extending our knowledge further.

 


        Recommendations To Physicians Practising Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2470

 

 

   (e) I cannot advise my colleagues too urgently to model themselves

during psycho-analytic treatment on the surgeon, who puts aside all

his feelings, even his human sympathy, and concentrates his mental

forces on the simple aim of performing the operation as skilfully as

possible.  Under  present-day  conditions  the  feeling  that  is  most

dangerous to a psycho-analyst is the therapeutic ambition to achieve

by this novel and much disputed method something that will produce a

convincing effect upon other people. This will not only put him into a

state of mind which is unfavourable for his work, but will make him

helpless against certain resistances of the patient, whose recovery, as

we  know,  primarily  depends  on  the  interplay  of  forces  in  him.  The

justification for requiring this emotional coldness in the analyst is that it

creates  the  most  advantageous  conditions  for  both  parties:  for  the

doctor  a  desirable  protection  for  his  own  emotional  life  and  for  the

patient  the  largest  amount  of  help  that  we  can  give  him  to-day.  A

surgeon of earlier times took as his motto the words: ‘Je le pansai,

Dieu le guérit.’¹ The analyst should be content with something similar.

    (f) It is easy to see upon what aim the different rules I have brought

forward  converge.  They  are  all  intended  to  create  for  the  doctor  a

counterpart to the ‘fundamental rule of psycho-analysis’ which is laid

down for the patient. Just as the patient must relate everything that his

self-observation can detect, and keep back all the logical and affective

objections that seek to induce him to make a selection from among

them,  so  the  doctor  must  put  himself  in  a  position  to  make  use  of

everything  he  is  told  for  the  purposes  of  interpretation  and  of

recognizing the concealed unconscious material without substituting a

censorship of his own for the selection that the patient has forgone. To

put it in a formula: he must turn his own unconscious like a receptive

organ towards the transmitting unconscious of the patient. He must

adjust himself to the patient as a telephone receiver is adjusted to the

transmitting  microphone.  Just  as  the  receiver  converts  back  into

sound waves the electric oscillations in the telephone line which were

set up by sound waves, so the doctor’s unconscious is able, from the

derivatives  of  the  unconscious  which  are  communicated  to  him,  to

reconstruct that unconscious, which has determined the patient’s free

associations.

 

   ¹ [‘I dressed his wounds, God cured him.’]

 


        Recommendations To Physicians Practising Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2471

 

   But if the doctor is to be in a position to use his unconscious in this

way  as  an  instrument  in  the  analysis,  he  must  himself  fulfil  one

psychological  condition  to  a  high  degree.  He  may  not  tolerate  any

resistances in himself which hold back from his consciousness what

has been perceived by his unconscious; otherwise he would introduce

into the analysis a new species of selection and distortion which would

be  far  more  detrimental  than  that  resulting  from  concentration  of

conscious attention. It is not enough for this that he himself should be

an approximately normal person. It may be insisted, rather, that he

should  have  undergone  a  psycho-analytic  purification  and  have

become aware of those complexes of his own which would be apt to

interfere with his grasp of what the patient tells him. There can be noreasonable doubt about the disqualifying effect of such defects in the

doctor; every unresolved repression in him constitutes what has been

aptly described by Stekel as a ‘blind spot’ in his analytic perception.

   Some years ago I gave as an answer to the question of how one

can  become  an  analyst:  ‘By  analysing  one’s  own  dreams.’  This

preparation is no doubt enough for many people, but not for everyone

who  wishes  to  learn  analysis.  Nor  can  everyone  succeed  in

interpreting his own dreams without outside help. I count it as one of

the many merits of the Zurich school of analysis that they have laid

increased emphasis on this requirement, and have embodied it in the

demand  that  everyone  who  wishes  to  carry  out  analyses  on  other

people shall first himself undergo an analysis by someone with expert

knowledge. Anyone who takes up the work seriously should choose

this  course,  which  offers  more  than  one  advantage;  the  sacrifice

involved in laying oneself open to another person without being driven

to it by illness is amply rewarded. Not only is one’s aim of learning to

know what is hidden in one’s own mind far more rapidly attained and

with less expense of affect, but impressions and convictions will be

gained in relation to oneself which will be sought in vain from studying

books and attending lectures. And lastly, we must not under-estimate

the advantage to be derived from the lasting mental contact that is as

a rule established between the student and his guide.

   An analysis such as this of someone who is practically healthy will,

as may be imagined, remain incomplete. Anyone who can appreciate

the high value of the self-knowledge and increase in self-control thus

acquired will, when it is over, continue the analytic examination of his

personality in the form of a self-analysis, and be content to realize

that, within himself as well as in the external world, he must always

expect to find something new. But anyone who has scorned to take

the precaution of being analysed himself will not merely be punished

by being incapable of learning more than a certain amount from his

patients,  he  will  risk  a  more  serious  danger  and  one  which  may

become a danger to others. He will easily fall into the temptation of

projecting outwards some of the peculiarities of his own personality,

which he has dimly perceived, into the field of science, as a theory

having universal validity; he will bring the psycho-analytic method into

discredit, and lead the inexperienced astray. 


        Recommendations To Physicians Practising Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2472

 

 

   (g) I shall now add a few other rules, that will serve as a transition

from the attitude of the doctor to the treatment of the patient.

   Young and eager psycho-analysts will no doubt be tempted to bring

their own individuality freely into the discussion, in order to carry the

patient along with them and lift him over the barriers of his own narrow

personality. It might be expected that it would be quite allowable and

indeed  useful,  with  a  view  to  overcoming  the  patient’s  existing

resistances, for the doctor to afford him a glimpse of his own mental

defects and conflicts and, by giving him intimate information about his

own  life,  enable  him  to  put  himself  on  an  equal  footing.  One

confidence  deserves  another,  and  anyone  who  demands  intimacy

from someone else must be prepared to give it in return.

   But in psycho-analytic relations things often happen differently from

what  the  psychology  of  consciousness  might  lead  us  to  expect.

Experience does not speak in favour of an affective technique of this

kind. Nor is it hard to see that it involves a departure from psycho-

analytic principles and verges upon treatment by suggestion. It may

induce  the  patient  to  bring  forward  sooner  and  with  less  difficulty

things he already knows but would otherwise have kept back for a

time  through  conventional  resistances.  But  this  technique  achieves

nothing towards the uncovering of what is unconscious to the patient.

It  makes  him  even  more  incapable  of  overcoming  his  deeper

resistances, and in severer cases it invariably fails by encouraging the

patient  to  be  insatiable:  he  would  like  to  reverse  the  situation,  and

finds the analysis of the doctor more interesting than his own. The

resolution  of  the  transference,  too  -  one  of  the  main  tasks  of  the

treatment  -  is  made  more  difficult  by  an  intimate  attitude  on  the

doctor’s part, so that any gain there may be at the beginning is more

than  outweighed  at  the  end.  I  have  no  hesitation,  therefore,  in

condemning this kind of technique as incorrect. The doctor should be

opaque to his patients and, like a mirror, should show them nothingbut what is shown to him. In practice, it is true, there is nothing to be

said against a psychotherapist combining a certain amount of analysis

with some suggestive influence in order to achieve a perceptible result

in a shorter time - as is necessary, for instance, in institutions. But one

has a right to insist that he himself should be in no doubt about what

he  is  doing  and  should  know  that  his  method  is  not  that  of  true

psycho-analysis.

 


        Recommendations To Physicians Practising Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2473

 

 

   (h) Another temptation arises out of the educative activity which, in

psycho-analytic  treatment,  devolves  on  the  doctor  without  any

deliberate intention on his part. When the developmental inhibitions

are  resolved,  it  happens  of  itself  that  the  doctor  finds  himself  in  a

position to indicate new aims for the trends that have been liberated. It

is then no more than a natural ambition if he endeavours to make

something specially excellent of a person whom he has been at such

pains to free from his neurosis and if he prescribes high aims for his

wishes. But here again the doctor should hold himself in check, and

take the patient’s capacities rather than his own desires as guide. Not

every neurotic has a high talent for sublimation; one can assume of

many  of  them  that  they  would  not  have  fallen  ill  at  all  if  they  had

possessed  the  art  of  sublimating  their  instincts.  If  we  press  them

unduly towards sublimation and cut them off from the most accessible

and  convenient  instinctual  satisfactions,  we  shall  usually  make  life

even harder for them than they feel it in any case. As a doctor, one

must above all be tolerant to the weakness of a patient, and must be

content if one has won back some degree of capacity for work and

enjoyment  for  a  person  even  of  only  moderate  worth.  Educative

ambition is of as little use as therapeutic ambition. It must further be

borne in mind that many people fall ill precisely from an attempt to

sublimate  their  instincts  beyond  the  degree  permitted  by  their

organization and that in those who have a capacity for sublimation the

process usually takes place of itself as soon as their inhibitions havebeen overcome by analysis. In my opinion, therefore, efforts invariably

to make use of the analytic treatment to bring about sublimation of

instinct are, though no doubt always laudable, far from being in every

case advisable.

 


        Recommendations To Physicians Practising Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2474

 

 

   (i) To what extent should the patient’s intellectual co-operation be

sought for in the treatment?  It is difficult to say anything of general

applicability on this point: the patient’s personality is the determining

factor. But in any case caution and self-restraint must be observed in

this connection. It is wrong to set a patient tasks, such as collecting

his memories or thinking over some particular period of his life. On the

contrary,  he  has  to  learn  above  all  -  what  never  comes  easily  to

anyone  -  that  mental  activities  such  as  thinking  something  over  or

concentrating the attention solve none of the riddles of a neurosis; that

can only be done by patiently obeying the psycho-analytic rule, which

enjoins  the  exclusion  of  all  criticism  of  the  unconscious  or  of  its

derivatives.  One  must  be  especially  unyielding  about  obedience  to

that  rule  with  patients  who  practise  the  art  of  sheering  off  into

intellectual discussion during their treatment, who speculate a great

deal and often very wisely about their condition and in that way avoid

doing anything to overcome it. For this reason I dislike making use of

analytic writings as an assistance to my patients; I require them to

learn by personal experience, and I assure them that they will acquire

wider  and  more  valuable  knowledge  than  the  whole  literature  of

psycho-analysis could teach them. I recognize, however, that under

institutional conditions it may be of great advantage to employ reading

as a preparation for patients in analysis and as a means of creating an

atmosphere of influence.

   I must give a most earnest warning against any attempt to gain the

confidence or support of parents or relatives by giving them psycho-

analytic  books  to  read,  whether  of  an  introductory  or  an  advanced

kind.  This  well-meant  step  usually  has  the  effect  of  bringing  onprematurely the natural opposition of the relatives to the treatment - an

opposition  which  is  bound  to  appear  sooner  or  later  -  so  that  the

treatment is never ever begun.

 

   Let me express a hope that the increasing experience of psycho-

analysts will soon lead to agreement on questions of technique and on

the most effective method of treating neurotic patients. As regards the

treatment of their relatives I must confess myself utterly at a loss, and

I have in general little faith in any individual treatment of them.

                                                                                       2475

 

                      ON BEGINNING THE TREATMENT

  (FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS I)

                                        (1913)

 


                                                                                      2476

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2477

 

                      ON BEGINNING THE TREATMENT

  (FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS I)

 

Anyone who hopes to learn the noble game of chess from book will

soon  discover  that  only  the  openings  and  end-games  admit  of  an

exhaustive  systematic  presentation  and  that  the  infinite  variety  of

moves  which  develop  after  the  opening  defy  any  such  description.

This gap in instruction can only be filled by a diligent study of games

fought  out  by  masters.  The  rules  which  can  be  laid  down  for  the

practice of psycho-analytic treatment are subject to similar limitations.

   In what follows I shall endeavour to collect together for the use of

practising  analysts  some  of  the  rules  for  the  beginning  of  the

treatment. Among them there are some which may seem to be petty

details, as, indeed, they are. Their justification is that they are simply

rules of the game which acquire their importance from their relation to

the general plan of the game. I think I am well-advised, however, to

call these rules ‘recommendations’ and not to claim any unconditional

acceptance  for  them.  The  extraordinary  diversity  of  the  psychical

constellations concerned, the plasticity of all mental processes and the

wealth  of  determining  factors  oppose  any  mechanization  of  the

technique; and they bring it about that a course of action that is as a

rule justified may at times prove ineffective, whilst one that is usually

mistaken  may  once  in  a  while  lead  to  the  desired  end.  Thesecircumstances,  however,  do  not  prevent  us  from  laying  down  a

procedure for the physician which is effective on the average.

 

   Some years ago I set out the most important indications for selecting

patients¹ and I shall therefore not repeat them here. They have in the

meantime been approved by other psycho-analysts. But I may add

that since then I have made it my habit, when I know little about a

patient, only to take him on at first provisionally, for a period of one to

two weeks. If one breaks off within this period one spares the patient

the  distressing  impression  of  an  attempted  cure  having  failed.  One

has only been undertaking a ‘sounding’ in order to get to know the

case and to decide whether it is a suitable one for psycho-analysis. No

other  kind  of  preliminary  examination  but  this  procedure  is  at  our

disposal; the most lengthy discussions and questionings in ordinary

consultations would offer no substitute. This preliminary experiment,

however,  is  itself  the  beginning  of  a  psycho-analysis  and  must

conform to its rules. There may perhaps be this distinction made, that

in it one lets the patient do nearly all the talking and explains nothing

more than what is absolutely necessary to get him to go on with what

he is saying.

 

   ¹ ‘On Psychotherapy’ (1905a).

 


                            On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2478

 

   There are also diagnostic reasons for beginning the treatment with a

trial period of this sort lasting for one or two weeks. Often enough,

when one sees a neurosis with hysterical or obsessional symptoms,

which is not excessively marked and has not been in existence for

long - just the type of case, that is, that one would regard as suitable

for treatment - one has to, reckon with the possibility that it may be a

preliminary  stage  of  what  is  known  as  dementia  praecox

(‘schizophrenia’,  in  Bleuler’s  terminology;  ‘paraphrenia’,  as  I  have

proposed to call it), and that sooner or later it will show a well-marked

picture of that affection. I do not agree that it is always possible to

make the distinction so easily. I am aware that there are psychiatristswho  hesitate  less  often  in  their  differential  diagnosis,  but  I  have

become convinced that just as often they make mistakes. To make a

mistake, moreover, is of far greater moment for the psycho-analyst

than it is for the clinical psychiatrist, as he is called. For the latter is not

attempting to do anything that will be of use, whichever kind of case it

may be. He merely runs the risk of making a theoretical mistake, and

his diagnosis is of no more than academic interest. Where the psycho-

analyst  is  concerned,  however,  if  the  case  is  unfavourable  he  has

committed  a  practical  error;  he  has  been  responsible  for  wasted

expenditure and has discredited his method of treatment. He cannot

fulfil his promise of cure if the patient is suffering, not from hysteria or

obsessional  neurosis,  but  from  paraphrenia,  and  he  therefore  has

particularly strong motives for avoiding mistakes in diagnosis. In an

experimental  treatment  of  a  few  weeks  he  will  often  observe

suspicious signs which may determine him not to pursue the attempt

any further. Unfortunately I cannot assert that an attempt of this kind

always enables us to arrive at a certain decision; it is only one wise

precaution the more.¹

 

   ¹ There is a great deal to be said about this uncertainty in diagnosis, about the prospects of

success  in  analysing  mild  forms  of  paraphrenia  and  about  the  reasons  for  the  similarity
between the two disorders; but I cannot enlarge on these subjects in the present context. I
should  be  glad  to  follow  Jung  in  contrasting  hysteria  and  obsessional  neurosis  as
‘transference neuroses’ with the paraphrenic affections as ‘introversion neuroses’, if it were
not that such a usage would deprive the concept of ‘introversion’ (of the libido) of its sole
legitimate meaning.
 


                            On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2479

 

 

   Lengthy preliminary discussions before the beginning of the analytic

treatment, previous treatment by another method and also previous

acquaintance  between  the  doctor  and  the  patient  who  is  to  be

analysed, have special disadvantageous consequences for which one

must be prepared. They result in the patient’s meeting the doctor with

a  transference  attitude  which  is  already  established  and  which  the

doctor must first slowly uncover instead of having the opportunity toobserve  the  growth  and  development  of  the  transference  from  the

outset. In this way the patient gains a temporary start upon us which

we do not willingly grant him in the treatment.

      One  must  mistrust  all  prospective  patients  who  want  to  make  a

delay before beginning their treatment. Experience show that when

the time agreed upon has arrived they fail to put in an appearance,

even though the motive for the delay - i.e. their rationalization of their

intention - seems to the uninitiated to be above suspicion.

   Special difficulties arise when the analyst and his new patient or

their families are on terms of friendship or have social ties with one

another. The psycho-analyst who is asked to undertake the treatment

of the wife or child of a friend must be prepared for it to cost him that

friendship,  no  matter  what  the  outcome  of  the  treatment  may  be:

nevertheless he must make the sacrifice if he cannot find a trustworthy

substitute.

 

   Both lay public and doctors - still ready to confuse psycho-analysis

with  treatment  by  suggestion  -  are  inclined  to  attribute  great

importance to the expectations which the patient brings to the new

treatment. They often believe in the case of one patient that he will not

give  much  trouble,  because  he  has  great  confidence  in  psycho-

analysis and is fully convinced of its truth and efficacy; whereas in the

case  of  another,  they  think  that  he  will  undoubtedly  prove  more

difficult,  because  he  has  a  sceptical  outlook  and  will  not  believe

anything until he has experienced its successful results on his own

person. Actually, however, this attitude on the part of the patient has

very little importance. His initial trust or distrust is almost negligible

compared with the internal resistances which hold the neurosis firmly

in  place.  It  is  true  that  the  patient’s  happy  trustfulness  makes  our

earliest relationship with him a very pleasant one; we are grateful to

him for that, but we warn him that his favourable prepossession will be

shattered  by  the  first  difficulty  that  arises  in  the  analysis.  To  the

sceptic we say that the analysis requires no faith, that he may be as

critical and suspicious as he pleases and that we do not regard his

attitude as the effect of his judgement at all, for he is not in a position

to form a reliable judgement on these matters; his distrust is only a

symptom like his other symptoms and it will not be an interference,provided he conscientiously carries out what the rule of the treatment

requires of him.

   No one who is familiar with the nature of neurosis will be astonished

to hear that even a man who is very well able to carry out an analysis

on other people can behave like any other mortal and be capable of

producing  the  most  intense  resistances  as  soon  as  he  himself

becomes the object of analytic investigation. When this happens we

are once again reminded of the dimension of depth in the mind, and it

does not surprise us to find that the neurosis has its roots in psychical

strata  to  which  an  intellectual  knowledge  of  analysis  has  not

penetrated.

 


                            On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2480

 

 

      Points  of  importance  at  the  beginning  of  the  analysis  are

arrangements about time and money.

   In regard to time, I adhere strictly to the principle of leasing a definite

hour. Each patient is allotted a particular hour of my available working

day; it belongs to him and he is liable for it, even if he does not make

use of it. This arrangement, which is taken as a matter of course for

teachers of music or languages in good society, may perhaps seem

too rigorous in a doctor, or even unworthy of his profession. There will

be an inclination to point to the many accidents which may prevent the

patient  from  attending  every  day  at  the  same  hour  and  it  will  be

expected  that  some  allowance  shall  be  made  for  the  numerous

intercurrent  ailments  which  may  occur  in  the  course  of  a  longish

analytic  treatment.  But  my  answer  is:  no  other  way  is  practicable.

Under  a  less  stringent  régime  the  ‘occasional’  non-attendances

increase  so  greatly  that  the  doctor  finds  his  material  existence

threatened; whereas when the arrangement is adhered to, it turns out

that accidental hindrances do not occur at all and intercurrent illnesses

only  very  seldom.  The  analyst  is  hardly  ever  put  in  the  position  of

enjoying a leisure hour which he is paid for and would be ashamed of;

and he can continue his work without interruptions, and is spared thedistressing  and  bewildering  experience  of  finding  that  a  break  for

which he cannot blame himself is always bound to happen just when

the  work  promises  to  be  especially  important  and  rich  in  content.

Nothing  brings  home  to  one  so  strongly  the  significance  of  the

psychogenic  factor  in  the  daily  life  of  men,  the  frequency  of

malingering and the non-existent of chance, as a few years’ practice

of  psycho-analysis  on  the  strict  principle  of  leasing  by  the  hour.  In

cases  of  undoubted  organic  illnesses,  which,  after  all,  cannot  be

excluded by the patient’s having a psychical interest in attending, I

break off the treatment, consider myself entitled to dispose elsewhere

of the hour which becomes free, and take the patient back again as

soon as he has recovered and I have another hour vacant.

   I work with my patients every day except on Sundays and public

holidays - that is, as a rule, six days a week. For slight cases or the

continuation of a treatment which is already well advanced, three days

a week will be enough. Any restrictions of time beyond this bring no

advantage either to the doctor or the patient; and at the beginning of

an analysis they are quite out of the question. Even short interruptions

have  a  slightly,  obscuring  effect  on  the  work.  We  used  to  speak

jokingly of the ‘Monday crust’ when we began work again after the rest

on Sunday. When the hours of work are less frequent, there is a risk

of not being able to keep pace with the patient’s real life and of the

treatment losing contact with the present and being forced into by-

paths.  Occasionally,  too,  one  comes  across  patients  to  whom  one

must give more than the average time of one hour a day, because the

best  part  of  an  hour  is  gone  before  they  begin  to  open  up  and  to

become communicative at all.

 


                            On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2481

 

   An unwelcome question which the patient asks the doctor at the

outset is: ‘How long will the treatment take? How much time will you

need  to  relieve  me  of  my  trouble?’  If  one  has  proposed  a  trial

treatment of a few weeks one can avoid giving a direct answer to this

question by promising to make a more reliable pronouncement at theend of the trial period. Our answer is like the answer given by the

Philosopher  to  the  Wayfarer  in  Aesop’s  fable.  When  the  Wayfarer

asked  how  long  a  journey  lay  ahead,  the  Philosopher  merely

answered ‘Walk!’ and afterwards explained his apparently unhelpful

reply on the ground that he must know the length of the Wayfarer’s

stride  before  he  could  tell  how  long  his  journey  would  take.  This

expedient helps one over the first difficulties; but the comparison is not

a good one, for the neurotic can easily alter his pace and may at times

make only very slow progress. In point of fact, the question as to the

probable duration of a treatment is almost unanswerable.

   As the combined result of lack of insight on the part of patients and

disingenuousness on the part of doctors, analysis finds itself expected

to fulfil the most boundless demands, and that in the shortest time. Let

me, as an example, give some details from a letter which I received a

few days ago from a lady in Russia. She is 53 years old, her illness

began twenty-three years ago and for the last ten years she has no

longer been able to do any continuous work. ‘Treatment in a number

of institutions for nervous cases’ have not succeeded in making an

‘active  life’  possible  for  her.  She  hopes  to  be  completely  cured  by

psycho-analysis,  which  she  has  read  about,  but  her  illness  has

already cost her family so much money that she cannot manage to

come  to  Vienna  for  longer  than  six  weeks  or  two  months.  Another

added  difficulty  is  that  she  wishes  from  the  very  start  to  ‘explain’

herself in writing only, since any discussion of her complexes would

cause an explosion of feeling in her or ‘render her temporarily unable

to speak’. - No one would expect a man to lift a heavy table with two

fingers as if it were a light stool, or to build a large house in the time it

would  take  to  put  up  a  wooden  hut;  but  as  soon  as  it  becomes  a

question of the neuroses - which do not seem so far to have found a

proper place in human thought - even intelligent people forget that a

necessary  proportion  must  be  observed  between  time,  work  and

success. This, incidentally, is an understandable result of the deep

ignorance which prevails about the aetiology of the neuroses. Thanks

to this ignorance, neurosis is looked or as a kind of ‘maiden from afar’.

‘None knew whence she came’; so they expected that one day she

would vanish.

                             On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2482

 

   Doctors lend support to these fond hopes. Even the informed among

them often fail to estimate properly the severity of nervous disorders.

A friend and colleague of mine, to whose great credit I account it that

after several decades of scientific work on other principles he became

converted to the merits of psycho-analysis, once wrote to me: ‘What

we need is a short, convenient, out-patient treatment for obsessional

neurosis.’ I could not supply him with it and felt ashamed; so I tried to

excuse myself with the remark that specialists in internal diseases,

too, would probably be very glad of a treatment for tuberculosis or

carcinoma which combined these advantages.

   To speak more plainly, psycho-analysis is always a matter of long

periods of time, of half a year or whole years - of longer periods than

the  patient  expects.  It  is  therefore  our  duty  to  tell  the  patient  this

before he finally decides upon the treatment. I consider it altogether

more honourable, and also more expedient, to draw his attention -

without trying to frighten him off, but at the very beginning - to the

difficulties and sacrifices which analytic treatment involves, and in this

way  to  deprive  him  of  any  right  to  say  later  on  that  he  has  been

inveigled into a treatment whose extent and implications he did not

realize. A patient who lets himself be dissuaded by this information

would in any case have shown himself unsuitable later on. It is a good

thing to institute a selection of this kind before the beginning of the

treatment.  With  the  progress  of  understanding  among  patients  the

number of those who successfully meet this first test increases.

   I do not bind patients to continue the treatment for a certain length of

time; I allow each one to break off whenever he likes. But I do not hide

it from him that if the treatment is stopped after only a small amount of

work has been done it will not be successful and may easily, like an

unfinished operation, leave him in an unsatisfactory state. In the early

years  of  my  psycho-analytic  practice  I  used  to  have  the  greatest

difficulty in prevailing on my patients to continue their analysis. This

difficulty  has  long  since  been  shifted,  and  I  now  have  to  take  the

greatest pains to induce them to give it up.

                             On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2483

 

   To shorten analytic treatment is a justifiable wish, and its fulfilment,

as  we  shall  learn,  is  being  attempted  along  various  lines.

Unfortunately, it is opposed by a very important factor, namely, the

slowness  with  which  deep-going  changes  in  the  mind  are

accomplished - in the last resort, no doubt, the ‘timelessness’ of our

unconscious processes. When patients are faced with the difficulty of

the  great  expenditure  of  time  required  for  analysis  they  not

infrequently manage to propose a way out of it. They divide up their

ailments and describe some as unbearable, and others as secondary,

and then say: ‘If only you will relieve me from this one (for instance, a

headache or a particular fear) I can deal with the other one on my own

in  my  ordinary  life.’  In  doing  this,  however,  they  over-estimate  the

selective power of analysis. The analyst is certainly able to do a great

deal, but he cannot determine beforehand exactly what results he will

effect. He sets in motion a process, that of the resolving of existing

repressions.  He  can  supervise  this  process,  further  it,  remove

obstacles in its way, and he can undoubtedly vitiate much of it. But on

the whole, once begun, it goes its own way and does not allow either

the direction it takes or the order in which it picks up its points to be

prescribed  for  it.  The  analyst’s  power  over  the  symptoms  of  the

disease may thus be compared to male sexual potency. A man can, it

is true, beget a whole child, but even the strongest man cannot create

in the female organism a head alone or an arm or a leg; he cannot

even prescribe the child’s sex. He, too, only sets in motion a highly

complicated process, determined by events in the remote past, which

ends with the severance of the child from its mother. A neurosis as

well has the character of an organism. Its component manifestations

are not independent of one another; they condition one another and

give one another mutual support. A person suffers from one neurosis

only, never from several which have accidentally met together in a

single individual. The patient freed, according to his wish, from his one

unendurable  symptom  might  easily  find  that  a  symptom  which  had

previously  been  negligible  had  now  increased  and  grown

unendurable.  The  analyst  who  wishes  the  treatment  to  owe  itssuccess as little as possible to its elements of suggestion (i.e. to the

transference) will do well to refrain from making use of even the trace

of  selective  influence  upon  the  results  of  the  therapy  which  may

perhaps  be  open  to  him.  The  patients  who  are  bound  to  be  most

welcome to him are those who ask him to give them complete health,

in  so  far  as  that  is  attainable,  and  who  place  as  much  time  at  his

disposal as is necessary for the process of recovery. Such favourable

conditions  as  these  are,  of  course,  to  be  looked  for  in  only  a  few

cases.

 


                            On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2484

 

 

      The  next  point  that  must  be  decided  at  the  beginning  of  the

treatment is the one of money, of the doctor’s fee. An analyst does not

dispute that money is to be regarded in the first instance as a medium

for self-preservation and for obtaining power; but he maintains that,

besides  this,  powerful  sexual  factors  are  involved  in  the  value  set

upon it. He can point out the money matters are treated by civilized

people  in  the  same  way  as  sexual  matters  -  with  the  same

inconsistency,  prudishness  and  hypocrisy.  The  analyst  is  therefore

determined  from  the  first  not  to  fall  in  with  this  attitude,  but,  in  his

dealings with his patients, to treat of money matters with the same

matter-of-course  frankness  to  which  he  wishes  to  educate  them  in

things relating to sexual life. He shows them that he himself has cast

off false shame on these topics, by voluntarily telling them the price at

which  he  values  his  time.  Ordinary  good  sense  cautions  him,

furthermore, not to allow large sums of money to accumulate, but to

ask for payment at fairly short regular intervals - monthly, perhaps. (It

is a familiar fact that the value of the treatment is not enhanced in the

patient’s eyes if a very low fee is asked.) This is, of course, not the

usual practice of nerve specialists or other physicians in our European

society. But the psycho-analyst may put himself in the position of a

surgeon, who is frank and expensive because he has at his disposal

methods  of  treatment  which  can  be  of  use.  It  seems  to  me  morerespectable  and  ethically  less  objectionable  to  acknowledge  one’s

actual  claims  and  needs  rather  than,  as  is  still  the  practice  among

physicians,  to  act  the  part  of  the  disinterested  philanthropist  -  a

position which one is not, in fact, able to fill, with the result that one is

secretly aggrieved, or complains aloud, at the lack of consideration

and the desire for exploitation evinced by one’s patients. In fixing his

fee the analyst must also allow for the fact that, hard as he may work,

he can never earn as much as other medical specialists.

 


                            On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2485

 

   For the same reason he should also refrain from giving treatment

free, and make no exceptions to this in favour of his colleagues or

their families. This last recommendation will seem to offend against

professional  amenities.  It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  a

gratuitous treatment means much more to a psycho-analyst than to

any  other  medical  man;  it  means  the  sacrifice  of  a  considerable

portion - an eighth or a seventh part, perhaps - of the working time

available to him for earning his living, over a period of many months. A

second  free  treatment  carried  on  at  the  same  time  would  already

deprive him of a quarter or a third of his earning capacity, and this

would be comparable to the damage inflicted by a severe accident.

      The  question  then  arises  whether  the  advantage  gained  by  the

patient would not to some extent counterbalance the sacrifice made

by the physician. I may venture to form a judgement about this, since

for ten years or so I set aside one hour a day, and sometimes two, for

gratuitous treatments, because I wanted, in order to find my way about

in the neuroses, to work in the face of as little resistance as possible.

The advantages I sought by this means were not forthcoming. Free

treatment enormously increases some of a neurotic’s resistances - in

young women, for instance, the temptation which is inherent in their

transference-relation,  and  in  young  men,  their  opposition  to  an

obligation to feel grateful, an opposition which arises from their father-

complex and which presents one of the most troublesome hindrances

to  the  acceptance  of  medical  help.  The  absence  of  the  regulatingeffect offered by the payment of a fee to the doctor makes itself very

painfully felt; the whole relationship is removed from the real world,

and  the  patient  is  deprived  of  a  strong  motive  for  endeavouring  to

bring the treatment to an end.

 


                            On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2486

 

   One may be very far from the ascetic view of money as a curse and

yet regret that analytic therapy is almost inaccessible to poor people,

both for external and internal reasons. Little can be done to remedy

this. Perhaps there is truth in the widespread belief that those who are

forced by necessity to a life of hard toil are less easily overtaken by

neurosis. But on the other hand experience shows without a doubt

that when once a poor man has produced a neurosis it is only with

difficulty that he lets it be taken from him. It renders him too good a

service in the struggle for existence; the secondary gain from illness

which it brings him is much too important. He now claims by right of

his  neurosis  the  pity  which  the  world  has  refused  to  his  material

distress,  and  he  can  now  absolve  himself  from  the  obligation  of

combating his poverty by working. Anyone therefore who tries to deal

with the neurosis of a poor person by psychotherapy usually discovers

that  what  is  here  required  of  him  is  a  practical  therapy  of  a  very

different kind - the kind which, according to our local tradition, used to

be  dispensed  by  the  Emperor  Joseph  II.  Naturally,  one  does

occasionally come across deserving people who are helpless from no

fault of their own, in whom unpaid treatment does not meet with any of

the obstacles that I have mentioned and in whom it leads to excellent

results.

   As far as the middle classes are concerned, the expense involved in

psycho-analysis is excessive only in appearance. Quite apart from the

fact  that  no  comparison  is  possible  between  restored  health  and

efficiency  on  the  one  hand  and  a  moderate  financial  outlay  on  the

other, when we add up the unceasing costs of nursing-homes and

medical treatment and contrast them with the increase of efficiency

and  earning  capacity  which  results  from  a  successfully  completedanalysis, we are entitled to say that the patients have made a good

bargain. Nothing in life is so expensive as illness - and stupidity.

 


                            On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2487

 

 

   Before I wind up these remarks on beginning analytic treatment, I

must  say  a  word  about  a  certain  ceremonial  which  concerns  the

position  in  which  the  treatment  is  carried  out.  I  hold  to  the  plan  of

getting the patient to lie on a sofa while I sit behind him out of his

sight. This arrangement has a historical basis; it is the remnant of the

hypnotic  method  out  of  which  psycho-analysis  was  evolved.  But  it

deserves to be maintained for many reasons. The first is a personal

motive, but one which others may share with me. I cannot put up with

being stared at by other people for eight hours a day (or more). Since,

while  I  am  listening  to  the  patient,  I,  too,  give  myself  over  to  the

current of my unconscious thoughts, I do not wish my expressions of

face to give the patient material for interpretations or to influence him

in what he tells me. The patient usually regards being made to adopt

this  position  as  a  hardship  and  rebels  against  it,  especially  if  the

instinct  for  looking  (scopophilia)  plays  an  important  part  in  his

neurosis. I insist on this procedure, however, for its purpose and result

are  to  prevent  the  transference  from  mingling  with  the  patient’s

associations imperceptibly, to isolate the transference and to allow it

to come forward in due course sharply defined as a resistance. I know

that many analysts work in a different way, but I do not know whether

this deviation is due more to a craving for doing things differently or to

some advantage which they find they gain by it.

   The conditions of treatment having been regulated in this manner,

the  question  arises  at  what  point  and  with  what  material  is  the

treatment to begin?

 

   What the material is with which one starts the treatment is on the

whole a matter of indifference - whether it is the patient’s life-history or

the history of his illness or his recollections of childhood. But in anycase the patient must be left to do the talking and must be free to

choose at what point he shall begin. We therefore say to him: ‘Before I

can say anything to you I must know a great deal about you; please

tell me what you know about yourself.’

 


                            On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2488

 

   The only exception to this is in regard to the fundamental rule of

psycho-analytic technique which the patient has to observe. This must

be imparted to him at the very beginning: ‘One more thing before you

start. What you tell me must differ in one respect from an ordinary

conversation.  Ordinarily  you  rightly  try  to  keep  a  connecting  thread

running through your remarks and you exclude any intrusive ideas that

may occur to you and any side-issues, so as not to wander too far

from the point. But in this case you must proceed differently. You will

notice  that  as  you  relate  things  various  thoughts  will  occur  to  you

which you would like to put aside on the ground of certain criticisms

and objections. You will be tempted to say to yourself that this or that

is  irrelevant  here,  or  is  quite  up  important,  or  nonsensical,  so  that

there is no need to say it. You must never give in to these criticisms,

but must say it in spite of them - indeed, you must say it precisely

because you feel an aversion to doing so. Later on you will find out

and learn to understand the reason for this injunction, which is really

the only one you have to follow. So say whatever goes through your

mind. Act as though, for instance, you were a traveller sitting next to

the window of a railway carriage and describing to someone inside the

carriage  the  changing  views  which  you  see  outside.  Finally,  never

forget  that  you  have  promised  to  be  absolutely  honest,  and  never

leave anything out because, for some reason or other, it is unpleasant

to tell it.’¹

 

   ¹ Much might be said about our experiences with the fundamental rule of psycho-analysis.

One  occasionally  comes  across  people  who  behave  as  if  they  had  made  this  rule  for
themselves. Others offend against it from the very beginning. It is indispensable, and also
advantageous,  to  lay  down  the  rule  in  the  first  stages  of  the  treatment.  Later,  under  the
dominance of the resistances, obedience to it weakens, and there comes a time in every
analysis when the patient disregards it. We must remember from our own self-analysis howirresistible the temptation is to yield to these pretexts put forward by critical judgement for
rejecting certain ideas. How small is the effect of such agreements as one makes with the
patient  in  laying  down  the  fundamental  rule  is  regularly  demonstrated  when  something
intimate about a third person comes up in his mind for the first time. He knows that he is
supposed to say everything, but he turns discretion about other people into a new obstacle!
‘Must I really say everything? I thought that only applied to things that concern myself.’ It is
naturally impossible to carry out analysis if the patient’s relations with other people and his
thoughts  about  them  are  excluded. Pour  faire  une  omelette  il  faut  casser  des  oeufs.  An
honourable man readily forgets such of the private affairs of strangers as do not seem to him
important  to  know.  Nor  can  an  exception  be  made  in  the  case  of  names.  Otherwise  the
patient’s narratives became a little shadowy, like the scenes in Goethe’s play Die natürliche
Tochter [The Natural Daughter],  and  do  not  lodge  in  the  doctor’s  memory.  Moreover,  the
names that are withheld screen the approach to all sorts of important connections. But one
may perhaps allow names to be left on one side until the patient has become more familiar
with  the  doctor  and  the  procedure  of  analysis.  It  is  very  remarkable  how  the  whole  task
becomes impossible if a reservation is allowed at any single place. But we have only to reflect
what would happen if the right of asylum existed at any one point in a town; how long would it
be before all the riff-raff of the town had collected there? I once treated a high official who was
bound  by  his  oath  of  office  not  to  communicate  certain  things  because  they  were  state
secrets, and the analysis came to grief as a consequence of this restriction. Psycho-analytic
treatment  must  have  no  regard  for  any  consideration,  because  the  neurosis  and  its
resistances are themselves without any such regard.
 


                            On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2489

 

   Patients who date their illness from a particular moment usually

concentrate  upon  its  precipitating  cause.  Others,  who  themselves

recognize the connection between their neurosis and their childhood,

often begin with an account of their whole life-history. A systematic

narrative should never be expected and nothing should be done to

encourage it. Every detail of the story will have to be told afresh later

on,  and  it  is  only  with  these  repetitions  that  additional  material  will

appear which will supply the important connections that are unknown

to the patient.

   There are patients who from the very first hours carefully prepare

what they are going to communicate, ostensibly so as to be sure of

making better use of the time devoted to the treatment. What is thus

disguising itself as eagerness is resistance. Any preparation of this

sort  should  be  disrecommended,  for  it  is  only  employed  to  guard

against  unwelcome  thoughts  cropping  up.¹  However  genuinely  the

patient may believe in his excellent intentions, the resistance will playits part in this deliberate method of preparation and will see to it that

the most valuable material escapes communication. One will soon find

that the patient devises yet other means by which what is required

may be withheld from the treatment. He may talk over the treatment

every day with some intimate friend, and bring into this discussion all

the thoughts which should come forward in the presence of the doctor.

The treatment thus has a leak which lets through precisely what is

most valuable. When this happens, the patient must, without much

delay, be advised to treat his analysis as a matter between himself

and  his  doctor  and  to  exclude  everyone  else  from  sharing  in  the

knowledge  of  it,  no  matter  how  close  to  him  they  may  be,  or  how

inquisitive. In later stages of the treatment the patient is usually not

subjected to temptations of this sort.

      Certain  patients  want  their  treatment  to  be  kept  secret,  often

because they have kept their neurosis secret; and I put no obstacle in

their way. That in consequence the world hears nothing of some of the

most successful cures is, of course, a consideration that cannot be

taken into account. It is obvious that a patient’s decision in favour of

secrecy already reveals a feature of his secret history.

 

   ¹ Exceptions may be made only for such data as family relationships, times and places of

residence, operations, and so on.
 


                            On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2490

 

   In advising the patient at the beginning of the treatment to tell as few

people as possible about it, we also protect him to some extent from

the many hostile influences that will seem to entice him away from

analysis. Such influences may be very mischievous at the outset of

the  treatment;  later,  they  are  usually  immaterial,  or  even  useful  in

bringing  to  the  fore  resistances  which  are  trying  to  conceal

themselves.

   If during the course of the analysis the patient should temporarily

need some other medical or specialist treatment, it is far wiser to call

in a non-analytic colleague than to give this other treatment oneself.

Combined  treatments  for  neurotic  disorders  which  have  a  powerfulorganic basis are nearly always impracticable. The patients withdraw

their interest from analysis as soon as they are shown more than one

path  that  promises  to  lead  them  to  health.  The  best  plan  is  to

postpone  the  organic  treatment  until  the  psychical  treatment  is

finished; if the former were tried first it would in most cases meet with

no success.

 

   To return to the beginning of the treatment. Patients are occasionally

met with who start the treatment by assuring us that they cannot think

of anything to say, although the whole field of their life-history and the

story of their illness is open to them to choose from. Their request that

we should tell them what to talk about must not be granted on this first

occasion any more than on any later one. We must bear in mind what

is involved here. A strong resistance has come to the front in order to

defend the neurosis; we must take up the challenge then and there

and come to grips with it. Energetic and repeated assurances to the

patient that it is impossible for no ideas at all to occur to him at the

beginning,  and  that  what  is  in  question  is  a  resistance  against  the

analysis,  soon  oblige  him  to  make  the  expected  admissions  or  to

uncover a first piece of his complexes. It is a bad sign if he has to

confess that while he was listening to the fundamental rule of analysis

he made a mental reservation that he would nevertheless keep this or

that  to  himself;  it  is  not  so  serious  if  all  he  has  to  tell  us  is  how

mistrustful he is of analysis or the horrifying things he has heard about

it. If he denies these and similar possibilities when they are put before

him, he can be driven by our insistence to acknowledge that he has

nevertheless overlooked certain thoughts which were occupying his

mind. He had thought of the treatment itself, though nothing definite

about it, or he had been occupied with the picture of the room in which

he was, or he could not help thinking of the objects in the consulting

room and of the fact that he was lying here on a sofa - all of which he

has replaced by the word ‘nothing’. These indications are intelligible

enough: everything connected with the present situation represents a

transference to the doctor, which proves suitable to serve as a first

resistance.  We  are  thus  obliged  to  begin  by  uncovering  this

transference; and a path from it will give rapid access to the patient’s

pathogenic material. Women who are prepared by events in their pasthistory to be subjected to sexual aggression and men with over-strong

repressed homosexuality are the most apt thus to withhold the ideas

that occur to them at the outset of their analysis.

      The  patient’s  first  symptoms  or  chance  actions,  like  his  first

resistance, may possess a special interest and may betray a complex

which governs his neurosis. A clever young philosopher with exquisite

aesthetic  sensibilities  will  hasten  to  put  the  creases  of  his  trousers

straight before lying down for his first hour; he is revealing himself as a

former  coprophilic  of  the  highest  refinement  -  which  was  to  be

expected from the later aesthete. A young girl will at the same juncture

hurriedly pull the hem of her skirt over her exposed ankles; in doing

this she is giving away the gist of what her analysis will uncover later:

her  narcissistic  pride  in  her  physical  beauty  and  her  inclinations  to

exhibitionism.

 


                            On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2491

 

   A particularly large number of patients object to being asked to lie

down, while the doctor sits out of sight behind them. They ask to be

allowed to go through the treatment in some other position, for the

most part because they are anxious not to be deprived of a view of the

doctor. Permission is regularly refused, but one cannot prevent them

from contriving to say a few sentences before the beginning of the

actual ‘session’ or after one has signified that it is finished and they

have got up from the sofa. In this way they divide the treatment in their

own view into an official portion, in which they mostly behave in a very

inhibited  manner,  and  an  informal  ‘friendly’  portion,  in  which  they

speak really freely and say all sorts of things which they themselves

do  not  regard  as  being  part  of  the  treatment.  The  doctor  does  not

accept this division for long. He takes note of what is said before or

after the session and he brings it forward at the first opportunity, thus

pulling down the partition which the patient has tried to erect. This

partition, once again, will have been put together from the material of

a transference-resistance.

   So long as the patient’s communications and ideas run on withoutany obstruction, the theme of transference should be left untouched.

One must wait until the transference, which is the most delicate of all

procedures, has become a resistance.

 

      The  next  question  with  which  we  are  faced  raises  a  matter  of

principle. It is this: When are we to begin making our communications

to the patient? When is the moment for disclosing to him the hidden

meaning of the ideas that occur to him, and for initiating him into the

postulates and technical procedures of analysis?

   The answer to this can only be: Not until an effective transference

has  been  established  in  the  patient,  a  proper rapport  with  him.  It

remains the first aim of the treatment to attach him to it and to the

person of the doctor. To ensure this, nothing need be done but to give

him time. If one exhibits a serious interest in him, carefully clears away

the  resistances  that  crop  up  at  the  beginning  and  avoids  making

certain mistakes, he will of himself form such an attachment and link

the doctor up with one of the imagos of the people by whom he was

accustomed  to  be  treated  with  affection.  It  is  certainly  possible  to

forfeit this first success if from the start one takes up any standpoint

other than one of sympathetic understanding, such as a moralizing

one, or if one behaves like a representative or contending party - of

the other member of a married couple, for instance.

 


                            On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2492

 

      This  answer  of  course  involves  a  condemnation  of  any  line  of

behaviour which would lead us to give the patient a translation of his

symptoms as soon as we have guessed it ourselves, or would even

lead us to regard it as a special triumph to fling these ‘solutions’ in his

face at the first interview. It is not difficult for a skilled analyst to read

the patient’s secret wishes plainly between the lines of his complaints

and the story of his illness; but what a measure of self-complacency

and thoughtlessness must be possessed by anyone who can, on the

shortest acquaintance, inform a stranger who is entirely ignorant of all

the tenets of analysis that he is attached to his mother by incestuousties,  that  he  harbours  wishes  for  the  death  of  his  wife  whom  he

appears  to  love,  that  he  conceals  an  intention  of  betraying  his

superior, and so on! I have heard that there are analysts who plume

themselves  upon  these  kinds  of  lightning  diagnoses  and  ‘express’

treatments,  but  I  must  warn  everyone  against  following  such

examples. Behaviour of this sort will completely discredit oneself and

the treatment in the patient’s eyes and will arouse the most violent

opposition in him, whether one’s guess has been true or not; indeed,

the truer the guess the more violent will be the resistance. As a rule

the therapeutic effect will be nil; but the deterring of the patient from

analysis will be final. Even in the later stages of analysis one must be

careful  not  to  give  a  patient  the  solution  of  a  symptom  or  the

translation of a wish until he is already so close to it that he has only

one short step more to make in order to get hold of the explanation for

himself. In former years I often had occasion to find that the premature

communication of a solution brought the treatment to an untimely end,

on  account  not  only  of  the  resistances  which  it  thus  suddenly

awakened but also of the relief which the solution brought with it.

   But at this point an objection will be raised. Is it, then, our task to

lengthen the treatment and not, rather, to bring it to an end as rapidly

as  possible?  Are  not  the  patient’s  ailments  due  to  his  lack  of

knowledge and understanding and is it not a duty to enlighten him as

soon as possible - that is, as soon as the doctor himself knows the

explanations? The answer to this question calls for a short digression

on the meaning of knowledge and the mechanism of cure in analysis.

 


                            On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2493

 

 

   It is true that in the earliest days of analytic technique we took an

intellectualist view of the situation. We set a high value on the patient’s

knowledge of what he had forgotten, and in this we made hardly any

distinction  between  our  knowledge  of  it  and  his.  We  thought  it  a

special piece of good luck if we were able to obtain information about

the forgotten childhood trauma from other sources - for instance, fromparents or nurses or the seducer himself - as in some cases it was

possible to do; and we hastened to convey the information and the

proofs of its correctness to the patient, in the certain expectation of

thus bringing the neurosis and the treatment to a rapid end. It was a

severe  disappointment  when  the  expected  success  was  not

forthcoming. How could it be that the patient, who now knew about his

traumatic  experience,  nevertheless  still  behaved  as  if  he  knew  no

more  about  it  than  before?  Indeed,  telling  and  describing  his

repressed trauma to him did not even result in any recollection of it

coming into his mind.

   In one particular case the mother of a hysterical girl had confided to

me the homosexual experience which had greatly contributed to the

fixation  of  the  girl’s  attacks.  The  mother  had  herself  surprised  the

scene;  but  the  patient  had  completely  forgotten  it,  though  it  had

occurred when she was already approaching puberty. I was now able

to  make  a  most  instructive  observation.  Every  time  I  repeated  her

mother’s story to the girl she reacted with a hysterical attack, and after

this she forgot the story once more. There is no doubt that the patient

was expressing a violent resistance against the knowledge that was

being forced upon her. Finally she simulated feeble-mindedness and a

complete loss of memory in order to protect herself against what I had

told her. After this, there was no choice but to cease attributing to the

fact  of  knowing,  in  itself,  the  importance  that  had  previously  been

given to it and to place the emphasis on the resistances which had in

the past brought about the state of not knowing and which were still

ready to defend that state. Conscious knowledge, even if it was not

subsequently  driven  out  again,  was  powerless  against  those

resistances.

 


                            On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2494

 

      The  strange  behaviour  of  patients,  in  being  able  to  combine  a

conscious knowing with not knowing, remains inexplicable by what is

called normal psychology. But to psycho-analysis, which recognizes

the  existence  of  the  unconscious,  it  presents  no  difficulty.  Thephenomenon  we  have  described,  moreover,  provides  some  of  the

best support for a view which approaches mental processes from the

angle of topographical differentiation. The patients now know of the

repressed experience in their conscious thought, but this thought lacks

any connection with the place where the repressed recollection is in

some  way  or  other  contained.  No  change  is  possible  until  the

conscious  thought-process  has  penetrated  to  that  place  and  has

overcome the resistances of repression there. It is just as though a

decree were promulgated by the Ministry of Justice to the effect that

juvenile  delinquencies  should  be  dealt  with  in  a  certain  lenient

manner. As long as this decree has not come to the knowledge of the

local magistrates, or in the event of their not intending to obey it but

preferring  to  administer  justice  by  their  own  lights,  no  change  can

occur in the treatment of particular youthful delinquents. For the sake

of  complete  accuracy,  however,  it  should  be  added  that  the

communication of repressed material to the patient’s consciousness is

nevertheless  not  without  effect.  It  does  not  produce  the  hoped-for

result  of  putting  an  end  to  the  symptoms;  but  it  has  other

consequences. At first it arouses resistances, but then, when these

have been overcome, it sets up a process of thought in the course of

which  the  expected  influencing  of  the  unconscious  recollection

eventually takes place.

 

   It is now time for us to take a survey of the play of forces which is

set in motion by the treatment. The primary motive force in the therapy

is the patient’s suffering and the wish to be cured that arises from it.

The strength of this motive force is subtracted from by various factors

- which are not discovered till the analysis is in progress - above all, by

what we have called the ‘secondary gain from illness’; but it must be

maintained till the end of the treatment. Every improvement effects a

diminution of it. By itself, however, this motive force is not sufficient to

get rid of the illness. Two things are lacking in it for this: it does not

know what paths to follow to reach this end; and it does not possess

the necessary quota of energy with which to oppose the resistances.

The  analytic  treatment  helps  to  remedy  both  these  deficiencies.  It

supplies the amounts of energy that are needed for overcoming the

resistances  by  making  mobile  the  energies  which  lie  ready  for  thetransference; and, by giving the patient information at the right time, it

shows  him  the  paths  along  which  he  should  direct  those  energies.

Often enough the transference is able to remove the symptoms of the

disease by itself, but only for a while - only for as long as it itself lasts.

In  this  case  the  treatment  is  a  treatment  by  suggestion,  and  not  a

psycho-analysis at all. It only deserves the latter name if the intensity

of  the  transference  has  been  utilized  for  the  overcoming  of

resistances. Only then has being ill become impossible, even when

the transference has once more been dissolved, which is its destined

end.

 


                            On Beginning The Treatment

                                                                                      2495

 

   In the course of the treatment yet another helpful factor is aroused.

This is the patient’s intellectual interest and understanding. But this

alone hardly comes into consideration in comparison with the other

forces that are engaged in the struggle; for it is always in danger of

losing its value, as a result of the clouding of judgement that arises

from the resistances. Thus the new sources of strength for which the

patient is indebted to his analyst are reducible to transference and

instruction (through the communications made to him). The patient,

however, only makes use of the instruction in so far as he is induced

to do so by the transference; and it is for this reason that our first

communication  should  be  withheld  until  a  strong  transference  has

been  established.  And  this,  we  may  add,  holds  good  of  every

subsequent  communication.  In  each  case  we  must  wait  until  the

disturbance  of  the  transference  by  the  successive  emergence  of

transference-resistances has been removed.

                                                                                       2496

 

        REMEMBERING, REPEATING AND WORKING-THROUGH

  (FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS II)

                                        (1914)

 


                                                                                      2497

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2498

 

        REMEMBERING, REPEATING AND WORKING-THROUGH

  (FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS II)

 

It seems to me not unnecessary to keep on reminding students of the

far-reaching changes which psycho-analytic technique has undergone

since its first beginnings. In its first phase - that of Breuer’s catharsis -

it consisted in bringing directly into focus the moment at which the

symptom was formed, and in persistently endeavouring to reproduce

the mental processes involved in that situation, in order to direct their

discharge  along  the  path  of  conscious  activity.  Remembering  and

abreacting, with the help of the hypnotic state, were what was at that

time  aimed  at.  Next,  where  hypnosis  had  been  given  up,  the  task

became one of discovering from the patient’s free associations what

he failed to remember. The resistance was to be circumvented by the

work of interpretation and by making its results known to the patient.

The situations which had given rise to the formation of the symptom

and the other situations which lay behind the moment at which the

illness broke out retained their place as the focus of interest; but the

element of abreaction receded into the background and seemed to be

replaced by the expenditure of work which the patient had to make in

being  obliged  to  overcome  his  criticism  of  his  free  associations,  in

accordance  with  the  fundamental  rule  of  psycho-analysis.  Finally,

there was evolved the consistent technique used to-day, in which theanalyst gives up the attempt to bring a particular moment or problem

into focus. He contents himself with studying whatever is present for

the time being on the surface of the patient’s mind, and he employs

the  art  of  interpretation  mainly  for  the  purpose  of  recognizing  the

resistances which appear there, and making them conscious to the

patient. From this there results a new sort of division of labour: the

doctor  uncovers  the  resistances  which  are  unknown  to  the  patient;

when these have been got the better of, the patient often relates the

forgotten situations and connections without any difficulty. The aim of

these  different  techniques  has,  of  course,  remained  the  same.

Descriptively  speaking,  it  is  to  fill  in  gaps  in  memory;  dynamically

speaking, it is to overcome resistances due to repression.

 


                Remembering, Repeating And Working-Through

                                                                                      2499

 

   We must still be grateful to the old hypnotic technique for having

brought before us single psychical processes of analysis in an isolated

or  schematic  form.  Only  this  could  have  given  us  the  courage

ourselves  to  create  more  complicated  situations  in  the  analytic

treatment and to keep them clear before us.

   In these hypnotic treatments the process of remembering took a

very simple form. The patient put himself back into an earlier situation,

which he seemed never to confuse with the present one, and gave an

account of the mental processes belonging to it, in so far as they had

remained normal; he then added to this whatever was able to emerge

as a result of transforming the processes that had at the time been

unconscious into conscious ones.

 

   At this point I will interpolate a few remarks which every analyst has

found confirmed in his observations. Forgetting impressions, scenes

or experiences nearly always reduces itself to shutting them off. When

the patient talks about these ‘forgotten’ things he seldom fails to add:

‘As a matter of fact I’ve always known it; only I’ve never thought of it.’

He often expresses disappointment at the fact that not enough things

come into his head that he can call ‘forgotten’ - that he has neverthought  of  since  they  happened.  Nevertheless,  even  this  desire  is

fulfilled,  especially  in  the  case  of  conversion  hysterias.  ‘Forgetting’

becomes still further restricted when we assess at their true value the

screen  memories  which  are  so  generally  present.  In  some  cases  I

have had an impression that the familiar childhood amnesia, which is

theoretically  so  important  to  us,  is  completely  counterbalanced  by

screen  memories.  Not  only some  but all  of  what  is  essential  from

childhood has been retained in these memories. It is simply a question

of knowing how to extract it out of them by analysis. They represent

the forgotten years of childhood as adequately as the manifest content

of a dream represents the dream-thoughts.

 


                Remembering, Repeating And Working-Through

                                                                                      2500

 

   The other group of psychical processes - phantasies, processes of

reference, emotional impulses, thought-connections - which, as purely

internal  acts,  can  be  contrasted  with  impressions  and  experiences,

must, in their relation to forgetting and remembering, be considered

separately.  In  these  processes  it  particularly  often  happens  that

something is ‘remembered’ which could never have been ‘forgotten’

because it was never at any time noticed - was never conscious. As

regards the course taken by psychical events it seems to make no

difference  whatever  whether  such  a  ‘thought-connection’  was

conscious and then forgotten or whether it never managed to become

conscious at all. The conviction which the patient obtains in the course

of his analysis is quite independent of this kind of memory.

   In the many different forms of obsessional neurosis in particular,

forgetting is mostly restricted to dissolving thought-connections, failing

to draw the right conclusions and isolating memories.

   There is one special class of experiences of the utmost importance

for  which  no  memory  can  as  a  rule  be  recovered.  These  are

experiences  which  occurred  in  very  early  childhood  and  were  not

understood at the time but which were subsequently understood and

interpreted. One gains a knowledge of them through dreams and one

is  obliged  to  believe  in  them  on  the  most  compelling  evidenceprovided by the fabric of the neurosis. Moreover, we can ascertain for

ourselves that the patient, after his resistances have been overcome,

no longer invokes the absence of any memory of them (any sense of

familiarity with them) as a ground for refusing to accept them. This

matter, however, calls for so much critical caution and introduces so

much that is novel and startling that I shall reserve it for a separate

discussion in connection with suitable material.

 


                Remembering, Repeating And Working-Through

                                                                                      2501

 

 

   Under the new technique very little, and often nothing, is left of this

delightfully  smooth  course  of  events.  There  are  some  cases  which

behave like those under the hypnotic technique up to a point and only

later cease to do so; but others behave differently from the beginning.

If we confine ourselves to this second type in order to bring out the

difference, we may say that the patient does not remember anything

of what he has forgotten and repressed, but acts it out. He reproduces

it not as a memory but as an action; he repeats it, without, of course,

knowing that he is repeating it.

   For instance, the patient does not say that he remembers that he

used to be defiant and critical towards his parents’ authority; instead,

he behaves in that way to the doctor. He does not remember how he

came  to  a  helpless  and  hopeless  deadlock  in  his  infantile  sexual

researches;  but  he  produces  a  mass  of  confused  dreams  and

associations,  complains  that  he  cannot  succeed  in  anything  and

asserts that he is fated never to carry through what he undertakes. He

does not remember having been intensely ashamed of certain sexual

activities and afraid of their being found out; but he makes it clear that

he is ashamed of the treatment on which he is now embarked and

tries to keep it secret from everybody. And so on.

   Above all, the patient will begin his treatment with a repetition of this

kind.  When  one  has  announced  the  fundamental  rule  of  psycho-

analysis to a patient with an eventful life-history and a long story of

illness and has then asked him to say what occurs to his mind, oneexpects him to pour out a flood of information; but often the first thing

that happens is that he has nothing to say. He is silent and declares

that nothing occurs to him. This, of course, is merely a repetition of a

homosexual attitude which comes to the fore as a resistance against

remembering anything. As long as the patient is in the treatment he

cannot  escape  from  this  compulsion  to  repeat;  and  in  the  end  we

understand that this is his way of remembering.

 


                Remembering, Repeating And Working-Through

                                                                                      2502

 

      What  interests  us  most  of  all  is  naturally  the  relation  of  this

compulsion to repeat to the transference and to resistance. We soon

perceive that the transference is itself only a piece of repetition, and

that the repetition is a transference of the forgotten past not only on to

the doctor but also on to all the other aspects of the current situation.

We must be prepared to find, therefore, that the patient yields to the

compulsion to repeat, which now replaces the impulsion to remember,

not only in his personal attitude to his doctor but also in every other

activity and relationship which may occupy his life at the time - if, for

instance, he falls in love or undertakes a task or starts an enterprise

during  the  treatment.  The  part  played  by  resistance,  too,  is  easily

recognized.  The  greater  the  resistance,  the  more  extensively  will

acting  out  (repetition)  replace  remembering.  For  the  ideal

remembering  of  what  has  been  forgotten  which  occurs  in  hypnosis

corresponds to a state in which resistance has been put completely on

one side. If the patient starts his treatment under the auspices of a

mild and unpronounced positive transference it makes it possible at

first for him to unearth his memories just as he would under hypnosis,

and  during  this  time  his  pathological  symptoms  themselves  are

quiescent. But if, as the analysis proceeds, the transference becomes

hostile  or  unduly  intense  and  therefore  in  need  of  repression,

remembering at once gives way to acting out. From then onwards the

resistances  determine  the  sequence  of  the  material  which  is  to  be

repeated.  The  patient  brings  out  of  the  armoury  of  the  past  the

weapons with which he defends himself against the progress of thetreatment - weapons which we must wrest from him one by one.

   We have learnt that the patient repeats instead of remembering, and

repeats under the conditions of resistance. We may now ask what it is

that  he  in  fact  repeats  or  acts  out.  The  answer  is  that  he  repeats

everything  that  has  already  made  its  way  from  the  sources  of  the

repressed  into  his  manifest  personality  -  his  inhibitions  and

unserviceable attitudes and his pathological character-traits. He also

repeats all his symptoms in the course of the treatment. And now we

can see that in drawing attention to the compulsion to repeat we have

acquired no new fact but only a more comprehensive view. We have

only  made  it  clear  to  ourselves  that  the  patient’s  state  of  being  ill

cannot cease with the beginning of his analysis, and that we must

treat his illness, not as an event of the past, but as a present-day

force. This state of illness is brought, piece by piece, within the field

and  range  of  operation  of  the  treatment,  and  while  the  patient

experiences it as something real and contemporary, we have to do our

therapeutic work on it, which consists in a large measure in tracing it

back to the past.

 


                Remembering, Repeating And Working-Through

                                                                                      2503

 

   Remembering, as it was induced in hypnosis, could not but give the

impression of an experiment carried out in the laboratory. Repeating,

as it is induced in analytic treatment according to the newer technique,

on the other hand, implies conjuring up a piece of real life; and for that

reason  it  cannot  always  be  harmless  and  unobjectionable.  This

consideration  opens  up  the  whole  problem  of  what  is  so  often

unavoidable - ‘deterioration during treatment’.

   First and foremost, the initiation of the treatment in itself brings about

a  change  in  the  patient’s  conscious  attitude  to  his  illness.  He  has

usually been content with lamenting it, despising it as nonsensical and

under-estimating its importance; for the rest, he has extended to its

manifestations the ostrich-like policy of repression which he adopted

towards its origins. Thus it can happen that he does not properly know

under what conditions his phobia breaks out or does not listen to theprecise wording of his obsessional ideas or does not grasp the actual

purpose of his obsessional impulse. The treatment, of course, is not

helped by this. He must find the courage to direct his attention to the

phenomena of his illness. His illness itself must no longer seem to him

contemptible,  but  must  become  an  enemy  worthy  of  his  mettle,  a

piece of his personality, which has solid ground for its existence and

out of which things of value for his future life have to be derived. The

way  is  thus  paved  from  the  beginning  for  a  reconciliation  with  the

repressed material which is coming to expression in his symptoms,

while at the same time place is found for a certain tolerance for the

state of being ill. If this new attitude towards the illness intensifies the

conflicts  and  brings  to  the  fore  symptoms  which  till  then  had  been

indistinct, one can easily console the patient by pointing out that these

are only necessary and temporary aggravations and that one cannot

overcome  an  enemy  who  is  absent  or  not  within  range.  The

resistance, however, may exploit the situation for its own ends and

abuse the licence to be ill. It seems to say: ‘See what happens if I

really  give  way  to  such  things.  Was  I  not  right  to  consign  them  to

repression?’ Young and childish people in particular are inclined to

make the necessity imposed by the treatment for paying attention to

their illness a welcome excuse for luxuriating in their symptoms.

 


                Remembering, Repeating And Working-Through

                                                                                      2504

 

      Further  dangers  arise  from  the  fact  that  in  the  course  of  the

treatment new and deeper-lying instinctual impulses, which have not

hitherto made themselves felt, may come to be ‘repeated’. Finally, it is

possible that the patient’s actions outside the transference may do him

temporary harm in his ordinary life, or even have been so chosen as

permanently to invalidate his prospects of recovery.

   The tactics to be adopted by the physician in this situation are easily

justified. For him, remembering in the old manner - reproduction in the

psychical field - is the aim to which he adheres, even though he knows

that  such  an  aim  cannot  be  achieved  in  the  new  technique.  He  is

prepared  for  a  perpetual  struggle  with  his  patient  to  keep  in  thepsychical sphere all the impulses which the patient would like to direct

into  the  motor  sphere;  and  he  celebrates  it  as  a  triumph  for  the

treatment  if  he  can  bring  it  about  that  something  that  the  patient

wishes  to  discharge  in  action  is  disposed  of  through  the  work  of

remembering. If the attachment through transference has grown into

something  at  all  serviceable,  the  treatment  is  able  to  prevent  the

patient  from  executing  any  of  the  more  important  repetitive  actions

and to utilize his intention to do so in statu nascendi as material for the

therapeutic work. One best protects the patient from injuries brought

about through carrying out one of his impulses by making him promise

not to take any important decisions affecting his life during the time of

his treatment - for instance, not to choose any profession or definitive

love-object - but to postpone all such plans until after his recovery.

   At the same time one willingly leaves untouched as much of the

patient’s personal freedom as is compatible with these restrictions, nor

does one hinder him from carrying out unimportant intentions, even if

they are foolish; one does not forget that it is in fact only through his

own experience and mishaps that a person learns sense. There are

also people whom one cannot restrain from plunging into some quite

undesirable  project  during  the  treatment  and  who  only  afterwards

become ready for, and accessible to, analysis. Occasionally, too, it is

bound to happen that the untamed instincts assert themselves before

there is time to put the reins of the transference on them, or that the

bonds which attach the patient to the treatment are broken by him in a

repetitive action. As an extreme example of this, I may cite the case of

an  elderly  lady  who  had  repeatedly  fled  from  her  house  and  her

husband in a twilight state and gone no one knew where, without ever

having become conscious of her motive for decamping in this way.

She came to treatment with a marked affectionate transference which

grew in intensity with uncanny rapidity in the first few days; by the end

of the week she had decamped from me, too, before I had had time to

say anything to her which might have prevented this repetition.

 


                Remembering, Repeating And Working-Through

                                                                                      2505

    The main instrument, however, for curbing the patient’s compulsion

to repeat and for turning it into a motive for remembering lies in the

handling of the transference. We render the compulsion harmless, and

indeed useful, by giving it the right to assert itself in a definite field. We

admit it into the transference as a playground in which it is allowed to

expand  in  almost  complete  freedom  and  in  which  it  is  expected  to

display  to  us  everything  in  the  way  of  pathogenic  instincts  that  is

hidden  in  the  patient’s  mind.  Provided  only  that  the  patient  shows

compliance  enough  to  respect  the  necessary  conditions  of  the

analysis, we regularly succeed in giving all the symptoms of the illness

a new transference meaning and in replacing his ordinary neurosis by

a ‘transference-neurosis’ of which he can be cured by the therapeutic

work. The transference thus creates an intermediate region between

illness and real life through which the transition from the one to the

other is made. The new condition has taken over all the features of the

illness;  but  it  represents  an  artificial  illness  which  is  at  every  point

accessible to our intervention. It is a piece of real experience, but one

which has been made possible by especially favourable conditions,

and it is of a provisional nature. From the repetitive reactions which

are exhibited in the transference we are led along the familiar paths to

the awakening of the memories, which appear without difficulty, as it

were, after the resistance has been overcome.

 


                Remembering, Repeating And Working-Through

                                                                                      2506

 

   I might break off at this point but for the title of this paper, which

obliges me to discuss a further point in analytic technique. The first

step  in  overcoming  the  resistances  is  made,  as  we  know,  by  the

analyst’s uncovering the resistance, which is never recognized by the

patient, and acquainting him with it. Now it seems that beginners in

analytic  practice  are  inclined  to  look  on  this  introductory  step  as

constituting the whole of their work. I have often been asked to advise

upon cases in which the doctor complained that he had pointed out his

resistance to the patient and that nevertheless no change had set in;

indeed, the resistance had become all the stronger, and the wholesituation was more obscure than ever. The treatment seemed to make

no  headway.  This  gloomy  foreboding  always  proved  mistaken.  The

treatment was as a rule progressing most satisfactorily. The analyst

had merely forgotten that giving the resistance a name could not result

in its immediate cessation. One must allow the patient time to become

more conversant with this resistance with which he has now become

acquainted,  to work  through  it,  to  overcome  it,  by  continuing,  in

defiance of it, the analytic work according to the fundamental rule of

analysis. Only where the resistance is at its height can the analyst,

working in common with his patient, discover the repressed instinctual

impulses  which  are  feeding  the  resistance;  and  it  is  this  kind  of

experience which convinces the patient of the existence and power of

such impulses. The doctor has nothing else to do than to wait and let

things take their course, a course which cannot be avoided nor always

hastened. If he holds fast to this conviction he will often be spared the

illusion of having failed when in fact he is conducting the treatment on

the right lines.

   This working-through of the resistances may in practice turn out to

be  an  arduous  task  for  the  subject  of  the  analysis  and  a  trial  of

patience for the analyst. Nevertheless it is a part of the work which

effects the greatest changes in the patient and which distinguishes

analytic treatment from any kind of treatment by suggestion. From a

theoretical point of view one may correlate it with the ‘abreacting’ of

the quotas of affect strangulated by repression - an abreaction without

which hypnotic treatment remained ineffective.

                                                                                       2507

 

                  OBSERVATIONS ON TRANSFERENCE-LOVE

  (FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS III)

                                        (1915)

 


                                                                                      2508

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2509

 

                  OBSERVATIONS ON TRANSFERENCE-LOVE

  (FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS III)

 

Every beginner in psycho-analysis probably feels alarmed at first at

the difficulties in store for him when he comes to interpret the patient’s

associations and to deal with the reproduction of the repressed. When

the  time  comes,  however,  he  soon  learns  to  look  upon  these

difficulties as insignificant, and instead becomes convinced that the

only really serious difficulties he has to meet lie in the management of

the transference.

   Among the situations which arise in this connection I shall select one

which  is  very  sharply  circumscribed;  and  I  shall  select  it,  partly

because it occurs so often and is so important in its real aspects and

partly because of its theoretical interest. What I have in mind is the

case in which a woman patient shows by unmistakable indications, or

openly  declares,  that  she  has  fallen  in  love,  as  any  other  mortal

woman might, with the doctor who is analysing her. This situation has

its distressing and comical aspects, as well as its serious ones. It is

also determined by so many and such complicated factors, it is so

unavoidable and so difficult to clear up, that a discussion of it to meet

a vital need of analytic technique has long been overdue. But since we

who laugh at other people’s failings are not always free from them

ourselves, we have not so far been precisely in a hurry to fulfil thistask.  We  are  constantly  coming  up  against  the  obligation  to

professional discretion - a discretion which cannot be dispensed with

in  real  life,  but  which  is  of  no  service  in  our  science.  In  so  far  as

psycho-analytic publications are a part of real life, too, we have here

an insoluble contradiction. I have recently disregarded this matter of

discretion  at  one  point,¹  and  shown  how  this  same  transference

situation held back the development of psycho-analytic therapy during

its first decade.

 

   ¹ In the first section of my contribution to the history of the psycho-analytic movement

(1914d)
 


                        Observations On Transference-Love

                                                                                      2510

 

   To a well-educated layman (for that is what the ideal civilized person

is in regard to psycho-analysis) things that have to do with love are

incommensurable with everything else; they are, as it were, written on

a  special  page  on  which  no  other  writing  is  tolerated.  If  a  woman

patient has fallen in love with her doctor it seems to such a layman

that  only  two  outcomes  are  possible.  One,  which  happens

comparatively  rarely,  is  that  all  the  circumstances  allow  of  a

permanent  legal  union  between  them;  the  other,  which  is  more

frequent, is that the doctor and the patient part and give up the work

they have begun which was to have led to her recovery, as though it

had been interrupted by some elemental phenomenon. There is, to be

sure, a third conceivable outcome, which even seems compatible with

a continuation of the treatment. This is that they should enter into a

love-relationship which is illicit and which is not intended to last for

ever. But such a course is made impossible by conventional morality

and  professional  standards.  Nevertheless,  our  layman  will  beg  the

analyst to reassure him as unambiguously as possible that this third

alternative is excluded.

   It is clear that a psycho-analyst must look at things from a different

point of view.

   Let us take the case of the second outcome of the situation we are

considering. After the patient has fallen in love with her doctor, theypart;  the  treatment  is  given  up.  But  soon  the  patient’s  condition

necessitates her making a second attempt at analysis, with another

doctor. The next thing that happens is that she feels she has fallen in

love with this second doctor too; and if she breaks off with him and

begins yet again, the same thing will happen with the third doctor, and

so on. This phenomenon, which occurs without fail and which is, as

we know, one of the foundations of the psycho-analytic theory, may be

evaluated from two points of view, that of the doctor who is carrying

out the analysis and that of the patient who is in need of it.

      For  the  doctor  the  phenomenon  signifies  a  valuable  piece  of

enlightenment  and  a  useful  warning  against  any  tendency  to  a

counter-transference which may be present in his own mind. He must

recognize that the patient’s falling in love is induced by the analytic

situation and is not to be attributed to the charms of his own person;

so  that  he  has  no  grounds  whatever  for  being  proud  of  such  a

‘conquest’, as it would be called outside analysis. And it is always well

to  be  reminded  of  this.  For  the  patient,  however,  there  are  two

alternatives: either she must relinquish psycho-analytic treatment or

she must accept falling in love with her doctor as an inescapable fate.¹

 

   ¹ We know that the transference can manifest itself in other, less tender feelings, but I do

not propose to go into that side of the matter here.
 


                        Observations On Transference-Love

                                                                                      2511

 

   I have no doubt that the patient’s relatives and friends will decide as

emphatically for the first of these two alternatives as the analyst will for

the second. But I think that here is a case in which the decision cannot

be left to the tender - or rather, the egoistic and jealous - concern of

her  relatives.  The  welfare  of  the  patient  alone  should  be  the

touchstone; her relatives’ love cannot cure her neurosis. The analyst

need  not  push  himself  forward,  but  he  may  insist  that  he  is

indispensable for the achievement of certain ends. Any relative who

adopts Tolstoy’s attitude to this problem can remain in undisturbed

possession of his wife or daughter; but he will have to try to put up

with  the  fact  that  she,  for  her  part,  retains  her  neurosis  and  theinterference with her capacity for love which it involves. The situation,

after all, is similar to that in a gynaecological treatment. Moreover, the

jealous  father  or  husband  is  greatly  mistaken  if  he  thinks  that  the

patient will escape falling in love with her doctor if he hands her over

to  some  kind  of  treatment  other  than  analysis  for  combating  her

neurosis. The difference, on the contrary, will only be that a love of

this kind, which is bound to remain unexpressed and unanalysed, can

never make the contribution to the patient’s recovery which analysis

would have extracted from it.

      It  has  come  to  my  knowledge  that  some  doctors  who  practise

analysis  frequently  prepare  their  patients  for  the  emergence  of  the

erotic transference or even urge them to ‘go ahead and fall in love with

the  doctor  so  that  the  treatment  may  make  progress’.  I  can  hardly

imagine a more senseless proceeding. In doing so, an analyst robs

the phenomenon of the element of spontaneity which is so convincing

and  lays  up  obstacles  for  himself  in  the  future  which  are  hard  to

overcome.

 


                        Observations On Transference-Love

                                                                                      2512

 

   At a first glance it certainly does not look as if the patient’s falling in

love  in  the  transference  could  result  in  any  advantage  to  the

treatment. No matter how amenable she has been up till then, she

suddenly loses all understanding of the treatment and all interest in it,

and  will  not  speak  or  hear  about  anything  but  her  love,  which  she

demands to have returned. She gives up her symptoms or pays no

attention to them; indeed, she declares that she is well. There is a

complete change of scene; it is as though some piece of make-believe

had been stopped by the sudden irruption of reality - as when, for

instance, a cry of fire is raised during a theatrical performance. No

doctor who experiences this for the first time will find it easy to retain

his grasp on the analytic situation and to keep clear of the illusion that

the treatment is really at an end.

      A  little  reflection  enables  one  to  find  one’s  bearings.  First  and

foremost, one keeps in mind the suspicion that anything that interfereswith  the  continuation  of  the  treatment  may  be  an  expression  of

resistance. There can be no doubt that the outbreak of a passionate

demand for love is largely the work of resistance. One will have long

since noticed in the patient the signs of an affectionate transference,

and  one  will  have  been  able  to  feel  certain  that  her  docility,  her

acceptance  of  the  analytic  explanations,  her  remarkable

comprehension and the high degree of intelligence she showed were

to  be  attributed  to  this  attitude  towards  her  doctor.  Now  all  this  is

swept away. She has become quite without insight and seems to be

swallowed up in her love. Moreover, this change quite regularly occurs

precisely at a point of time when one is having to try to bring her to

admit  or  remember  some  particularly  distressing  and  heavily

repressed piece of her life-history. She has been in love, therefore, for

a long time; but now the resistance is beginning to make use of her

love in order to hinder the continuation of the treatment, to deflect all

her  interest  from  the  work  and  to  put  the  analyst  in  an  awkward

position.

 


                        Observations On Transference-Love

                                                                                      2513

 

      If  one  looks  into  the  situation  more  closely  one  recognizes  the

influence of motives which further complicate things - of which some

are connected with being in love and others are particular expressions

of resistance. Of the first kind are the patient’s endeavour to assure

herself of her irresistibility, to destroy the doctor’s authority by bringing

him down to the level of a lover and to gain all the other promised

advantages  incidental  to  the  satisfaction  of  love.  As  regards  the

resistance,  we  may  suspect  that  on  occasion  it  makes  use  of  a

declaration  of  love  on  the  patient’s  part  as  a  means  of  putting  her

analyst’s  severity  to  the  test,  so  that,  if  he  should  show  signs  of

compliance, he may expect to be taken to task for it. But above all one

gets  an  impression  that  the  resistance  is  acting  as  an agent

provocateur;  it  heightens  the  patient’s  state  of  being  in  love  and

exaggerates her readiness for sexual surrender in order to justify the

workings of repression all the more emphatically, by pointing to thedangers of such licentiousness. All these accessory motives, which in

simpler cases may not be present, have, as we know, been regarded

by Adler as the essential part of the whole process.

   But how is the analyst to behave in order not to come to grief over

this situation, supposing he is convinced that the treatment should be

carried on in spite of this erotic transference and should take it in its

stride?

   It would be easy for me to lay stress on the universally accepted

standards of morality and to insist that the analyst must never under

any circumstances accept or return the tender feelings that are offered

him: that, instead, he must consider that the time has come for him to

put before the woman who is in love with him the demands of social

morality and the necessity for renunciation, and to succeed in making

her give up her desires, and, having surmounted the animal side of

herself, go on with the work of analysis.

   I shall not, however, fulfil these expectations - neither the first nor

the second of them. Not the first, because I am writing not for patients

but for doctors who have serious difficulties to contend with, and also

because in this instance I am able to trace the moral prescription back

to  its  source,  namely  to  expediency.  I  am  on  this  occasion  in  the

happy  position  of  being  able  to  replace  the  moral  embargo  by

considerations  of  analytic  technique,  without  any  alteration  in  the

outcome.

 


                        Observations On Transference-Love

                                                                                      2514

 

   Even more decidedly, however, do I decline to fulfil the second of

the expectations I have mentioned. To urge the patient to suppress,

renounce or sublimate her instincts the moment she has admitted her

erotic transference would be, not an analytic way of dealing with them,

but a senseless one. It would be just as though, after summoning up a

spirit from the underworld by cunning spells, one were to send him

down again without having asked him a single question. One would

have  brought  the  repressed  into  consciousness,  only  to  repress  it

once  more  in  a  fright.  Nor  should  we  deceive  ourselves  about  thesuccess of any such proceeding. As we know, the passions are little

affected  by  sublime  speeches.  The  patient  will  feel  only  the

humiliation, and she will not fail to take her revenge for it.

      Just  as  little  can  I  advocate  a  middle  course,  which  would

recommend itself to some people as being specially ingenious. This

would consist in declaring that one returns the patient’s fond feelings

but at the same time in avoiding any physical implementation of this

fondness  until  one  is  able  to  guide  the  relationship  into  calmer

channels and raise it to a highest level. My objection to this expedient

is that psycho-analytic treatment is founded on truthfulness. In this fact

lies  a  great  part  of  its  educative  effect  and  its  ethical  value.  It  is

dangerous to depart from this foundation. Anyone who has become

saturated in the analytic technique will no longer be able to make use

of the lies and pretences which a doctor normally finds unavoidable;

and if, with the best intentions, he does attempt to do so, he is very

likely to betray himself. Since we demand strict truthfulness from our

patients,  we  jeopardize  our  whole  authority  if  we  let  ourselves  be

caught  out  by  them  in  a  departure  from  the  truth.  Besides,  the

experiment of letting oneself go a little way in tender feelings for the

patient is not altogether without danger. Our control over ourselves is

not so complete that we may not suddenly one day go further than we

had intended. In my opinion, therefore, we ought not to give up the

neutrality  towards  the  patient,  which  we  have  acquired  through

keeping the counter-transference in check.

 


                        Observations On Transference-Love

                                                                                      2515

 

   I have already let it be understood that analytic technique requires of

the physician that he should deny to the patient who is craving for love

the satisfaction she demands. The treatment must be carried out in

abstinence. By this I do not mean physical abstinence alone, nor yet

the deprivation of everything that the patient desires, for perhaps no

sick  person  could  tolerate  this.  Instead,  I  shall  state  it  as  a

fundamental principle that the patient’s need and longing should be

allowed  to  persist  in  her,  in  order  that  they  may  serve  as  forcesimpelling  her  to  do  work  and  to  make  changes,  and  that  we  must

beware of appeasing those forces by means of surrogates. And what

we could offer would never be anything else than a surrogate, for the

patient’s condition is such that, until her repressions are removed, she

is incapable of getting real satisfaction.

   Let us admit that this fundamental principle of the treatment being

carried out in abstinence extends far beyond the single case we are

considering here, and that it needs to be thoroughly discussed in order

that we may define the limits of its possible application. We will not

enter into this now, however, but will keep as close as possible to the

situation from which we started out. What would happen if the doctor

were to behave differently and, supposing both parties were free, if he

were to avail himself of that freedom in order to return the patient’s

love and to still her need for affection?

   If he has been guided by the calculation that this compliance on his

part will ensure his domination over his patient and thus enable him to

influence her to perform the tasks required by the treatment, and in

this  way  to  liberate  herself  permanently  from  her  neurosis  -  then

experience would inevitably show him that his calculation was wrong.

The patient would achieve her aim, but he would never achieve his.

What would happen to the doctor and the patient would only be what

happened, according to the amusing anecdote, to the pastor and the

insurance agent. The insurance agent, a free-thinker, lay at the point

of  death  and  his  relatives  insisted  on  bringing  in  a  man  of  God  to

convert him before he died. The interview lasted so long that those

who were waiting outside began to have hopes. At last the door of the

sick-chamber opened. The free-thinker had not been converted; but

the pastor went away insured.

 


                        Observations On Transference-Love

                                                                                      2516

 

   If the patient’s advances were returned it would be a great triumph

for  her,  but  a  complete  defeat  for  the  treatment.  She  would  have

succeeded in what all patients strive for in analysis - she would have

succeeded in acting out, in repeating in real life, what she ought onlyto have remembered, to have reproduced as psychical material and to

have kept within the sphere of psychical events.¹ In the further course

of  the  love-relationship  she  would  bring  out  all  the  inhibitions  and

pathological  reactions  of  her  erotic  life,  without  there  being  any

possibility of correcting them; and the distressing episode would end

in remorse and a great strengthening of her propensity to repression.

The  love-relationship  in  fact  destroys  the  patient’s  susceptibility  to

influence from analytic treatment. A combination of the two would be

an impossibility.

   It is, therefore, just as disastrous for the analysis if the patient’s

craving  for  love  is  gratified  as  if  it  is  suppressed.  The  course  the

analyst must pursue is neither of these; it is one for which there is no

model  in  real  life.  He  must  take  care  not  to  steer  away  from  the

transference-love,  or  to  repulse  it  or  to  make  it  distasteful  to  the

patient; but he must just as resolutely withhold any response to it. He

must keep firm hold of the transference-love, but treat it as something

unreal, as a situation which has to be gone through in the treatment

and traced back to its unconscious origins and which must assist in

bringing all that is most deeply hidden in the patient’s erotic life into

her consciousness and therefore under her control. The more plainly

the analyst lets it be seen that he is proof against every temptation,

the more readily will he be able to extract from the situation its analytic

content.  The  patient,  whose  sexual  repression  is  of  course  not  yet

removed but merely pushed into the background, will then feel safe

enough  to  allow  all  her  preconditions  for  loving,  all  the  phantasies

springing from her sexual desires, all the detailed characteristics of

her state of being in love, to come to light; and from these she will

herself open the way to the infantile roots of her love.

   There is, it is true, one class of women with whom this attempt to

preserve  the  erotic  transference  for  the  purposes  of  analytic  work

without satisfying it will not succeed. These are women of elemental

passionateness  who  tolerate  no  surrogates.  They  are  children  of

nature who refuse to accept the psychical in place of the material,

who, in the poet’s words, are accessible only to ‘the logic of soup, with

dumplings  for  arguments’.  With  such  people  one  has  the  choice

between returning their love or else bringing down upon oneself the

full enmity of a woman scorned. In neither case can one safeguard theinterests of the treatment. One has to withdraw, unsuccessful; and all

one can do is to turn the problem over in one’s mind of how it is that a

capacity for neurosis is joined with such an intractable need for love.

 

   ¹ See the preceding paper.

 


                        Observations On Transference-Love

                                                                                      2517

 

   Many analysts will no doubt be agreed on the method by which

other women, who are less violent in their love, can be gradually made

to adopt the analytic attitude. What we do, above all, is to stress to the

patient the unmistakable element of resistance in this ‘love’. Genuine

love, we say, would make her docile and intensify her readiness to

solve the problems of her case, simply because the man she was in

love with expected it of her. In such a case she would gladly choose

the road to completion of the treatment, in order to acquire value in the

doctor’s eyes and to prepare herself for real life, where this feeling of

love could find a proper place. Instead of this, we point out, she is

showing a stubborn and rebellious spirit, she has thrown up all interest

in  her  treatment,  and  clearly  feels  no  respect  for  the  doctor’s  well-

founded convictions. She is thus bringing out a resistance under the

guise of being in love with him; and in addition to this she has no

compunction in placing him in a cleft stick. For if he refuses her love,

as his duty and his understanding compel him to do, she can play the

part  of  a  woman  scorned,  and  then  withdraw  from  his  therapeutic

efforts out of revenge and resentment, exactly as she is now doing out

of her ostensible love.

      As  a  second  argument  against  the  genuineness  of  this  love  we

advance the fact that it exhibits not a single new feature arising from

the  present  situation,  but  is  entirely  composed  of  repetitions  and

copies of earlier reactions, including infantile ones. We undertake to

prove this by a detailed analysis of the patient’s behaviour in love.

   If the necessary amount of patience is added to these arguments, it

is usually possible to overcome the difficult situation and to continue

the work with a love which has been moderated or transformed; the

work then aims at uncovering the patient’s infantile object-choice andthe phantasies woven round it.

 


                        Observations On Transference-Love

                                                                                      2518

 

   I should now like, however, to examine these arguments with a

critical eye and to raise the question whether, in putting them forward

to the patient, we are really telling the truth, of whether we are not

resorting in our desperation to concealments and misrepresentations.

In other words: can we truly say that the state of being in love which

becomes manifest in analytic treatment is not a real one?

   I think we have told the patient the truth, but not the whole truth

regardless of the consequences. Of our two arguments the first is the

stronger.  The  part  played  by  resistance  in  transference-love  is

unquestionable  and  very  considerable.  Nevertheless  the  resistance

did not, after all, create this love; it finds it ready to hand, makes use

of it and aggravates its manifestations. Nor is the genuineness of the

phenomenon disproved by the resistance. The second argument is far

weaker. It is true that the love consists of new editions of old traits and

that it repeats infantile reactions. But this is the essential character of

every state of being in love. There is no such state which does not

reproduce  infantile  prototypes.  It  is  precisely  from  this  infantile

determination that it receives its compulsive character, verging as it

does  on  the  pathological.  Transference-love  has  perhaps  a  degree

less of freedom than the love which appears in ordinary life and is

called normal; it displays its dependence on the infantile pattern more

clearly and is less adaptable and capable of modification; but that is

all, and not what is essential.

   By what other signs can the genuineness of a love be recognized?

By its efficacy, its serviceability in achieving the aim of love? In this

respect transference-love seems to be second to none; one has the

impression that one could obtain anything from it.

   Let us sum up, therefore. We have no right to dispute that the state

of being in love which makes its appearance in the course of analytic

treatment has the character of a ‘genuine’ love. If it seems so lacking

in normality, this is sufficiently explained by the fact that being in lovein ordinary life, outside analysis, is also more similar to abnormal than

to  normal  mental  phenomena.  Nevertheless,  transference-love  is

characterized by certain features which ensure it a special position. In

the first place, it is provoked by the analytic situation; secondly, it is

greatly  intensified  by  the  resistance,  which  dominates  the  situation;

and thirdly, it is lacking to a high degree in a regard for reality, is less

sensible, less concerned about consequences and more blind in its

valuation of the loved person than we are prepared to admit in the

case  of  normal  love.  We  should  not  forget,  however,  that  these

departures from the norm constitute precisely what is essential about

being in love.

 


                        Observations On Transference-Love

                                                                                      2519

 

   As regards the analyst’s line of action, it is the first of these three

features  of  transference-love  which  is  the  decisive  factor.  He  has

evoked this love by instituting analytic treatment in order to cure the

neurosis.  For  him,  it  is  an  unavoidable  consequence  of  a  medical

situation, like the exposure of a patient’s body or the imparting of a

vital secret. It is therefore plain to him that he must not derive any

personal  advantage  from  it.  The  patient’s  willingness  makes  no

difference;  it  merely  throws  the  whole  responsibility  on  the  analyst

himself. Indeed, as he must know, the patient had been prepared for

no  other  mechanism  of  cure.  After  all  the  difficulties  have  been

successfully  overcome,  she  will  often  confess  to  having  had  an

anticipatory phantasy at the time when she entered the treatment, to

the effect that if she behaved well she would be rewarded at the end

by the doctor’s affection.

      For  the  doctor,  ethical  motives  unite  with  the  technical  ones  to

restrain him from giving the patient his love. The aim he has to keep in

view  is  that  this  woman,  whose  capacity  for  love  is  impaired  by

infantile fixations, should gain free command over a function which is

of such inestimable importance to her; that she should not, however,

dissipate it in the treatment, but keep it ready for the time when, after

her treatment, the demands of real life make themselves felt. He mustnot  stage  the  scene  of  a  dog-race  in  which  the  prize  was  to  be  a

garland of sausages but which some humorist spoilt by throwing a

single sausage on to the track. The result was, of course, that the

dogs threw themselves upon it and forgot all about the race and about

the garland that was luring them to victory in the far distance. I do not

mean to say that it is always easy for the doctor to keep within the

limits prescribed by ethics and technique. Those who are still youngish

and not yet bound by strong ties may in particular find it a hard task.

Sexual love is undoubtedly one of the chief things in life, and the union

of mental and bodily satisfaction in the enjoyment of love is one of its

culminating  peaks.  Apart  from  a  few  queer  fanatics,  all  the  world

knows  this  and  conducts  its  life  accordingly;  science  alone  is  too

delicate to admit it. Again, when a woman sues for love, to reject and

refuse is a distressing part for a man to play; and, in spite of neurosis

and resistance, there is an incomparable fascination in a woman of

high principles who confesses her passion. It is not a patient’s crudely

sensual desires which constitute the temptation. These are more likely

to repel, and it will call for all the doctor’s tolerance if he is to regard

them as natural phenomenon. It is rather, perhaps, a woman’s subtler

and aim-inhibited wishes which bring with them the danger of making

a man forget his technique and his medical task for the sake of a fine

experience.

 


                        Observations On Transference-Love

                                                                                      2520

 

   And yet it is quite out of the question for the analyst to give way.

However highly he may prize love he must prize even more highly the

opportunity for helping his patient over a decisive stage in her life. She

has to learn from him to overcome the pleasure principle, to give up a

satisfaction which lies to hand but is socially not acceptable, in favour

of  a  more  distant  one,  which  is  perhaps  altogether  uncertain,  but

which is both psychologically and socially unimpeachable. To achieve

this overcoming, she has to be led through the primal period of her

mental development and on that path she has to acquire the extra

piece of mental freedom which distinguishes conscious mental activity- in the systematic sense - from unconscious.

   The analytic psychotherapist thus has a threefold battle to wage - in

his own mind against the forces which seek to drag him down from the

analytic level; outside the analysis, against opponents who dispute the

importance he attaches to the sexual instinctual forces and hinder him

from making use of them in his scientific technique; and inside the

analysis, against his patients, who at first behave like opponents but

later on reveal the overvaluation of sexual life which dominates them,

and who try to make him captive to their socially untamed passion.

   The lay public, about whose attitude to psycho-analysis I spoke at

the outset, will doubtless seize upon this discussion of transference-

love as another opportunity for directing the attention of the world to

the  serious  danger  of  this  therapeutic  method.  The  psycho-analyst

knows  that  he  is  working  with  highly  explosive  forces  and  that  he

needs to proceed with as much caution and conscientiousness as a

chemist. But when have chemists ever been forbidden, because of the

danger, from handling explosive substances, which are indispensable,

on account of their effects? It is remarkable that psycho-analysis has

to  win  for  itself  afresh  all  the  liberties  which  have  long  since  been

accorded to other medical activities. I am certainly not in favour of

giving up the harmless methods of treatment. For many cases they

are sufficient, and, when all is said, human society has no more use

for the furor sanandi¹ than for any other fanaticism. But to believe that

the psychoneuroses are to be conquered by operating with harmless

little remedies is grossly to under-estimate those disorders both as to

their  origin  and  their  practical  importance.  No;  in  medical  practice

there will always be room for the ‘ferrum’ and the ‘ignis’ side by side

with the ‘medicina’; and in the same way we shall never be able to do

without a strictly regular, undiluted psycho-analysis which is not afraid

to handle the most dangerous mental impulses and to obtain mastery

over them for the benefit of the patient.

 

   ¹ [’Passion for curing people.’]

                                                                                       2521

 

                              DREAMS IN FOLKLORE

                                (FREUD AND OPPENHEIM)

                                    (1957 [1911])

 


                                                                                      2522

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2523

 

                              DREAMS IN FOLKLORE

 

          By Sigm. Freud and Prof. Ernst Oppenheim (Vienna)

 

                                                ‘Celsi praetereunt austera poemata Ramnes.’¹
                                                                                                Persius, Satirae.

 

One of us (O.) in his studies of folklore has made two observations

with regard to the dreams narrated there which seem to him worth

communicating. Firstly, that the symbolism employed in these dreams

coincides  completely  with  that  accepted  by  psycho-analysis,  and

secondly,  that  a  number  of  these  dreams  are  understood  by  the

common  people  in  the  same  way  as  they  would  be  interpreted  by

psycho-analysis - that is, not as premonitions about a still unrevealed

future, but as the fulfilment of wishes, the satisfaction of needs which

arise during the state of sleep. Certain peculiarities of these, usually

indecent,  dreams,  which  are  told  as  comic  anecdotes,  have

encouraged the second of us (Fr.) to attempt an interpretation of them

which  has  made  them  seem  more  serious  and  more  deserving  of

attention.

 

                                            I

 

    PENIS-SYMBOLISM IN DREAMS OCCURRING IN FOLKLORE 

   The dream which we introduce first, although it contains no symbolic

representations,  sounds  almost  like  ridicule  of  the  prophetic  and  a

plea in favour of the psychological interpretation of dreams.

 

                            A DREAM-INTERPRETATION²

 

   A girl got up from her bed and told her mother that she had had a most strange dream.
   ‘Well, what did you dream, then?’ asked her mother.
   ‘How shall I tell you? I don’t know myself what it was - some sort of long and red and
blunted thing.’
   ‘Long means a road,’ said her mother reflectively, ‘a long road; red means joy, but I don’t
know what blunted can mean.’
   The girl’s father, who was getting dressed meanwhile, and was listening to everything that
the mother and daughter were saying, muttered at this, more or less to himself: ‘It sounds

rather like my cock.’³

 

   ¹ [‘Haughty persons in authority disdain poems that are lacking in charm.’]

    ² ‘Sudslavische  Volksüberlieferungen,  die  sich  auf  den  Geschlechtsverkehr  beziehen

[Southern Slav Folk Traditions concerning Sexual Intercourse]’, collected and elucidated by F.
S. Krauss, Anthropophyteia, 7, 450, No. 820.

   ³ [Addition by F. S. Krauss:] See Anthropophyteia, 1 , 4, No. 5. Cf. further the German

Jewish proverb: ‘The goose dreams of maize and the betrothed girl of a prick.’

 


                                  Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2524

 

 

      It  is  very  much  more  convenient  to  study  dream-symbolism  in

folklore than in actual dreams. Dreams are obliged to conceal things

and  only  surrender  their  secrets  to  interpretation;  these  comic

anecdotes, however, which are disguised as dreams, are intended as

communications, meant to give pleasure to the person who tells them

as well as to the listener, and therefore the interpretation is added

quite unashamedly to the symbol. These stories delight in stripping off

the veiling symbols.

 

   In the following quatrain the penis appears as a sceptre:

 

                                                                Last night I dreamt                                                                I was King of the land,
                                                                And how jolly I was

                                                                With a prick in my hand.¹

 

   Now compare with this the following examples in which the same

symbolism is employed outside a dream.

 

                                                                I love a little lass
                                                                The prettiest I’ve seen,
                                                                I’ll put a sceptre in your hand

                                                                And you shall be a queen.²

 

                                                                ‘Remember, my boy’, said Napoleon,
                                                                The Emperor of renown,
                                                                ‘So long as the prick is the sceptre

                                                                The  will be the crown.’³

 

A different variant of this symbolic exaltation of the genitals is favoured

                                                                              4
in the imagination of artists. A fine etching by Félicien Rops, bearing

the  title  ‘Tout  est  grand  chez  les  rois’  [’Everything  about  kings  is

great’], shows the naked figure of a king with the features of the Roi

Soleil, whose gigantic penis, which rises to arm level, itself wears a

crown. The right hand balances a sceptre, while the left clasps a large

orb,  which  by  reason  of  a  central  cleft  achieves  an  unmistakable

resemblance to another part of the body which is the object of erotic

        5
desires. The index finger of the left hand is inserted into this groove.

 

   ¹ ‘Niederösterreichische Schnadahüpfeln’, collected by Dr. H. Rollett. Anthropophyteia, 5,

151, No. 2.

   ² From the Austrian Alps, Kryptadia, 4, 111, No. 160.

   ³ From Gaming in Lower Austria, Anthropophyteia, 3, 190, No. 85, 4.

4
    Rops, 1905, Plate 20.

5
    [Marginal Note by Oppenheim:] Like the orb in Rops’s picture, a Roman relief in the

Amphitheatre at Nîmes shows an egg transformed into a symbol of the female sexual organs
by means of a similar groove. Here, too, the male counterpart is not absent. It appears as a
phallus strangely furbished up as a bird which sits on four eggs of the kind described - one
might say brooding them.
 


                                  Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2525 

 

   In the Silesian folksong that follows, the dream is only invented in

order  to  hide  a  different  occurrence.  The  penis  appears  here  as  a

worm (‘fat earthworm’), which has crawled into the girl, and at the right

time crawls out again as a little worm (baby).¹

 

                                                                SONG OF THE EARTHWORMS²

 

                                                Asleep on the grass one day a young lass
                                                Susanna of passion was dreaming;
                                                A soft smile did play round her nose as she lay
                                                While she thought of her swain and his scheming.
 
                                                Then - dream full of fear! - it swift did appear
                                                That her lover so handsome and charming
                                                Had become as she slept a fat earthworm which crept
                                                Right inside. What could be more alarming?
 
                                                Full of dread in her heart she awoke with a start
                                                And swift to the village she hied her
                                                And tearfully told all the folk young and old
                                                That an earthworm had crawled up inside her.
 
                                                Her wailing and tears came at last to the ears
                                                Of her mother who cursed and swore roundly;
                                                With bodings of gloom she repaired to her room
                                                And examined the maiden most soundly.
 
                                                For the earthworm she sought, but alas! could find nought -
                                                An unfortunate thing which dismayed her.
                                                So she hurried away without further delay
                                                To ask the wise woman to aid her.
 
                                                With cunning she laid out the cards for the maid
                                                And said: ‘We must wait a while longer.
                                                ‘I have questioned the Knave, but no answer he gave;
                                                ‘Perhaps the Red King will prove stronger.
 

                                                ‘'Tis the news that you fear which the Red King³ speaks clear:

                                                ‘The worm really crawled in the girlie;
                                                ‘But as everything bides its due times and its tides
                                                ‘To catch it 'tis yet much too early.’
 
                                                When Susanna had heard the lugubrious word
                                                She went to her chamber full sadly;
                                                Till at last there appeared the dread hour that she feared                                                And out crept the little worm gladly.
 
                                                So be warned, every lass: do not dream on the grass,
                                                But let poor Susanna’s fate guide you,
                                                Or - as you too may know, to your grief and your woe -
                                                                    4
                                                A fat earthworm will creep up inside you.

 

   The same symbolization of the penis by a worm is familiar from

numerous obscene jokes.

 

   ¹ [‘Würmchen’ (‘little worm’) is a common German expression for ‘baby’.]

     ² ‘Schlesische  Volkslieder  [Silesian  Folksongs]’,  transcribed  by  Dr.  von  Waldheim,

Anthropophyteia, 7, 369.

   ³ [’Röter Konig’ (‘Red King’) is an Austrian slang term for ‘menstruation’.]

4
    [Footnote by F. S. Krauss:] Cf. p. 359 and the Southern Slav version in Krauss, ‘Die

Zeugung in Sitte, Brauch und Glauben der Südslaven [Procreation in the Customs, Usages
and Beliefs of the Southern Slavs]’, Kryptadia, 6, 259-269 and 375 f.
 


                                  Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2526

 

 

   The dream which now follows symbolizes the penis by a dagger: the

woman who dreams it is pulling at a dagger in order to stab herself,

when she is awakened by her husband and exhorted not to tear his

member off.

 

                                    A BAD DREAM

 

   A woman dreamt that things had got to such a pitch that they had

nothing to eat before the holiday and could not buy anything either.

Her husband had drunk up all the money. There was only a lottery

ticket left and even this they really ought to pawn. But the man was

still keeping it back, for the draw was to be on the second of January.

He said: ‘Wife, now tomorrow is the draw, let the ticket wait a while

longer. If we don’t win, then we must sell the ticket or pawn it.’ - ‘Well,

the devil take it, all you’ve bought is worry, and you’ve got about as

much out of it as there is milk in a billy-goat.’ So the next day arrived.

See, along came the newspaper man. He stopped him, took a copyand began to look down the list. He ran his eyes over the figures, he

looked through every column, his number was not among them. He

did not trust his eyes, looked through once again and this time sure

enough he came upon the number of his ticket. The number was the

same, but the number of the series did not fit. Once again he did not

trust himself and thought to himself: ‘This must be a mistake. Wait a

bit, I will go to the bank and make certain one way or the other.’ So he

went  there  with  his  head  hanging.  On  the  way  he  met  a  second

newspaper man. He bought another copy of a second paper, scanned

the list and found the number of his ticket straight away. The number

of the series, too, was the same as the one which included his ticket.

The prize of 5,000 roubles fell to his lot. He burst into the bank, rushed

up  and  asked  them  to  pay  out  on  the  winning  ticket  at  once.  The

banker said that they could not pay out yet, only in a week or two. He

began to beg and pray: ‘Please be kind, give me one thousand at

least, I can get the rest later!’ The banker refused, but advised him to

apply to the private individual who had procured the winning lottery

ticket  for  him.  What  was  to  be  done  now?  Just  then  a  little  Jew

appeared as though he had sprung up from the ground. He smelt a

bargain and made him an offer to pay over the money at once, though

instead  of  5,000  only  4,000.  The  fifth  thousand  would  be  his  own

share. The man was delighted at this good fortune and decided to give

the Jew the thousand, just so that he could get the money on the spot.

He took the money from the Jew and handed over the ticket to him.

Then he went home. On the way he went into an inn, swallowed a

quick  glass  and  from  there  went  straight  home.  He  walked  along

grinning  and  humming  a  little  song.  His  wife  saw  him  through  the

window and thought: ‘Now he’s certainly sold the lottery ticket; you

can see he’s cheerful, he’s probably paid a visit to the inn and got

himself  drunk  because  he  was  feeling  miserable.’  Then  he  came

indoors, put the money on the kitchen table and went to his wife to

bring her the good news that he had won and had got the money.

While  they  were  hugging  and  kissing  one  another  to  their  heart’s

content  because  they  were  so  happy,  their  little  three-year-old

daughter grabbed the money and threw it into the stove. Then they

came along to count the money and it was no longer there. The last

bundle of notes was already on fire. In a rage the man seized hold ofthe  little  girl  by  the  legs  and  dashed  her  against  the  stove.  She

dropped dead. Disaster stared him in the face, there was no escaping

Siberia now. He seized his revolver and bang! he shot himself in the

chest  and  dropped  dead.  Horrified  by  such  a  disaster,  the  woman

snatched up a dagger and was going to stab herself. She tried to pull

it out of the sheath but could not manage it however she tried. Then

she heard a voice as though from Heaven: ‘Enough, let go! What are

you  doing?’  She  woke  up  and  saw  that  she  was  not  pulling  at  a

dagger but at her husband’s tool, and he was saying: ‘Enough, let go

or you’ll tear it off!’

 


                                  Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2527

 

   The representation of the penis as a weapon, cutting knife,¹ dagger,

etc., is familiar to us from the anxiety dreams of abstinent women in

particular and also lies at the root of numerous phobias in neurotic

people.  The  complicated  disguise  of  this  present  dream,  however,

demands that we should make an attempt to clarify our understanding

of  it  by  a  psycho-analytic  interpretation  based  on  interpretations

already carried out. In doing so we are not overlooking the fact that we

shall be going beyond the material presented in the folk tale itself and

that consequently our conclusions will lose in certainty.

   Since this dream ends in an act of sexual aggression carried out by

the woman as a dream-action, this suggests that we should take the

state of material need in the content of the dream as a substitute for a

state of sexual need. Only the most extreme libidinal compulsion can

at  all  justify  such  aggressiveness  on  the  part  of  a  woman.  Other

pieces  of  the  dream-content  point  in  a  quite  definite  and  different

direction. The blame for the state of need is ascribed to the man. (He

had drunk up all the money.)² The dream goes on to get rid of the man

and the child and skilfully evades the sense of guilt attached to these

wishes by causing the child to be killed by the man who then commits

suicide out of remorse. Since this is the content of the dream we are

led to conclude from many analogous instances that here is a woman

who  is  not  satisfied  by  her  husband  and  who  in  her  phantasies  is

longing for another marriage. It is all one for the interpretation whetherwe like to regard this dissatisfaction of the dreamer’s as a permanent

state of want or merely as the expression of a temporary one. The

lottery,  which  in  the  dream  brought  about  a  short-lived  state  of

happiness, could perhaps be understood as a symbolic reference to

marriage.  This  symbol  has  not  yet  been  identified  with  certainty  in

psycho-analytic  work,  but  people  are  in  the  habit  of  saying  that

marriage is a game of chance, that in marriage one either draws the

winning lot or a blank.³ The numbers, which have been enormously

          4
magnified by the dream-work, could well correspond in that case to

the number of repetitions of the satisfying act that are wished for. We

are thus made aware that the act of pulling the man’s member not

only has the meaning of libidinal provocation but also the additional

meaning of contemptuous criticism, as though the woman wanted to

pull the member off - as the man correctly assumed - because it was

no good, did not fulfil its obligations.

   We should not have lingered over the interpretation of this dream

and  exploited  it  beyond  its  overt  symbolism  were  it  not  that  other

dreams  which  likewise  end  in  a  dream-action  demonstrate  that  the

common  people  have  recognized  here  a  typical  situation  which,

wherever it occurs, is susceptible to the same explanation. (Cf. below

p. 2538.)

 

   ¹ [Footnote by Oppenheim:] A knife is habitually carried by a burglar [‘Einbrecher’, literally,

‘someone who breaks in’]. The kind of breaking-in intended is shown by a proverbial phrase
from  Solingen,  reported  in Anthropophyteia, 5,  182:  ‘After  marriage  comes  a  burglary
[breaking-in].’ Cf. the Berlin slang term ‘Brecheisen’ [‘jemmy’, literally, ‘breaking-iron’] for ‘a
powerful penis’ (Anthropophyteia, 7, 3).

   ² [Marginal Note by Oppenheim:] Cf. further below our remarks on ‘marriage portion’ as a

term for ‘penis’ and ‘purse’ for ‘testes’ and also in comparisons between virility and wealth and
between the thirst for gold and libido.

   ³ Another dream about a lottery in this little collection confirms this suggestion.

4
    Psycho-analytic experience shows that noughts appended to numbers in dreams can be

ignored in interpretation.
 


                                  Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2528

 

                                            II 

        FAECES-SYMBOLISM AND RELATED DREAM-ACTIONS

 

   Psycho-analysis has taught us that in the very earliest period of

childhood  faeces  is  a  highly  prized  substance,  in  relation  to  which

coprophilic  instincts  find  satisfaction.  With  the  repression  of  these

instincts, which is accelerated as much as possible by up-bringing,

this  substance  falls  into  contempt  and  then  serves  conscious

purposes as a means of expressing disdain and scorn. Certain forms

of mental activity such as joking are still able to make the obstructed

source of pleasure accessible for a brief moment, and thus show how

much of the esteem in which human beings once held their faeces still

remains preserved in the unconscious. The most important residue of

this former esteem is, however, that all the interest which the child has

had in faeces is transferred in the adult on to another material which

he learns in life to set above almost everything else - gold.¹ How old

this connection between excrement and gold is can be seen from an

observation  by  Jeremias:²  gold,  according  to  ancient  oriental

mythology, is the excrement of hell.³

   In dreams in folklore gold is seen in the most unambiguous way to

be a symbol of faeces. If the sleeper feels a need to defaecate, he

dreams  of  gold,  of  treasure.  The  disguise  in  the  dream,  which  is

designed to mislead him into satisfying his need in bed, usually makes

the pile of faeces serve as a sign to mark the place where the treasure

is to be found; that is to say, the dream - as though by means of

endopsychic perception - states outright, even if in a reversed form,

that gold is a sign or a symbol for faeces.

   A simple treasure- or defaecation-dream of this kind is the following

one, related in the Facetiae of Poggio.

 

   ¹ Cf. ‘Character and Anal Erotism’ (1908b),

   ² Jeremias (1904, 115 n.).

   ³ [Marginal Note by Oppenheim:] Similarly in Mexico.

 


                                  Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2529

  

                                      DREAM-GOLD¹

 

      A  certain  man  related  in  company  that  he  had  dreamt  he  had  found  gold.  Thereupon
another man capped it with this story. (What follows is quoted verbatim.)
   ‘My neighbour once dreamt that the Devil had led him to a field to dig for gold; but he found
none. Then the Devil said: "It is there for sure, only you cannot dig it up now; but take note of
the place so that you may recognize it again by yourself."
   ‘When the man asked that the place should be made recognizable by some sign, the Devil
suggested: "Just shit on it, then it will not occur to anybody that there is gold lying hidden here
and you will be able to recognize the exact place." The man did so and then immediately
awoke and felt that he had done a great heap in his bed.’
   (We give the conclusion in summary.) As he was fleeing from the house, he put on a cap in
which a cat had done its business during the same night. He had to wash his head and his
hair. ‘Thus his dream-gold was turned to filth.’
   Tarasevsky (1909, 194, No. 232) reports a similar dream from the Ukraine in which a
peasant receives some treasure from the Devil, to whom he has lit a candle, and puts a pile of

faeces to mark the place.²

 

   We need not be surprised if the Devil appears in these two dreams

as a bestower of treasure and a seducer, for the Devil - himself an

angel  expelled  from  Paradise  -  is  certainly  nothing  else  than  the

personification of the repressed unconscious instinctual life.³

 

   The motives behind these simple comic anecdotes about dreams

appear to be exhausted in a cynical delight in dirt and a malicious

satisfaction over the dreamer’s embarrassment. But in other dreams

about treasure the form taken by the dream is confused in all sorts of

ways and includes various constituents the origin and significance of

which we may well investigate. For we shall not regard even these

dream-contents,  which  are  intended  to  provide  a  rationalistic

justification  for  obtaining  the  satisfaction,  as  entirely  arbitrary  and

meaningless.

   In the two next examples, the dream is not ascribed to a person

sleeping alone but to one of two sleepers - two men - who share a

bed. As a result of the dream, the dreamer dirties his bedfellow.

 

   ¹ Poggio (1905, No. 130).

   ² [Addition by Oppenheim:] Attention is there drawn to parallels in Anthropophyteia, 4, 342-

345, Nos. 580-581.

   ³ ‘Character and Anal Erotism’ (1908b). 


                                  Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2530

 

                                  A LIVELY DREAM¹

 

   Two travelling journeymen arrived weary at an inn and asked for a night’s lodging. ‘Yes,’
said the host, ‘if you are not afraid, you can have a bedroom, but it’s a haunted one. If you
want to stay, that’s all right, and the night will cost you nothing as far as sleeping goes.’ The
lads asked one another: ‘Are you frightened?’ ‘No.’ Very well, so they seized another litre of
wine and went to the room assigned to them.
   They had hardly been lying down any time when the door opened and a white figure glided
through the room. One fellow said to the other: ‘Didn’t you see something?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Well, why
didn’t you say anything?’ ‘Just wait, it’s going to come through the room again.’ Sure enough,
the figure glided in again. One of the lads jumped up swiftly, but swifter still the ghost glided
out through the crack in the door. The lad, by no means slow, pulled open the door and saw
the figure, a beautiful woman, already half way down the stairs. ‘What are you doing there?’
the lad shouted out. The figure stood still, turned round and spoke: ‘Now I am released. I have
long had to wander. As a reward take the treasure which lies just at the spot where you are
standing.’ The lad was as much frightened as delighted, and in order to mark the place he
lifted up his shirt and planted a fine pile, for he thought that no one would wipe out that mark.
But just as he was at his happiest, he felt someone suddenly seize hold of him. ‘You dirty
swine,’ someone bellowed in his ear, ‘you’re shitting on my shirt.’ At these coarse words the
happy dreamer awoke from his fairy-tale good fortune to find himself; roughly hurled out of
bed.

 

 
                                HE SHAT ON THE GRAVE

 

   Two gentlemen arrived at a hotel, ate their evening meal and drank and at last wanted to go
to bed. They asked the host if he would show them to a room. As the rooms were all occupied
the host gave up his own bed to them, which they were both to sleep in, and he would soon
find a place for himself to sleep somewhere else. The two men lay down in the same bed. A
spirit appeared to one of them in a dream, lit a candle and led him to the churchyard. The
lychgate opened and the spirit with the candle in its hand and the man behind walked up to
the grave of a maiden. When they had reached the grave, the candle suddenly went out.
‘What shall I do now? How shall I tell which is the maiden’s grave to-morrow, when it is day?’
he asked in the dream. Then an idea came to his rescue, he pulled down his drawers and
shat on the grave. When he had finished shitting, his comrade, who was sleeping beside him,
struck him first on one cheek and then on the other: ‘What! You’d shit right in my face?’

 

   ¹ F. Wernert, ‘Deutsche Bauernerzählungen gesammelt im Ober- und Unterelsass [German

Peasant-Tales, Collected in Upper and Lower Alsace]’, Anthropophyteia, 3, 72, No. 15.
                                   Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2531

 

      In  these  two  dreams,  in  place  of  the  Devil  other  super,  natural

figures appear, namely ghosts - that is, spirits of dead people. ‘the

spirit  in  the  second  dream  actually  leads  the  dreamer  to  the

churchyard, where he is to mark a particular grave by defaecating on

it.  A  part  of  this  situation  is  very  easy  to  understand.  The  sleeper

knows that the bed is not the proper place for satisfying his need;

hence  in  the  dream  he  causes  himself  to  be  led  away  from  it  and

procures a person who shows his hidden urge the right way to another

place where he is permitted to satisfy his need, indeed is required by

the circumstances to do so. The spirit in the second dream actually

makes use of a candle when leading him, as a servant would do if he

was conducting a stranger to the W.C. at night when it was dark. But

why are these representatives of the demand for a change of scene,

which  the  lazy  sleeper  wants  to  avoid  at  all  costs,  such  uncanny

individuals as ghosts and spirits of dead people? Why does the spirit

in the second dream lead the way to a churchyard as if to desecrate a

grave? After all, these: elements seem to have nothing to do with the

urge to defaecate and the symbolization of faeces by gold. There is an

indication; in them of an anxiety which could perhaps be traced back

to an: effort to suppress the achievement of satisfaction in bed; but

that anxiety would not explain the specific nature of the dream-content

- its reference to death. We will refrain from making an interpretation

at this point and will stress further, as being in need of explanation, the

fact  that  in  both  these  situations,  where  two  men  are  sleeping

together, the uncanny element of the ghostly guide is associated with

a  woman.  The  spirit  in  the  first  dream  is  early  on  revealed  as  a

beautiful woman who feels she is now released, and the spirit in the

second  dream  leads  the  way  to  the  grave  of  a  girl,  on  which  the

distinguishing mark is to be placed.

 


                                  Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2532

 

    Let us turn for further enlightenment to some other defaecation-

dreams of this kind, in which the bedfellows are no longer two men but

a  man  and  a  woman,  a  married  couple.  The  satisfying  action

accomplished  in  sleep  as  a  result  of  the  dream  seems  here

particularly  repellent,  but  perhaps  for  that  very  reason  conceals  a

special meaning.

      First,  however,  we  will  introduce  a  dream  (on  account  of  its

connection in content with those that follow) which does not strictly

speaking fit in with the plan we have just put forward It is incomplete,

inasmuch as the element of the dreamer’s dirtying his bedfellow, his

wife, is absent. On the other hand, the connection between the urge to

defaecate and the fear of death is extremely plain. The peasant, who

is described as married, dreams that he is struck by lightning and that

his soul flies up to Heaven. Up there he begs to be allowed to return

once more to the earth in order to see his wife and children, obtains

permission to transform himself into a spider and to let himself down

on the thread spun by himself. The thread is too short and the effort to

express still more thread out of his body results in defaecation.

 

 

                                DREAM AND REALITY¹

 

   A peasant lay in bed and had a dream. He saw himself in the field with his oxen, ploughing.
Then suddenly down came a flash of lightning and struck him dead. Then he felt quite clearly
his soul floating upwards until at last it reached Heaven. Peter stood by the entrance gates
and was going to send the peasant in without more ado. But he begged to be allowed down to
earth once more, so that he could at least take leave of his wife and his children. But Peter
said that would not do, and once a man was in Heaven he was not allowed to return to the
world. At this the peasant wept and begged pitifully, until at last Peter gave way. Now there
was only one possible way for the peasant to see his family again and that was for Peter to
change him into an animal and send him down. So the peasant was turned into a spider and
span  a  long  thread  on  which  he  let  himself  down.  When  he  had  arrived  just  over  his
homestead, at about the level of the chimneys, and could already see his children playing in
the meadow, he noticed to his horror that he could not spin any further. Naturally his fear was
great,  for  of  course  he  wanted  to  get  right  down  to  the  earth.  So  he  squeezed  and  he
squeezed to make the thread longer. He squeezed with all his might and main - there was a
loud noise - and the peasant awoke. Something very human had happened to him while he
slept.

 

   Here we encounter spun thread as a new symbol for evacuated

faeces, although psycho-analysis furnishes us with no counterpart tothis  symbolization  but  on  the  contrary  attributes  another  symbolic

meaning to thread. This contradiction will be settled later on.

 

   ¹ Dr. von Waldheim, ‘Skatologische Erzählungen aus Preussisch-Schlesien [Scatologic

Tales from Prussian Silesia]’, Anthropophyteia, 6, 431, No. 9.

 


                                  Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2533

 

      The  next  dream,  richly  elaborated  and  pungently  told,  might  be

described as a ‘sociable’ one; it ends with the wife’s being dirtied. Its

points  of  agreement  with  the  previous  dream  are,  however,  quite

striking. The peasant is, it is true, not dead, but he finds himself in

Heaven,  wants  to  return  to  the  earth  and  experiences  the  same

difficulty over ‘spinning’ a sufficiently long thread to let himself down

on. However, he does not make this thread for himself as a spider out

of his own body, but in a less fantastic way out of everything that he

can  fasten  together,  and  as  the  thread  is  still  not  long  enough  to

reach, the little angels actually advise him to shit and to lengthen the

rope with the turds.

 
 

                      THE PEASANT’S ASSUMPTION TO HEAVEN¹

 

   A peasant had the following dream. He had heard that wheat in Heaven was standing at a
high price. So he thought he would like to take his wheat there. He loaded his cart, harnessed
the horse and set out. He journeyed a long way till he saw the road to Heaven and followed it.
Thus he came to the gates of Heaven, and look! they stood open. He charged straight forward
so as to drive right inside, but he had scarcely headed the cart towards them when - crash!
the gates banged shut. Then he began to beg: ‘Let me in, please be kind!’ But the angels did
not let him in and said he had come late. Then he saw that there was no business to be done
here; there was just nothing for him, and so he turned round. But look! the road he had
travelled on had vanished. What was he to do? He addressed himself to the angels again.
‘Little dears, please be kind and take me back to the earth, if it’s possible! give me a road so
that I can get home with my horse and cart!’ But the angels said: ‘No, child of man, your horse
and cart stay here and you can go down how you please.’ ‘But how shall I let myself down
then, I haven’t any rope?’ ‘Just look for something to let yourself down with.’ So he took the
reins, the bridle and the bit, fastened them all together and began to let himself down. He
crawled and he crawled and he looked down - it was still a long way to the earth. He crawled
back again and lengthened the rope he had joined together by adding the girth and the traces.
Then he began to climb down again and it still did not reach the earth. So he fastened on the
shafts and the body of the cart. It was still too short. What was he to do next? He racked hisbrains and then he thought: ‘Ah, I’ll lengthen it with my coat and my breeches and my shirt
and then with my belt.’ And that is what he did, joined everything together and climbed on.
When he had reached the end of the belt it was still a long way to the earth. Then he did not
know what to do; he had nothing more to fasten on and it was dangerous to jump down: he
might break his neck. He begged the angels again: ‘Be kind, take me down to the earth!’ The
angels said: ‘Shit, and the muck will make a rope.’ So he shat and he shat almost half an hour
until he had nothing left to shit with. It made a long rope and he climbed down it. He climbed
and he climbed and reached the end of the rope, but it was still a long way to the earth. Then
he began once more to beg the angels to take him down to the earth. But the angels said:
‘Now, child of man, piss and it will make a silken thread.’ The peasant pissed and he pissed,
on and on, till he could do no more. He saw that it really had turned into a silken thread and
he climbed on. He climbed and he climbed and he reached the end of it, and look, it did not
reach to the earth, it still needed one and a half or two fathoms. He begged the angels again
to take him down. But the angels said: ‘No, brother, there is no help for you now; just jump
down!’ The peasant dangled undecided; he could not find the courage to jump down. But then
he saw that there was no other was out left to him, and bump! instead of jumping down from
Heaven he came flying down from the stove and only came to his senses in the middle of the
room. Then he woke up and shouted: ‘ Wife, wife, where are you?’ His wife woke up, she
heard the din and said: ‘The Devil take you, have you gone mad?’ She felt round about her
and saw the mess: her husband had shat and pissed all over her. She began to rate and to
scold  him  roundly.  The  peasant  said:  ‘What  are  you  screaming  about?  There’s  vexation
enough anyway. The horse is lost, stayed behind in Heaven, and I was almost done for. God
be thanked that I am alive at least!’ ‘What rubbish you’re talking. You’ve had much too much
to drink. The horse is in the stable and you were on the stove, and dirtied me all over and then
jumped down.’ Then the man collected himself. Only then did it dawn on him that he had
merely dreamt it all; and then he told his wife the dream, how he had journeyed up to Heaven
and how from there he came down to the earth again.

 

   ¹ Tarasevsky (1909, 196).

 


                                  Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2534

 

   At this point, however, psycho-analysis forces on our attention an

interpretation which changes our whole view of this class of dreams.

Extensible objects, so the experience of interpreting dreams tells us,

are ordinarily symbols of erection.¹ In both these anecdotes of dreams

the emphasis lies on the element of the thread’s refusing to get long

enough, and the anxiety in the dream is also attached to this same

element. Thread moreover, like all things analogous to it (cord, rope,

twine etc.), is a symbol of semen.² The peasant, then, is striving to

produce an erection and only when this is unsuccessful does he resort

to  defaecation.  All  at  once  a  sexual  need  comes  to  view  in  thesedreams behind the excremental one.

   This sexual need is, however, much better adapted to explain the

remaining constituents of the dream’s content. We are bound to admit,

if we are ready to assume that these fictitious dreams are essentially

correctly constructed, that the dream-action with which they end must

have a meaning and must be one intended by the latent thoughts of

the dreamer. If the dreamer defaecates over his wife at the end of it,

then  the  whole  dream  must  have  this  as  its  aim  and  provide  the

reason for this outcome. It can signify nothing else but an insult to the

wife, or, strictly speaking, a rejection of her. It is then easy to establish

a connection between this and the deeper significance of the anxiety

expressed in the dream.

   The situation from which this last dream grows can be construed

according to these suggestions as follows. The sleeper is overcome

by a strong erotic need which is indicated in fairly clear symbols at the

beginning  of  the  dream.  (He  had  heard  that  wheat  -  probably

equivalent  to  semen  -  was  standing  at  a  high  price.  He  charged

forward in order to drive with his horse and cart - genital symbols -

through the open gates of Heaven.) But this libidinal impulse probably

applies to an unattainable object. The gates close, he gives up his

intention and wants to return to the earth. But his wife, who lies by

him, does not attract him; he exerts himself in vain to get an erection

for her. The wish to discard her in order to replace her by another and

better woman is in the infantile sense a death-wish. When someone

cherishes such wishes in his unconscious against a person who is

nevertheless  really  loved,  they  are  transformed  for  him  into  fear  of

death, fear for his own life. Hence the presence in these dreams of the

state  of  being  dead,  the  assumption  to  Heaven,  the  hypocritical

longing to see wife and children again. But the disappointed sexual

libido finds release along the path of regression in the excremental

wishful  impulse,  which  abuses  and  soils  the  unserviceable  sexual

object.

 

   ¹ [Marginal Note by Oppenheim:] In a story which comes from Picardy, pushing a ring down

on a finger serves as a symbolic way of depicting an erection. The lower the ring goes, the
longer the penis becomes - the analogy naturally has a magical force. (Kryptadia, 1, No. 32.)
   ² Cf. Stekel, 1911a.
                                   Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2535

 

   If this particular dream makes an interpretation of this kind plausible,

then,  in  view  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  material  which  the  dream-

contains,  we  can  only  succeed  in  proving  the  interpretation  by

applying the same one to a whole succession of dreams with an allied

content.  With  this  aim  in  view,  let  us  turn  back  to  the  dreams

mentioned earlier, where we find the situation of a sleeper who has a

man as his bedfellow. The connection in which the woman appears in

these dreams now acquires an added significance in retrospect. The

sleeper, overcome by a libidinal impulse, rejects the man; he wishes

him far away and a woman in his place. A death-wish directed against

the dreamer’s unwanted male bedfellow is naturally not so severely

punished by the moral censorship as one directed against his wife, but

the reaction is sufficiently far-reaching to turn the wish against himself

or  against  the  female  object  he  desires.  The  dreamer  himself  is

carried off by death; not the man, but the woman the dreamer longs

for,  is  dead.  In  the  end,  however,  the  rejection  of  the  male  sexual

object finds an outlet in defiling him, and this is felt and avenged by

the other as an affront.

   Our interpretation thus fits this group of dreams. If we now turn back

to the dreams accompanied by defilement of the woman, we shall be

prepared to find that elements missing or only hinted at in the dream

we have taken as the type are expressed unmistakably in other similar

dreams.

   In the following defaecation-dream the dirtying of the woman is not

emphasized,  but  we  are  told  quite  clearly,  as  far  as  can  be  in  the

realm  of  symbolism,  that  the  libidinal  impulse  is  directed  towards

another woman. The dreamer does not want to dirty his own field, but

intends to defaecate on his neighbour’s land.

 

 

                                      MUTTON-HEAD!¹

 

   A peasant dreamt that he was at work in his clover field. He was overtaken by an urgent
need and, since he did not want to foul his own clover, he hurried off to the tree standing in his
neighhour’s field, pulled down his breeches and slapped down a pat of number two on to theground. At last, when he had happily come to an end, he wanted to clean himself and began
to tear up grass with a will. But what was that? Our little peasant woke up from his sleep with
a jerk, and clutched at his painfully smarting cheek which someone had just slapped. ‘You
deaf old mutton-head!’ - the peasant, coming to himself, heard his wife in bed beside him
scolding. ‘So you’d go on pulling the hair right off my body would you!’

 

   ¹ F. Wernert, ‘Deutsche Bauernerzählungen gesammelt im Ober- und Unterelsass [German

Peasant-Tales, Collected in Upper and Lower Alsace]’, Anthropophyteia, 4, 138, No. 173.
 


                                  Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2536

 

   Tearing out hair (grass), which here takes the place of defiling, is

found  mentioned  alongside  it  in  the  next  dream.  Psycho-analytic

experience  shows  that  it  originates  from  the  group  of  symbols

concerning  masturbation  (ausreissen, abreissen  [to  pull  out,  to  pull

off]).

   The dreamer’s death-wish directed against his wife would seem to

be  what  most  requires  confirming  in  our  interpretation.  But  in  the

dream  which  follows  next,  the  dreamer  actually  buries  his  wife

(hypocritically designated as a treasure) by digging the vessel which

contains the gold into the earth and, as is familiar to us in dreams

about treasure, planting a heap of faeces on the top to mark the place.

During the digging he is working his hands in his wife’s vagina.¹

 

 

                            THE DREAM OF THE TREASURE²

 

   Once upon a time a peasant had a terrible dream. It seemed to him just like it was war-time
and the whole district was being plundered by the enemy soldiers. But he had a treasure that
he was so scared about that he didn’t rightly know what to do with it and where he should
really hide it. At last he thought he would bury it in his garden, where he knew of a proper fine
place. Now he dreams on further how he goes right out and comes to the place where he
wants to dig up the earth so he can put the big pot in the hole. But when he looks for a tool to
dig with he finds nix round about, and at last he has to take his hands to it. So he makes the
hole with his bare hands, puts the crock with the money into it and covers the whole lot over
again with earth. Now he wants to go, but he stops a while standing there and thinks to
himself: ‘But when the soldiers have gone away again, how’ll I find my treasure then if I don’t
put a sign there?’ And straight away he begins to hunt about; he hunts up and down and to
and fro, wherever he can. No, in the end he finds nix nowhere that would show him again
straight away where he has buried his money. But just then he feels a need. ‘Ah,’ he says to
himself, ‘now that’ll be fine, I can shit on it.’ So of course he pulls his breeches down rightaway and does a fine heap on the place where he has put the crock in. Then he sees nearby
a bit of grass and is going to pull it out, so he cam wipe himself with it. But that moment he
gets such a fine clout that for a second he is quite silly and looks round all dazed. And straight
after he hears his wife, who is quite beside herself with rage, yelling at him: ‘You cheeky
bastard, you good-for-nothing! D’you think I’ve got to put up with everything from you? First
you mess about with both hands in my cunt, then you shit on it and now you even want to pull
all the hair off it!’

 

   ¹ [Marginal Note by Oppenheim:] Significance?
   ² A Riedl, ‘Schwänke und Schnurren niederösterreichischer Landleute [Comic and Curious
Anecdotes from Lower-Austrian Country People]’, Anthropophyteia, 5, 10, No. 19.
 


                                  Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2537

 

   With this example of a dream we have returned to the treasure-

dreams  from  which  we  started  out,  and  we  observe  that  those

defaecation-dreams which are concerned with treasure contain little or

no fear of death, whereas the others, in which the relation to death is

expressed directly (dreams of an assumption to Heaven), disregard

treasure and motivate the defaecation in other ways. It is almost as

though the hypocritical transformation of the wife into a treasure had

obviated punishment for the death-wish.¹

   A death-wish directed against the woman is most clearly admitted to

in another dream of an assumption to Heaven, which, however, ends

not in defaecating on the woman’s body but in sexual activity involving

her  genitals,  as  already  happened  in  the  previous  dream.  The

dreamer actually shortens his wife’s life in order to lengthen his own,

by  putting  oil  from  her  lamp  of  life  into  his  own.  As  a  kind  of

compensation for this undisguised hostility there appears at the end of

the dream something like an attempt at a caress.

 

 

                                  THE LIGHT OF LIFE²

 

   Saint Peter appeared to a man when he was fast asleep and led him away to Paradise. The
man  agreed  to  go  with  all  his  heart  and  went  with  Saint  Peter.  They  wandered  about  in
Paradise for a long time and came to a copse, which was large and spacious but kept in
beautiful order, and where hanging lamps were burning on every tree. The man asked Saint
Peter what this could mean. Saint Peter answered that they were hanging lamps which only
burned as long as a man lived. But as soon as the oil vanished and the lamp went out, theman had to die at once too. This interested the man very much and he asked Saint Peter if he
would lead him to his own hanging lamp. Saint Peter granted his request and led him to his
wife’s lamp, and just by it was the man’s own lamp. The man saw that his wife’s lamp still had
a lot of oil in it, but there was very little in his own and this made him very sorry because he
would have to die soon, and he asked Saint Peter if he would pour a little more oil into his
lamp. Saint Peter said that God put the oil in at the moment when a man was born and
determined for each the length of his life. This made the man very downcast and he wept and
wailed beside his lamp. Saint Peter said to him: ‘You stay there, but I must go on - I have
more to do.’ The man rejoiced at this and hardly was Saint Peter out of sight when he began
to dip his finger in his wife’s hanging lamp and to drip the oil into his own. He did this several
times and when Saint Peter approached he started up terrified, and awoke from his dream,
and saw that he had been dipping his finger in his wife’s cunt and then dribbling it into his
mouth and licking his finger.
   Note. According to a version told by a journeyman in Sarajevo, the man awoke after getting
a box on the ears from his wife, whom he had awakened by fumbling around in her pudenda.
Here Saint Peter is missing and instead of hanging lamps there are glasses with oil burning in
them.  According  to  a  third  version,  which  I  heard  from  a  student  in  Mostar,  a  venerable
greybeard shows the man various burning candles. His own is very thin, his wife’s enormously
thick. In order to lengthen his life, the man then begins with burning zeal to lick the thick
candle. But then he gets a tremendous clout. ‘I knew that you were an ox, but I honestly didn’t
know that you were a swine as well,’ his wife said to him, for he was licking her cunt in his
sleep.

   The story is extraordinarily widespread in Europe.³

 

   ¹ [Marginal Note by Oppenheim:] What about the treasure in the dreams of one of two male

bedfellows?

   ² Narrated by a Secondary School teacher in Belgrade, based on a version told by a

peasant woman from the region of Kragujevac. Anthropophyteia, 4, 255, No. 10.

   ³ [Marginal Note by Oppenheim:] Cf. a very similar story from the Ukraine, Kryptadia, 5, 15.

 


                                  Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2538
 

   This is the moment to recall the ‘bad dream’ of the woman who

ended by pulling at her husband’s organ as if she wanted to tear it out.

The interpretation which we found; reason to make in that instance

agrees completely with the interpretation of the defaecation-dreams

dreamt  by  men  which  is  expounded  here.  In  the  dream  of  the

unsatisfied wife, she, as well, shamelessly gets rid of her husband

(and the child) as obstacles in the way of satisfaction.

   Another defaecation-dream, about whose interpretation we cannot

perhaps  be  completely  certain,  suggests,  however,  that  we  should

concede  that  there  are  certain  differences  in  the  purpose  of  thesedreams, and throws new light on dreams like the ones we have just

mentioned and on some that are still to follow, in which the dream-

action consists in a manipulation of the woman’s genitals.

 

 

                                    ‘FROM FRIGHT’¹

 

   The Pasha passed the night with the Bey. When the next day came, the Bey lay on in bed
and did not want to get up. The Bey asked the Pasha: ‘What did you dream?’ ‘I dreamt that on
the minaret there was another minaret.’ ‘Could that really be?’ wondered the Bey. ‘And what
else did you dream?’ ‘I dreamt,’ he said, ‘that on the minaret there stood a copper jug, and
there was water in the jug. The wind blew and the copper jug rocked. Now what would you
have done if you had dreamt that?’ ‘I should have pissed myself and shat myself as well, from
fright.’ ‘And, you see, I only pissed myself.’

 

   This dream calls for a symbolic interpretation, because its manifest

content  is  quite  incomprehensible  whereas  the  symbols  are

unmistakably clear. Why should the dreamer really feel frightened at

the sight of a water-jug rocking on the tip of a minaret? But a minaret

is excellently suited to be a symbol for the penis, and the rhythmically

moving water-vessel seems a good symbol of the female genitals in

the act of copulation The Pasha, then, has had a copulation-dream,

and if his host suggests defaecation in connection with it this makes it

likely that the interpretation is to be sought in the circumstance that

both  of  them  are  old  and  impotent  men,  in  whom  old  age  has

occasioned  the  same  proverbial  replacement  of  sexual  by

excremental  pleasure  which,  as  we  have  seen,  came  about  in  the

other dreams owing to the lack of an appropriate sexual object. For a

man who can no longer copulate, so say the common people with

their crude love of truth, there still remains the pleasure of shitting; we

can say of such a man there is a recurrence of anal erotism, which

was there before genital erotism and

was  repressed  and  replaced  by  this  later  impulse.  Defaecation-

dreams can thus also be impotence-dreams.

 

   ¹ F. S. Krauss, ‘Südslavische Volksüberlieferungen, die sich auf den Geschlechtsverkehr

beziehen [Southern Slav Folk Traditions concerning Sexual Intercourse]’, Anthropophyteia, 5,
293, No. 697.
                                   Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2539

 

   The difference between the interpretations is not so pronounced as

might appear at first sight. The defaecation-dreams too, in which the

victim is a woman, deal with impotence - relative impotence, at least,

towards the particular person who no longer has any attraction for the

dreamer. A defaecation-dream thus becomes the dream of a man who

can no longed satisfy a woman, as well as of a man whom a woman

no longer satisfies.

      The  same  interpretation  (as  an  impotence-dream)  can  also  be

applied to a dream in the Facetiae of Poggio, which manifestly, it is

true, poses as the dream of a jealous man - that is, in fact, of a man

who does not think he can satisfy his wife.

 

                                THE RING OF FIDELITY¹

 

   Franciscus Philelphus was jealous of his wife and became tormented by the greatest fear
that she had to do with another man, and day and night he lay on the watch. Since what
occupies us in waking is wont to return to us in dreams, there appeared to him during his
sleep a demon, who said to him that if he would act according to his bidding his wife would
always remain faithful to him. Franciscus said to him in the dream that he would be very
indebted to him and promised him a reward.
   ‘Take this ring,’ replied the demon, ‘and wear it on your finger with care. As long as you
wear it, your wife cannot lie with any other man without your knowledge.’
   As he awoke, excited with joy, he felt that he was pushing his finger into the vulva of his
wife.
  The jealous have no better expedient; in this way their wives can never let themselves be
taken by another man without the knowledge of their husbands.

 

   ¹ Poggio (1905, No. 133).

 


                                  Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2540

 

   This anecdote of Poggio is considered to be the source of a tale by

Rabelais, which, in other respects very similar, is clearer inasmuch as

it actually describes the husband bringing home a young wife in his

old age, who then gives him grounds for jealous fears.¹

       Hans  Carvel  was  a  learned,  experienced,  industrious  man,  a  man  of  honour,  of  good
understanding and judgement, benevolent, charitable to the poor and a cheerful philosopher.
Withal a good companion, who was fond of a jest, somewhat corpulent and unsteady, but
otherwise well set up in every way. In his old age he married the daughter of Concordat the
bailiff, a young, comely, good, gay, lively and pleasing woman, merely perchance a little too
friendly towards the gentlemen neighbours and menservants. So it befell that in the course of
some weeks he became as jealous as a tiger and was suspicious that she might be getting
her buttocks drummed upon elsewhere. To guard against this, he related to her a whole stock
of pleasing histories of the punishments for adultery, often read aloud to her lovely legends of
virtuous women, preached her the gospel of chastity, wrote her a small volume of songs of
praise to matrimonial fidelity, inveighed in sharp and caustic words against the wantonness of
undisciplined wives and in addition to all bestowed on her a magnificent necklace set round
with oriental sapphires.
   But regardless of this, he saw her going about with the neighbours in such a friendly and
sociable fashion that his jealousy mounted yet higher. One night at that time, as he was lying
with her in bed, in the midst of these painful thoughts, he dreamt he spoke with the Fiend
Incarnate and bewailed his grief to him. But the Devil comforted him, put a ring on his finger
and said: ‘Take this ring; as long as you carry it on your finger no other man can have carnal
knowledge of your wife without your knowledge and against your will.’ ‘A thousand thanks, Sir
Devil!’ said Hans Carvel, ‘I will deny Mahomet before ever I take this ring from my finger.’ The
Devil disappeared. But Hans Carvel awoke with a joyful heart and found that he had his finger
in his wife’s what-d’you-call-it.
   I forgot to relate how the young woman, when she felt this, jerked her buttocks backwards
as if to say: ‘Stop! No, no! That’s not what ought to be put in there!’ - which made Hans Carvel
imagine that someone wanted to pull off his ring.
   Is that not an infallible measure? Believe me! act after this example and take care at all

times to have your wife’s ring on your finger!²

 

      The  Devil,  who  appears  here  as  counsellor,  as  he  does  in  the

treasure-dreams, gives us a clue to something of the dreamer’s latent

thoughts. Originally at least, he was supposed to ‘take’ the unfaithful

wife who is hard to keep a watch on. He then shows in the manifest

dream an infallible means of keeping her permanently. In this too we

recognize an analogy with the wish to get rid of someone (death-wish)

in the defaecation-dreams.

 
 
   ¹ Rabelais, Pantagruel, Chapter 28 of Le Tiers Livre.
   ² [Footnote by Freud:] Goethe is concerned with this symbolism of the ring and the finger in
a Venetian Epigram (Paralipomena, No. 65, Sophienausgabe, Abt. II, Bd. 5, 381).
                Costly rings I possess! Excellent stones, engraved
                In lofty style and conception, held by the purest of gold;
                Dearly men pay for these rings, adorned with fiery stones,
                Oft have you seen them sparkle over the gaming-table.
                But one little ring I know, whose virtue is not the same,
                Which Hans Carvel once possessed, sadly, when he was old.
                Foolish he pushed in the ring the smallest of all his ten fingers,                The eleventh, the biggest, alone is worthy and fit to be there.
 


                                  Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2541

 

 

   We will conclude this small collection of dreams by adding a lottery-

dream, whose connection with the others is rather slight, but which

serves to confirm the suggestion which we put forward earlier that a

lottery symbolizes a marriage contract.

 

 

                      IT’S NO USE CRYING OVER SPILT MILK!¹

 

   A merchant had a strange dream. He dreamt that he saw a woman’s arse with everything
that belonged to it. On one half was a figure 1 and on the other a 3. Before this, the merchant
had had the idea of buying a lottery ticket. It seemed to him that this picture in his dream was
a lucky omen. Without waiting till the ninth hour, he ran to the bank first thing in the morning,
in order to buy his ticket. He arrived there and without pausing to think he demanded ticket
Number Thirteen, the same figures that he had seen in his dream. After he had bought his
ticket, not a day passed on which he did not look in all the newspapers to see if his number
had won. After a week, or at the most after ten days, the list of the draw came out. When he
looked through, he saw that his number had not been drawn but the number 103, Series 8,
and that number had won 200,000 roubles. The merchant nearly tore his hair out. ‘I must have
made  a  mistake!  there  is  something  wrong!’  He  was  beside  himself,  he  was  almost
inconsolable and could not conceive what his having had such a dream could mean. Then he
resolved to discuss the matter with his friend to see if he could not account for his misfortune.
He met his friend and told him everything in minute detail. Then his friend said: ‘Oh you
simpleton! Didn’t you see the nought between the number 1 and the 3 on the arse?’ ‘A-a-ah,
the Devil take it, it never occurred to me that the arse had a nought.’ ‘But it was there plain
and clear, only you didn’t work out the lottery number right. And the number 8 belonging to the
series - the cunt shows you that - it’s like a number 8.’ - It’s no use crying over spilt milk!

 

   ¹ Tarasevsky (1909, 40).

 


                                  Dreams In Folklore

                                                                                      2542

 

 

   Our intention in putting together this short paper was twofold. On the

one hand we wanted to suggest that one should not be deterred bythe often repulsively dirty and indecent nature of this popular material

from seeking in it valuable confirmation of psycho-analytic views. Thus

on this occasion we have been able to establish the fact that folklore

interprets dream-symbols in the same way as psycho-analysis, and

that, contrary to loudly proclaimed popular opinion, it derives a group

of dreams from needs and wishes which have become immediate. On

the other hand, we should like to express the view that it is doing the

common people an injustice to assume that they employ this form of

entertainment merely to satisfy the coarsest desires. It seems rather

that  behind  these  ugly  façades  are  concealed  mental  reactions  to

impressions of life which are to be taken seriously, which even strike a

sad note - reactions to which common people are ready to surrender,

but only if they are accompanied by a yield of coarse pleasure.

                                                                                       2543

 

                              ON PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

                                    (1913 [1911])

 


                                                                                      2544

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2545

 

                              ON PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

In response to a friendly request by the Secretary of your Section of

Neurology  and  Psychiatry,  I  venture  to  draw  the  attention  of  this

Congress to the subject of psycho-analysis, which is being extensively

studied at the present time in Europe and America.

   Psycho-analysis is a remarkable combination, for it comprises not

only a method of research into the neuroses but also a method of

treatment  based  on  the  aetiology  thus  discovered.  I  may  begin  by

saying  that  psycho-analysis  is  not  a  child  of  speculation,  but  the

outcome of experience; and for that reason, like every new product of

science, is unfinished. It is open to anyone to convince himself by his

own investigations of the correctness of the theses embodied in it, and

to help in the further development of the study.

   Psycho-analysis started with researches into hysteria, but in the

course  of  years  it  has  extended  far  beyond  that  field  of  work.  The

Studies on Hysteria by Breuer and myself, published in 1895, were the

beginnings of psycho-analysis. They followed in the track of Charcot’s

work on ‘traumatic’ hysteria, Liébeault’s and Bernheim’s investigations

of the phenomena of hypnosis, and Janet’s studies of unconscious

mental  processes.  Psycho-analysis  soon  found  itself  in  sharp

opposition  to  Janet’s  views,  because  (a)  it  declined  to  trace  back

hysteria  directly  to  congenital  hereditary  degeneracy,  (b)  it  offered,

instead of a mere description, a dynamic explanation based on theinterplay of psychical forces and (c) it ascribed the origin of psychical

dissociation  (whose  importance  had  been  recognized  by  Janet  as

well) not to a failure of mental synthesis resulting from a congenital

disability,  but  to  a  special  psychical  process  known  as  ‘repression’

(‘Verdrängung’).

   It was conclusively proved that hysterical symptoms are residues

(reminiscences) of profoundly moving experiences, which have been

withdrawn  from  everyday  consciousness,  and  that  their  form  is

determined (in a manner that excludes deliberate action) by details of

the traumatic effects of the experiences. On this view, the therapeutic

prospects lie in the possibility of getting rid of this ‘repression’, so as to

allow part of the unconscious psychical material to become conscious

and thus to deprive it of its pathogenic power. This view is a dynamic

one, in so far as it regards psychical processes as displacements of

psychical energy which can be gauged by the amount of their effect

on the affective elements. This is most significant in hysteria, where

the process of ‘conversion’ creates the symptoms by transforming a

quantity of mental impulses into somatic innervations.

 


                                  On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2546

 

   The first psycho-analytic examinations and attempts at treatment

were  made  with  the  help  of  hypnotism.  Afterwards  this  was

abandoned  and  the  work  was  carried  out  by  the  method  of  ‘free

association’,  with  the  patient  remaining  in  his  normal  state.  This

modification  had  the  advantage  of  enabling  the  procedure  to  be

applied to a far larger number of cases of hysteria, as well as to other

neuroses and also to healthy people. The development of a special

technique of interpretation became necessary, however, in order to

draw  conclusions  from  the  expressed  ideas  of  the  person  under

investigation.  These  interpretations  established  with  complete

certainty the fact that psychical dissociations are maintained entirely

by  ‘internal  resistances’.  The  conclusion  seems  justified,  therefore,

that the dissociations have originated owing to internal conflict, which

has led to the ‘repression’ of the underlying impulse. To overcome thisconflict and in that way to cure the neurosis, the guiding hand of a

doctor trained in psycho-analysis is required.

   Furthermore, it has been shown to be true quite generally that in all

neuroses  the  pathological  symptoms  are  really  the  end-products  of

such  conflicts,  which  have  led  to  ‘repression’  and  ‘splitting’  of  the

mind.  The  symptoms  are  generated  by  different  mechanisms:  (a)

either as formations in substitution for the repressed forces, or (b) as

compromises between the repressing and repressed forces, or (c) as

reaction-formations and safeguards against the repressed forces.

      Researches  were  further  extended  to  the  conditions  which

determine whether or not psychical conflicts will lead to ‘repression’

(that  is,  to  dissociation  dynamically  caused),  since  it  goes  without

saying  that  a  psychical  conflict, per  se,  may  also  have  a  normal

outcome. The conclusion arrived at by psycho-analysis was that such

conflicts  were  always  between  the  sexual  instincts  (using  the  word

‘sexual’  in  the  widest  sense)  and  the  wishes  and  trends  of  the

remainder  of  the  ego.  In  neuroses  it  is  the  sexual  instincts  that

succumb to ‘repression’ and so constitute the most important basis for

the  genesis  of  symptoms,  which  may  accordingly  be  regarded  as

substitutes for sexual satisfactions.

 


                                  On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2547

 

   Our work on the question of the disposition to neurotic affections has

added the ‘infantile’ factor to the somatic and hereditary ones hitherto

recognized.  Psycho-analysis  was  obliged  to  trace  back  patients’

mental life to their early infancy, and the conclusion was reached that

inhibitions of mental development (‘infantilisms’) present a disposition

to  neurosis.  In  particular,  we  have  learnt  from  our  investigations  of

sexual life that there really is such a thing as ‘infantile sexuality’, that

the  sexual  instinct  is  made  up  of  many  components  and  passes

through a complicated course of development, the final outcome of

which,  after  many  restrictions  and  transformations,  is  the  ‘normal’

sexuality  of  adults.  The  puzzling  perversions  of  the  sexual  instinct

which occur in adults appear to be either inhibitions of development,fixations  or  lop-sided  growths.  Thus  neuroses  are  the  negative  of

perversions.

   The cultural development imposed on mankind is the factor which

necessitates  the  restrictions  and  repressions  of  the  sexual  instinct,

greater  or  lesser  sacrifices  being  demanded  according  to  the

individual constitution. Development is hardly ever achieved smoothly,

and  disturbances  may  occur  (whether  on  account  of  the  individual

constitution  or  of  premature  sexual  incidents)  leaving  behind  a

disposition  to  future  neuroses.  Such  dispositions  may  remain

harmless if the adult’s life proceeds satisfactorily and quietly; but they

become pathogenic if the conditions of mature life forbid satisfaction of

the libido or make too high demands on its suppression.

   Researches into the sexual activity of children have led to a further

conception of the sexual instinct, based not on its purposes but on its

sources. The sexual instinct possesses in a high degree the capacity

for  being  diverted  from  direct  sexual  aims  and  for  being  directed

towards higher aims which are no longer sexual (‘sublimation’). The

instinct is thus enabled to make most important contributions to the

social and artistic achievements of humanity.

 


                                  On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2548

 

   Recognition of the simultaneous presence of the three factors of

‘infantilism’,  ‘sexuality’  and  ‘repression’  constitutes  the  main

characteristic of the psycho-analytic theory, and marks its distinction

from other views of pathological mental life. At the same time, psycho-

analysis has demonstrated that there is no fundamental difference, but

only  one  of  degree,  between  the  mental  life  of  normal  people,  of

neurotics and of psychotics. A normal person has to pass through the

same  repressions  and  has  to  struggle  with  the  same  substitutive

structures; the only difference is that he deals with these events with

less  trouble  and  better  success.  The  psycho-analytic  method  of

investigation can accordingly be applied equally to the explanation of

normal psychical phenomena, and has made it possible to discover

the  close  relationship  between  pathological  psychical  products  andnormal structures such as dreams, the small blunders of everyday life,

and  such  valuable  phenomena  as  jokes,  myths  and  imaginative

works. The explanation of these has been carried furthest in the case

of dreams, and has resulted here in the following general formula: ‘A

dream is a disguised fulfilment of a repressed wish.’ The interpretation

of dreams has as its object the removal of the disguise to which the

dreamer’s  thoughts  have  been  subjected.  It  is,  moreover,  a  highly

valuable aid to psycho-analytic technique, for it constitutes the most

convenient method of obtaining insight into unconscious psychical life.

   There is often a tendency in medical and especially in psychiatric

circles to contradict the theories of psycho-analysis without any real

study  or  practical  application  of  them.  This  is  due  not  only  to  the

striking novelty of these theories and the contrast they present to the

views  hitherto  held  by  psychiatrists,  but  also  to  the  fact  that  the

premisses and technique of psycho-analysis are much more nearly

related to the field of psychology than to that of medicine. It cannot be

disputed,  however,  that  purely  medical  and  non-psychological

teachings have hitherto done very little towards an understanding of

mental life. The progress of psycho-analysis is further retarded by the

dread felt by the average observer of seeing himself in his own mirror.

Men of science tend to meet emotional resistances with arguments,

and thus satisfy themselves to their own satisfaction! Whoever wishes

not to ignore a truth will do well to distrust his antipathies, and, if he

wishes  to  submit  the  theory  of  psycho-analysis  to  a  critical

examination, let him first analyse himself.

 


                                  On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2549

 

 

      I  cannot  think  that  in  these  few  sentences  I  have  succeeded  in

painting  a  clear  picture  of  the  principles  and  purposes  of  psycho-

analysis. But I will add a list of the chief publications on the subject, a

study of which will give further enlightenment to any whom I may have

interested.

    1.  Breuer  and  Freud, Studies  on  Hysteria,  1895.  Fr.  Deuticke,Vienna.

  A  portion  of  the  above  has  been  translated  into  English  in

    ‘Selected Papers on Hysteria and other Psycho‑neuroses’, by Dr.

    A. A. Brill, New York, 1909.

  2. Freud, Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie, Vienna, 1905.

    English translation by Dr. Brill, ‘Three Contributions to the Sexual

    Theory’, New York, 1910.

  3. Freud, Zur Psychopathologie des Alltagslebens, S. Karger, Berlin.

3rd edition, 1910.

  4. Freud, Die Traumdeutung, Vienna, 1900. 3rd ed., 1911.

  5. Freud, ‘The Origin and Development of Psycho-analysis’,

    Amer. Jour. of Psychology, April, 1910. Also in German:

    Ueber  Psychoanalyse.  Five  Lectures  given  at  the  Clark

    University, Worcester, Mass, 1909.

  6. Freud, Der Witz und seine Beziehung zum Unbewussten, Vienna,

1905.

  7. Freud, Collection of minor papers on the Doctrine of Neuroses,

      1893-1906. Vienna,1906.

 8. Idem. A second collection. Vienna, 1909.

 9. Hitschmann, Freud’s Neurosenlehre, Vienna, 1911.

10.  C.  G.  Jung, Diagnostische  Associationsstudien.  Two  volumes,

1906-1910.

11. C. G. Jung, Über die psychologie der Dementia Praecox, 1907.

12. Jahrbuch  für  psycho-analytische  und  psychopathologische

Forschungen,

    published by E. Bleuler and S. Freud, edited by Jung. Since 1909.

13. Schriften zur angewandten Seelenkunde. Fr. Deuticke, Vienna.

    Since  1907.  Eleven  parts,  by  Freud,  Jung,  Abraham,  Pfister,

    Rank, Jones, Riklin, Graf, Sadger.

14. Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse.

    Edited by A. Adler and W Stekel. J. Bergmann, Wiesbaden. Since

    Sept., 1910.

                                                                                       2550

 

        FORMULATIONS ON THE TWO PRINCIPLES OF MENTAL

                                    FUNCTIONING

                                        (1911)

 


                                                                                      2551

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2552

 

        FORMULATIONS ON THE TWO PRINCIPLES OF MENTAL

                                    FUNCTIONING

 

We  have  long  observed  that  every  neurosis  has  as  its  result,  and

probably therefore as its purpose, a forcing of the patient out of real

life, an alienating of him from reality. Nor could a fact such as this

escape  the  observation  of  Pierre  Janet;  he  spoke:  of  a  loss  of  ‘la

fonction  du  réel’  [‘the  function  of  reality’]  as  being  a  special

characteristic of neurotics, but without discovering the connection of

this disturbance with the fundamental determinants of neurosis.¹ By

introducing the process of repression into the genesis of the neuroses

we have been able to gain some insight into this connection. Neurotics

turn  away  from  reality  because  they  find  it  unbearable  -  either  the

whole or parts of it. The most extreme type of this turning away from

reality  is  shown  by  certain  cases  of  hallucinatory  psychosis  which

seek to deny the particular event that occasioned the outbreak of their

insanity (Griesinger). But in fact every neurotic does the same with

some fragment of reality.² And we are now confronted with the task of

investigating  the  development  of  the  relation  of  neurotics  and  of

mankind  in  general  to  reality,  and  in  this  way  of  bringing  the

psychological significance of the real external world into the structure

of our theories.

   In the psychology which is founded on psycho-analysis we havebecome accustomed to taking as our starting-point the unconscious

mental  processes,  with  the  peculiarities  of  which  we  have  become

acquainted  through  analysis.  We  consider  these  to  be  the  older,

primary processes, the residues of a phase of development in which

they were the only kind of mental process. The governing purpose

obeyed  by  these  primary  processes  is  easy  to  recognize;  it  is

described as the pleasure-unpleasure [Lust-Unlust] principle, or more

shortly the pleasure principle. These processes strive towards gaining

pleasure; psychical activity draws back from any event which might

arouse unpleasure. (Here we have repression.) Our dreams at night

and  our  waking  tendency  to  tear  ourselves  away  from  distressing

impressions  are  remnants  of  the  dominance  of  this  principle  and

proofs of its power.

 

   ¹ Janet, 1909.

   ² Otto Rank (1910) has recently drawn attention to a remarkably clear prevision of this

causation shown in Schopenhauer’s The World as Will and Idea.
 


        Formulations On The Two Principles Of Mental Functioning

                                                                                      2553

 

      I  shall  be  returning  to  lines  of  thought  which  I  have  developed

elsewhere¹  when  I  suggest  that  the  state  of  psychical  rest  was

originally  disturbed  by  the  peremptory  demands  of  internal  needs.

When  this  happened,  whatever  was  thought  of  (wished  for)  was

simply presented in a hallucinatory manner, just as still happens to-

day  with  our  dream-thoughts  every  night.²  It  was  only  the  non-

occurrence  of  the  expected  satisfaction,  the  disappointment

experienced,  that  led  to  the  abandonment  of  this  attempt  at

satisfaction  by  means  of  hallucination.  Instead  of  it,  the  psychical

apparatus  had  to  decide  to  form  a  conception  of  the  real

circumstances in the external world and to endeavour to make a real

alteration  in  them.  A  new  principle  of  mental  functioning  was  thus

introduced; what was presented in the mind was no longer what was

agreeable but what was real, even if it happened to be disagreeable.³

This setting-up of the reality principle proved to be a momentous step.

    ¹ In the General Section of The Interpretation of Dreams.

   ² The state of sleep is able to re-establish the likeness of mental life as it was before the

recognition of reality, because a prerequisite of sleep is a deliberate rejection of reality (the
wish to sleep).

   ³ I will try to simplify the above schematic account with some further details. It will rightly be

objected that an organization which was a slave to the pleasure principle and neglected the
reality of the external world could not maintain itself alive for the shortest time, so that it could
not have come into existence at all. The employment of a fiction like this is, however, justified
when one considers that the infant - provided one includes with it the care it receives from its
mother - does almost realize a psychical system of this kind. It probably hallucinates the
fulfilment of its internal needs; it betrays its unpleasure, when there is an increase of stimulus
and an absence of satisfaction, by the motor discharge of screaming and beating about with
its arms and legs, and it then experiences the satisfaction it has hallucinated. Later, as an
older child, it learns to employ these manifestations of discharge intentionally as methods of
expressing its feelings. Since the later care of children is modelled on the care of infants, the
dominance of the pleasure principle can really come to an end only when a child has achieved
complete psychical detachment from its parents. - A neat example of a psychical system shut
off from the stimuli of the external world, and able to satisfy even its nutritional requirements
autistically (to use Bleuler’s term), is afforded by a bird’s egg with its food supply enclosed in
its shell; for it, the care provided by its mother is limited to the provision of warmth. - I shall not
regard it as a correction, but as an amplification of the schematic picture under discussion, if it
is insisted that a system living according to the pleasure principle must have devices to enable
it  to  withdraw  from  the  stimuli  of  reality.  Such  devices  are  merely  the  correlative  of
‘repression’, which treats internal unpleasurable stimuli as if they were external - that is to say,
pushes them into the external world.
 


        Formulations On The Two Principles Of Mental Functioning

                                                                                      2554

 

 

      (1)  In  the  first  place,  the  new  demands  made  a  succession  of

adaptations necessary in the psychical apparatus, which, owing to our

insufficient or uncertain knowledge, we can only retail very cursorily.

      The  increased  significance  of  external  reality  heightened  the

importance, too, of the sense-organs that are directed towards that

external  world,  and  of  the consciousness  attached  to  them.

Consciousness  now  learned  to  comprehend  sensory  qualities  in

addition to the qualities of pleasure and unpleasure which hitherto had

alone been of interest to it. A special function was instituted which had

periodically to search the external world, in order that its data might be

familiar already if an urgent internal need should arise - the function of

attention. Its activity meets the sense-impressions half way, instead ofawaiting their appearance. At the same time, probably, a system of

notation was introduced, whose task it was to lay down the results of

this  periodical  activity  of  consciousness  -  a  part  of  what  we  call

memory.

   The place of repression, which excluded from cathexis as productive

of unpleasure some of the emerging ideas, was taken by an impartial

passing of judgement, which had to decide whether a given idea was

true or false - that is, whether it was in agreement with reality or not -

the  decision  being  determined  by  making  a  comparison  with  the

memory-traces of reality.

   A new function was now allotted to motor discharge, which, under

the dominance of the pleasure principle, had served as a means of

unburdening the mental apparatus of accretions of stimuli, and which

had carried out this task by sending innervations into the interior of the

body (leading to expressive movements and the play of features and

to manifestations of affect). Motor discharge was now employed in the

appropriate alteration of reality; it was converted into action.

   Restraint upon motor discharge (upon action), which then became

necessary, was provided by means of the process of thinking, which

was developed from the presentation of ideas. Thinking was endowed

with characteristics which made it possible for the mental apparatus to

tolerate  an  increased  tension  of  stimulus  while  the  process  of

discharge  was  postponed.  It  is  essentially  an  experimental  kind  of

acting, accompanied by displacement of relatively small quantities of

cathexis together with less expenditure (discharge) of them. For this

purpose the conversion of freely displaceable cathexes into ‘bound’

cathexes was necessary, and this was brought about by means of

raising  the  level  of  the  whole  cathectic  process.  It  is  probable  that

thinking was originally unconscious, in so far as it went beyond mere

ideational  presentations  and  was  directed  to  the  relations  between

impressions  of  objects,  and  that  it  did  not  acquire  further  qualities,

perceptible to consciousness, until it became connected with verbal

residues.

 


        Formulations On The Two Principles Of Mental Functioning

                                                                                      2555 

      (2)  A  general  tendency  of  our  mental  apparatus,  which  can  be

traced back to the economic principle of saving expenditure, seems to

find expression in the tenacity with which we hold on to the sources of

pleasure at our disposal, and in the difficulty with which we renounce

them.  With  the  introduction  of  the  reality  principle  one  species  of

thought-activity was split off; it was kept free from reality-testing and

remained subordinated to the pleasure principle alone.¹ This activity is

phantasying,  which  begins  already  in  children’s  play,  and  later,

continued as day-dreaming, abandons dependence on real objects.

      (3)  The  supersession  of  the  pleasure  principle  by  the  reality

principle, with all the psychical consequences involved, which is here

schematically  condensed  into  a  single  sentence,  is  not  in  fact

accomplished all at once; nor does it take place simultaneously all

along  the  line.  For  while  this  development  is  going  on  in  the  ego-

instincts, the sexual instincts become detached from them in a very

significant  way.  The  sexual  instincts  behave  auto-erotically  at

first;  they  obtain  their  satisfaction  in  the  subject’s  own  body  and

therefore do not find themselves in the situation of frustration which

was what necessitated the institution of the reality principle; and when,

later on, the process of finding an object begins, it is soon interrupted

by the long period of latency, which delays sexual development until

puberty.  These  two  factors  -  auto-erotism  and  the  latency  period  -

have as their result that the sexual instinct is held up in its psychical

development  and  remains  far  longer  under  the  dominance  of  the

pleasure  principle,  from  which  in  many  people  it  is  never  able  to

withdraw.

   In consequence of these conditions, a closer connection arises, on

the one hand, between the sexual instinct and phantasy and, on the

other  hand,  between  the  ego-instincts  and  the  activities  of

consciousness. Both in healthy and in neurotic people this connection

strikes  us  as  very  intimate,  although  the  considerations  of  genetic

psychology which have just been put forward lead us to recognize it

as a secondary one. The continuance of auto-erotism is what makes it

possible  to  retain  for  so  long  the  easier  momentary  and  imaginary

satisfaction in relation to the sexual object in place of real satisfaction,

which  calls  for  effort  and  postponement.  In  the  realm  of  phantasy,repression remains all-powerful; it brings about the inhibition of ideas

in statu nascendi before they can be noticed by consciousness, if their

cathexis is likely to occasion a release of unpleasure. This is the weak

spot in our psychical organization; and it can be employed to bring

back under the dominance of the pleasure principle thought-processes

which had already become rational. An essential part of the psychical

disposition to neurosis thus lies in the delay in educating the sexual

instincts to pay regard to reality and, as a corollary, in the conditions

which make this delay possible.

 

   ¹ In the same way, a nation whose wealth rests on the exploitation of the produce of its soil

will yet set aside certain areas for reservation in their original state and for protection from the
changes brought about by civilization. (E.g. Yellowstone Park.)
 


        Formulations On The Two Principles Of Mental Functioning

                                                                                      2556

 

   (4) Just as the pleasure-ego can do nothing but wish, work for a

yield of pleasure, and avoid unpleasure, so the reality-ego need do

nothing but strive for what is useful and guard itself against damage.¹

Actually  the  substitution  of  the  reality  principle  for  the  pleasure

principle  implies  no  deposing  of  the  pleasure  principle,  but  only  a

safeguarding of it. A momentary pleasure, uncertain in its results, is

given up, but only in order to gain along the new path an assured

pleasure at a later time. But the endopsychic impression made by this

substitution  has  been  so  powerful  that  it  is  reflected  in  a  special

religious  myth.  The  doctrine  of  reward  in  the  after-life  for  the  -

voluntary  or  enforced  -  renunciation  of  earthly  pleasures  is  nothing

other  than  a  mythical  projection  of  this  revolution  in  the  mind.

Following consistently along these lines, religions have been able to

effect absolute renunciation of pleasure in this life by means of the

promise of compensation in a future existence; but they have not by

this means achieved a conquest of the pleasure principle. It is science

which  comes  nearest  to  succeeding  in  that  conquest;  science  too,

however,  offers  intellectual  pleasure  during  its  work  and  promises

practical gain in the end.

   (5) Education can be described without more ado as an incitementto the conquest of the pleasure principle, and to its replacement by the

reality principle; it seeks, that is, to lend its help to the developmental

process which affects the ego. To this end it makes use of an offer of

love as a reward from the educators; and it therefore fails if a spoilt

child thinks that it possesses that love in any case and cannot lose it

whatever happens.

   (6) Art brings about a reconciliation between the two principles in a

peculiar way. An artist is originally a man who turns away from reality

because he cannot come to terms with the renunciation of instinctual

satisfaction which it at first demands, and who allows his erotic and

ambitious wishes full play in the life of phantasy. He finds the way

back to reality, however, from this world of phantasy by making use of

special gifts to mould his phantasies into truths of a new kind, which

are valued by men as precious reflections of reality. Thus in a certain

fashion he actually becomes the hero, the king, the creator, or the

favourite he desired to be, without following the one roundabout path

of  making  real  alterations  in  the  external  world.  But  he  can  only

achieve this because other men feel the same dissatisfaction as he

does  with  the  renunciation  demanded  by  reality,  and  because  that

dissatisfaction,  which  results  from  the  replacement  of  the  pleasure

principle by the reality principle, is itself a part of reality.²

   (7) While the ego goes through its transformation from a pleasure-

ego into a reality-ego, the sexual instincts undergo the changes that

lead them from their original auto-erotism through various intermediate

phases to object-love in the service of procreation. If we are right in

thinking  that  each  step  in  these  two  courses  of  development  may

become the site of a disposition to later neurotic illness, it is plausible

to suppose that the form taken by the subsequent illness (the choice

of neurosis) will depend on the particular phase of the development of

the  ego  and  of  the  libido  in  which  the  dispositional  inhibition  of

development has occurred. Thus unexpected significance attaches to

the chronological features of the two developments (which have not

yet been studied), and to possible variations in their synchronization.

 

   ¹ The superiority of the reality-ego over the pleasure-ego has been aptly expressed by

Bernard Shaw in these words: ‘To be able to choose the line of greatest advantage instead of
yielding in the direction of least resistance.’ (Man and Superman.)

   ² Cf. the similar position taken by Otto Rank (1907). 


        Formulations On The Two Principles Of Mental Functioning

                                                                                      2557

 

      (8)  The  strangest  characteristic  of  unconscious  (repressed)

processes, to which no investigator can become accustomed without

the exercise of great self-discipline, is due to their entire disregard of

reality-testing;  they  equate  reality  of  thought  with  external  actuality,

and  wishes  with  their  fulfilment  -  with  the  event  -  just  as  happens

automatically under the dominance of the ancient pleasure principle.

Hence  also  the  difficulty  of  distinguishing  unconscious  phantasies

from memories which have become unconscious. But one must never

allow  oneself  to  be  misled  into  applying  the  standards  of  reality  to

repressed  psychical  structures,  and  on  that  account,  perhaps,  into

undervaluing  the  importance  of  phantasies  in  the  formation  of

symptoms on the ground that they are not actualities, or into tracing a

neurotic sense of guilt back to some other source because there is no

evidence that any actual crime has been committed. One is bound to

employ the currency that is in use in the country one is exploring - in

our case a neurotic currency. Suppose, for instance, that one is trying

to solve a dream such as this. A man who had once nursed his father

through a long and painful mortal illness, told me that in the months

following his father’s death he had repeatedly dreamt that his father

was alive once more and that he was talking to him in his usual way.

But he felt it exceedingly painful that his father had really died, only

without  knowing  it.  The  only  way  of  understanding  this  apparently

nonsensical  dream  is  by  adding  ‘as  the  dreamer  wished’  or  ‘in

consequence of his wish’ after the words ‘that his father had really

died’, and by further adding ‘that he wished it’ to the last words. The

dream-thought then runs: it was a painful memory for him that he had

been obliged to wish for his father’s death (as a release) while he was

still alive, and how terrible it would have been if his father had had any

suspicion of it! What we have here is thus the familiar case of self-

reproaches after the loss of someone loved, and in this instance the

self-reproach went back to the infantile significance of death-wishes

against the father.

    The deficiencies of this short paper, which is preparatory rather than

expository, will perhaps be excused only in small part if I plead that

they  are  unavoidable.  In  these  few  remarks  on  the  psychical

consequences  of  adaptation  to  the  reality  principle  I  have  been

obliged  to  adumbrate  views  which  I  should  have  preferred  for  the

present  to  withhold  and  whose  justification  will  certainly  require  no

small effort. But I hope it will not escape the notice of the benevolent

reader how in these pages too the dominance of the reality principle is

beginning.

                                                                                       2558

 

                        TYPES OF ONSET OF NEUROSIS

                                        (1912)

 


                                                                                      2559

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2560

 

                        TYPES OF ONSET OF NEUROSIS

 

In the pages which follow, I shall describe, on the basis of impressions

arrived at empirically, the changes which conditions must undergo in

order to bring about the outbreak of a neurotic illness in a person with

a  disposition  to  it.  I  shall  thus  be  dealing  with  the  question  of  the

precipitating factors of illnesses and shall have little to say about their

forms. The present discussion of the precipitating causes will differ

from  others  in  that  the  changes  to  be  enumerated  will  relate

exclusively to the subject’s libido. For psycho-analysis has taught us

that the vicissitudes of the libido are what decide in favour of nervous

health or sickness. Nor are words to be wasted in this connection on

the  concept  of  disposition.  It  is  precisely  psycho-analytic  research

which  has  enabled  us  to  show  that  neurotic  disposition  lies  in  the

history  of  the  development  of  the  libido,  and  to  trace  back  the

operative  factors  in  that  development  to  innate  varieties  of  sexual

constitution  and  to  influences  of  the  external  world  experienced  in

early childhood.

 

   (a) The most obvious, the most easily discoverable and the most

intelligible precipitating cause of an onset of neurosis is to be seen in

the  external  factor  which  may  be  described  in  general  terms  as

frustration. The subject was healthy so long at his need for love was

satisfied by a real object in the external world; he becomes neurotic assoon as this object is withdrawn from him without a substitute taking

its place. Here happiness coincides with health and unhappiness with

neurosis.  It  is  easier  for  fate  to  bring  about  a  cure  than  for  the

physician; for it can offer the patient a substitute for the possibility of

satisfaction which he has lost.

   Thus with this type, to which, no doubt, the majority of human beings

on the whole belong, the possibility of falling ill arises only when there

is abstinence. And it may be judged from this what an important part in

the causation of neuroses may be played by the limitation imposed by

civilization on the field of accessible satisfactions. Frustration has a

pathogenic  effect  because  it  dams  up  libido,  and  so  submits  the

subject  to  a  test  as  to  how  long  he  can  tolerate  this  increase  in

psychical tension and as to what methods he will adopt for dealing

with  it.  There  are  only  two  possibilities  for  remaining  healthy  when

there is a persistent frustration of satisfaction in the real world. The

first is by transforming the psychical tension into active energy which

remains directed towards the external world and eventually extorts a

real  satisfaction  of  the  libido  from  it.  The  second  is  by  renouncing

libidinal satisfaction, sublimating the dammed-up libido and turning it

to the attainment of aims which are no longer erotic and which escape

frustration.  That  these  two  possibilities  are  realized  in  men’s  lives

proves  that  unhappiness  does  not  coincide  with  neurosis  and  that

frustration does not alone decide whether its victim remains healthy or

falls ill. The immediate effect of frustration lies in its bringing into play

the dispositional factors which have hitherto been inoperative.

   Where these are present and sufficiently strongly developed, there

is a risk of the libido becoming ‘introverted’.¹ It turns away from reality,

which,  owing  to  the  obstinate  frustration,  has  lost  its  value  for  the

subject, and turns towards the life of phantasy, in which it creates new

wishful structures and revives the traces of earlier, forgotten ones. In

consequence  of  the  intimate  connection  between  the  activity  of

phantasy  and  material  present  in  everyone  which  is  infantile  and

repressed  and  has  become  unconscious,  and  thanks  to  the

exceptional position enjoyed by the life of phantasy in regard to reality-

testing,² the libido may thenceforward move on a backward course; it

may follow the path of regression along infantile lines, and strive after

aims  that  correspond  with  them.  If  these  strivings,  which  areincompatible  with  the  subject’s  present-day  individuality,  acquire

enough intensity, a conflict must result between them and the other

portion of his personality, which has maintained its relation to reality.

This conflict is resolved by the formation of symptoms, and is followed

by  the  onset  of  manifest  illness.  The  fact  that  the  whole  process

originated from frustration in the real world is reflected in the resulting

event that the symptoms, in which the ground of reality is reached

once more, represent substitutive satisfactions.

 

   ¹ To use a term introduced by C. G. Jung.

   ² See my ‘Formulations on the Two Principles of Mental Functioning’ (1911b).

 


                            Types Of Onset Of Neurosis

                                                                                      2561

 

 

   (b)  The  second  type  of  precipitating  cause  of  falling  ill  is  by  no

means  so  obvious  as  the  first;  and  it  was  in  fact  only  possible  to

discover it through searching analytic investigations following on the

Zurich school’s theory of complexes.¹ Here the subject does not fall ill

as  a  result  of  a  change  in  the  external  world  which  has  replaced

satisfaction by frustration, but as a result of an internal effort to obtain

the satisfaction which is accessible to him in reality. He falls ill of his

attempt to adapt himself to reality and to fulfil the demands of reality -

an  attempt  in  the  course  of  which  he  comes  up  against

insurmountable internal difficulties.

   It is advisable to draw a sharp distinction between the two types of

onset  of  illness  -  a  sharper  distinction  than  observation  as  a  rule

permits. In the first type what is prominent is a change in the external

world; in the second type the accent falls on an internal change. In the

first type the subject falls ill from an experience; in the second type it is

from a developmental process. In the first case he is faced by the task

of  renouncing  satisfaction,  and  he  falls  ill  from  his  incapacity  for

resistance; in the second case his task is to exchange one kind of

satisfaction for another, and he breaks down from his inflexibility. In

the second case the conflict, which is between the subject’s effort to

remain as he is and the effort to change himself in order to meet freshpurposes and fresh demands from reality, is present from the first. In

the former case the conflict only arises after the dammed-up libido has

chosen other, and incompatible, possibilities of satisfaction. The part

played  by  the  conflict  and  the  previous  fixation  of  the  libido  is

incomparably  more  obvious  in  the  second  type  than  in  the  first,  in

which  such  unserviceable  fixations  may  perhaps  only  emerge  as  a

result of the external frustration.

 

   ¹ Cf. Jung (1909).

 


                            Types Of Onset Of Neurosis

                                                                                      2562

 

    A young man who has hitherto satisfied his libido by means of

phantasies ending in masturbation, and who now seeks to replace a

régime approximating to auto-erotism by the choice of a real object -

or a girl who has given her whole affection to her father or brother and

who must now, for the sake of a man who is courting her, allow her

hitherto unconscious incestuous libidinal wishes to become conscious

- or a married woman who would like to renounce her polygamous

inclinations and phantasies of prostitution so as to become a faithful

consort to her husband and a perfect mother to her child - all of these

fall ill from the most laudable efforts, if the earlier fixations of their

libido are powerful enough to resist a displacement; and this point will

be decided, once again, by the factors of disposition, constitution and

infantile experience. All of them, it might be said, meet with the fate of

the little tree in the Grimms’ fairy tale, which wished it had different

leaves. From the hygienic point of view - which, to be sure, is not the

only one to be taken into account - one could only wish for them that

they had continued to be as undeveloped, as inferior and as useless

as they were before they fell ill. The change which the patients strive

after, but bring about only imperfectly or not at all, invariably has the

value of a step forward from the point of view of real life. It is otherwise

if we apply ethical standards: we see people falling ill just as often

when they discard an ideal as when they seek to attain it.

   In spite of the very clear differences between the two types of onset

of  illness  that  we  have  described,  they  nevertheless  coincide  inessentials and can without difficulty be brought together into a unity.

Falling  ill  from  frustration  may  also  be  regarded  as  incapacity  for

adaptation to reality - in the particular case, that is, in which reality

frustrates satisfaction of libido. Falling ill under the conditions of the

second type leads directly to a special case of frustration. It is true that

reality  does  not  here  frustrate every  kind  of  satisfaction;  but  it

frustrates the one kind which the subject declares is the only possible

one.  Nor  does  the  frustration  come  immediately  from  the  external

world,  but  primarily  from  certain  trends  in  the  subject’s  ego.

Nevertheless,  frustration  remains  the  common  factor  and  the  more

inclusive one. In consequence of the conflict which immediately sets in

in the second type, both kinds of satisfaction - the habitual one as well

as the one aimed at - are equally inhibited; a damming-up of libido,

with all its consequences, comes about just as it does in the first case.

The  psychical  events  leading  to  the  formation  of  symptoms  are  if

anything easier to follow in the second type than in the first; for in the

second type the pathogenic fixations of the libido do not need to be

freshly established, but have already been in force while the subject

was healthy. A certain amount of introversion of libido is, as a rule,

already present; and there is a saving of some part of the subject’s

regression  to  the  infantile  stage,  owing  to  the  fact  that  his  forward

development has not yet completed its course.

 


                            Types Of Onset Of Neurosis

                                                                                      2563

 

 

      (c)  The  next  type,  which  I  shall  describe  as  falling  ill  from an

inhibition in development, looks like an exaggeration of the second

one - falling ill from the demands of reality. There is no theoretical

reason for distinguishing it, but only a practical one; for those we are

here concerned with are people who fall ill as soon as they get beyond

the irresponsible age of childhood, and who have thus never reached

a phase of health - a phase, that is, of capacity for achievement and

enjoyment which is on the whole unrestricted. The essential feature of

the dispositional process is in these cases quite plain. Their libido hasnever  left  its  infantile  fixations;    the  demands  of  reality  are  not

suddenly made upon a wholly or partly mature person, but arise from

the very fact of growing older, since it is obvious that they constantly

alter  with  the  subject’s  increasing  age.  Thus  conflict  falls  into  the

background  in  comparison  with  insufficiency.  But  here,  too,  all  our

other  experience  leads  us  to  postulate  an  effort  at  overcoming  the

fixations of childhood; for otherwise the outcome of the process could

never be neurosis but only a stationary infantilism.

 

   (d) Just as the third type has brought the dispositional determinant

before us almost in isolation, so the fourth type, which now follows,

draws our attention to another factor, which comes into consideration

in  every  single  case  and  might  easily  for  that  very  reason  be

overlooked in a theoretical discussion. We see people fall ill who have

hitherto been healthy, who have met with no fresh experience and

whose relation to the external world has undergone no change, so that

the onset of their illness inevitably gives an impression of spontaneity.

A closer consideration of such cases, however, shows us that none

the less a change has taken place in them whose importance we must

rate  very  highly  as  a  cause  of  illness.  As  a  result  of  their  having

reached  a  particular  period  of  life,  and  in  conformity  with  regular

biological processes, the quantity  of  libido  in  their  mental  economy

has experienced an increase which is in itself enough to upset the

equilibrium of their health and to set up the necessary conditions for a

neurosis. It is well known that more or less sudden increases of libido

of this kind are habitually associated with puberty and the menopause

- with the attainment of a certain age in women; in some people they

may in addition be manifested in periodicities that are still unknown.

Here  the  damming-up  of  libido  is  the  primary  factor;  it  becomes

pathogenic as a consequence of a relative frustration on the part of

the  external  world,  which  would  still  have  granted  satisfaction  to  a

smaller claim by the libido. The unsatisfied and dammed-up libido can

once again open up paths to regression and kindle the same conflicts

which  we  have  demonstrated  in  the  case  of  absolute  external

frustration. We are reminded in this way that the quantitative factor

should  not  be  left  out  of  account  in  any  consideration  of  the

precipitating  causes  of  illness.  All  the  other  factors  -  frustration,fixation,  developmental  inhibition  -  remain  ineffective  unless  they

affect  a  certain  amount  of  libido  and  bring  about  a  damming-up  of

libido of a certain height. It is true that we are unable to measure this

amount of libido which seems to us indispensable for a pathogenic

effect; we can only postulate it after the resulting illness has started.

There  is  only  one  direction  in  which  we  can  determine  it  more

precisely. We may assume that it is not a question of an absolute

quantity, but of the relation between the quota of libido in operation

and the quantity of libido which the individual ego is able to deal with -

that is, to hold under tension, to sublimate or to employ directly. For

this reason a relative increase in the quantity of libido may have the

same effects as an absolute one. An enfeeblement of the ego owing

to organic illness or owing to some special demand upon its energy

will  be  able  to  cause  the  emergence  of  neuroses  which  would

otherwise have remained latent in spite of any disposition that might

be present.

   The importance in the causation of illness which must be ascribed to

quantity of libido is in satisfactory agreement with two main theses of

the theory of the neuroses to which psycho-analysis has led us: first,

the thesis that the neuroses are derived from the conflict between the

ego  and  the  libido,  and  secondly,  the  discovery  that  there  is  no

qualitative distinction between the determinants of health and those of

neurosis, and that, on the contrary, healthy people have to contend

with  the  same  tasks  of  mastering  their  libido  -  they  have  simply

succeeded better in them.

 


                            Types Of Onset Of Neurosis

                                                                                      2564

 

 

   It remains to say a few words on the relation of these types to the

facts of observation. If I survey the set of patients on whose analysis I

am at the moment engaged, I must record that not one of them is a

pure  example  of  any  of  the  four  types  of  onset.  In  each  of  them,

rather, I find a portion of frustration operating alongside of a portion of

incapacity  to  adapt  to  the  demands  of  reality;  inhibition  indevelopment, which coincides, of course, with inflexibility of fixations,

has to be reckoned with in all of them, and, as I have already said, the

importance  of  quantity  of  libido  must  never  be  neglected.  I  find,

indeed, that in several of these patients their illness has appeared in

successive waves, between which there have been healthy intervals,

and that each of these waves has been traceable to a different type of

precipitating cause. Thus the erection of these four types cannot lay

claim to any high theoretical value; they are merely different ways of

establishing  a  particular  pathogenic  constellation  in  the  mental

economy - namely the damming-up of libido, which the ego cannot,

with the means at its command, ward off without damage. But this

situation itself only becomes pathogenic as a result of a quantitative

factor; it does not come as a novelty to mental life and is not created

by the impact of what is spoken of as a ‘cause of illness’.

   A certain practical importance may readily be allowed to these types

of  onset.  They  are  to  be  met  with  in  their  pure  form,  indeed,  in

individual cases; we should not have noticed the third and fourth types

if  they  had  not  in  some  subjects  constituted  the  sole  precipitating

causes  of  the  illness.  The  first  type  keeps  before  our  eyes  the

extraordinarily  powerful  influence  of  the  external  world,  and  the

second the no less important influence - which opposes the former

one - of the subject’s peculiar individuality. Pathology could not do

justice to the problem of the precipitating factors in the neuroses so

long  as  it  was  merely  concerned  with  deciding  whether  those

affections  were  of  an  ‘endogenous’  or  ‘exogenous’  nature.  It  was

bound to meet every observation which pointed to the importance of

abstinence (in the widest sense of the word) as a precipitating cause

with  the  objection  that  other  people  tolerate  the  same  experiences

without falling ill. If, however, it sought to lay stress on the peculiar

individuality  of  the  subject  as  being  the  essential  factor  decisive

between illness and health, it was obliged to put up with the proviso

that  people  possessing  such  a  peculiarity  can  remain  healthy

indefinitely,  just  so  long  as  they  are  able  to  retain  that  peculiarity.

Psycho-analysis has warned us that we must give up the unfruitful

contrast  between  external  and  internal  factors,  between  experience

and constitution, and has taught us that we shall invariably find the

cause of the onset of neurotic illness in a particular psychical situationwhich can be brought about in a variety of ways.

                                                                                       2565

 

        CONTRIBUTIONS TO A DISCUSSION ON MASTURBATION

                                        (1912)

 


                                                                                      2566

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2567

 

        CONTRIBUTIONS TO A DISCUSSION ON MASTURBATION

 

                                            I

 

                                    INTRODUCTION

 

It is never the aim of the discussions in the Vienna Psycho-Analytical

Society to remove diversities or to arrive at conclusions. The different

speakers, who are held together by taking a similar fundamental view

of the same facts, allow themselves to give the sharpest expression to

the  variety  of  their  individual  opinions  without  any  regard  to  the

probability  of  converting  any  of  their  audience  who  may  think

otherwise. There may be many points in these discussions which have

been  misstated  and  misunderstood,  but  the  final  outcome,

nevertheless, is that every one has received the clearest impression of

views differing from his own and has communicated his own differing

views to other people.

   The discussion on masturbation, of which actually only fragments

are published here, lasted for several months and was conducted on

the plan of each speaker in turn reading a paper, which was followed

by an exhaustive debate. Only the actual papers are included in the

present  publication,  and  not  the  debates,  which  were  highly

stimulating and in which the differing opinions were expressed and

defended. This pamphlet would otherwise have attained dimensionswhich would certainly have stood in the way of its being widely read

and proving effective.

   The choice of the topic calls for no apologies in these days when an

attempt is at last being made to subject the problems of man’s sexual

life  to  a  scientific  examination.  Numerous  repetitions  of  the  same

thoughts and assertions were unavoidable: they are, of course, the

signs  of  agreement  between  the  speakers.  As  regards  the  many

divergences  in  their  views,  it  can  no  more  be  an  editor’s  task  to

harmonize them than it is to attempt to hide them. It is to be hoped

that the reader’s interest will be repelled neither by the repetitions nor

by the contradictions.

   It has been our purpose on this occasion to show the direction into

which the study of the problem of masturbation has been forced by the

emergence of the psycho-analytic method of approach. How far we

have  succeeded  in  that  purpose  will  appear  from  our  readers’

applause, or perhaps still more clearly from their disapproval.

 

VIENNA, Summer 1912

 


                  Contributions To A Discussion On Masturbation

                                                                                      2568

 

                                            II

 

                            CONCLUDING REMARKS

 

GENTLEMEN, - The older members of this group will be able to recall

that  some  years  ago  we  made  a  previous  attempt  at  a  collective

discussion of this kind - a ‘symposium’, as our American colleagues

call  it  -  on  the  subject  of  masturbation.  At  that  time  the  opinions

expressed  showed  such  important  divergences  that  we  did  not

venture to lay our proceedings before the public. Since then the same

group, together with some newcomers, having been uninterruptedly in

touch with observed facts, and having had a constant interchange of

ideas with one another, have so far clarified their views and arrived at

common ground that the venture which we previously abandoned nowno longer seems so rash. I really have an impression that the points

on  which  we  are  agreed  in  connection  with  masturbation  are  now

firmer and more deep-going than the disagreements - though these

undeniably  exist.  Some  of  the  apparent  contradictions  are  only  the

result  of  the  many  different  directions  from  which  you  have

approached the subject, whereas in fact the opinions in question may

quite well find a place alongside one another.

   With your permission I will set before you a summary of the points

on which we seem to be agreed or divided.

   We are all agreed, I feel,

      (a)  on  the  importance  of  the  phantasies  which  accompany  or

represent the act of masturbation,

   (b) on the importance of the sense of guilt, whatever its source may

be, which is attached to masturbation, and

   (c) on the impossibility of assigning a qualitative determinant for the

injurious effects of masturbation. (On this last point agreement is not

unanimous.)

   Unresolved differences of opinion have appeared

      (a)  in  respect  to  a  denial  of  a  somatic  factor  in  the  effects  of

masturbation,

      (b)  in  respect  to  a  general  denial  of  the  injurious  effects  of

masturbation,

   (c) with regard to the origin of the sense of guilt, which some of you

wish to attribute directly to lack of satisfaction, while others adduce

social factors in addition, or the attitude of the subject’s personality at

the moment, and

   (d) with regard to the ubiquity of masturbation in children.

   Lastly, significant uncertainties exist

   (a) as to the mechanism of the injurious effects of masturbation, if

there are any, and

      (b)  as  to  the  aetiological  relation  of  masturbation  to  the  ‘actual

neuroses’.

   As regards the majority of the points of controversy among us, we

have  to  thank  the  challenging  criticisms  of  our  colleague  Wilhelm

Stekel, based on his great and independent experience. There is no

doubt that we have left very many points over to be established and

clarified by some future band of observers and enquirers. But we mayconsole ourselves with the knowledge that we have worked honestly

and in no narrow spirit, and that in so doing we have opened up paths

along which later research will be able to travel.

 


                  Contributions To A Discussion On Masturbation

                                                                                      2569

 

 

      You  must  not  expect  much  from  my  own  contributions  to  the

questions we are concerned with. You are aware of my preference for

the fragmentary treatment of a subject, with emphasis on the points

which seem to me best established. I have nothing new to offer - no

solutions, only a few repetitions of things I have already maintained, a

few words in defence of these old assertions against attacks made

upon them by some of you, and in addition, a few comments which

must inevitably force themselves on anyone listening to your papers.

   I have, as you know, divided masturbation according to the subject’s

age  into  (1)  masturbation  in  infants,  which  includes  all  auto-erotic

activities serving the purpose of sexual satisfaction, (2) masturbation

in children, which arises directly out of the preceding kind and has

already  become  fixed  to  certain  erotogenic  zones,  and  (3)

masturbation  at  puberty,  which  is  either  continuous  with  childhood

masturbation or is separated from it by the period of latency. In some

of the accounts which I have heard you give, full justice has not quite

been  done  to  this  temporal  division.  The  ostensible  unity  of

masturbation, which is fostered by the customary medical terminology,

has  given  rise  to  some  generalizations  where  a  differentiation

according to the three periods of life would have been better justified.

It has been a matter for regret, too, that we have not been able to pay

as  much  attention  to  female  as  to  male  masturbation;  female

masturbation, I believe, is deserving of a special study and in its case

it is particularly true that a special emphasis lies on the modifications

in it that arise in relation to the subject’s age.

   I come now to the objections raised by Reitler to my teleological

argument in favour of the ubiquity of masturbation in infancy. I admit

that  this  argument  must  be  abandoned.  If  one  more  edition  of  myThree  Essays  on  the  Theory  of  Sexuality  is  called  for,  it  will  not

contain  the  sentence  under  attack.  I  will  renounce  my  attempt  at

guessing  the  purposes  of  Nature  and  will  content  myself  with

describing the facts.

   Another remark of Reitler’s is, I think, significant and important. This

was to the effect that certain arrangements in the genital apparatus

which are peculiar to human beings seem to tend towards preventing

sexual intercourse in childhood. Here, however, my doubts arise. The

occlusion of the female sexual orifice and the absence of an os penis

which would assure erection are, after all, directed only against actual

coition, not against sexual excitations in general. Reitler seems to me

to  take  too  anthropomorphic  a  view  of  the  way  in  which  Nature

pursues  her  aims  -  as  though  it  were  a  question  of  her  carrying

through a single purpose, as is the case with human activity. But so

far as we can see, in natural processes a whole number of aims are

pursued alongside one another, without interfering with one another. If

we are to speak of Nature in human terms, we shall have to say that

she appears to us to be what, in the case of men, we should call

inconsistent. For my part, I think Reitler should not attach so much

weight to his own teleological arguments. The use of teleology as a

heuristic hypothesis has its dubious side: in any particular instance

one  can  never  tell  whether  one  has  hit  upon  a  ‘harmony’  or  a

‘disharmony’. It is the same as when one drives a nail into the wall of a

room: one cannot be certain whether one is going to come up against

lath and plaster or brick-work.

 


                  Contributions To A Discussion On Masturbation

                                                                                      2570

 

   On the question of the relation of masturbation and emissions to the

causation of so-called ‘neurasthenia’, I find myself like many of you, in

opposition to Stekel, and, subject to a limitation which I shall mention

presently, I maintain, as against him, my former views. I see nothing

that  could  oblige  us  to  abandon  the  distinction  between  ‘actual

neuroses’ and psychoneuroses, and I cannot regard the genesis of

the symptoms in the case of the former as anything but toxic. HereStekel really seems to me greatly to overstretch psychogenicity. My

view is still what it was in the first instance, more than fifteen years

ago: namely, that the two ‘actual neuroses’ - neurasthenia and anxiety

neurosis (and perhaps we ought to add hypochondria proper as a third

‘actual  neurosis’)  -  provide  the  psychoneuroses  with  the  necessary

‘somatic  compliance’;  they  provide  the  excitatory  material,  which  is

then  psychically  selected  and  given  a  ‘psychical  coating’,  so  that,

speaking generally, the nucleus of the psychoneurotic symptom - the

grain of sand at the centre of the pearl - is formed of a somatic sexual

manifestation.  This  is  clearer,  it  is  true,  of  anxiety  neurosis  and  its

relation to hysteria than it is of neurasthenia, into which no careful

psycho-analytic  investigations  have  yet  been  made.  In  anxiety

neurosis, as you have often been able to convince yourselves, it is at

bottom  a  small  fragment  of  undischarged  excitation  connected  with

coition which emerges as an anxiety symptom or provides the nucleus

for the formation of a hysterical symptom.

   Stekel shares with many non-psycho-analytic writers an inclination

to reject the morphological differentiations which we have made within

the jumble of the neuroses and to lump them all together under one

heading - under psychasthenia, perhaps. We have often contradicted

him  on  this,  and  have  held  fast  to  our  expectation  that  the

morphologico-clinical  differences  will  prove  valuable  as  indications

that have not yet been understood of essentially distinct processes.

When he - justly - points out to us that he has regularly found the

same complexes present in what are termed neurasthenics as in other

neurotics, his argument fails to meet the point at issue. We have long

known that the same complexes and conflicts are to be looked for,

too,  in  all  normal  and  healthy  people.  In  fact,  we  have  grown

accustomed  to  attributing  to  every  civilized  human  being  a  certain

amount of repression of perverse impulses, a certain amount of anal

erotism,  of  homosexuality  and  so  on,  as  well  as  a  piece  of  father-

complex and mother-complex and of other complexes besides - just

as in the chemical analysis of an organic substance we have every

hope of finding certain elements: carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen

and a trace of sulphur. What distinguishes organic substances from

one another is the relative amounts of these elements and the way in

which the links between them are constituted. In the same way, in thecase of normal and neurotic people what is in question is not whether

these complexes and conflicts exist but whether they have become

pathogenic  and,  if  so,  by  means  of  what  mechanisms  they  have

become so.

 


                  Contributions To A Discussion On Masturbation

                                                                                      2571

 

   The essence of the theories about the ‘actual neuroses’ which I

have  put  forward  in  the  past  and  am  defending  to-day  lies  in  my

assertion,  based  on  experiment,  that  their  symptoms,  unlike

psychoneurotic  ones,  cannot  be  analysed.  That  is  to  say,  the

constipation, headaches and fatigue of the so-called neurasthenic do

not admit of being traced back historically or symbolically to operative

experiences  and  cannot  be  understood  as  substitutes  for  sexual

satisfaction  or  as  compromises  between  opposing  instinctual

impulses, as is the case with psycho-neurotic symptoms (even though

the latter may perhaps have the same appearance). I do not believe it

will be possible to upset this assertion by the help of psycho-analysis.

On the other hand I will grant to-day what I was unable to believe

formerly  -  that  an  analytic  treatment  can  have  an  indirect  curative

effect on ‘actual’ symptoms. It can do so either by enabling the current

noxae to be better tolerated, or by enabling the sick person to escape

from  the  current  noxae  by  making  a  change  in  his  sexual  régime.

These  would  be  desirable  prospects  from  the  point  of  view  of  our

therapeutic interest.

   If in the end I am convicted of being in error over the theoretical

problem of the ‘actual neuroses’, I shall be able to console myself with

the advance in our knowledge, which must disregard the opinions of

an individual. You may then ask why, since I have such a laudable

appreciation of the limitations of my own infallibility, I do not at once

give in to these new suggestions but prefer to re-enact the familiar

comedy of an old man obstinately clinging to his opinions. My reply is

that I do not yet see any evidence to induce me to give in. In early

days I made a number of alterations in my views and did not conceal

them from the public. I was reproached on account of these changes,just as to-day I am reproached for my conservativeness. Not that I

should be intimidated by the one reproach or the other. But I know that

I  have  a  destiny  to  fulfil.  I  cannot  escape  it  and  I  need  not  move

towards it. I shall await it, and in the meantime I shall behave towards

our science as earlier experience has taught me.

   I am loth to take up a position on the question that has been dealt

with by you so extensively of the injuriousness of masturbation, for it

offers no proper approach to the problems which concern us. But we

must all do so, no doubt: the world seems to feel no other interest in

masturbation. You will recall that at our former series of discussions

on the subject we had among us as a visitor a distinguished Viennese

paediatrician. What was it that he repeatedly asked us to tell him?

Simply,  how  far  masturbation  is  injurious  and  why  it  injures  some

people but not others. So we must force our researches to make a

pronouncement to meet this practical demand.

 


                  Contributions To A Discussion On Masturbation

                                                                                      2572

 

   I must confess that here again I am unable to share Stekel’s point of

view, in spite of the many courageous and correct comments that he

has made to us on the question. As he sees it, the injuriousness of

masturbation amounts to no more than a senseless prejudice which,

purely as a result of personal limitations, we are unwilling to cast off

with sufficient thoroughness. I believe, however, that if we fix our eyes

on the problem sine ira et studio¹ - so far, of course, as we are able to,

- we shall be obliged to declare, rather, that to take up such a position

contradicts our fundamental views on the aetiology of the neuroses.

Masturbation corresponds essentially to infantile sexual activity and to

its  subsequent  retention  at  a  more  mature  age.  We  derive  the

neuroses  from  a  conflict  between  a  person’s  sexual  urges  and  his

other  (ego)  trends.  Now  someone  might  say:  ‘In  my  view  the

pathogenic factor in this aetiological relation lies solely in the ego’s

reaction to its sexuality.’ By this he would be asserting that anyone

could keep free of neurosis if only he were willing to allow unrestricted

satisfaction to his sexual urges. But it is clearly arbitrary, and evidentlypointless as well, to come to such a decision, and not to allow the

sexual urges themselves to have any share in the pathogenic process.

But if you admit that the sexual urges can have a pathogenic effect,

you  should  no  longer  deny  a  similar  significance  to  masturbation,

which  after  all  only  consists  in  carrying  out  such  sexual  instinctual

impulses. In every case which seems to show that masturbation is

pathogenic, you will, no doubt, be able to trace the operation further

back - to the instincts which manifest themselves in the masturbation

and  to  the  resistances  which  are  directed  against  those  instincts.

Masturbation  is  not  anything  ultimate  -  whether  somatically  or

psychologically - it is not a real ‘agent’, but merely the name for certain

activities. Yet, however much we may trace things further back, our

judgement  on  the  causation  of  the  illness  will  nevertheless  rightly

remain attached to this activity. And do not forget that masturbation is

not to be equated with sexual activity in general: it is sexual activity

subjected to certain limiting conditions. Thus it also remains possible

that it is precisely these peculiarities of masturbatory activity which are

the vehicles of its pathogenic effects.

 

   ¹ [’Without bitterness or partiality.’]

 


                  Contributions To A Discussion On Masturbation

                                                                                      2573

 

   We are therefore brought back once more from arguments to clinical

observation, and we are warned by it not to strike out the heading

‘Injurious Effects of Masturbation’. We are at all events confronted in

the neuroses with cases in which masturbation has done damage.

   This damage seems to occur in three different ways:

   (a) Organic injury may occur by some unknown mechanism. Here

we  must  take  into  account  the  considerations  of  excess  and  of

inadequate satisfaction, which have often been mentioned by you.

   (b) The injury may occur through the laying down of a psychical

pattern according to which there is no necessity for trying to alter the

external world in order to satisfy a great need. Where, however, a far-

reaching  reaction  against  this  pattern  develops,  the  most  valuable

character-traits may be initiated.   (c) A fixation of infantile sexual aims may be made possible, and a

persistence of psychical infantilism. Here we have the disposition for

the occurrence of a neurosis. As psycho-analysts we cannot fail to be

greatly interested in this result of masturbation - which in this case

means, of course, masturbation occurring at puberty and continued

afterwards. We must keep in mind the significance which masturbation

acquires as a carrying into effect of phantasy - that half-way region

interpolated between life in accordance with the pleasure principle and

life in accordance with the reality principle; and we must remember

how  masturbation  makes  it  possible  to  bring  about  sexual

developments and sublimations in phantasy, which are nevertheless

not  advances  but  injurious  compromises  -  though  it  is  true,  as  an

important  remark  of  Stekel’s  has  pointed  out,  that  this  same

compromise renders severe perverse inclinations harmless and averts

the worst consequences of abstinence.

      On  the  basis  of  my  medical  experience,  I  cannot  rule  out  a

permanent  reduction  in  potency  as  one  among  the  results  of

masturbation, though I will grant to Stekel that in a number of cases it

may  turn  out  to  be  only  apparent.  This  particular  result  of

masturbation, however, cannot be classed unhesitatingly among the

injurious  ones.  Some  diminution  of  male  potency  and  of  the  brutal

aggressiveness involved in it is much to the purpose from the point of

view of civilization. It facilitates the practice by civilized men of the

virtues of sexual moderation and trustworthiness that are incumbent

on them. Virtue accompanied by full potency is usually felt as a hard

task.

   This may strike you as cynical, but you may rest assured that it is

not  cynically  meant.  It  sets  out  to  be  no  more  than  a  piece  of  dry

description,  without  regard  to  whether  it  may  cause  satisfaction  or

annoyance.  For  masturbation,  like  so  many  other  things,  has les

défauts de ses vertus and on the other hand les vertus de ses défauts.

If one is disentangling an involved and complex subject with a one-

sided practical interest in its harmfulness and uses, one must put up

with unwelcome discoveries.

   Furthermore, I think we may with advantage distinguish what we

may describe as the direct injuries caused by masturbation from those

which  arise indirectly  from  the  ego’s  resistance  and  indignationagainst  that  sexual  activity.  I  have  not  entered  into  these  latter

consequences.

 


                  Contributions To A Discussion On Masturbation

                                                                                      2574

 

   And now I am obliged to add a few words on the second of the two

painful questions we have been asked. Assuming that masturbation

can be injurious, under what conditions and in what people does it

prove to be so?

   Like the majority of you, I am inclined to refuse to give a general

answer  to  the  question.  It  partly  coincides  with  another,  more

comprehensive  question:  when  does  sexual  activity  in  general

become pathogenic for particular people? If we put this consideration

on  one  side,  we  are  left  with  a  question  of  detail  relating  to  the

characteristics  of  masturbation  in  so  far  as  it  represents  a  special

manner and form of sexual satisfaction. Here it would be to the point

to repeat what is already known to us and has been discussed in other

connections - to assess the influence of the quantitative factor and of

the  combined  operation  of  several  pathogenic  factors.  Above  all,

however, we should have to leave a wide field for what are known as

an  individual’s  constitutional  dispositions.  But  it  must  be  confessed

that dealing with these is an awkward business. For we are in the

habit of forming our opinion of individual dispositions ex post facto: we

attribute this or that disposition to people after the event, when they

have  already  fallen  ill.  We  have  no  method  of  discovering  it

beforehand. We behave, in fact, like the Scottish King in one of Victor

Hugo’s  novels,  who  boasted  of  an  infallible  method  of  recognizing

witchcraft. He had the accused woman stewed in boiling water and

then tasted the broth. He then judged according to the taste: ‘Yes, that

was a witch’, or ‘No, that was not one.’

   There is another question that I might draw your attention to, which

has been dealt with too little in our discussions: that of ‘unconscious’

masturbation.  I  mean  masturbation  during  sleep,  during  abnormal

states,  or  fits.  You  will  recall  the  many  hysterical  fits  in  which

masturbatory acts recur in a disguised or unrecognizable way, afterthe  subject  has  renounced  that  form  of  satisfaction,  and  the  many

symptoms in obsessional neurosis which seek to replace and repeat

this kind of sexual activity, which has formerly been forbidden. We

may also speak of a therapeutic return of masturbation. A number of

you will have found on occasion, as I have, that it represents a great

advance  if  during  the  treatment  the  patient  ventures  to  take  up

masturbation once more, though he may have no intention of making

a permanent stop at that infantile halting-place. In this connection I

may  remind  you  that  a  considerable  number  of  precisely  the  most

severe  sufferers  from  neurosis  have  avoided  all  recollection  of

masturbation  during  historic  times,  while  psycho-analysis  is  able  to

prove  that  that  species  of  sexual  activity  had  by  no  means  been

strange to them during the forgotten earliest period of their lives.

   But I think the time has come to break off. For we are all agreed on

one thing - that the subject of masturbation is quite inexhaustible.

                                                                                       2575

 

      A NOTE ON THE UNCONSCIOUS IN PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

                                        (1912)

 


                                                                                      2576

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2577

 

      A NOTE ON THE UNCONSCIOUS IN PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

I wish to expound in a few words and as plainly as possible what the

term  ‘unconscious’  has  come  to  mean  in  Psycho-analysis  and  in

Psycho-analysis alone.

      A  conception  -  or  any  other  psychical  element  -  which  is  now

present to my consciousness may become absent the next moment,

and may become present again, after an interval, unchanged, and, as

we say, from memory, not as a result of a fresh perception by our

senses. It is this fact which we are accustomed to account for by the

supposition that during the interval the conception has been present in

our mind, although latent in consciousness. In what shape it may have

existed while present in the mind and latent in consciousness we have

no means of guessing.

   At this very point we may be prepared to meet with the philosophical

objection  that  the  latent  conception  did  not  exist  as  an  object  of

psychology,  but  as  a  physical  disposition  for  the  recurrence  of  the

same psychical phenomenon, i.e. of the said conception. But we may

reply that this is a theory far overstepping the domain of psychology

proper; that it simply begs the question by asserting ‘conscious’ to be

an  identical  term  with  ‘psychical’,  and  that  it  is  clearly  at  fault  in

denying psychology the right to account for its most common facts,

such as memory, by its own means.

   Now let us call ‘conscious’ the conception which is present to ourconsciousness and of which we are aware, and let this be the only

meaning of the term ‘conscious’. As for latent conceptions, if we have

any reason to suppose that they exist in the mind - as we had in the

case of memory - let them be denoted by the term ‘unconscious’.

   Thus an unconscious conception is one of which we are not aware,

but  the  existence  of  which  we  are  nevertheless  ready  to  admit  on

account of other proofs or signs.

   This might be considered an uninteresting piece of descriptive or

classificatory work if no experience appealed to our judgement other

than the facts of memory, or the cases of association by unconscious

links.  The  well-known  experiment,  however,  of  the  ‘post-hypnotic

suggestion’ teaches us to insist upon the importance of the distinction

between conscious and unconscious and seems to increase its value.

 


              A Note On The Unconscious In Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2578

 

   In this experiment, as performed by Bernheim, a person is put into a

hypnotic  state  and  is  subsequently  aroused.  While  he  was  in  the

hypnotic state, under the influence of the physician, he was ordered to

execute  a  certain  action  at  a  certain  fixed  moment  after  his

awakening,  say  half  an  hour  later.  He  awakes,  and  seems  fully

conscious and in his ordinary condition; he has no recollection of his

hypnotic state, and yet at the prearranged moment there rushes into

his mind the impulse to do such and such a thing, and he does it

consciously, though not knowing why. It seems impossible to give any

other description of the phenomenon than to say that the order had

been present in the mind of the person in a condition of latency, or

had been present unconsciously, until the given moment came, and

then  had  become  conscious.  But  not  the  whole  of  it  emerged  into

consciousness: only the conception of the act to be executed. All the

other ideas associated with this conception - the order, the influence

of  the  physician,  the  recollection  of  the  hypnotic  state,  remained

unconscious even then.

   But we have more to learn from such an experiment. We are led

from the purely descriptive to a dynamic view of the phenomenon. Theidea of the action ordered in hypnosis not only became an object of

consciousness at a certain moment, but the more striking aspect of

the fact is that this idea grew active: it was translated into action as

soon  as  consciousness  became  aware  of  its  presence.  The  real

stimulus to the action being the order of the physician, it is hard not to

concede that the idea of the physician’s order became active too. Yet

this last idea did not reveal itself to consciousness, as did its outcome,

the idea of the action; it remained unconscious, and so it was active

and unconscious at the same time.

   A post-hypnotic suggestion is a laboratory production, an artificial

fact.  But  if  we  adopt  the  theory  of  hysterical  phenomena  first  put

forward by P. Janet and elaborated by Breuer and myself, we shall not

be  at  a  loss  for  plenty  of  natural  facts  showing  the  psychological

character  of  the  post-hypnotic  suggestion  even  more  clearly  and

distinctly.

 


              A Note On The Unconscious In Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2579

 

   The mind of the hysterical patient is full of active yet unconscious

ideas; all her symptoms proceed from such ideas. It is in fact the most

striking character of the hysterical mind to be ruled by them. If the

hysterical  woman  vomits,  she  may  do  so  from  the  idea  of  being

pregnant. She has, however, no knowledge of this idea, although it

can easily be detected in her mind, and made conscious to her, by

one of the technical procedures of psycho-analysis. If she is executing

the  jerks  and  movements  constituting  her  ‘fit’,  she  does  not  even

consciously represent to herself the intended actions, and she may

perceive  those  actions  with  the  detached  feelings  of  an  onlooker.

Nevertheless analysis will show that she was acting her part in the

dramatic  reproduction  of  some  incident  in  her  life,  the  memory  of

which  was  unconsciously  active  during  the  attack.  The  same

preponderance of active unconscious ideas is revealed by analysis as

the essential fact in the psychology of all other forms of neurosis.

   We learn therefore by the analysis of neurotic phenomena that a

latent or unconscious idea is not necessarily a weak one, and that thepresence of such an idea in the mind admits of indirect proofs of the

most cogent kind, which are equivalent to the direct proof furnished by

consciousness.  We  feel  justified  in  making  our  classification  agree

with  this  addition  to  our  knowledge  by  introducing  a  fundamental

distinction between different kinds of latent or unconscious ideas. We

were accustomed to think that every latent idea was so because it was

weak and that it grew conscious as soon as it became strong. We

have not gained the conviction that there are some latent ideas which

do not penetrate into consciousness, however strong they may have

become.  Therefore  we  may  call  the  latent  ideas  of  the  first  type

foreconscious,¹  while we reserve the term unconscious (proper) for

the  latter  type  which  we  came  to  study  in  the  neuroses.  The  term

unconscious, which was used in the purely descriptive sense before,

now  comes  to  imply  something  more.  It  designates  not  only  latent

ideas  in  general,  but  especially  ideas  with  a  certain  dynamic

character,  ideas  keeping  apart  from  consciousness  in  spite  of  their

intensity and activity.

 

    ¹ [In  the  1925  English  version,  throughout  the  paper,  ‘foreconscious’  was  altered  to

‘preconscious’,  which  has,  of  course,  become  the  regular  translation  of  the  German
‘vorbewusst’.]
 


              A Note On The Unconscious In Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2580

 

   Before continuing my exposition I will refer to two objection which

are likely to be raised at this point. The first of these may be stated

thus: instead of subscribing to the hypothesis of unconscious ideas of

which we know nothing, we had better assume that consciousness

can  be  split  up,  so  that  certain  ideas  or  other  psychical  acts  may

constitute a consciousness apart; which has become detached and

estranged from the bulk of conscious psychical activity. Well-known

pathological cases like that of Dr. Azam seem to go far to show that

the splitting up of consciousness is no fanciful imagination.

      I  venture  to  urge  against  this  theory  that  it  is  a  gratuitous

assumption, based on the abuse of the word ‘conscious’. We have no

right to extend the meaning of this word so for as to make it include aconsciousness of which its owner himself is not aware. If philosophers

find  difficulty  in  accepting  the  existence  of  unconscious  ideas,  the

existence of an unconscious consciousness seems to me even more

objectionable. The cases described as splitting of consciousness, like

Dr. Azam’s, might better be denoted as shifting of consciousness, -

that  function  -  or  whatever  it  be  -  oscillating  between  two  different

psychical  complexes  which  become  conscious  and  unconscious  in

alternation.

   The other objection that may probably be raised would be that we

apply to normal psychology conclusions which are drawn chiefly from

the study of pathological conditions. We are enabled to answer it by

another  fact,  the  knowledge  of  which  we  owe  to  psycho-analysis.

Certain deficiencies of function of most frequent occurrence among

healthy  people,  e.g. lapsus linguae,  errors  in  memory  and  speech,

forgetting  of  names,  etc.,  may  easily  be  shown  to  depend  on  the

action  of  strong  unconscious  ideas  in  the  same  way  as  neurotic

symptoms. We shall meet with another still more convincing argument

at a later stage of this discussion.

   By the differentiation of foreconscious and unconscious ideas, we

are led on to leave the field of classification and to form an opinion

about functional and dynamical relations in psychical action. We have

found  a foreconscious  activity  passing  into  consciousness  with  no

difficulty, and an unconscious activity which remains so and seems to

be cut off from consciousness.

 


              A Note On The Unconscious In Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2581

 

   Now we do not know whether these two modes of psychical activity

are identical or essentially divergent from their beginning, but we may

ask  why  they  should  become  different  in  the  course  of  psychical

action.  To  this  last  question  psycho-analysis  gives  a  clear  and

unhesitating answer. It is by no means impossible for the product of

unconscious  activity  to  pierce  into  consciousness,  but  a  certain

amount of exertion is needed for this task. When we try to do it in

ourselves, we become aware of a distinct feeling of repulsion¹ whichmust be overcome, and when we produce it in a patient we get the

most unquestionable signs of what we call his resistance to it. So we

learn that the unconscious idea is excluded from consciousness by

living forces which oppose themselves to its reception, while they do

not  object  to  other  ideas,  the  foreconscious  ones.  Psycho-analysis

leaves no room for doubt that the repulsion from unconscious ideas is

only provoked by the tendencies embodied in their contents. The next

and most probable theory which can be formulated at this stage of our

knowledge  is  the  following.  Unconsciousness  is  a  regular  and

inevitable phase in the processes constituting our psychical activity;

every psychical act begins as an unconscious one, and it may either

remain so or go on developing into consciousness, according as it

meets with resistance or not. The distinction between foreconscious

and  unconscious  activity  is  not  a  primary  one,  but  comes  to  be

established after repulsion has sprung up. Only then the difference

between foreconscious ideas, which can appear in consciousness and

reappear at any moment, and unconscious ideas which cannot do so

gains  a  theoretical  as  well  as  a  practical  value.  A  rough  but  not

inadequate  analogy  to  this  supposed  relation  of  conscious  to

unconscious  activity  might  be  drawn  from  the  field  of  ordinary

photography. The first stage of the photograph is the ‘negative’; every

photographic picture has to pass through the ‘negative process’, and

some of these negatives which have held good in examination are

admitted to the ‘positive process’ ending in the picture.

 

   ¹ [In the German translation the word ‘repulsion’, here and lower down, is rendered by

‘Abwehr’, of which the usual English version is ‘defence’ or ‘fending off ‘.]
 


              A Note On The Unconscious In Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2582

 

   But the distinction between foreconscious and unconscious activity,

and the recognition of the barrier which keeps them asunder, is not

the  last  or  the  most  important  result  of  the  psycho-analytic

investigation of psychical life. There is one psychical product to be met

with in the most normal persons, which yet presents a very striking

analogy  to  the  wildest  productions  of  insanity,  and  was  no  moreintelligible  to  philosophers  than  insanity  itself.  I  refer  to  dreams.

Psycho-analysis  is  founded  upon  the  analysis  of  dreams;  the

interpretation of dreams is the most complete piece of work the young

science has done up to the present. One of the most common types of

dream-formation may be described as follows: a train of thoughts has

been aroused by the working of the mind in the daytime, and retained

some of its activity, escaping from the general inhibition of interests

which introduces sleep and constitutes the psychical preparation for

sleeping. During the night this train of thoughts succeeds in finding

connections  with  one  of  the  unconscious  tendencies  present  ever

since  his  childhood  in  the  mind  of  the  dreamer,  but  ordinarily

repressed and excluded from his conscious life. By the borrowed force

of this unconscious help, the thoughts, the residue of the day’s work,¹

now  become  active  again,  and  emerge  into  consciousness  in  the

shape of the dream. Now three things have happened:

        (1)  The  thoughts  have  undergone  a  change,  a  disguise  and  a

distortion, which represents the part of the unconscious helpmate.

    (2) The thoughts have occupied consciousness at a time when they

ought not.

    (3) Some part of the unconscious, which could not otherwise have

done so, has emerged into consciousness.

   We have learnt the art of finding out the ‘residual thoughts’, the

latent  thoughts  of  the  dream,  and,  by  comparing  them  with  the

apparent² dream, we are able to form a judgement on the changes

they underwent and the manner in which these were brought about.

      The  latent  thoughts  of  the  dream  differ  in  no  respect  from  the

products of our regular conscious activity; they deserve the name of

foreconscious  thoughts,  and  may  indeed  have  been  conscious  at

some moment of waking life. But by entering into connection with the

unconscious  tendencies  during  the  night  they  have  become

assimilated  to  the  latter,  degraded  as  it  were  to  the  condition  of

unconscious  thoughts,  and  subjected  to  the  laws  by  which

unconscious activity is governed. And here is the opportunity to learn

what we could not have guessed from speculation, or from another

source of empirical information - that the laws of unconscious activity

differ widely from those of the conscious. We gather in detail what the

peculiarities of the Unconscious are, and we may hope to learn stillmore about them by a profounder investigation of the processes of

dream-formation.

 

   ¹ [In the 1925 English version the word ‘mental’ was inserted before ‘work’. In the German

translation the whole phrase is rendered ‘Tagesreste’, for which the usual English equivalent
is ‘day’s residues’.]

   ² [This word was altered to ‘manifest’ in the 1925 English version.]

 


              A Note On The Unconscious In Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2583

 

   This inquiry is not yet half finished, and an exposition of the results

obtained hitherto is scarcely possible without entering into the most

intricate problems of dream-analysis. But I would not break off this

discussion  without  indicating  the  change  and  progress  in  our

comprehension  of  the  Unconscious  which  are  due  to  our  psycho-

analytic study of dreams.

      Unconsciousness  seemed  to  us  at  first  only  an  enigmatical

characteristic of a definite psychical act. Now it means more for us. It

is a sign that this act partakes of the nature of a certain psychical

category known to us by other and more important characters¹ and

that it belongs to a system of psychical activity which is deserving of

our  fullest  attention.  The  index-value  of  the  unconscious  has  far

outgrown its importance as a property. The system revealed by the

sign  that  the  single  acts  forming  parts  of  it  are  unconscious  we

designate by the name ‘The Unconscious’, for want of a better and

less ambiguous term. In German, I propose to denote this system by

the letters Ubw, an abbreviation of the German word ‘Unbewusst’.²

And  this  is  the  third  and  most  significant  sense  which  the  term

‘unconscious’ has acquired in psycho-analysis.

 

   ¹ [This was altered to ‘features’ in the 1925 English version.]
   ² [Equivalent English abbreviation: ‘Ucs.’.]

                                                                                       2584

 

                              AN EVIDENTIAL DREAM

                                        (1913)

 


                                                                                      2585

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2586

 

                              AN EVIDENTIAL DREAM

 

A  lady  suffering  from  doubting  mania  and  obsessive  ceremonials

insisted that her nurses should never let her out of their sight for a

single moment: otherwise she would begin to brood about forbidden

actions  that  she  might  have  committed  while  she  was  not  being

watched. One evening, while she was resting on the sofa, she thought

she saw that the nurse on duty had fallen asleep. She called out: ‘Did

you see me?’ The nurse started up and replied: ‘Of course I did.’ This

gave  the  patient  grounds  for  a  fresh  doubt,  and  after  a  time  she

repeated  her  question,  which  the  nurse  met  with  renewed

protestations; just at that moment another attendant came in bringing

the patient’s supper.

   This incident occurred one Friday evening. Next morning the nurse

recounted  a  dream  which  had  the  effect  of  dispelling  the  patient’s

doubts.

   DREAM. - Someone had entrusted a child to her. Its mother had left

home, and she had lost it. As she went along, she enquired from the

people in the street whether they had seen the child. Then she came

to a large expanse of water and crossed a narrow footbridge. (There

was  an  addendum: Suddenly  there  appeared  before  her  on  the

footbridge, like a ‘fata Morgana’, the figure of another nurse.) Then

she found herself in a familiar place, where she met a woman whom

she  had  known  as  a  girl  and  who  had  in  those  days  been  asaleswoman in a provision shop and later had got married. She asked

the woman, who was standing in front of her door: ‘Did you see the

child?’ The woman paid no attention to the question but informed her

that she was now divorced from her husband, adding that marriage is

not always happy either. She woke up feeling reassured and thought

that the child would turn up all right in a neighbour’s house.

   ANALYSIS.  -  The  patient  assumed  that  this  dream  referred  to  the

falling asleep which the nurse had denied. From additional information

volunteered by the latter, she was able to interpret the dream in a

fashion which, although incomplete in some respects, was sufficient

for all practical purposes. I myself heard only the lady’s report and did

not interview the nurse. I shall first quote the patient’s interpretation,

and then supplement it with whatever our general understanding of

the laws governing dream-formation allows us to add.

 


                                  An Evidential Dream

                                                                                      2587

 

   ‘The nurse told me that the child in the dream reminded her of a

case the nursing of which had given her the most lively satisfaction. It

was that of a child who was unable to see on account of inflammation

of the eyes (blennorrhoea). The mother, however, did not leave home:

she helped to nurse the child. On the other hand I remember too that

when my husband, who thinks highly of this nurse, went away, he left

me in her care and she promised to look after me as she would after a

child.’

   Furthermore, we know from the patient’s analysis that by insisting on

never being let out of sight she had put herself back in the position of

being a child once more.

   ‘Her having lost the child’, continued the patient, ‘signified that she

had not seen me; she had lost sight of me. This was her admission

that she had actually gone to sleep for a time and had not told me the

truth afterwards.’

   She was in the dark about the meaning of the small piece of the

dream  in  which  the  nurse  enquired  from  the  people  in  the  street

whether they had seen the child; on the other hand, she was able toelucidate the later details of the manifest dream.

   ‘The large expanse of water made the nurse think of the Rhine; she

added, however, that it was much larger than the Rhine. Then she

remembered that on the previous evening I had read her the story of

Jonah and the whale, and had told her that I myself once saw a whale

in the English Channel. I fancy that the large expanse of water was

the sea and was an allusion to the story of Jonah.

   ‘I think, too, the narrow footbridge came from the same story, which

was amusingly written in dialect. The anecdote related how a religious

instructor described to his pupils the wonderful adventures of Jonah;

whereupon a boy objected that it could not be true, since the teacher

himself  had  told  them  before  that  whales  could  swallow  only  the

smallest  creatures  owing  to  the  narrowness  of  their  gullets.  The

teacher got out of the difficulty by saying that Jonah was a Jew, and

that Jews would squeeze in anywhere. My nurse is very pious but

inclined to religious doubts, and I reproached myself in case what I

had read to her might have stirred them up.

 


                                  An Evidential Dream

                                                                                      2588

 

   ‘On this narrow footbridge she now saw the apparition of another

nurse, whom she knew. She told me the story of this nurse: she had

drowned herself in the Rhine because she had been discharged from

a case owing to something she had been guilty of.¹ She herself had

feared,  therefore,  that  she  would  be  discharged  for  having  fallen

asleep. Moreover, on the day following the incident and after relating

the dream, the nurse cried bitterly, and when I asked her why, replied

quite rudely: "You know why as well as I do; and now you won’t trust

me any more!"‘

   Since the apparition of the drowned nurse was an addendum and an

especially distinct one, we would have advised the lady to begin her

dream-interpretation at that point. According to the dreamer’s report,

too, this first half of her dream was accompanied by acute anxiety; the

second part paved the way for the feeling of reassurance with which

she awoke.   ‘I regard the next part of the dream’, said the lady, continuing her

analysis, ‘as certain corroboration of my view that the dream had to do

with  what  happened  on  Friday  evening,  for  the  person  who  had

formerly  been  a  saleswoman  in  a  provision  shop  can  only  have

referred to the attendant who brought in the supper on that occasion. I

noticed, too, that the nurse had complained of nausea all day long.

The  question  she  put  to  this  woman:  "Did  you  see  the  child?"  is

obviously traceable to my question: "Did you see me!" which I had put

to  her  for  the  second  time  just  as  the  attendant  came  in  with  the

dishes.’

 

   ¹ At this point I have been guilty of making a condensation of the material, which I have

been able to put right after going through my draft with the lady who told me the story. The
nurse who met the dreamer as an apparition on the footbridge had not been guilty of anything
in her nursing. She was discharged because the child’s mother, who had to leave home at the
time, wanted to leave her child in charge of an older attendant - thus in point of fact a more
trustworthy one. This was followed by a second story about another nurse who had actually
been discharged on account of neglect, but who did not on that account drown herself. The
material necessary for the interpretation of the dream-element came, as is so often the way,
from two sources. My memory carried out the synthesis that led to the interpretation. For the
rest, this story of the drowned nurse contains the factor of the mother leaving home, which the
lady connected with the departure of her husband. We thus have here an overdetermination
which detracts somewhat from the elegance of the interpretation.
 


                                  An Evidential Dream

                                                                                      2589

 

      In  the  dream,  too,  enquiry  after  the  child  was  made  on  two

occasions. The fact that the woman did not reply - paid no attention -

we may regard as a depreciation of this other attendant made in the

dreamer’s  favour:  she  represented  herself  in  the  dream  as  being

superior to the other woman, precisely because she herself had to

face reproaches on account of her own lack of attention.

      ‘The  woman  who  appeared  in  the  dream  was  not  in  actual  fact

divorced from her husband. The situation was taken from an incident

in the life of the other attendant, who had been separated - "divorced"

- from a man by her parents’ command. The remark that "marriage

does not always run smoothly either" was probably a consolation used

in  the  course  of  conversation  between  the  two  women.  Thisconsolation  prefigured  another,  with  which  the  dream  ended:  "The

child will turn up all right."

   ‘I concluded from this dream that on the evening in question the

nurse really did fall asleep and that she was afraid of being dismissed

on that account. Because of this I no longer felt any doubt about the

correctness of my observation. Incidentally, after relating the dream,

she added that she was very sorry she had not got a dream-book with

her. To my comment that such books were full of the most ignorant

superstitions,  she  replied  that,  although  she  was  not  at  all

superstitious, still all the unpleasant happenings of her life had taken

place on a Friday. I must add that at the present time her treatment of

me is not at all satisfactory, and she is touchy and irritable and makes

scenes about nothing.’

   I think we must credit the lady with having correctly interpreted and

evaluated  her  nurse’s  dream.  As  so  often  happens  with  dream-

interpretation during analysis, the translation of the dream does not

depend solely on the products of association, but we have also to take

into account the circumstances of its narration, the behaviour of the

dreamer before and after the analysis of the dream, as well as every

remark or disclosure made by the dreamer at about the same time -

during  the  same  analytic  session.  If  we  take  into  consideration  the

nurse’s  touchiness,  her  attitude  to  unlucky  Fridays,  etc.,  we  shall

confirm the conclusion that the dream contained an admission that, in

spite of her denial, she had actually dozed off, and was afraid she

would be sent away from the ‘child’ in her care.¹

 

   ¹ A few days later, indeed, the nurse confessed to a third person that she had fallen asleep

that evening, and thus confirmed the lady’s interpretation.
 


                                  An Evidential Dream

                                                                                      2590

 

 

   While, however, for the lady who reported it to me this dream had

practical  significance,  for  us  it  stimulates  theoretical  interest  in  two

directions. It is true that it ended in a consolation, but in the main it

represented an important admission in regard to the nurse’s relation toher patient. How does it come about that a dream, which is supposed,

after all, to serve as the fulfilment of a wish, could take the place of an

admission  which  was  not  even  of  any  advantage  to  the  dreamer?

Must  we  really  concede  that  in  addition  to  wishful  (and  anxiety)

dreams, there are also dreams of admission, as well as of warning,

reflection, adaptation, and so on?

   I must confess that I still do not quite understand why the stand I

took against any such temptation in my Interpretation of Dreams has

given  rise  to  misgivings  in  the  minds  of  so  many  psycho-analysts,

among  them  some  well-known  ones.  It  seems  to  me  that  the

differentiation  between  dreams  of  wishing,  admission,  warning,

adaptation,  and  so  on,  has  not  much  more  sense  than  the

differentiation, which is accepted perforce, of medical specialists into

gynaecologists, paediatricians, and dentists. Let me recapitulate here

as  briefly  as  possible  what  I  have  said  on  this  question  in  my

Interpretation of Dreams.¹

   The so-called ‘day’s residues’ can act as disturbers of sleep and

constructors  of  dreams;  they  are  affectively  cathected  thought-

processes  from  the  dream-day,  which  have  resisted  the  general

lowering  through  sleep.  These  day’s  residues  are  uncovered  by

tracing back the manifest dream to the latent dream-thoughts; they

constitute portions of the latter and are thus among the activities of

waking life - whether conscious or unconscious - which have been

able  to  persist  into  the  period  of  sleep.  In  accordance  with  the

multiplicity of thought-processes in the conscious and preconscious,

these day’s residues have the most numerous and varied meanings:

they  may  be  wishes  or  fears  that  have  not  been  disposed  of,  or

intentions,  reflections,  warnings,  attempts  at  adaptation  to  current

tasks, and so on. To this extent the classification of dreams that is

under  consideration  seems  to  be  justified  by  the  content  which  is

uncovered by interpretation. These day’s residues, however, are not

the  dream  itself:  they  lack  the  main  essential  of  a  dream.  Of

themselves they are not able to construct a dream. They are, strictly

speaking,  only  the  psychical  material  for  the  dream-work,  just  as

sensory and somatic stimuli, whether accidental or produced under

experimental conditions, constitute the somatic material for the dream-

work. To attribute to them the main part in the construction of dreamsis  simply  to  repeat  at  a  new  point  the  pre-analytic  error  which

explained dreams by referring them to bad digestion or to pressure on

the skin. Scientific errors, indeed, are tenacious of life, and even when

they  have  been  refuted  are  ready  to  creep  in  again  under  new

disguises.

 

   ¹ p. 992 ff.

 


                                  An Evidential Dream

                                                                                      2591

 

   The present state of our knowledge leads us to conclude that the

essential factor in the construction of dreams is an unconscious wish -

as  a  rule  an  infantile  wish,  now  repressed  -  which  can  come  to

expression in this somatic or psychical material (in the day’s residues

too, therefore) and can thus supply these with a force which enables

them  to  press  their  way  through  to  consciousness  even  during  the

suspension of thought at night. The dream is in every case a fulfilment

of this  unconscious  wish,  whatever  else  it  may  contain  -  warning,

reflection,  admission,  or  any  other  part  of  the  rich  content  of

preconscious waking life that has persisted undealt-with into the night.

It  is this  unconscious  wish  that  gives  the  dream-work  its  peculiar

character  as  an  unconscious  revision  of  preconscious  material.  A

psycho-analyst can characterize as dreams only the products of the

dream-work: in spite of the fact that the latent dream-thoughts are only

arrived at from the interpretation of the dream, he cannot reckon them

as  part  of  the  dream,  but  only  as  part  of  preconscious  reflection.

(Secondary revision by the conscious agency is here reckoned as part

of the dream-work. Even if one were to separate it, this would not

involve any alteration in our conception. We should then have to say:

dreams  in  the  analytic  sense  comprise  the  dream-work  proper

together with the secondary revision of its products.) The conclusion

to be drawn from these considerations is that one cannot put the wish-

fulfilling character of dreams on a par with their character as warnings,

admissions, attempts at solution, etc., without denying the concept of

a psychical dimension of depth - that is to say, without denying the

standpoint of psycho-analysis. 

   Let us now go back to the nurse’s dream, in order to demonstrate

the quality of depth in the wish-fulfilment contained in it. We already

know  that  the  lady’s  interpretation  of  the  dream  was  by  no  means

complete;  there  were  portions  of  it  to  which  she  was  unable  to  do

justice.  Moreover  she  suffered  from  an  obsessional  neurosis,  a

condition  which,  from  what  I  have  observed,  makes  it  considerably

harder  to  understand  dream-symbols,  just  as  dementia  praecox

makes it easier.

   Nevertheless, our knowledge of dream-symbolism enables us to

understand  uninterpreted  portions  of  this  dream  and  to  discover  a

deeper  significance  behind  the  interpretations  already  given.  We

cannot but notice that some of the material employed by the nurse

came  from  the  complex  of  giving  birth,  of  having  children.  The

expanse of water (the Rhine, the Channel where the whale was seen)

was certainly the water out of which children come. And then, too, she

came to the water in search of a child. The Jonah legend, which was a

factor lying behind the determination of this water, the question how

Jonah (the child) could get through such a narrow passage, belongs to

the same complex. And the nurse who threw herself into the Rhine out

of mortification found a sexual-symbolic consolation for her despair of

life  in  the  mode  of  her  death  -  by  going  into  water.  The  narrow

footbridge on which the apparition met her was in all probability also a

genital symbol, although I must admit that here we lack as yet more

precise knowledge.

 


                                  An Evidential Dream

                                                                                      2592

 

   The wish ‘I want to have a child’ seems therefore to have been the

dream-constructor from the unconscious; no other would have been

better  calculated  to  console  the  nurse  for  the  distressing  state  of

affairs in real life. ‘I shall be discharged: I shall lose the child in my

care. What does it matter? I shall get a real child of my own instead.’

The  uninterpreted  portion  of  the  dream  in  which  she  questioned

everyone in the street about the child may perhaps belong here; theinterpretation would then run: ‘And even if I have to offer myself on the

streets I know how to get a child for myself.’ A strain of defiance in the

dreamer, hitherto disguised, suddenly declares itself at this point. Her

admission  fits  in  here  for  the  first  time:  ‘I  have  shut  my  eyes  and

compromised my professional reputation for conscientiousness; now I

shall lose my place. Shall I be such a fool as to drown myself like

Nurse X? Not I: I’ll give up nursing altogether and get married; I’ll be a

woman  and  have  a  real  child;  nothing  shall  prevent  me.’  This

interpretation is justified by the consideration that ‘having children’ is

really the infantile expression of a wish for sexual intercourse: indeed

it can be chosen in consciousness as a euphemistic expression of this

objectionable wish.

      Thus  the  dreamer’s  disadvantageous  admission,  to  which  she

showed some inclination even in waking life, was made possible in the

dream by being employed by a latent character-trait of hers for the

purpose of bringing about the fulfilment of an infantile wish. We may

surmise that this trait had a close connection - in regard both to time

and to content - with the wish for a child and for sexual enjoyment.

   Subsequent enquiry from the lady to whom I owe the first part of this

interpretation afforded some unexpected information about the nurse’s

previous life. Before she took up nursing she had wanted to marry a

man who had been keenly interested in her; but she had abandoned

the  projected  marriage  on  account  of  the  opposition  of  an  aunt,

towards whom her relations were a curious mixture of dependence

and defiance. This aunt who prevented the marriage was the Superior

of a nursing Order. The dreamer always regarded her as her pattern.

She had expectations of an inheritance from her and was tied to her

for that reason. Nevertheless, she opposed her aunt by not entering

the Order as that lady had planned. The defiance shown in the dream

was therefore directed against the aunt. We have ascribed an anal-

erotic origin to this character-trait, and may take into consideration that

the  interests  which  made  her  dependent  on  her  aunt  were  of  a

financial nature; we are also reminded that children favour the anal

theory of birth.

 


                                  An Evidential Dream                                                                                      2593

 

   This factor of infantile defiance may perhaps allow us to assume a

closer relation between the first and last scenes in the dream. The

former saleswoman in a provision shop represents in the dream the

attendant who brought the lady’s supper into the room just when she

was asking the question ‘Did you see me?’ It appears, however, that

she  was  cast  for  the  role  of  hostile  rival  in  general.  The  dreamer

disparaged  her  capacities  as  a  nurse  by  making  her  take  not  the

slightest interest in the lost child, but deal only with her own private

affairs  in  her  answer.  She  had  thus  displaced  on  to  this  figure  the

indifference about the child in her care which she was beginning to

feel. The unhappy marriage and divorce which she herself must have

dreaded  in  her  most  secret  wishes  were  attributed  to  the  other

woman. We know, however, that it was the aunt who had separated

the  dreamer  from  her  fiancé.  Hence  the  ‘provision  saleswoman’  (a

figure not necessarily without an infantile symbolic significance) may

represent the aunt-Superior, who was in fact not much older than the

dreamer and who had played the traditional part of mother-rival in her

life. A satisfactory confirmation of this interpretation is to be found in

the  fact  that  the  ‘familiar’  place  where  she  came  upon  this  person

standing in front of her door was precisely the place where her aunt

resided as a Superior.

   Owing to the lack of contact between the analyst and the person

under analysis, it is scarcely advisable to penetrate deeper into the

structure of the dream. But we may perhaps say that so far as it was

accessible  to  interpretation  it  has  provided  us  with  plenty  of

confirmations as well as with plenty of new problems.

                                                                                       2594

 

    THE OCCURRENCE IN DREAMS OF MATERIAL FROM FAIRY

                                        TALES

                                        (1913)

 


                                                                                      2595

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2596

 

    THE OCCURRENCE IN DREAMS OF MATERIAL FROM FAIRY

                                        TALES

 

It is not surprising to find that psycho-analysis confirms our recognition

of  the  important  place  which  folk  fairy  tales  have  acquired  in  the

mental  life  of  our  children.  In  a  few  people  a  recollection  of  their

favourite  fairy  tales  takes  the  place  of  memories  of  their  own

childhood; they have made the fairy tales into screen memories.

   Elements and situations derived from fairy tales are also frequently

to be found in dreams. In interpreting the passages in question the

patient will produce the significant fairy tale as an association. In the

present  paper  I  shall  give  two  instances  of  this  very  common

occurrence.  But  it  will  not  be  possible  to  do  more  than  hint  at  the

relations  between  the  fairy  tales  and  the  history  of  the  dreamer’s

childhood and his neurosis, though this limitation will involve the risk of

breaking links which were of the utmost importance to the analyst.

 

                                            I

 

   Here is a dream of a young married woman who had had a visit from

her husband a few days before: She was in a room that was entirely

brown. A little door led to the top of a steep staircase, and up this

staircase there came into the room a curious manikin - small, withwhite hair, a bald top to his head and a red nose. He danced round

the room in front of her, carried on in the funniest way, and then went

down the staircase again. He was dressed in a grey garment, through

which  every  part  of  his  figure  was  visible.  (A  correction  was  made

subsequently: He was wearing a long black coat and grey trousers.)

      The  analysis  was  as  follows.  The  description  of  the  manikin’s

personal  appearance  fitted  the  dreamer’s  father-in-law  without  any

alteration  being  necessary.¹  Immediately  afterwards,  however,  she

thought of the story of ‘Rumpelstiltskin’, who danced around in the

same funny way as the man in the dream and in so doing betrayed his

name to the queen; but by that he lost his claim to the queen’s first

child, and in his fury tore himself in two.

 

   ¹ Except for the detail that the manikin had his hair cut short, whereas her father-in-law

wore his long.
 


          The Occurrence In Dreams Of Material From Fairy Tales

                                                                                      2597

 

   On the day before she had the dream she herself had been just as

furious with her husband and had exclaimed: ‘I could tear him in two.’

   The brown room at first gave rise to difficulties. All that occurred to

her was her parents’ dining-room, which was panelled in that colour -

in brown wood. She then told some stories of beds which were so

uncomfortable for two people to sleep in. A few days before, when the

subject of conversation had been beds in other countries, she had

said  something  very mal  à  propos  -  quite  innocently,  as  she

maintained - and everyone in the room had roared with laughter.

   The dream was now already intelligible. The brown wood room¹ was

in the first place a bed, and through the connection with the dining-

room it was a marriage bed.² She was therefore in her marriage bed.

Her  visitor  should  have  been  her  young  husband,  who,  after  an

absence  of  several  months,  had  visited  her  to  play  his  part  in  the

double bed. But to begin with it was her husband’s father, her father-

in-law.

   Behind this first interpretation we have a glimpse of deeper and

purely sexual material. Here the room was the vagina. (The room wasin her - this was reversed in the dream.) The little man who made

grimaces and behaved so funnily was the penis. The narrow door and

the  steep  stairs  confirmed  the  view  that  the  situation  was  a

representation of intercourse. As a rule we are accustomed to find the

penis symbolized by a child; but we shall find there was good reason

for a father being introduced to represent the penis in this instance.

      The  solution  of  the  remaining  portion  of  the  dream  will  entirely

confirm us in this interpretation. The dreamer herself explained the

transparent  grey  garment  as  a  condom.  We  may  gather  that

considerations of preventing conception and worries whether this visit

of her husband’s might not have sown the seed of a second child were

among the instigating causes of the dream.

 

   ¹ Wood, as is well known, is frequently a female or maternal symbol: e.g. materia, Madeira,

etc.

   ² For bed and board stand for marriage.

 


          The Occurrence In Dreams Of Material From Fairy Tales

                                                                                      2598

 

   The black coat. Coats of that kind suited her husband admirably.

She  wanted  to  persuade  him  always  to  wear  them,  instead  of  his

usual clothes. Dressed in the black coat, therefore, her husband was

as she liked to see him. The black coat and grey trousers. At two

different levels, one above the other, this had the same meaning: ‘I

should like you to be dressed like that. I like you like that.’

      Rumpelstiltskin  was  connected  with  the  contemporary  thoughts

underlying  the  dream  -  the  day’s  residues  -  by  a  neat  antithetic

relation. In the fairy tale he comes in order to take away the queen’s

first child. In the dream the little man comes in the shape of a father,

because  he  had  presumably  brought  a  second  child.  But

Rumpelstiltskin also gave access to the deeper, infantile stratum of

the  dream-thoughts.  The  droll  little  fellow,  whose  very  name  is

unknown, whose secret is so eagerly canvassed, who can perform

such extraordinary tricks - in the fairy tale he turns straw into gold - the

fury against him, or rather against his possessor, who is envied for

possessing  him  (the  girl’s  envy  for  the  penis)  -  all  of  these  wereelements whose relation to the foundations of the patient’s neurosis

can, as I have said, barely be touched upon in this paper. The short-

cut hair of the manikin in the dream was no doubt also connected with

the subject of castration.

      If  we  carefully  observe  from  clear  instances  the  way  in  which

dreamers use fairy tales and the point at which they bring them in, we

may perhaps also succeed in picking up some hints which will help in

interpreting remaining obscurities in the fairy tales themselves.

 


          The Occurrence In Dreams Of Material From Fairy Tales

                                                                                      2599

 

                                            II

 

   A young man told me the following dream. He had a chronological

basis  for  his  early  memories  in  the  circumstance  that  his  parents

moved  from  one  country  estate  to  another  just  before  he  was  five

years old; the dream, which he said was his earliest one, occurred

while he was still upon the first estate.

   ‘I dreamt that it was night and that I was lying in my bed. (My bed

stood with its foot towards the window: in front of the window there

was a row of old walnut trees. I know it was winter when I had the

dream,  and  night-time.)  Suddenly  the  window  opened  of  its  own

accord, and I was terrified to see that some white wolves were sitting

on the big walnut tree in front of the window. There were six or seven

of them. The wolves were quite white, and looked more like foxes or

sheep-dogs, for they had big tails like foxes and they had their ears

pricked  like  dogs  when  they  pay  attention  to  something.  In  great

horror,  evidently  of  being  eaten  up  by  the  wolves,  I  screamed and

woke up. My nurse hurried to my bed, to see what had happened to

me. It took quite a long while before I was convinced that it had only

been  a  dream;  I  had  had  such  a  clear  and  life-like  picture  of  the

window  opening  and  the  wolves  sitting  on  the  tree.  At  last  I  grew

quieter, felt as though I had escaped from some danger, and went to

sleep again.

      ‘The  only  piece  of  action  in  the  dream  was  the  opening  of  thewindow;  for  the  wolves  sat  quite  still  and  without  making  any

movement  on  the  branches  of  the  tree,  to  the  right  and  left  of  the

trunk, and looked at me. It seemed as though they had riveted their

whole attention upon me. - I think this was my first anxiety-dream. I

was three, four, or at most five years old at the time. From then until

my eleventh or twelfth year I was always afraid of seeing something

terrible in my dreams.’

   He added a drawing of the tree with the wolves, which confirmed his

description. The analysis of the dream brought the following material

to light.

      He  had  always  connected  this  dream  with  the  recollection  that

during these years of his childhood he was most tremendously afraid

of the picture of a wolf in a book of fairy tales. His elder sister, who

was  very  much  his  superior,  used  to  tease  him  by  holding  up  this

particular picture in front of him on some excuse or other, so that he

was  terrified  and  began  to  scream.  In  this  picture  the  wolf  was

standing upright, striding out with one foot, with its claws stretched out

and  its  ears  pricked.  He  thought  this  picture  must  have  been  an

illustration to the story of ‘Little Red Riding-Hood’.

   Why were the wolves white? This made him think of the sheep,

large flocks of which were kept in the neighbourhood of the estate. His

father occasionally took him with him to visit these flocks, and every

time this happened he felt very proud and blissful. Later on - according

to enquiries that were made it may easily have been shortly before the

time  of  the  dream  -  an  epidemic  broke  out  among  the  sheep.  His

father sent for a follower of Pasteur’s, who inoculated the animals, but

after the inoculation even more of them died than before.

 


          The Occurrence In Dreams Of Material From Fairy Tales

                                                                                      2600

 

   How did the wolves come to be on the tree? This reminded him of a

story that he had heard his grandfather tell. He could not remember

whether it was before or after the dream, but its subject is a decisive

argument in favour of the former view. The story ran as follows. A

tailor was sitting at work in his room, when the window opened and awolf leapt in. The tailor hit after him with his yard - no (he corrected

himself), caught him by his tail and pulled it off, so that the wolf ran

away  in  terror.  Some  time  later  the  tailor  went  into  the  forest,  and

suddenly saw a pack of wolves coming towards him; so he climbed up

a tree to escape from them. At first the wolves were in perplexity; but

the  maimed  one,  which  was  among  them  and  wanted  to  revenge

himself  on  the  tailor,  proposed  that  they  should  climb  one  upon

another  till  the  last  one  could  reach  him.  He  himself  -  he  was  a

vigorous old fellow - would be the base of the pyramid. The wolves did

as he suggested, but the tailor had recognized the visitor whom he

had punished, and suddenly called out as he had before: ‘Catch the

grey one by his tail!’ The tailless wolf, terrified by the recollection, ran

away, and all the others tumbled down.

   In this story the tree appears, upon which the wolves were sitting in

the  dream.  But  it  also  contains  an  unmistakable  allusion  to  the

castration complex. The old wolf was docked of his tail by the tailor.

The fox-tails of the wolves in the dream were probably compensations

for this taillessness.

      Why  were  there  six  or  seven  wolves?  There  seemed  to  be  no

answer to this question, until I raised a doubt whether the picture that

had frightened him could be connected with the story of ‘Little Red

Riding-Hood’.  This  fairy  tale  only  offers  an  opportunity  for  two

illustrations  -  Little  Red  Riding-Hood’s  meeting  with  the  wolf  in  the

wood, and the scene in which the wolf lies in bed in the grandmother’s

night-cap. There must therefore be some other fairy tale behind his

recollection of the picture. He soon discovered that it could only be the

story of ‘The Wolf and the Seven Little Goats’ Here the number seven

occurs, and also the number six, for the wolf only ate up six of the little

goats, while the seventh hid itself in the clock-case. The white, too,

comes  into  this  story,  for  the  wolf  had  his  paw  made  white  at  the

baker’s after the little goats had recognized him on his first visit by his

grey paw. Moreover, the two fairy tales have much in common. In both

there is the eating up, the cutting open of the belly, the taking out of

the  people  who  have  been  eaten  and  their  replacement  by  heavy

stones, and finally in both of them the wicked wolf perishes. Besides

all this, in the story of the little goats the tree appears. The wolf lay

down under a tree after his meal and snored. 


          The Occurrence In Dreams Of Material From Fairy Tales

                                                                                      2601

 

   I shall have, for a special reason, to deal with this dream again

elsewhere,  and  interpret  it  and  consider  its  significance  in  greater

detail.  For  it  is  the  earliest  anxiety-dream  that  the  dreamer

remembered from his childhood, and its content, taken in connection

with other dreams that followed it soon afterwards and with certain

events  in  his  earliest  years,  is  of  quite  peculiar  interest.  We  must

confine ourselves here to the relation of the dream to the two fairy

tales  which  have  so  much  in  common  with  each  other,  ‘Little  Red

Riding-Hood’ and ‘The Wolf and the Seven Little Goats’. The effect

produced by these stories was shown in the little dreamer by a regular

animal phobia. This phobia was only distinguished from other similar

cases  by  the  fact  that  the  anxiety-animal  was  not  an  object  easily

accessible to observation (such as a horse or a dog), but was known

to him only from stories and picture-books.

   I shall discuss on another occasion the explanation of these animal

phobias and the significance attaching to them. I will only remark in

anticipation  that  this  explanation  is  in  complete  harmony  with  the

principal characteristic shown by the neurosis from which the present

dreamer  suffered  later  in  his  life.  His  fear  of  his  father  was  the

strongest motive for his falling ill, and his ambivalent attitude towards

every father-surrogate was the dominating feature of his life as well as

of his behaviour during the treatment.

   If in my patient’s case the wolf was merely a first father-surrogate,

the question arises whether the hidden content in the fairy tales of the

wolf that ate up the little goats and of ‘Little Red Riding-Hood’ may not

simply be infantile fear of the father.¹ Moreover, my patient’s father

had the characteristic, shown by so many people in relation to their

children,  of  indulging  in  ‘affectionate  abuse’;  and  it  is  possible  that

during the patient’s earlier years his father (though he grew severe

later on) may more than once, as he caressed the little boy or played

with  him,  have  threatened  in  fun  to  ‘gobble  him  up’.  One  of  my

patients told me that her two children could never get to be fond oftheir grandfather, because in the course of his affectionate romping

with them he used to frighten them by saying he would cut open their

tummies.

 

   ¹ Compare the similarity between these two fairy tales and the myth of Kronos, which has

been pointed out by Rank (1912).

                                                                                       2602

 

                    THE THEME OF THE THREE CASKETS

                                        (1913)

 


                                                                                      2603

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2604

 

                    THE THEME OF THE THREE CASKETS

 

                                            I

 

Two  scenes  from  Shakespeare,  one  from  a  comedy  and  the  other

from a tragedy, have lately given me occasion for posing and solving a

small problem.

   The first of these scenes is the suitors’ choice between the three

caskets in The Merchant of Venice. The fair and wise Portia is bound

at her father’s bidding to take as her husband only that one of her

suitors  who  chooses  the  right  casket  from  among  the  three  before

him. The three caskets are of gold, silver and lead: the right casket is

the one that contains her portrait. Two suitors have already departed

unsuccessful: they have chosen gold and silver. Bassanio, the third,

decides in favour of lead; thereby he wins the bride, whose affection

was already his before the trial of fortune. Each of the suitors gives

reasons for his choice in a speech in which he praises the metal he

prefers and depreciates the other two. The most difficult task thus falls

to  the  share  of  the  fortunate  third  suitor;  what  he  finds  to  say  in

glorification of lead as against gold and silver is little and has a forced

ring.  If  in  psycho-analytic  practice  we  were  confronted  with  such  a

speech, we should suspect that there were concealed motives behind

the unsatisfying reasons produced.

   Shakespeare did not himself invent this oracle of the choice of acasket; he took it from a tale in the Gesta Romanorum, in which a girl

has to make the same choice to win the Emperor’s son.¹ Here too the

third metal, lead, is the bringer of fortune. It is not hard to guess that

we  have  here  an  ancient  theme,  which  requires  to  be  interpreted,

accounted for and traced back to its origin. A first conjecture as to the

meaning  of  this  choice  between  gold,  silver  and  lead  is  quickly

confirmed by a statement of Stucken’s,² who has made a study of the

same material over a wide field. He writes: ‘The identity of Portia’s

three suitors is clear from their choice: the Prince of Morocco chooses

the gold casket - he is the sun; the Prince of Arragon chooses the

silver casket - he is the moon; Bassanio chooses the leaden casket -

he is the star youth.’ In support of this explanation he cites an episode

from  the  Estonian  folk-epic  ‘Kalewipoeg’,  in  which  the  three  suitors

appear undisguisedly as the sun, moon and star youths (the last being

‘the Pole-star’s eldest boy’) and once again the bride falls to the lot of

the third.

 

   ¹ Brandes (1896).

   ² Stucken (1907, 655).

 


                        The Theme Of The Three Caskets

                                                                                      2605

 

   Thus our little problem has led us to an astral myth! The only pity is

that with this explanation we are not at the end of the matter. The

question  is  not  exhausted,  for  we  do  not  share  the  belief  of  some

investigators that myths were read in the heavens and brought down

to earth; we are more inclined to judge with Otto Rank¹ that they were

projected  on  to  the  heavens  after  having  arisen  elsewhere  under

purely human conditions. It is in this human content that our interest

lies.

   Let us look once more at our material. In the Estonian epic, just as in

the tale from the Gesta Romanorum, the subject is a girl choosing

between three suitors; in the scene from The Merchant of Venice the

subject  is  apparently  the  same,  but  at  the  same  time  something

appears in it that is in the nature of an inversion of the theme: a man

chooses  between  three  -  caskets.  If  what  we  were  concerned  withwere  a  dream,  it  would  occur  to  us  at  once  that  caskets  are  also

women, symbols of what is essential in woman, and therefore of a

woman herself - like coffers, boxes, cases, baskets, and so on. If we

boldly assume that there are symbolic substitutions of the same kind

in myths as well, then the casket scene in The Merchant of Venice

really becomes the inversion we suspected. With a wave of the wand,

as though we were in a fairy tale, we have stripped the astral garment

from our theme; and now we see that the theme is a human one, a

man’s choice between three women.

   This same content, however, is to be found in another scene of

Shakespeare’s, in one of his most powerfully moving dramas; not the

choice of a bride this time, yet linked by many hidden similarities to the

choice of the casket in The Merchant of Venice. The old King Lear

resolves to divide his kingdom while he is still alive among his three

daughters,  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  love  that  each  of  them

expresses for him. The two elder ones, Goneril and Regan, exhaust

themselves in asseverations and laudations of their love for him; the

third,  Cordelia,  refuses  to  do  so.  He  should  have  recognized  the

unassuming, speechless love of his third daughter and rewarded it,

but he does not recognize it. He disowns Cordelia, and divides the

kingdom between the other two, to his own and the general ruin. Is not

this once more the scene of a choice between three women, of whom

the youngest is the best, the most excellent one?

 

   ¹ Rank (1909, 8 ff.).

 


                        The Theme Of The Three Caskets

                                                                                      2606

 

   There will at once occur to us other scenes from myths, fairy tales

and literature, with the same situation as their content. The shepherd

Paris has to choose between three goddesses, of whom he declares

the  third  to  be  the  most  beautiful.  Cinderella,  again,  is  a  youngest

daughter,  who  is  preferred  by  the  prince  to  her  two  elder  sisters.

Psyche,  in  Apuleius’s  story,  is  the  youngest  and  fairest  of  three

sisters. Psyche is, on the one hand, revered as Aphrodite in human

form; on the other, she is treated by that goddess as Cinderella wastreated by her stepmother and is set the task of sorting a heap of

mixed seeds, which she accomplishes with the help of small creatures

(doves in the case of Cinderella, ants in the case of Psyche).¹ Anyone

who cared to make a wider survey of the material would undoubtedly

discover  other  versions  of  the  same  theme  preserving  the  same

essential features.

   Let us be content with Cordelia, Aphrodite, Cinderella and Psyche.

In  all  the  stories  the  three  women,  of  whom  the  third  is  the  most

excellent one, must surely be regarded as in some way alike if they

are represented as sisters. (We must not be led astray by the fact that

Lear’s  choice  is  between  three daughters;  this  may  mean  nothing

more than that he has to be represented as an old man. An old man

cannot very well choose between three women in any other way. Thus

they become his daughters.)

   But who are these three sisters and why must the choice fall on the

third? If we could answer this question, we should be in possession of

the interpretation we are seeking. We have once already made use of

an application of psycho-analytic technique, when we explained the

three caskets symbolically as three women. If we have the courage to

proceed in the same way, we shall be setting foot on a path which will

lead  us  first  to  something  unexpected  and  incomprehensible,  but

which will perhaps, by a devious route, bring us to a goal.

 

   ¹ I have to thank Dr. Otto Rank for calling my attention to these similarities.

 


                        The Theme Of The Three Caskets

                                                                                      2607

 

      It  must  strike  us  that  this  excellent  third  woman  has  in  several

instances  certain  peculiar  qualities  besides  her  beauty.  They  are

qualities that seem to be tending towards some kind of unity; we must

certainly  not  expect  to  find  them  equally  well  marked  in  every

example. Cordelia makes herself unrecognizable, in conspicuous like

lead, she remains dumb, she ‘loves and is silent’. Cinderella hides so

that  she  cannot  be  found.  We  may  perhaps  be  allowed  to  equate

concealment  and  dumbness.  These  would  of  course  be  only  two

instances out of the five we have picked out. But there is an intimationof the same thing to be found, curiously enough, in two other cases.

We have decided to compare Cordelia, with her obstinate refusal, to

lead. In Bassanio’s short speech while he is choosing the casket, he

says of lead (without in any way leading up to the remark):

 

                    ‘Thy paleness¹moves me more than eloquence.’

 

That is to say: ‘Thy plainness moves me more than the blatant nature

of the other two.’ Gold and silver are ‘loud’; lead is dumb - in fact like

Cordelia, who ‘loves and is silent’.²

   In the ancient Greek accounts of the Judgement of Paris, nothing is

said of any such reticence on the part of Aphrodite. Each of the three

goddesses speaks to the youth and tries to win him by promises. But,

oddly  enough,  in  a  quite  modern  handling  of  the  same  scene  this

characteristic  of  the  third  one  which  has  struck  us  makes  its

appearance  again.  In  the  libretto  of  Offenbach’s La  Belle  Hélène,

Paris,  after  telling  of  the  solicitations  of  the  other  two  goddesses,

describes  Aphrodite’s  behaviour  in  this  competition  for  the  beauty-

prize:

 

                                                                La troisième, ah! la troisième . . .
                                                                La troisième ne dit rien.

                                                                Elle eut le prix tout de même . . .³

 

   ¹ ‘Plainness’ according to another reading.

   ² In Schlegel’s translation this allusion is quite lost; indeed, it is given the opposite meaning:

‘Dein  schlichtes  Wesen  spricht  beredt  mich  an.’  [‘Thy  plainness  speaks  to  me  with
eloquence.‘]

   ³ [Literally: ‘The third one, ah! the third one . . . the third one said nothing. She won the prize

all the same.’]
 


                        The Theme Of The Three Caskets

                                                                                      2608

 

      If  we  decide  to  regard  the  peculiarities  of  our  ‘third  one’  as

concentrated in her ‘dumbness’, then psycho-analysis will tell us that

in dreams dumbness is a common representation of death.¹

   More than ten years ago a highly intelligent man told me a dreamwhich  he  wanted  to  use  as  evidence  of  the  telepathic  nature  of

dreams. In it he saw an absent friend from whom he had received no

news for a very long time, and reproached him energetically for his

silence. The friend made no reply. It afterwards turned out that he had

met his death by suicide at about the time of the dream. Let us leave

the problem of telepathy on one side: there seems, however, not to be

any doubt that here the dumbness in the dream represented death.

Hiding and being unfindable - a thing which confronts the prince in the

fairly tale of Cinderella three times, is another unmistakable symbol of

death in dreams; so, too, is a marked pallor, of which the ‘paleness’ of

the lead in one reading of Shakespeare’s text is a reminder.² It would

be very much easier for us to transpose these interpretations from the

language of dreams to the mode of expression used in the myth that is

now  under  consideration  if  we  could  make  it  seem  probable  that

dumbness must be interpreted as a sign of being dead in productions

other than dreams.

   At this point I will single out the ninth story in Grimm’s Fairy Tales,

which bears the title ‘The Twelve Brothers’. A king and a queen have

twelve children, all boys. The king declares that if the thirteenth child is

a girl, the boys will have to die. In expectation of her birth he has

twelve  coffins  made.  With  their  mother’s  help  the  twelve  sons  take

refuge in a hidden wood, and swear death to any girl they may meet.

A girl is born, grows up, and learns one day from her mother that she

has had twelve brothers. She decides to seek them out, and in the

wood she finds the youngest; he recognizes her, but is anxious to hide

her on account of the brothers’ oath. The sister says: ‘I will gladly die,

if by so doing I can save my twelve brothers.’ The brothers welcome

her affectionately, however, and she stays with them and looks after

their house for them. In a little garden beside the house grow twelve

lilies.  The  girl  picks  them  and  gives  one  to  each  brother.  At  that

moment  the  brothers  are  changed  into  ravens,  and  disappear,

together  with  the  house  and  garden.  (Ravens  are  spirit-birds;  the

killing  of  the  twelve  brothers  by  their  sister  is  represented  by  the

picking of the flowers, just as it is at the beginning of the story by the

coffins and the disappearance of the brothers.) The girl, who is once

more ready to save her brothers from death, is now told that as a

condition she must be dumb for seven years, and not speak a singleword.  She  submits  to  the  test,  which  brings  her  herself  into  mortal

danger. She herself, that is, dies for her brothers, as she promised to

do before she met them. By remaining dumb she succeeds at last in

setting the ravens free.

 

    ¹ In  Stekel’s Sprache  des  Traumes,  too,  dumbness  is  mentioned  among  the  ‘death’

symbols (1911a, 351).

   ² Stekel (1911a), loc. cit.

 


                        The Theme Of The Three Caskets

                                                                                      2609

 

   In the story of ‘The Six Swans’ the brothers who are changed into

birds are set free in exactly the same way - they are restored to life by

their sister’s dumbness. The girl has made a firm resolve to free her

brothers, ‘even if it should cost her her life’; and once again (being the

wife of the king) she risks her own life because she refuses to give up

her dumbness in order to defend herself against evil accusations.

   It would certainly be possible to collect further evidence from fairy

tales that dumbness is to be understood as representing death. These

indications would lead us to conclude that the third one of the sisters

between whom the choice is made is a dead woman. But she may be

something else as well - namely, Death itself, the Goddess of Death.

Thanks to a displacement that is far from infrequent, the qualities that

a  deity  imparts  to  men  are  ascribed  to  the  deity  himself.  Such  a

displacement will surprise us least of all in relation to the Goddess of

Death,  since  in  modern  versions  and  representations,  which  these

stories would thus be forestalling, Death itself is nothing other than a

dead man.

   If the third of the sisters is the Goddess of Death, the sisters are

known  to  us.  They  are  the  Fates,  the  Moerae,  the  Parcae  or  the

Norns, the third of whom is called Atropos, the inexorable.

 


                        The Theme Of The Three Caskets

                                                                                      2610

                                             II

 

      We  will  for  the  time  being  put  aside  the  task  of  inserting  the

interpretation that we have found into our myth, and listen to what the

mythologists have to teach us about the role and origin of the Fates.¹

      The  earliest  Greek  mythology  (in  Homer)  only  knew  a  single  ,

personifying  inevitable  fate.  The  further  development  of  this  one

Moera into a company of three (or less often two) sister-goddesses

probably came about on the basis of other divine figures to which the

Moerae  were  closely  related  -  the  Graces  and  the  Horae  [the

Seasons].

      The  Horae  were  originally  goddesses  of  the  waters  of  the  sky,

dispensing rain and dew, and of the clouds from which rain falls; and,

since the clouds were conceived of as something that has been spun,

it came about that these goddesses were looked upon as spinners, an

attribute  that  then  became  attached  to  the  Moerae.  In  the  sun-

favoured Mediterranean lands it is the rain on which the fertility of the

soil depends, and thus the Horae became vegetation goddesses. The

beauty of flowers and the abundance of fruit was their doing, and they

were accredited with a wealth of agreeable and charming traits. They

became the divine representatives of the Seasons, and it is possibly

owing to this connection that there were three of them, if the sacred

nature  of  the  number  three  is  not  a  sufficient  explanation.  For  the

peoples of antiquity at first distinguished only three seasons: winter,

spring and summer. Autumn was only added in late Graeco-Roman

times, after which the Horae were often represented in art as four in

number.

   The Horae retained their relation to time. Later they presided over

the times of day, as they did at first over the times of the year; and at

last their name came to be merely a designation of the hours (heure,

ora). The Norns of German mythology are akin to the Horae and the

Moerae  and  exhibit  this  time  signification  in  their  names.  It  was

inevitable, however, that a deeper view should come to be taken of

the essential nature of these deities, and that their essence should be

transposed on to the regularity with which the seasons change. The

Horae  thus  became  the  guardians  of  natural  law  and  of  the  divine

Order  which  causes  the  same  thing  to  recur  in  Nature  in  anunalterable sequence.

 

   ¹ What follows is taken from Roscher’s lexicon, under the relevant headings.

 


                        The Theme Of The Three Caskets

                                                                                      2611

 

   This discovery of Nature reacted on the conception of human life.

The nature-myth changed into a human myth: the weather-goddesses

became  goddesses  of  Fate.  But  this  aspect  of  the  Horae  found

expression  only  in  the  Moerae,  who  watch  over  the  necessary

ordering of human life as inexorably as do the Horae over the regular

order  of  nature.  The  ineluctable  severity  of  Law  and  its  relation  to

death and dissolution, which had been avoided in the charming figures

of the Horae, were now stamped upon the Moerae, as though men

had only perceived the full seriousness of natural law when they had

to submit their own selves to it.

      The  names  of  the  three  spinners,  too,  have  been  significantly

explained by mythologists. Lachesis, the name of the second, seems

to denote ‘the accidental that is included in the regularity of destiny’¹ -

or,  as  we  should  say,  ‘experience’;  just  as  Atropos  stands  for  ‘the

ineluctable’  -  Death.  Clotho  would  then  be  left  to  mean  the  innate

disposition with its fateful implications.

   But now it is time to return to the theme which we are trying to

interpret - the theme of the choice between three sisters. We shall be

deeply disappointed to discover how unintelligible the situations under

review  become  and  what  contradictions  of  their  apparent  content

result, if we apply to them the interpretation that we have found. On

our supposition the third of the sisters is the Goddess of Death, Death

itself. But in the Judgement of Paris she is the Goddess of Love, in the

tale of Apuleius she is someone comparable to the goddess for her

beauty, in The Merchant of Venice she is the fairest and wisest of

women,  in King  Lear  she  is  the  one  loyal  daughter.  We  may  ask

whether  there  can  be  a  more  complete  contradiction.  Perhaps,

improbable though it may seem, there is a still more complete one

lying close at hand. Indeed, there certainly is; since, whenever our

theme occurs, the choice between the women is free, and yet it fallson death. For, after all, no one chooses death, and it is only by a

fatality that one falls a victim to it.

 

   ¹ Roscher, quoting Preller, ed. Robert (1894).

 


                        The Theme Of The Three Caskets

                                                                                      2612

 

      However,  contradictions  of  a  certain  kind  -  replacements  by  the

precise  opposite  -  offer  no  serious  difficulty  to  the  work  of  analytic

interpretation. We shall not appeal here to the fact that contraries are

so often represented by one and the same element in the modes of

expression used by the unconscious, as for instance in dreams. But

we shall remember that there are motive forces in mental life which

bring about replacement by the opposite in the form of what is known

as  reaction-formation;  and  it  is  precisely  in  the  revelation  of  such

hidden forces as these that we look for the reward of this enquiry. The

Moerae were created as a result of a discovery that warned man that

he too is a part of nature and therefore subject to the immutable law of

death.  Something  in  man  was  bound  to  struggle  against  this

subjection, for it is only with extreme unwillingness that he gives up his

claim to an exceptional position. Man, as we know, makes use of his

imaginative activity in order to satisfy the wishes that reality does not

satisfy. So his imagination rebelled against the recognition of the truth

embodied  in  the  myth  of  the  Moerae,  and  constructed  instead  the

myth derived from it, in which the Goddess of Death was replaced by

the Goddess of Love and by what was equivalent to her in human

shape.  The  third  of  the  sisters  was  no  longer  Death;  she  was  the

fairest, best, most desirable and most lovable of women. Nor was this

substitution in any way technically difficult: it was prepared for by an

ancient  ambivalence,  it  was  carried  out  along  a  primaeval  line  of

connection which could not long have been forgotten. The Goddess of

Love herself, who now took the place of the Goddess of Death, had

once been identical with her. Even the Greek Aphrodite had not wholly

relinquished  her  connection  with  the  underworld,  although  she  had

long  surrendered  he:  chthonic  role  to  other  divine  figures,  to

Persephone,  or  to  the  tri-form  Artemis-Hecate.  The  great  Mother-goddesses of the oriental peoples, however, all seem to have been

both creators and destroyers - both goddesses of life and fertility and

goddesses of death. Thus the replacement by a wishful opposite in

our theme harks back to a primaeval identity.

   The same consideration answers the question how the feature of a

choice came into the myth of the three sisters. Here again there has

been a wishful reversal. Choice stands in the place of necessity, of

destiny. In this way man overcomes death, which he has recognized

intellectually. No greater triumph of wish-fulfilment is conceivable. A

choice is made where in reality there is obedience to a compulsion;

and what is chosen is not a figure of terror, but the fairest and most

desirable of women.

 


                        The Theme Of The Three Caskets

                                                                                      2613

 

   On closer inspection we observe, to be sure, that the original myth is

not so thoroughly distorted that traces of it do not show through and

betray  its  presence.  The  free  choice  between  the  three  sisters  is,

properly speaking, no free choice, for it must necessarily fall on the

third if every kind of evil is not to come about, as it does in King Lear.

The fairest and best of women, who has taken the place of the Death-

goddess, has kept certain characteristics that border on the uncanny,

so that from there we have been able to guess at what lies beneath.¹

   So far we have been following out the myth and its transformation,

and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  we  have  correctly  indicated  the  hidden

causes of the transformation. We may now turn our interest to the way

in  which  the  dramatist  has  made  use  of  the  theme.  We  get  an

impression that a reduction of the theme to the original myth is being

carried out in his work, so that we once more have a sense of the

moving significance which had been weakened by the distortion. It is

by means of this reduction of the distortion, this partial return to the

original, that the dramatist achieves his more profound effect upon us.

   To avoid misunderstandings, I should like to say that it is not my

purpose  to  deny  that  King  Lear’s  dramatic  story  is  intended  to

inculcate  two  wise  lessons:  that  one  should  not  give  up  one’spossessions and rights during one’s lifetime, and that one must guard

against accepting flattery at its face value. These and similar warnings

are undoubtedly brought out by the play; but it seems to me quite

impossible to explain the overpowering effect of King Lear from the

impression that such a train of thought would produce, or to suppose

that the dramatist’s personal motives did not go beyond the intention

of teaching these lessons. It is suggested, too, that his purpose was to

present the tragedy of ingratitude, the sting of which he may well have

felt in his own heart, and that the effect of the play rests on the purely

formal element of its artistic presentation; but this cannot, so it seems

to  me,  take  the  place  of  the  understanding  brought  to  us  by  the

explanation we have reached of the theme of the choice between the

three sisters.

 

   ¹ The Psyche of Apuleius’s story has kept many traits that remind us of her relation with

death. Her wedding is celebrated like a funeral, she has to descend into the underworld, and
afterwards she sinks into a death-like sleep (Otto Rank). - On the significance of Psyche as
goddess of the spring and as ‘Bride of Death’, cf. Zinzow (1881). - In another of Grimm’s
Tales (‘The Goose-girl at the Fountain’, No. 179) there is, as in ‘Cinderella’, an alternation
between the beautiful and the ugly aspect of the third sister, in which one may no doubt see
an indication of her double nature - before and after the substitution. This third daughter is
repudiated by her father, after a test which is almost the same as the one in King Lear. Like
her sisters, she has to declare how fond she is of their father, but can find no expression for
her love but a comparison with salt. (Kindly communicated by Dr. Hanns Sachs.)
 


                        The Theme Of The Three Caskets

                                                                                      2614

 

   Lear is an old man. It is for this reason, as we have already said,

that the three sisters appear as his daughters. The relationship of a

father  to  his  children,  which  might  be  a  fruitful  source  of  many

dramatic situations, is not turned to further account in the play. But

Lear  is  not  only  an  old  man:  he  is  a  dying  man.  In  this  way  the

extraordinary  premiss  of  the  division  of  his  inheritance  loses  all  its

strangeness. But the doomed man is not willing to renounce the love

of women; he insists on hearing how much he is loved. Let us now

recall the moving final scene, one of the culminating points of tragedy

in modern drama. Lear carries Cordelia’s dead body on to the stage.

Cordelia is Death. If we reverse the situation it becomes intelligibleand familiar to us. She is the Death-goddess who, like the Valkyrie in

German mythology, carries away the dead hero from the battlefield.

Eternal  wisdom,  clothed  in  the  primaeval  myth,  bids  the  old  man

renounce love, choose death and make friends with the necessity of

dying.

   The dramatist brings us nearer to the ancient theme by representing

the man who makes the choice between the three sisters as aged and

dying. The regressive revision which he has thus applied to the myth,

distorted  as  it  was  by  wishful  transformation,  allows  us  enough

glimpses of its original meaning to enable us perhaps to reach as well

a superficial allegorical interpretation of the three female figures in the

theme. We might argue that what is represented here are the three

inevitable relations that a man has with a woman - the woman who

bears him, the woman who is his mate and the woman who destroys

him; or that they are the three forms taken by the figure of the mother

in the course of a man’s life - the mother herself, the beloved one who

is chosen after her pattern, and lastly the Mother Earth who receives

him once more. But it is in vain that an old man yearns for the love of

woman as he had it first from his mother; the third of the Fates alone,

the silent Goddess of Death, will take him into her arms.

                                                                                       2615

 

                        TWO LIES TOLD BY CHILDREN

                                        (1913)

 


                                                                                      2616

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2617

 

                        TWO LIES TOLD BY CHILDREN

 

We can understand children telling lies, when in doing so, they are

imitating the lies told by grown-up people. But a number of lies told by

well-brought-up  children  have  a  particular  significance  and  should

cause those in charge of them to reflect rather than be angry. These

lies  occur  under  the  influence  of  excessive  feelings  of  love,  and

become momentous when they lead to a misunderstanding between

the child and the person it loves.

 

                                            I

 

   A girl of seven (in her second year at school) had asked her father

for some money to buy colours for painting Easter eggs. Her father

had  refused,  saying  he  had  no  money.  Shortly  afterwards  the  girl

asked her father for some money for a contribution towards a wreath

for the funeral of their reigning princess, who had recently died. Each

of the schoolchildren was to bring fifty pfennigs. Her father gave her

ten marks; she paid her contribution, put nine marks on her father’s

writing-table, and with the remaining fifty pfennigs bought some paints,

which  she  hid  in  her  toy  cupboard.  At  dinner  her  father  asked

suspiciously what she had done with the missing fifty pfennigs, and

whether she had not bought paints with them after all. She denied it;

but her brother, who was two years her elder and with whom she hadplanned to paint the eggs, betrayed her; the paints were found in the

cupboard. The angry father handed the culprit over to her mother for

punishment, and it was severely administered. Afterwards her mother

was herself much shaken, when she saw how great the child’s despair

was. She caressed the little girl after the punishment, and took her for

a walk to console her. But the effects of the experience, which were

described by the patient herself as the ‘turning-point in her life’, proved

to  be  ineradicable.  Up  to  then  she  had  been  a  wild,  self-confident

child, afterwards she became shy and timid. When she was engaged

to be married and her mother undertook the purchase of her furniture

and her trousseau, she flew into a rage which was incomprehensible

even to herself. She had a feeling that after all it was her money, and

no one else ought to buy anything with it. As a young wife she was

shy of asking her husband for any expenditure on her personal needs,

and  made  an  uncalled-for  distinction  between  ‘her’  money  and  his.

During the treatment it happened now and again that her husband’s

remittances  to  her  were  delayed,  so  that  she  was  left  without

resources in a foreign city. After she had told me this once, I made her

promise that if it happened again she would borrow the small sum

necessary from me. She promised to do so; but on the next occasion

of  financial  embarrassment  she  did  not  keep  her  promise,  but

preferred to pawn her jewellery. She explained that she could not take

money from me.

 


                              Two Lies Told By Children

                                                                                      2618

 

   The appropriation of the fifty pfennigs in her childhood had had a

significance which her father could not guess. Some time before she

began going to school she had played a singular prank with money. A

neighbour with whom they were friendly had sent the girl out with a

small sum of money, in the company of her own little boy who was

even younger, to buy something in a shop. Being the elder of the two,

she was bringing the change back home. But, meeting the neighbour’s

servant in the street, she threw the money down on the pavement. In

the analysis of this action, which she herself found inexplicable, thethought of Judas occurred to her, who threw down the thirty pieces of

silver which he had been given for betraying his Master. She said she

was certainly acquainted with the story of the Passion before she went

to school. But in what way could she identify herself with Judas?

   When she was three and a half she had a nursemaid of whom she

was extremely fond. This girl became involved in a love affair with a

doctor whose surgery she visited with the child. It appears that at that

time the child witnessed various sexual proceedings. It is not certain

whether she saw the doctor give the girl money; but there is no doubt

that,  to  make  sure  of  the  child’s  keeping  silence,  the  girl  gave  her

some  small  coins,  with  which  purchases  were  made  (probably  of

sweets) on the way home. It is possible too that the doctor himself

occasionally gave the child money. Nevertheless the child betrayed

the girl to her mother out of jealousy. She played so ostentatiously

with the coins she had brought home that her mother could not help

asking: ‘Where did you get that money?’ The girl was dismissed.

   To take money from anyone had thus early come to mean to her a

physical surrender, an erotic relation. To take money from her father

was equivalent to a declaration of love. The phantasy that her father

was her lover was so seductive that with its help her childish wish for

paints for the Easter eggs easily put itself into effect in spite of the

prohibition. She could not admit, however, that she had appropriated

the money; she was obliged to disavow it, because her motive for the

deed, which was unconscious to herself, could not be admitted. Her

father’s punishment was thus a rejection of the tenderness she was

offering  him  -  a  humiliation  -  and  so  it  broke  her  spirit.  During  the

treatment a period of severe depression occurred (whose explanation

led  to  her  remembering  the  events  described  here)  when  on  one

occasion I was obliged to reproduce this humiliation by asking her not

to bring me any more flowers.

   For psycho-analysts I need hardly emphasize the fact that in this

little  experience  of  the  child’s  we  have  before  us  one  of  those

extremely  common  cases  in  which  early  anal  erotism  persists  into

later erotic life. Even her desire to paint the eggs with colours derived

from the same source.

                               Two Lies Told By Children

                                                                                      2619

 

                                            II

 

   A woman who is now seriously ill in consequence of a frustration in

life was in her earlier years a particularly capable, truth-loving, serious

and virtuous girl, and became an affectionate wife. But still earlier, in

the first years of her life, she had been a wilful and discontented child,

and, though she had changed fairly quickly into an excessively good

and  conscientious  one,  there  were  occurrences  in  her  schooldays,

which, when she fell ill, caused her deep self-reproaches, and were

regarded by her as proofs of fundamental depravity. Her memory told

her that in those days she had often bragged and lied. Once on the

way to school a school-fellow had said boastfully: ‘Yesterday we had

ice at dinner.’ She replied: ‘Oh we have ice every day.’ In reality she

did not know what ice at dinner could mean; she only knew ice in the

long blocks in which it is carted about, but she assumed that there

must be something grand in having it for dinner, so she refused to be

outdone by her school-fellow.

   When she was ten years old, they were set the task in the drawing

lesson of making a free-hand drawing of a circle. But she used a pair

of compasses, thus easily producing a perfect circle, and showed her

achievement in triumph to her neighbour in class. The mistress came

up, heard her boasting, discovered the marks of the compasses in the

circle, and questioned the girl. But she stubbornly denied what she

had done, would not give way to any evidence, and took refuge in

sullen silence. The mistress consulted with her father about it. They

were both influenced by the girl’s usually good behaviour into deciding

not to take any further steps about the matter.

   Both the child’s lies were instigated by the same complex. As the

eldest  of  five  children,  the  little  girl  early  developed  an  unusually

strong attachment to her father, which was destined when she was

grown  up  to  wreck  her  happiness  in  life.  But  she  could  not  long

escape  the  discovery  that  her  beloved  father  was  not  so  great  a

personage  as  she  was  inclined  to  think  him.  He  had  to  struggle

against money difficulties; he was not so powerful or so distinguishedas she had imagined. But she could not put up with this departure

from her ideal. Since, as women do, she based all her ambition on the

man she loved, she became too strongly dominated by the motive of

supporting her father against the world. So she boasted to her school-

fellows, in order not to have to belittle her father. When, later on, she

learned to translate ice for dinner by ‘glace’, her self-reproaches about

this reminiscence led her by an easy path into a pathological dread of

pieces or splinters of glass.

   Her father was an excellent draughtsman, and had often enough

excited the delight and admiration of the children by exhibitions of his

skill. It was as an identification of herself with her father that she had

drawn the circle at school - which she could only do successfully by

deceitful  methods.  It  was  as  though  she  wanted  to  boast:  ‘Look  at

what my father can do!’ The sense of guilt that was attached to her

excessive fondness for her father found its expression in connection

with her attempted deception; an admission was impossible for the

same reason that was given in the first of these observations: it would

inevitably have been an admission of her hidden incestuous love.

 


                              Two Lies Told By Children

                                                                                      2620

 

 

   We should not think lightly of such episodes in the life of children. It

would be a serious mistake to read into childish misdemeanours like

these  a  prognosis  of  the  development  of  a  bad  character.

Nevertheless, they are intimately connected with the most powerful

motive forces in children’s minds, and give notice of dispositions that

will lead to later eventualities in their lives or to future neuroses.

                                                                                       2621

 

            THE DISPOSITION TO OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS

A CONTRIBUTION TO THE PROBLEM OF CHOICE OF NEUROSIS

                                        (1913)

 


                                                                                      2622

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2623

 

            THE DISPOSITION TO OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS

A CONTRIBUTION TO THE PROBLEM OF CHOICE OF NEUROSIS

 

The problem of why and how a person may fall ill of a neurosis is

certainly  among  those  to  which  psycho-analysis  should  offer  a

solution. But it will probably be necessary to find a solution first to

another  and  narrower  problem  -  namely,  why  it  is  that  this  or  that

person must fall ill of a particular neurosis and of none other. This is

the problem of ‘choice of neurosis’.

   What do we know so far about this problem? Strictly speaking, only

one single general proposition can be asserted on the subject with

certainty. It will be recalled that we divide the pathogenic determinants

concerned in the neuroses into those which a person brings along with

him into his life and those which life brings to him - the constitutional

and  the  accidental  -  by  whose  combined  operation  alone  the

pathogenic  determinant  is  as  a  rule  established.  The  general

proposition, then, which I have alluded to above, lays it down that the

grounds  for  determining  the  choice  of  neurosis  are  entirely  of  the

former kind - that is, that they are in the nature of dispositions and are

independent of experiences which operate pathogenically.

   Where are we to look for the source of these dispositions? We have

become aware that the psychical functions concerned - above all, the

sexual  function,  but  various  important  ego-functions  too  -  have  toundergo  a  long  and  complicated  development  before  reaching  the

state characteristic of the normal adult. We can assume that these

developments are not always so smoothly carried out that the total

function  passes  through  this  regular  progressive  modification.

Wherever a portion of it clings to a previous stage, what is known as a

‘point  of  fixation’  results,  to  which  the  function  may  regress  if  the

subject falls ill through some external disturbance.

 


                    The Disposition To Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2624

 

      Thus  our  dispositions  are  inhibitions  in  development.  We  are

confirmed in this view by the analogy of the facts of general pathology

of other illnesses. But before the question as to what factors can bring

about such disturbances of development the work of psycho-analysis

comes to a stop: it leaves that problem to biological research.¹

      Already  a  few  years  back  we  ventured,  with  the  help  of  these

hypotheses,  to  approach  the  problem  of  choice  of  neurosis.  Our

method  of  work,  which  aims  at  discovering  normal  conditions  by

studying  their  disturbances,  led  us  to  adopt  a  very  singular  and

unexpected  line  of  attack.  The  order  in  which  the  main  forms  of

psychoneurosis  are  usually  enumerated  -  Hysteria,  Obsessional

Neurosis, Paranoia, Dementia Praecox - corresponds (even though

not quite exactly) to the order of the ages at which the onset of these

disorders occurs. Hysterical forms of illness can be observed even in

earliest  childhood;  obsessional  neurosis  usually  shows  its  first

symptoms in the second period of childhood (between the ages of six

and eight); while the two other psychoneuroses, which I have brought

together under the heading of ‘paraphrenia’, do not appear until after

puberty and during adult life. It is these disorders - the last to emerge -

which were the first to show themselves accessible to our enquiry into

the  dispositions  that  result  in  the  choice  of  neurosis.  The

characteristics peculiar to both of them - megalomania, turning away

from the world of objects, increased difficulty in transference - have

obliged us to conclude that their dispositional fixation is to be looked

for in a stage of libidinal development before object-choice has beenestablished - that is in the phase of auto-erotism and of narcissism.

Thus these forms of illness, which make their appearance so late, go

back to very early inhibitions and fixations.

 

   ¹ Since Wilhelm Fliess’s writings have revealed the biological significance of certain periods

of time it has become conceivable that disturbances of development may be traceable to
temporal changes in the successive waves of development.
 


                    The Disposition To Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2625

 

   This would accordingly lead us to suppose that the disposition to

hysteria  and  obsessional  neurosis,  the  two  transference  neuroses

proper, which produce their symptoms at an early age, lies in later

phases of libidinal development. But at what point in them should we

find  a  developmental  inhibition?  and,  above  all,  what  would  be  the

difference in phases that would determine a disposition to obsessional

neurosis as contrasted with hysteria? For a long time nothing was to

be learned about this; and my earlier attempts at discovering these

two  dispositions  -  the  notion,  for  instance,  that  hysteria  might  be

determined  by  passivity  and  obsessional  neurosis  by  activity  in

infantile experience - had soon to be abandoned as incorrect.

   I shall now take my footing once more on the clinical observation of

an  individual  case.  Over  a  long  period  I  studied  a  woman  patient

whose  neurosis  underwent  an  unusual  change.  It  began,  after  a

traumatic  experience,  as  a  straightforward  anxiety  hysteria  and

retained that character for a few years. One day, however, it suddenly

changed into an obsessional neurosis of the severest type. A case of

this  kind  could  not  fail  to  become  significant  in  more  than  one

direction. On the one hand, it might perhaps claim to be looked upon

like a bilingual document and to show how an identical content could

be expressed by the two neuroses in different languages. On the other

hand, it threatened to contradict completely our theory that disposition

arises  from  developmental  inhibition,  unless  we  were  prepared  to

accept the supposition that a person could innately possess more than

one weak spot in his libidinal development. I told myself that we had

no right to dismiss this latter possibility; but I was greatly interested toarrive at an understanding of the case.

   When in the course of the analysis this came about, I was forced to

see that the situation was quite different from what I had imagined.

The  obsessional  neurosis  was  not  a  further  reaction  to  the  same

trauma which had first provoked the anxiety hysteria; it was a reaction

to  a  second  experience,  which  had  completely  wiped  out  the  first.

(Here,  then,  we  have  an  exception  -  though,  it  is  true,  a  not

indisputable one - to our proposition affirming that choice of neurosis

is independent of experience.)

 


                    The Disposition To Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2626

 

   Unfortunately I am unable, for familiar reasons, to enter into the

history of the case as far as I should like, and I must restrict myself to

the account which follows. Up to the time of her falling ill the patient

had been a happy and almost completely satisfied wife. She wanted to

have  children,  from  motives  based  on  an  infantile  fixation  of  her

wishes, and she fell ill when she learned that it was impossible for her

to have any by the husband who was the only object of her love. The

anxiety  hysteria  with  which  she  reacted  to  this  frustration

corresponded,  as  she  herself  soon  learned  to  understand,  to  the

repudiation of phantasies of seduction in which her firmly implanted

wish for a child found expression. She now did all she could to prevent

her  husband  from  guessing  that  she  had  fallen  ill  owing  to  the

frustration of which he was the cause. But I have had good reason for

asserting  that  everyone  possesses  in  his  own  unconscious  an

instrument  with  which  he  can  interpret  the  utterances  of  the

unconscious in other people. Her husband understood, without any

admission or explanation on her part, what his wife’s anxiety meant;

he felt hurt, without showing it, and in his turn reacted neurotically by -

for the first time - failing in sexual intercourse with her. Immediately

afterwards  he  started  on  a  journey.  His  wife  believed  that  he  had

become  permanently  impotent,  and  produced  her  first  obsessional

symptoms on the day before his expected return.

      The  content  of  her  obsessional  neurosis  was  a  compulsion  forscrupulous  washing  and  cleanliness  and  extremely  energetic

protective measures against severe injuries which she thought other

people had reason to fear from her - that is to say, reaction-formations

against her own anal-erotic and sadistic impulses. Her sexual need

was obliged to find expression in these shapes after her genital life

had lost all its value owing to the impotence of the only man of whom

there could be any question for her.

   This is the starting-point of the small new fragment of theory which I

have formulated. It is of course only in appearance that it is based on

this  one  observation;  actually  it  brings  together  a  large  number  of

earlier impressions, though an understanding of them was only made

possible  by  this  last  experience.  I  told  myself  that  my  schematic

picture of the development of the libidinal function called for an extra

insertion in it. To begin with, I had only distinguished, first the phase of

auto-erotism during which the subject’s component instincts, each on

its own account, seek for the satisfaction of their desires in his own

body, and then the combination of all the component instincts for the

choice of an object, under the primacy of the genitals acting on behalf

of reproduction. The analysis of the paraphrenias has, as we know,

necessitated  the  insertion  between  them  of  a  stage  of  narcissism,

during which the choice of an object has already taken place but that

object coincides with the subject’s own ego. And now we see the need

for yet another stage to be inserted before the final shape is reached -

a stage in which the component instincts have already come together

for  the  choice  of  an  object  and  that  object  is  already  something

extraneous  in  contrast  to  the  subject’s  own  self,  but  in  which the

primacy of the genital zones has not yet been established. On the

contrary,  the  component  instincts  which  dominate  this pregenital

organization of sexual life are the anal-erotic and sadistic ones.

 


                    The Disposition To Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2627

 

   I am aware that any such hypotheses sound strange at first. It is

only by discovering their relations to our former knowledge that they

become  familiar  to  us;  and  in  the  end  it  is  often  their  fate  to  beregarded  as  minor  and  long-foreseen  innovations.  Let  us  therefore

turn with anticipations such as these to a discussion of the ‘pregenital

sexual organization’.

 

   (a) The extraordinary part played by impulses of hatred and anal

erotism in the symptomatology of obsessional neurosis has already

struck  many  observers  and  has  recently  been  emphasized  with

particular clarity by Ernest Jones (1913). This follows directly from our

hypothesis if we suppose that in that neurosis the component instincts

in  question  have  once  more  taken  over  the  representation  of  the

genital  instincts,  whose  forerunners  they  were  in  the  process  of

development.

   At this point a portion of our case history fits in, which I have so far

kept back. The patient’s sexual life began in her earliest childhood

with  beating-phantasies.  After  they  were  suppressed,  an  unusually

long period of latency set in, during which the girl passed through a

period  of  exalted  moral  growth,  without  any  awakening  of  female

sexual  feelings.  Her  marriage,  which  took  place  at  an  early  age,

opened a time of normal sexual activity. This period, during which she

was a happy wife, continued for a number of years, until her first great

frustration brought on the hysterical neurosis. When this was followed

by her genital life losing all its value, her sexual life, as I have said,

returned to the infantile stage of sadism.

   It is not difficult to determine the characteristic which distinguishes

this  case  of  obsessional  neurosis  from  those  more  frequent  ones

which start at an early age and thereafter run a chronic course with

exacerbations of a more or less striking kind. In these other cases,

once  the  sexual  organization  which  contains  the  disposition  to

obsessional neurosis is established it is never afterwards completely

surmounted; in our case it was replaced to begin with by the higher

stage of development, and was then re-activated by regression from

the latter.

 


                    The Disposition To Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2628

  

   (b) If we wish to bring our hypothesis into contact with biological

lines of thought, we must not forget that the antithesis between male

and female, which is introduced by the reproductive function, cannot

be present as yet at the stage of pregenital object-choice. We find in

its  place  the  antithesis  between  trends  with  an  active  and  with  a

passive aim, an antithesis which later becomes firmly attached to that

between  the  sexes.  Activity  is  supplied  by  the  common  instinct  of

mastery, which we call sadism when we find it in the service of the

sexual function; and even in fully developed normal sexual life it has

important subsidiary services to perform. The passive trend is fed by

anal  erotism,  whose  erotogenic  zone  corresponds  to  the  old,

undifferentiated  cloaca.  A  stressing  of  this  anal  erotism  in  the

pregenital  stage  of  organization  leaves  behind  a  significant

predisposition to homosexuality in men when the next stage of the

sexual function, the primacy of the genitals, is reached. The way in

which  this  last  phase  is  erected  upon  the  preceding  one  and  the

accompanying  remoulding  of  the  libidinal  cathexes  present  analytic

research with the most interesting problems.

   The view may be taken that all the difficulties and complications

involved in this can be avoided by denying that there is any pregenital

organization of sexual life and by holding that sexual life coincides

with the genital and reproductive function and begins with it. It would

then  be  asserted,  having  regard  to  the  ummistakable  findings  of

analytic research, that the neuroses are compelled by the process of

sexual repression to give expression to sexual trends through other,

non-sexual  instincts,  and  thus  to  sexualize  the  latter  by  way  of

compensation.  But  this  line  of  argument  would  place  us  outside

psycho-analysis.  It  would  place  us  where  we  were  before  psycho-

analysis  and  would  mean  abandoning  the  understanding  which

psycho-analysis  has  given  us  of  the  relations  between  health,

perversion  and  neurosis.  Psycho-analysis  stands  or  falls  with  the

recognition of the sexual component instincts, of the erotogenic zones

and of the extension thus made possible of the concept of a ‘sexual

function’ in contrast to the narrower ‘genital function’. Moreover the

observation of the normal development of children is in itself enough

to make us reject any such temptation. 


                    The Disposition To Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2629

 

 

   (c) In the field of the development of character we are bound to meet

with the same instinctual forces which we have found at work in the

neuroses.  But  a  sharp  theoretical  distinction  between  the  two  is

necessitated by the single fact that the failure of repression and the

return  of  the  repressed  -  which  are  peculiar  to  the  mechanism  of

neurosis  -  are  absent  in  the  formation  of  character.  In  the  latter,

repression either does not come into action or smoothly achieves its

aim  of  replacing  the  repressed  by  reaction-formations  and

sublimations. Hence the processes of the formation of character are

more obscure and less accessible to analysis than neurotic ones.

   But it is precisely in the field of character-development that we come

across a good analogy with the case we have been describing - a

confirmation, that is, of the occurrence of the pregenital sadistic anal-

erotic sexual organization. It is a well-known fact, and one that has

given  much  ground  for  complaint,  that  after  women  have  lost  their

genital function their character often undergoes a peculiar alteration.

They  become  quarrelsome,  vexatious  and  overbearing,  petty  and

stingy; that is to say, they exhibit typically sadistic and anal-erotic traits

which they did not possess earlier, during their period of womanliness.

Writers  of  comedy  and  satirists  have  in  all  ages  directed  their

invectives against the ‘old dragon’ into which the charming girl, the

loving wife and the tender mother have been transformed. We can see

that this alteration of character corresponds to a regression of sexual

life to the pregenital sadistic and anal-erotic stage, in which we have

discovered the disposition to obsessional neurosis. It seems, then, to

be not only the precursor of the genital phase but often enough its

successor as well, its termination after the genitals have fulfilled their

function.

   A comparison between such a change of character and obsessional

neurosis is very impressive. In both cases the work of regression is

apparent.  But  whereas  in  the  former  we  find  complete  regressionfollowing repression (or suppression) that has occurred smoothly, in

the neurosis there are conflict, an effort to prevent regression from

occurring,  reaction-formations  against  it  and  symptom-formations

produced  by  compromises  between  the  two  opposing  sides,  and  a

splitting  of  the  psychical  activities  into  some  that  are  admissible  to

consciousness and others that are unconscious.

 


                    The Disposition To Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2630

 

 

   (d) Our hypothesis of a pregenital sexual organization is incomplete

in two respects. In the first place, it takes no account of the behaviour

of other component instincts, in regard to which there is plenty that

would  repay  examination  and  discussion,  and  it  is  content  with

stressing the striking primacy of sadism and anal erotism. In particular

we  often  gain  an  impression  that  the  instinct  for  knowledge  can

actually take the place of sadism in the mechanism of obsessional

neurosis. Indeed it is at bottom a sublimated off-shoot of the instinct of

mastery exalted into something intellectual, and its repudiation in the

form of doubt plays a large part in the picture of obsessional neurosis.

   The second gap in our hypothesis is far more important. As we

know, the developmental disposition to a neurosis is only complete if

the phase of the development of the ego at which fixation occurs is

taken into account as well as that of the libido. But our hypothesis has

only  related  to  the  latter,  and  therefore  does  not  include  all  the

knowledge that we should demand. The stages of development of the

ego-instincts are at present very little known to us; I know of only one

attempt  -  the  highly  promising  one  made  by  Ferenczi  (1913)  -  to

approach these questions. I cannot tell if it may seem too rash if, on

the basis of such indications as we possess, I suggest the possibility

that  a  chronological  outstripping  of  libidinal  development  by  ego

development  should  be  included  in  the  disposition  to  obsessional

neurosis. A precocity of this kind would necessitate the choice of an

object under the influence of the ego-instincts, at a time at which the

sexual instincts had not yet assumed their final shape, and a fixationat the stage of the pregenital sexual organization would thus be left. If

we  consider  that  obsessional  neurotics  have  to  develop  a  super-

morality in order to protect their object-love from the hostility lurking

behind it, we shall be inclined to regard some degree of this precocity

of  ego  development  as  typical  of  human  nature  and  to  derive  the

capacity for the origin of morality from the fact that in the order of

development  hate  is  the  precursor  of  love.  This  is  perhaps  the

meaning of an assertion by Stekel (1911a, 536), which at the time I

found  incomprehensible,  to  the  effect  that  hate  and  not  love  is  the

primary emotional relation between men.

 


                    The Disposition To Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2631

 

 

   (e) It follows from what has been said that there remains for hysteria

an intimate relation to the final phase of libidinal development, which is

characterized by the primacy of the genitals and the introduction of the

reproductive  function.  In  hysterical  neurosis  this  acquisition  is

subjected  to  repression,  which  does  not  involve  regression  to  the

pregenital stage. The gap in determining the disposition owing to our

ignorance of ego development is even more obvious here than with

obsessional neurosis.

   On the other hand, it is not hard to show that another regression to

an earlier level occurs in hysteria too. The sexuality of female children,

is, as we know, dominated and directed by a masculine organ (the

clitoris) and often behaves like the sexuality of boys. This masculine

sexuality has to be got rid of by a last wave of development at puberty,

and the vagina, an organ derived from the cloaca, has to be raised

into  the  dominant  erotogenic  zone.  Now,  it  is  very  common  in

hysterical  neurosis  for  this  repressed  masculine  sexuality  to  be  re-

activated and then for the defensive struggle on the part of the ego-

syntonic instincts to be directed against it. But it seems to me too early

to enter here into a discussion of the problems of the disposition to

hysteria.

                                                                                       2632

 

          INTRODUCTION TO PFISTER’S THE PSYCHO-ANALYTIC

                                        METHOD

                                        (1913)

 


                                                                                      2633

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2634

 

          INTRODUCTION TO PFISTER’S THE PSYCHO-ANALYTIC

                                        METHOD

 

Psycho-analysis  had  its  origin  on  medical  soil,  as  a  therapeutic

procedure for the treatment of certain nervous illnesses which were

termed  ‘functional’  and  which  were  considered  with  increasing

certainty  to  be  consequences  of  disturbances  in  emotional  life.  It

attains its end - of removing the manifestations of these disturbances,

the symptoms - by assuming that they are not the only possible and

final outcome of particular psychical processes. It therefore uncovers

the  history  of  the  development  of  these  symptoms  in  the  patient’s

memory,  it  revivifies  the  processes  underlying  them,  and  then

conducts  them,  under  the  doctor’s  guidance,  to  a  more  favourable

outlet. Psycho-analysis has set itself the same therapeutic aims as

treatment  by  hypnotism,  which  was  introduced  by  Liébeault  and

Bernheim and after lengthy and severe struggles achieved a place in

the  technique  of  nerve  specialists.  But  it  goes  far  deeper  into  the

structure  of  the  mechanism  of  the  mind,  and  seeks  to  bring  about

permanent results and viable changes in its subjects.

      In  its  time,  hypnotic  treatment  by  suggestion  very  soon  passed

beyond the sphere of medical application and entered the service of

the education¹ of young people. If we are to believe the reports, it

proved  to  be  an  effective  means  forgetting  rid  of  childish  faults,  ofinconvenient  physical  habits  and  of  character  traits  that  were

otherwise  irreducible.  No  one  at  that  time  objected  to,  or  was

surprised at, this extension of its uses, which, incidentally, has only

been  made  fully  understandable  by  the  researches  of  psycho-

analysis. For we know to-day that pathological symptoms are often

nothing but substitutes for bad (that is, unserviceable) inclinations, and

that the determinants of these symptoms are laid down in the years of

childhood and youth - during the same period in which human beings

are  the  subject  of  education  -  whether  the  illnesses  themselves

already emerge in youth or only at a later time of life.

 

   ¹ [The German words ‘Erziehung’ and ‘Erzieher’, which are here translated throughout by

‘education’ and ‘educator’, have in fact a wider application and include the general notion of
the ‘up-bringing’ of children.]
 


              Introduction To Pfister's The Psycho-Analytic Method

                                                                                      2635

 

   Education and therapeutics stand in an assignable relation to each

other. Education seeks to ensure that certain of a child’s dispositions

and inclinations shall not cause any damage either to the individual or

to society. Therapeutics come into action if these same dispositions

have already led to the unwished-for result of pathological symptoms.

The  alternative  outcome  -  of  the  child’s  unserviceable  dispositions

leading,  not  to  substitutes  in  the  form  of  symptoms,  but  to  direct

perversions of character - is almost inaccessible to therapeutics and

as  a  rule  beyond  the  influence  of  an  educator.  Education  is  a

prophylaxis, which is intended to obviate both outcomes - neurosis

and perversion alike; psychotherapy seeks, to undo the less stable of

the two outcomes and to institute a kind of after-education.

   In view of this position of affairs, the question automatically arises

whether psycho-analysis should not be used for educative purposes

just as hypnotic suggestion was in the past. The advantages would be

obvious. The educator would, on the one hand, be prepared by his

knowledge of the general human dispositions of childhood to judge

which of those dispositions are threatening to lead to an undesirable

outcome; and, if psycho-analysis can influence the course taken by