short, as it were, by a word which I saw before me as though it were

half written and half printed. The word was "erzefilisch", and it formed

part  of  a  sentence  which  slipped  into  my  conscious  memory  apart

from any context and in complete isolation: "That has an erzefilisch

influence on the sexual emotions." I knew at once that the word ought

really to have been "erzieherisch" ["educational"]. And I was in doubt

for some time whether the second "e" in "erzefilisch" should not have

been an "i". In that connection the word "syphilis" occurred to me and,

starting to analyse the dream while I was still half asleep, I racked my

brains in an effort to make out how that word could have got into my

dream, since I had nothing to do with the disease either personally or

professionally.  I  then  thought  of  "erzehlerisch  [another  nonsense

word], and this explained the "e" of the second syllable of "erzefilisch"

by reminding me that the evening before I had been asked by our

governess  [Erzieherin]  to  say  something  to  her  on  the  problem  of

prostitution, and had given her Hesse’s book on prostitution in order to

influence her emotional life - for this had not developed quite normally;

after which I had talked [erzählt] a lot to her on the problem. I then saw

all at once that the word "syphilis" was not to be taken literally, but

stood  for  "poison"  -  of  course  in  relation  to  sexual  life.  When

translated,  therefore,  the  sentence  in  the  dream  ran  quite  logically:

"My  talk  [Erzählung]  was  intended  to  have  an  educational

[erzieherisch]  influence  on  the  emotional  life  of  our  governess

[Erzieherin]; but I fear it may at the same time have had a poisonous

effect." "Erzefilisch" was compounded from "erzäh-" and "erzieh-".’

 

   ¹ Quoted from Marcinowski.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        776

 

 

   The verbal malformations in dreams greatly resemble those which

are  familiar  in  paranoia  but  which  are  also  present  in  hysteria  and

obsessions.  The  linguistic  tricks  performed  by  children,  who

sometimes  actually  treat  words  as  though  they  were  objects  and

moreover invent new languages and artificial syntactic forms, are thecommon source of these things in dreams and psychoneuroses alike.

   The analysis of the nonsensical verbal forms that occur in dreams is

particularly well calculated to exhibit the dream work’s achievements

in the way of condensation. The reader should not conclude from the

paucity of the instances which I have given that material of this kind is

rare  or  observed  at  all  exceptionally.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  very

common.  But  as  a  result  of  the  fact  that  dream-interpretation  is

dependent upon psycho-analytic treatment, only a very small number

of  instances  are  observed  and  recorded  and  the  analyses  of  such

instances are as a rule only intelligible to experts in the pathology of

the  neuroses.  Thus  a  dream  of  this  kind  was  reported  by  Dr.  von

Karpinska (1914) containing the nonsensical verbal form: ‘Svingnum

elvi.’ It is also worth mentioning those cases in which a word appears

in a dream which is not in itself meaningless but which has lost its

proper meaning and combines a number of other meanings to which it

is related in just the same way as a ‘meaningless’ word would be. This

is what occurred, for instance, in the ten-year-old boy’s dream of a

‘category’  which  was  recorded  by  Tausk  (1913).  ‘Category’  in  that

case meant ‘female genitals’, and to ‘categorate’ meant the same as

‘to micturate.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        777

 

 

      Where  spoken  sentences  occur  in  dreams  and  are  expressly

distinguished as such from thoughts, it is an invariable rule that the

words  spoken  in  the  dream  are  derived  from  spoken  words

remembered in the dream-material. The text of the speech is either

retained  unaltered  or  expressed  with  some  slight  displacement.  A

speech  in  a  dream  is  often  put  together  from  various  recollected

speeches, the text remaining the same but being given, if possible,

several meanings, or one different from the original one. A spoken

remark in a dream is not infrequently no more than an allusion to an

occasion on which the remark in question was made.¹

    ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] Not long ago I found a single exception to this rule in the case of a

young  man  who  suffered  from  obsessions  while  retaining  intact  his  highly  developed
intellectual powers. The spoken words which occurred in his dreams were not derived from
remarks which he had heard or made himself. They contained the undistorted text of his
obsessional thoughts, which in his waking life only reached his consciousness in a modified
form.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        778

 

                                          (B)

 

                            THE WORK OF DISPLACEMENT

 

   In making our collection of instances of condensation in dreams, the

existence  of  another  relation,  probably  of  no  less  importance,  had

already  become  evident.  It  could  be  seen  that  the  elements  which

stand out as the principal components of the manifest content of the

dream are far from playing the same part in the dream-thoughts. And,

as a corollary, the converse of this assertion can be affirmed: what is

clearly the essence of the dream-thoughts need not be represented in

the dream at all. The dream is, as it were, differently centred from the

dream thoughts - its content has different elements as its central point.

Thus  in  the  dream  of  the  botanical  monograph,  for  instance,  the

central  point  of  the  dream-content  was  obviously  the  element

‘botanical’;  whereas  the  dream-thoughts  were  concerned  with  the

complications  and  conflicts  arising  between  colleagues  from  their

professional obligations, and further with the charge that I was in the

habit of sacrificing too much for the sake of my hobbies. The element

‘botanical’ had no place whatever in this core of the dream-thoughts,

unless it was loosely connected with it by an antithesis - the fact that

botany never had a place among my favourite studies. In my patient’s

Sappho dream the central position was occupied by climbing up and

down  and  being  up  above  and  down  below;  the  dream-thoughts,

however, dealt with the dangers of sexual relations with people of an

inferior  social  class.  So  that  only  a  single  element  of  the  dream-

thoughts seems to have found its way into the dream-content, though

that element was expanded to a disproportionate extent. Similarly, inthe dream of the may-beetles, the topic of which was the relations of

sexuality to cruelty, it is true that the factor of cruelty emerged in the

dream-content; but it did so in another connection and without any

mention  of  sexuality,  that  is  to  say,  divorced  from  its  context  and

consequently transformed into something extraneous. Once again, in

my dream about my uncle, the fair beard which formed its centre-point

seems to have had no connection in its meaning with my ambitious

wishes  which,  as  we  saw,  were  the  core  of  the  dream-thoughts.

Dreams such as these give a justifiable impression of ‘displacement.’

In complete contrast to these examples, we can see that in the dream

of Irma’s injection the different elements were able to retain, during the

process of constructing the dream, the approximate place which they

occupied  in  the  dream-thoughts.  This  further  relation  between  the

dream-thoughts and the dream-content, wholly variable as it is in its

sense or direction, is calculated at first to create astonishment. If we

are considering a psychical process in normal life and find that one out

of its several component ideas has been picked out and has acquired

a special degree of vividness in consciousness, we usually regard this

effect as evidence that a specially high amount of psychical value -

some particular degree of interest - attaches to this predominant idea.

But we now discover that, in the case of the different elements of the

dream-thoughts, a value of this kind does not persist or is disregarded

in the process of dream-formation. There is never any doubt as to

which  of  the  elements  of  the  dream-thoughts  have  the  highest

psychical value, we learn that by direct judgement. In the course of the

formation of a dream these essential elements, charged, as they are,

with intense interest, may be treated as though they were of small

value, and their place may be taken in the dream by other elements,

of whose small value in the dream-thoughts there can be no question.

At first sight it looks as though no attention whatever is paid to the

psychical intensity¹ of the various ideas in making the choice among

them for the dream, and as though the only thing considered is the

greater  or  less  degree  of  multiplicity  of  their  determination.  What

appears in dreams, we might suppose, is not what is important in the

dream-thoughts but what occurs in them several times over. But this

hypothesis  does  not  greatly  assist  our  understanding  of  dream-

formation, since from the nature of things it seems clear that the twofactors  of  multiple  determination  and  inherent  psychical  value  must

necessarily  operate  in  the  same  sense.  The  ideas  which  are  most

important  among  the  dream-thoughts  will  almost  certainly  be  those

which occur most often in them, since the different dream-thoughts

will,  as  it  were,  radiate  out  from  them.  Nevertheless  a  dream  can

reject elements which are thus both highly stressed in themselves and

reinforced from many directions, and can select for its content other

elements which possess only the second of these attributes.

 

   ¹ Psychical  intensity  or  value  or  the  degree  of  interest  of  an  idea  is  of  course  to  be

distinguished from sensory intensity or the intensity of the image presented.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        779

 

      In  order  to  solve  this  difficulty  we  shall  make  use  of  another

impression derived from our enquiry into the overdetermination of the

dream-content. Perhaps some of those who have read that enquiry

may  already  have  formed  an  independent  conclusion  that  the

overdetermination  of  the  elements  of  dreams  is  no  very  important

discovery, since it is a self-evident one. For in analysis we start out

from the dream-elements and note down all the associations which

lead off from them; so that there is nothing surprising in the fact that in

the  thought-material  arrived  at  in  this  way  we  come  across  these

same elements with peculiar frequency. I cannot accept this objection;

but I will myself put into words something that sounds not unlike it.

Among the thoughts that analysis brings to light are many which are

relatively  remote  from  the  kernel  of  the  dream  and  which  look  like

artificial  interpolations  made  for  some  particular  purpose.  That

purpose  is  easy  to  divine.  It  is  precisely they  that  constitute  a

connection, often a forced and far-fetched one, between the dream-

content and the dream thoughts; and if these elements were weeded

out of the analysis the result would often be that the component parts

of the dream-content would be left not only without overdetermination

but without any satisfactory determination at all. We shall be led to

conclude that the multiple determination which decides what shall be

included  in  a  dream  is  not  always  a  primary  factor  in  dream-construction but is often the secondary product of a psychical force

which is still unknown to us. Nevertheless multiple determination must

be of importance in choosing what particular elements shall enter a

dream, since we can see that a considerable expenditure of effort is

used to bring it about in cases where it does not arise from the dream-

material unassisted.

      It  thus  seems  plausible  to  suppose  that  in  the  dream-work  a

psychical force is operating which on the one hand strips the elements

which have a high psychical value of their intensity, and on the other

hand, by means of overdetermination, creates from elements of low

psychical value new values, which afterwards find their way into the

dream-content.  If  that  is  so,  a transference  and  displacement  of

psychical intensities occurs in the process of dream-formation, and it

is  as  a  result  of  these  that  the  difference  between  the  text  of  the

dream-content  and  that  of  the  dream  thoughts  comes  about.  The

process  which  we  are  here  presuming  is  nothing  less  than  the

essential portion of the dream work; and it deserves to be described

as  ‘dream-displacement.’  Dream-displacement  and  dream-

condensation are the two governing factors to whose activity we may

in essence ascribe the form assumed by dreams.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        780

 

      Nor  do  I  think  we  shall  have  any  difficulty  in  recognizing  the

psychical  force  which  manifests  itself  in  the  facts  of  dream-

displacement.  The  consequence  of  the  displacement  is  that  the

dream-content no longer resembles the core of the dream-thoughts

and that the dream gives no more than a distortion of the dream-wish

which  exists  in  the  unconscious.  But  we  are  already  familiar  with

dream-distortion.  We  traced  it  back  to  the  censorship  which  is

exercised by one psychical agency in the mind over another. Dream-

displacement is one of the chief methods by which that distortion is

achieved. Is  fecit  cui  profuit.  We  may  assume,  then,  that  dream-

displacement  comes  about  through  the  influence  of  the  same

censorship - that is, the censorship of endopsychic defence.¹   The question of the interplay of these factors - of displacement,

condensation and overdetermination - in the construction of dreams,

and the question which is a dominant factor and which a subordinate

one - all of this we shall leave aside for later investigation. But we can

state  provisionally  a  second  condition  which  must  be  satisfied  by

those elements of the dream-thoughts which make their way into the

dream: they must escape the censorship imposed by resistance. And

henceforward  in  interpreting  dreams  we  shall  take  dream-

displacement into account as an undeniable fact.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] Since I may say that the kernel of my theory of dreams lies in my

derivation of dream-distortion from the censorship, I will here insert the last part of a story
from Phantasien ein Realisten by ‘Lynkeus’ (Vienna, 2nd edition, 1900), in which I have found
this principal feature of my theory once more expounded.

   ‘About a man who has the remarkable attribute of never dreaming nonsense . . .

   ‘"This splendid gift of yours, for dreaming as though you were waking, is a consequence of
your virtue, of your kindness, your sense of justice, and your love of truth; it is the moral
serenity of your nature which makes me understand all about you."
      ‘"But  when  I  think  the  matter  over  properly,"  replied  the  other,  "I  almost  believe  that
everyone is made like me, and that no one at all ever dreams nonsense. Any dream which
one can remember clearly enough to describe it afterwards - any dream, that is to say, which
is not a fever-dream - must always make sense, and it cannot possibly be otherwise. For
things that were mutually contradictory could not group themselves into a single whole. The
fact that time and space are often thrown into confusion does not affect the true content of the
dream, since no doubt neither of them are of significance for its real essence. We often do the
same thing in waking life. Only think of fairy tales and of the many daring products of the
imagination, which are full of meaning and of which only a man without intelligence could say:
‘This is nonsense, for it’s impossible.’"
   ‘"If only one always knew how to interpret dreams in the right way, as you have just done
with mine!" said his friend.
   ‘"That is certainly no easy task; but with a little attention on the part of the dreamer himself it
should  no  doubt  always  succeed.  -You  ask  why  it  is  that  for  the  most  part  it  does not
succeed? In you other people there seems always to be something that lies concealed in your
dreams, something unchaste in a special and higher sense, a certain secret quality in your
being which it is hard to follow. And that is why your dreams so often seem to be without
meaning or even to be nonsense. But in the deepest sense this is not in the least so; indeed,
it cannot be so at all - for it is always the same man, whether he is awake or dreaming."'
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        781

 

                                          (B)

                     THE MEANS OF REPRESENTATION IN DREAMS

 

   In the process of transforming the latent thoughts into the manifest

content  of  a  dream  we  have  found  two  factors  at  work:  dream-

condensation  and  dream-displacement.  As  we  continue  our

investigation we shall, in addition to these, come across two further

determinants which exercise an undoubted influence on the choice of

the material which is to find access to the dream.

   But first, even at the risk of appearing to bring our progress to a halt,

I should like to take a preliminary glance at the processes involved in

carrying  out  the  interpretation  of  a  dream.  I  cannot  disguise  from

myself that the easiest way of making those processes clear and of

defending  their  trustworthiness  against  criticism  would  be  to  take

some particular dream as a sample, go through its interpretation (just

as  I  have  done  with  the  dream  of  Irma’s  injection  in  my  second

chapter), and then collect the dream-thoughts which I have discovered

and so on to reconstruct from them the process by which the dream

was  formed  -  in  other  words,  to  complete  a  dream-analysis  by  a

dream-synthesis.  I  have  in  fact  carried  out  that  task  for  my  own

instruction on several specimens; but I cannot reproduce them here,

since I am forbidden to do so for reasons connected with the nature of

the psychical material involved - reasons which are of many kinds and

which  will  be  accepted  as  valid  by  any  reasonable  person.  Such

considerations  interfered  less  in  the analysis  of  dreams,  since  an

analysis could be incomplete and nevertheless retain its value, even

though it penetrated only a small way into the texture of the dream.

But in the case of the synthesis of a dream I do not see how it can be

convincing  unless  it  is  complete.  I  could  only  give  a  complete

synthesis of dreams dreamt by people unknown to the reading public.

Since, however, this condition is fulfilled only by my patients, who are

neurotics, I must postpone this part of my exposition of the subject till I

am able - in another volume - to carry the psychological elucidation of

neuroses  to  a  point  at  which  it  can  make  contact  with  our  present

topic.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] Since writing the above words, I have published a complete

analysis and synthesis of two dreams in my ‘Fragment of the Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’.
[Added 1914:] Otto Rank’s analysis, ‘Ein Traum, der sich selbst deutet’, deserves mention asthe most complete interpretation that has been published of a dream of considerable length.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        782

 

   My attempts at building up dreams by synthesis from the dream-

thoughts  have  taught  me  that  the  material  which  emerges  in  the

course of interpretation is not all of the same value. One part of it is

made  up  of  the  essential  dream-thoughts  -  those,  that  is,  which

completely replace the dream, and which, if there were no censorship

of dreams, would be sufficient in themselves to replace it. The other

part of the material is usually to be regarded as of less importance.

Nor  is  it  possible  to  support  the  view  that  all  the  thoughts  of  this

second  kind  had  a  share  in  the  formation  of  the  dream.  On  the

contrary,  there  may  be  associations  among  them  which  relate  to

events that occurred after the dream, between the times of dreaming

and interpreting. This part of the material includes all the connecting

paths that led from the manifest dream-content to the latent dream-

thoughts,  as  well  as  the  intermediate  and  linking  associations  by

means  of  which,  in  the  course  of  the  process  of  interpretation,  we

came to discover these connecting paths.

   We are here interested only in the essential dream-thoughts. These

usually emerge as a complex of thoughts and memories of the of the

most intricate possible structure, with all the attributes of the trains of

thought familiar to us in waking life. They are not infrequently trains of

thought starting out from more than one centre, though having points

of contact. Each train of thought is almost invariably accompanied by

its contradictory counterpart, linked with it by antithetical association.

   The different portions of this complicated structure stand, of course,

in  the  most  manifold  logical  relations  to  one  another.  They  can

represent  foreground  and  background,  digressions  and  illustrations,

conditions,  chains  of  evidence  and  counter-arguments.  When  the

whole mass of these dream-thoughts is brought under the pressure of

the  dream-work,  and  its  elements  are  turned  about,  broken  into

fragments and jammed together - almost like pack-ice - the question

arises of what happens to the logical connections which have hitherto

formed its framework. What representation do dreams provide for ‘if’,‘because’,  ‘just  as’,  ‘although’,  ‘either-or’,  and  all  the  other

conjunctions  without  which  we  cannot  understand  sentences  or

speeches?

   In the first resort our answer must be that dreams have no means at

their  disposal  for  representing  these  logical  relations  between  the

dream-thoughts.  For  the  most  part  dreams  disregard  all  these

conjunctions,  and  it  is  only  the  substantive  content  of  the  dream-

thoughts that they take over and manipulate. The restoration of the

connections which the dream-work has destroyed is a task which has

to be performed by the interpretative process.

   The incapacity of dreams to express these things must lie in the

nature of the psychical material out of which dreams are made. The

plastic arts of painting and sculpture labour, indeed, under a similar

limitation as compared with poetry, which can make use of speech;

and here once again the reason for their incapacity lies in the nature

of the material which these two forms of art manipulate in their effort to

express something. Before painting became acquainted with the laws

of expression by which it is governed, it made attempts to get over this

handicap. In ancient paintings small labels were hung from the mouths

of  the  persons  represented,  containing  in  written  characters  the

speeches which the artist despaired of representing pictorially.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        783

 

   At this point an objection may perhaps be raised in dispute of the

idea that dreams are unable to represent logical relations. For there

are dreams in which the most complicated intellectual operations take

place,  statements  are  contradicted  or  confirmed,  ridiculed  or

compared,  just  as  they  are  in  waking  thought.  But  here  again

appearances are deceitful. If we go into the interpretation of dreams

such as these, we find that the whole of this is part of the material of

the  dream-thoughts  and  is  not  a  representation  of  intellectual  work

performed  during  the  dream  itself.  What  is  reproduced  by  the

ostensible thinking in the dream is the subject-matter of the dream-

thoughts and not the mutual relations between them, the assertion ofwhich constitutes thinking. I shall bring forward some instances of this.

But the easiest point to establish in this connection is that all spoken

sentences which occur in dreams and are specifically described as

such  are  unmodified  or  slightly  modified  reproductions  of  speeches

which are also to be found among the recollections in the material of

the dream-thoughts. A speech of this kind is often no more than an

allusion to some event included among the dream-thoughts, and the

meaning of the dream may be a totally different one.

   Nevertheless, I will not deny that critical thought-activity which is not

a mere repetition of material in the dream-thoughts does have a share

in the formation of dreams. I shall have to elucidate the part played by

this factor at the end of the present discussion. It will then become

apparent  that  this  thought-activity  is  not  produced  by  the  dream-

thoughts but by the dream itself after it has already, in a certain sense,

been completed.

   Provisionally, then, it may be said that the logical relations between

the  dream-thoughts  are  not  given  any  separate  representation  in

dreams. For instance, if a contradiction occurs in a dream, it is either a

contradiction of the dream itself or a contradiction derived from the

subject-matter  of  one  of  the  dream-thoughts.  A  contradiction  in  a

dream can only correspond in an exceedingly indirect manner to a

contradiction between  the  dream-thoughts.  But  just  as  the  art  of

painting eventually found a way of expressing, by means other than

the  floating  labels,  at  least  the intention  of  the  words  of  the

personages represented - affection, threats, warnings, and so on - so

too there is a possible means by which dreams can take account of

some of the logical relations between their dream-thoughts, by making

an  appropriate  modification  in  the  method  of  representation

characteristic of dreams. Experience shows that different dreams vary

greatly in this respect. While some dreams completely disregard the

logical sequence of their material, others attempt to give as full an

indication  of  it  as  possible.  In  doing  so  dreams  depart  sometimes

more and some times less widely from the text that is at their disposal

for manipulation. Incidentally dreams vary similarly in their treatment

of  the chronological  sequence  of  the  dream-thoughts,  if  such  a

sequence has been established in the unconscious (as, for instance,

in the dream of Irma’s injection). 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        784

 

      What  means  does  the  dream-work  possess  for  indicating  these

relations in the dream-thoughts which it is so hard to represent? I will

attempt to enumerate them one by one.

   In the first place, dreams take into account in a general way the

connection  which  undeniably  exists  between  all  the  portions  of  the

dream-thoughts by combining the whole material into a single situation

or event. They reproduce logical connection by simultaneity in time.

Here they are acting like the painter who, in a picture of the School of

Athens or of Parnassus, represents in one group all the philosophers

or all the poets. It is true that they were never in fact assembled in a

single hall or on a single mountain-top; but they certainly form a group

in the conceptual sense.

      Dreams  carry  this  method  of  reproduction  down  to  details.

Whenever they show us two elements close together, this guarantees

that  there  is  some  specially  intimate  connection  between  what

correspond to them among the dream-thoughts. In the same way, in

our  system  of  writing,  ‘ab’  means  that  the  two  letters  are  to  be

pronounced in a single syllable. If a gap is left between the ‘a’ and the

‘b’, it means that the ‘a’ is the last letter of one word and the ‘b’ is the

first of the next one. So, too, collocations in dreams do not consist of

any  chance,  disconnected  portions  of  the  dream-material,  but  of

portions which are fairly closely connected in the dream-thoughts as

well.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        785

 

 

      For  representing causal  relations  dreams  have  two  procedures

which are in essence the same. Suppose the dream-thoughts run like

this: ‘Since this was so and so, such and such was bound to happen.’

Then the commoner method of representation would be to introducethe  dependent  clause  as  an  introductory  dream  and  to  add  the

principal clause as the main dream. If I have interpreted aright, the

temporal sequence may be reversed. But the more extensive part of

the dream always corresponds to the principal clause.

   One of my women patients once produced an excellent instance of

this way of representing causality in a dream which I shall later record

fully. It consisted of a short prelude and a very diffuse piece of dream

which was centred to a marked degree on a single theme and might

be entitled ‘The Language of Flowers.’

   The introductory dream was as follows: She went into the kitchen,

where her two maids were, and found fault with them for not having

got her ‘bite of food’ ready. At the same time she saw a very large

quantity  of  common  kitchen  crockery  standing  upside  down  in  the

kitchen to drain; it was piled up in heaps. The two maids went to fetch

some water and had to step into a kind of river which came right up to

the house or into the yard. The main dream then followed, beginning

thus: She  was  descending  from  a  height  over  some  strangely

constructed palisades, and felt glad that her dress was not caught in

them . . . etc.

   The introductory dream related to the dreamer’s parents’ home. No

doubt she had often heard her mother using the words that occurred

in the dream. The heaps of common crockery were derived from a

modest hardware shop which was located in the same building. The

other part of the dream contained a reference to her father, who used

always to run after the maids and who eventually contracted a fatal

illness during a flood. (The house stood near a river-bank.) Thus the

thought  concealed  behind  the  introductory  dream  ran  as  follows:

‘Because  I  was  born  in  this  house,  in  such  mean  and  depressing

circumstances . . . ’ The main dream took up the same thought and

presented  it  in  a  form  modified  by  wish-fulfilment:  ‘I  am  of  high

descent.’ Thus the actual underlying thought was: ‘Because I am of

such low descent, the course of my life has been so and so.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        786

    The division of a dream into two unequal parts does not invariably,

so far as I can see, signify that there is a causal relation between the

thoughts behind the two parts. It often seems as though the same

material  were  being  represented  in  the  two  dreams  from  different

points of view. (This is certainly the case where a series of dreams

during one night end in an emission or orgasm - a series in which the

somatic need finds its way to progressively clearer expression.) Or the

two dreams may have sprung from separate centres in the dream-

material, and their content may overlap, so that what is the centre in

one dream is present as a mere hint in the other, and vice versa. But

in a certain number of dreams a division into a shorter preliminary

dream and a longer sequel does in fact signify that there is a causal

relation between the two pieces.

   The other method of representing a causal relation is adapted to

less  extensive  material  and  consists  in  one  image  in  the  dream,

whether  of  a  person  or  thing,  being  transformed  into  another.  The

existence  of  a  causal  relation  is  only  to  be  taken  seriously  if  the

transformation actually occurs before our eyes and not if we merely

notice that one thing has appeared in the place of another.

   I have said that the two methods of representing a causal relation

were in essence the same. In both cases causation is represented by

temporal sequence: in one instance by a sequence of dreams and in

the other by the direct transformation of one image into another. In the

great majority of cases, it must be confessed, the causal relation is not

represented  at  all  but  is  lost  in  the  confusion  of  elements  which

inevitably occurs in the process of dreaming.

 

   The alternative ‘either-or’ cannot be expressed in dreams in any way

whatever. Both of the alternatives are usually inserted in the text of the

dream  as  though  they  were  equally  valid.  The  dream  of  Irma’s

injection contains a classic instance of this. Its latent thoughts clearly

ran:  ‘I  am  not  responsible  for  the  persistence  of  Irma’s  pains;  the

responsibility lies either in her recalcitrance to accepting my solution,

or in the unfavourable sexual conditions under which she lives and

which I cannot alter, or in the fact that her pains are not hysterical at

all but of an organic nature.’ The dream, on the other hand, fulfilled all

of these possibilities (which were almost mutually exclusive), and didnot hesitate to add a fourth solution, based on the dream-wish. After

interpreting  the  dream,  I  proceeded  to  insert  the  ‘either-or’  into  the

context of the dream thoughts.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        787

 

   If, however, in reproducing a dream, its narrator feels inclined to

make use of an ‘either-or’ - e.g. ‘it was either a garden or a sitting-

room’ - what was present in the dream-thoughts was not an alternative

but  an  ‘and’,  a  simple  addition.  An  ‘either-or’  is  mostly  used  to

describe a dream-element that has a quality of vagueness - which,

however,  is  capable  of  being  resolved.  In  such  cases  the  rule  for

interpretation is: treat the two apparent alternatives as of equal validity

and link them together with an ‘and’.

   For instance, on one occasion a friend of mine was stopping in Italy

and I had been without his address for a considerable time. I then had

a  dream  of  receiving  a  telegram  containing  this  address.  I  saw  it

printed in blue on the telegraph form. The first word was vague:

 

‘Via’, perhaps

or ‘Villa’                             ; the second was clear: ‘Secerno’

or possibly even (‘Casa’)

 

The second word sounded like some Italian name and reminded me of

discussions I had had with my friend on the subject of etymology. It

also expressed my anger with him for having kept his address secret

from me for so long. On the other hand, each of the three alternatives

for the first word turned out on analysis to be an independent and

equally valid starting point for a chain of thoughts.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        788

 

      During  the  night  before  my  father’s  funeral  I  had  a  dream  of  a

printed notice, placard or poster - rather like the notices forbidding oneto smoke in railway waiting-rooms - on which appeared either

 

              ‘You are requested to close the eyes’

or,        ‘You are requested to close an eye.’

 

   I usually write this in the form:

 

                                                                 the

                       ‘You are requested to close       eye(s).’

                                                                  an

 

Each of these two versions had a meaning of its own and led in a

different direction when the dream was interpreted. I had chosen the

simplest  possible  ritual  for  the  funeral,  for  I  knew  my  father’s  own

views on such ceremonies. But some other members of the family

were  not  sympathetic  to  such  puritanical  simplicity  and  thought  we

should be disgraced in the eyes of those who attended the funeral.

Hence one of the versions: ‘you are requested to close an eye’, i.e. to

‘wink at’ or ‘overlook.’ Here it is particularly easy to see the meaning of

the vagueness expressed by the ‘either-or.’ The dream-work failed to

establish a unified wording for the dream-thoughts which could at the

same  time  be  ambiguous,  and  the  two  main  lines  of  thought

consequently began to diverge even in the manifest content of the

dream.

   In a few instances the difficulty of representing an alternative is got

over by dividing the dream into two pieces of equal length.

 

      The  way  in  which  dreams  treat  the  category  of  contraries  and

contradictories  is  highly  remarkable.  It  is  simply  disregarded.  ‘No’

seems  not  to  exist  so  far  as  dreams  are  concerned.  They  show  a

particular  preference  for  combining  contraries  into  a  unity  or  for

representing  them  as  one  and  the  same  thing.  Dreams  feel

themselves  at  liberty,  moreover,  to  represent  any  element  by  its

wishful contrary; so that there is no way of deciding at a first glance

whether any element that admits of a contrary is present in the dream-

thoughts as a positive or as a negative.¹

    ¹ [Footnote added 1911:] I was astonished to learn from a pamphlet by K. Abel, The

Antithetical Meaning of Primal Words (1884) (cf. my review of it, 1910e) - and the fact has
been confirmed by other philologists - that the most ancient languages behave exactly like
dreams in this respect. In the first instance they have only a single word to describe the two
contraries at the extreme ends of a series of qualities or activities (e.g. ‘strong-weak’, ‘old-
young’,  ‘far-near’,  ‘bind-sever’);  they  only  form  distinct  terms  for  the  two  contraries  by  a
secondary process of making small modifications in the common word. Abel demonstrates
this particularly from Ancient Egyptian; but he shows that there are distinct traces of the same
course of development in the Semitic and Indo-Germanic languages as well.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        789

 

   In one of the dreams recorded just above, the first clause of which

has  already  been  interpreted  (‘because  my  descent  was  such  and

such’), the dreamer saw herself climbing down over some palisades

holding  a  blossoming  branch  in  her  hand.  In  connection  with  this

image she thought of the angel holding a spray of lilies in pictures of

the Annunciation - her own name was Maria - and of girls in white

robes  walking  in  Corpus  Christi  processions,  when  the  streets  are

decorated with green branches. Thus the blossoming branch in the

dream without any doubt alluded to sexual innocence. However, the

branch  was  covered  with red  flowers,  each  of  which  was  like  a

camellia.  By  the  end  of  her  walk  -  so  the  dream  went  on  -  the

blossoms were already a good deal faded. There then followed some

unmistakable allusions to menstruation. Accordingly, the same branch

which was carried like a lily and as though by an innocent girl was at

the  same  time  an  allusion  to  the Dame  aux  camélias  who,  as  we

know, usually wore a white camellia, except during her periods, when

she wore a red one. The same blossoming branch (cf. ‘des Mädchens

Blüten’  [‘the  maiden’s  blossoms’]  in  Goethe’s  poem  ‘Der  Müllerin

Verrat’) represented both sexual innocence and its contrary. And the

same dream which expressed her joy at having succeeded in passing

through life immaculately gave one glimpses at certain points (e.g. in

the  fading  of  the  blossoms)  of  the  contrary  train  of  ideas  -  of  her

having  been  guilty  of  various  sins  against  sexual  purity  (in  her

childhood, that is). In analysing the dream it was possible clearly to

distinguish  the  two  trains  of  thought,  of  which  the  consoling  one

seemed the more superficial and the self-reproachful one the deeper-lying  -  trains  of  thought  which  were  diametrically  opposed  to  each

other but whose similar though contrary elements were represented

by the same elements in the manifest dream.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        790

 

 

   One and one only of these logical relations is very highly favoured

by  the  mechanism  of  dream-formation;  namely,  the  relation  of

similarity, consonance or approximation - the relation of ‘just as’. This

relation, unlike any other, is capable of being represented in dreams in

a variety of ways.¹ Parallels or instances of ‘just as’ inherent in the

material of the dream-thoughts constitute the first foundations for the

construction of a dream; and no inconsiderable part of the dream-work

consists  in  creating  fresh  parallels  where  those  which  are  already

present cannot find their way into the dream owing to the censorship

imposed by resistance. The representation of the relation of similarity

is assisted by the tendency of the dream-work towards condensation.

   Similarity, consonance, the possession of common attributes - all

these are represented in dreams by unification, which may either be

present  already  in  the  material  of  the  dream-thoughts  or  may  be

freshly constructed. The first of these possibilities may be described

as  ‘identification’  and  the  second  as  ‘composition.’  Identification  is

employed where persons  are  concerned;  composition  where things

are the material of the unification. Nevertheless composition may also

be applied to persons. Localities are often treated like persons.

      In  identification,  only  one  of  the  persons  who  are  linked  by  a

common  element  succeeds  in  being  represented  in  the  manifest

content of the dream, while the second or remaining persons seem to

be  suppressed  in  it.  But  this  single  covering  figure  appears  in  the

dream in all the relations and situations which apply either to him or to

the figures which he covers. In composition, where this is extended to

persons, the dream-image contains features which are peculiar to one

or other of the persons concerned but not common to them; so that

the combination of these features leads to the appearance of a newunity, a composite figure. The actual process of composition can be

carried out in various ways. On the one hand, the dream-figure may

bear the name of one of the persons related to it - in which case we

simply know directly, in a manner analogous to our waking knowledge,

that  this  or  that  person  is  intended  -  while  its  visual  features  may

belong to the other person. Or, on the other hand, the dream-image

itself may be composed of visual features belonging in reality partly to

the one person and partly to the other. Or again the second person’s

share in the dream-image may lie, not in its visual features, but in the

gestures that we attribute to it, the words that we make it speak, or the

situation in which we place it. In this last case the distinction between

identification and the construction of a composite figure begins to lose

its  sharpness.  But  it  may  also  happen  that  the  formation  of  a

composite figure of this kind is unsuccessful. If so, the scene in the

dream is attributed to one of the persons concerned, while the other

(and usually the more important one) appears as an attendant figure

without any other function. The dreamer may describe the position in

such a phrase as: ‘My mother was there as well.’ (Stekel.) An element

of  this  kind  in  the  dream-content  may  be  compared  to  the

‘determinatives’ used in hieroglyphic script, which are not meant to be

pronounced but serve merely to elucidate other signs.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] Cf. Aristotle’s remark on the qualifications of a dream-interpreter

quoted above on p. 602 n. 2.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        791

 

      The  common  element  which  justifies,  or  rather  causes,  the

combination of the two persons may be represented in the dream or

may be omitted from it. As a rule the identification or construction of a

composite person takes place for the very purpose of avoiding the

representation  of  the  common  element.  Instead  of  saying:  ‘A  has

hostile feelings towards me and so has B’, I make a composite figure

out of A and B in the dream, or I imagine A performing an act of some

other  kind  which  is  characteristic  of B.  The  dream-figure  thus

constructed appears in the dream in some quite new connection, andthe  circumstance  that  it  represents  both A  and B  justifies  me  in

inserting at the appropriate point in the dream the element which is

common to both of them, namely a hostile attitude towards me. It is

often possible in this way to achieve quite a remarkable amount of

condensation in the content of a dream; I can save myself the need for

giving  a  direct  representation  of  very  complicated  circumstances

relating to one person, if I can find another person to whom some of

these circumstances apply equally. It is easy to see, too, how well this

method  of  representation  by  means  of  identification  can  serve  to

evade the censorship due to resistance, which imposes such severe

conditions upon the dream-work. What the censorship objects to may

lie  precisely  in  certain  ideas  which,  in  the  material  of  the  dream-

thoughts, are attached to a particular person; so I proceed to find a

second person, who is also connected with the objectionable material,

but only with part of it. The contact between the two persons upon this

censorable point now justifies me in constructing a composite figure

characterized  by  indifferent  features  derived  from  both.  This  figure,

arrived at by identification or composition, is then admissible to the

dream-content without censorship, and thus, by making use of dream-

condensation, I have satisfied the claims of the dream-censorship.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        792

 

   When a common element between two persons is represented in a

dream,  it  is  usually  a  hint  for  us  to  look  for  another,  concealed

common element whose representation has been made impossible by

the censorship. A displacement in regard to the common element has

been made in order, as it were, to facilitate its representation. The fact

that  the  composite  figure  appears  in  the  dream  with  an  indifferent

common element leads us to conclude that there is another far from

indifferent common element present in the dream-thoughts.

   Accordingly, identification or the construction of composite figures

serves  various  purposes  in  dreams:  firstly  to  represent  an  element

common to two persons, secondly to represent a displaced common

element,  and  thirdly,  too,  to  express  a  merely wishful  commonelement.  Since  wishing  that  two  persons  had  a  common  element

frequently  coincides  with  exchanging  one  for  the  other,  this  latter

relation is also expressed in dreams by means of identification. In the

dream  of  Irma’s  injection,  I  wished  to  exchange  her  for  another

patient: I wished, that is, that the other woman might be my patient

just as Irma was. The dream took this wish into account by showing

me  a  person  who  was  called  Irma,  but  who  was  examined  in  a

position in which I had only had occasion to see the other woman. In

the  dream  about  my  uncle  an  exchange  of  this  kind  became  the

central  point  of  the  dream:  I  identified  myself  with  the  Minister  by

treating and judging my colleagues no better than he did.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        793

 

   It is my experience, and one to which I have found no exception,

that  every  dream  deals  with  the  dreamer  himself.  Dreams  are

completely egoistical.¹ Whenever my own ego does not appear in the

content of the dream, but only some extraneous person, I may safely

assume that my own ego lies concealed, by identification, behind this

other person; I can insert my ego into the context. On other occasions,

when my own ego does appear in the dream, the situation in which it

occurs  may  teach  me  that  some  other  person  lies  concealed,  by

identification behind my ego. In that case the dream should warn me

to  transfer  on  to  myself,  when  I  am  interpreting  the  dream,  the

concealed common element attached to this other person. There are

also dreams in which my ego appears along with other people who,

when the identification is resolved, are revealed once again as my

ego. These identifications should then make it possible for me to bring

into contact with my ego certain ideas whose acceptance has been

forbidden by the censorship. Thus my ego may be represented in a

dream several times over, now directly and now through identification

with  extraneous  persons.  By  means  of  a  number  of  such

identifications  it  becomes  possible  to  condense  an  extraordinary

amount  of  thought-material.²  The  fact  that  the  dreamer’s  own  ego

appears several times, or in several forms, in a dream is at bottom nomore remarkable than that the ego should be contained in a conscious

thought several times or in different places or connections - e.g. in the

sentence ‘when I think what a healthy child I was’.

   Identifications in the case of proper names of localities are resolved

even more easily than in the case of persons, since here there is no

interference by the ego, which occupies such a dominating place in

dreams. In one of my dreams about Rome (see p. 680 f.), the place in

which I found myself was called Rome, but I was astonished at the

quantity of German posters at a street-corner. This latter point was a

wish-fulfilment, which at once made me think of Prague; and the wish

itself may perhaps have dated from a German-nationalist phase which

I passed through during my youth, but have since got over. At the time

at which I had the dream there was a prospect of my meeting my

friend in Prague; so that the identification of Rome and Prague can be

explained as a wishful common element: I would rather have met my

friend in Rome than in Prague and I would have liked to exchange

Prague for Rome for the purpose of this meeting.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1925:] Cf. the footnote on p. 746.

   ² When I am in doubt behind which of the figures appearing in the dream my ego is to be

looked for, I observe the following rule: the person who in the dream feels an emotion which I
myself experience in my sleep is the one who conceals my ego.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        794

 

      The  possibility  of  creating  composite  structures  stands  foremost

among  the  characteristics  which  so  often  lend  dreams  a  fantastic

appearance,  for  it  introduces  into  the  content  of  dreams  elements

which  could  never  have  been  objects  of  actual  perception.  The

psychical  process  of  constructing  composite  images  in  dreams  is

evidently  the  same  as  when  we  imagine  or  portray  a  centaur  or  a

dragon in waking life. The only difference is that what determines the

production  of  the  imaginary  figure  in  waking  life  is  the  impression

which  the  new  structure  itself  is  intended  to  make;  whereas  the

formation of the composite structure in a dream is determined by a

factor extraneous to its actual shape - namely the common element inthe dream-thoughts. Composite structures in dreams can be formed in

a great variety of ways. The most naïve of these procedures merely

represents  the  attributes  of  one  thing  to  the  accompaniment  of  a

knowledge  that  they  also  belong  to  something  else.  A  more

painstaking  technique  combines  the  features  of  both  objects  into  a

new image and in so doing makes clever use of any similarities that

the two objects may happen to possess in reality. The new structure

may seem entirely absurd or may strike us as an imaginative success,

according  to  the  material  and  to  the  ingenuity  with  which  it  is  put

together. If the objects which are to be condensed into a single unity

are  much  too  incongruous,  the  dream-work  is  often  content  with

creating a composite structure with a comparatively distinct nucleus,

accompanied by a number of less distinct features. In that case the

process of unification into a single image may be said to have failed.

The two representations are superimposed and produce something in

the nature of a contest between the two visual images. One might

arrive at similar representations in a drawing, if one tried to illustrate

the  way  in  which  a  general  concept  is  formed  from  a  number  of

individual perceptual images.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        795

 

   Dreams are, of course, a mass of these composite structures. I have

given some examples of them in dreams that I have already analysed;

and  I  will  now  add  a  few  more.  In  the  dream  reported  below  on

p.  816  ff.,  which  describes  the  course  of  the  patient’s  life  ‘in  the

language of flowers’ the dream-ego held a blossoming branch in her

hand which, as we have seen, stood both for innocence and for sexual

sinfulness. The branch, owing to the way in which the blossoms were

placed  on  it,  also  reminded  the  dreamer  of cherry-blossom;  the

blossoms  themselves,  regarded  individually,  were camellias,  and

moreover  the  general  impression  was  of  an exotic  growth.  The

common factor among the elements of this composite structure was

shown by the dream-thoughts. The blossoming branch was composed

of allusions to gifts made to her in order to win, or attempt to win, herfavour. Thus she had been given cherries in her childhood and, later

in  life,  a camellia-plant;  while  ‘exotic’  was  an  allusion  to  a  much-

travelled  naturalist  who  had  tried  to  win  her  favour  with  a  flower-

drawing.  -  Another  of  my  women  patients  produced  in  one  of  her

dreams a thing that was intermediate between a bathing-hut at the

seaside, an outside closet in the country and an attic in a town house.

The  first  two  elements  have  in  common  a  connection  with  people

naked and undressed; and their combination with the third element

leads to the conclusion that (in her childhood) an attic had also been a

scene  of  undressing.  -  Another  dreamer,  a  man,  produced  a

composite locality out of two places where ‘treatments’ are carried out:

one  of  them  being  my  consulting-room  and  the  other  the  place  of

entertainment where he had first made his wife’s acquaintance. -A girl

dreamt, after her elder brother had promised to give her a feast of

caviare, that this same brother’s legs were covered all over with black

grains of caviare. The element of ‘contagion’ (in the moral sense) and

a recollection of a rash in her childhood, which had covered her legs

all over with red spots, instead of black ones, had been combined with

the grains of caviare into a new concept - namely the concept of ‘what

she had got from her brother.’ In this dream, as in others, parts of the

human  body  were  treated  like  objects.  -  In  a  dream  recorded  by

Ferenczi, a composite image occurred was made up from the figure of

a doctor and of a horse and was also dressed in a nightshirt. The

element  common  to  these  three  components  was  arrived  at  in  the

analysis after the woman-patient had recognized that the night-shirt

was an allusion to her father in a scene from her childhood. In all three

cases it was a question of an object of her sexual curiosity. When she

was a child she had often been taken by her nurse to a military stud-

farm where she had ample opportunities of gratifying what was at that

time her still uninhibited curiosity.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        796

 

 

   I have asserted above that dreams have no means of expressingthe relation of a contradiction, a contrary or a ‘no’. I shall now proceed

to give a first denial of this assertion One class of cases which can be

comprised under the heading of ‘contraries’ are, as we have seen,

simply represented by identification - cases, that is, in which the idea

of an exchange or substitution can be brought into connection with the

contrast. I have given a number of instances of this. Another class of

contraries in the dream-thoughts, falling into a category which may be

described  as  ‘contrariwise’  or  ‘just  the  reverse’,  find  their  way  into

dreams in the following remarkable fashion, which almost deserves to

be described as a joke. The ‘just the reverse’ is not itself represented

in the dream-content, but reveals its presence in the material through

the fact that some piece of the dream-content, which has already been

constructed and happens (for some other reason) to be adjacent to it,

is - as it were by an afterthought - turned round the other way. The

process is more easily illustrated than described. In the interesting ‘Up

and Down’ dream (p. 759 ff.) the representation of the climbing in the

dream was the reverse of what it was in its prototype in the dream-

thoughts - that is, in the introductory scene from Daudet’s Sappho: in

the dream the climbing was difficult at first but easier later, while in the

Daudet scene it was easy at first but more and more difficult later.

Further, the ‘up above’ and ‘down below’ in the dreamer’s relation to

his brother were represented the other way round in the dream. This

pointed to the presence of a reversed or contrary relation between two

pieces of the material in the dream-thoughts; and we found it in the

dreamer’s childhood phantasy of being carried by his wet-nurse, which

was  the  reverse  of  the  situation  in  the  novel,  where  the  hero  was

carrying his mistress. So too in my dream of Goethe’s attack on Herr

M. (see below, p. 886 ff.) there is a similar ‘just the reverse’ which has

to be put straight before the dream can be successfully interpreted. In

the dream Goethe made an attack on a young man, Herr M.; in the

real situation contained in the dream-thoughts a man of importance,

my  friend,  had  been  attacked  by  an  unknown  young  writer.  In  the

dream I based a calculation on the date of Goethe’s death; in reality

the calculation had been made from the year of the paralytic patient’s

birth.  The  thought  which  turned  out  to  be  the  decisive  one  in  the

dream-thoughts was a contradiction of the idea that Goethe should be

treated as though he were a lunatic. ‘Just the reverse’, said the dream,‘if you don’t understand the book, it’s you that are feeble-minded, and

not  the  author.’  I  think,  moreover,  that  all  these  dreams  of  turning

things round the other way include a reference to the contemptuous

implications of the idea of ‘turning one’s back on something.’ (E.g. the

dreamer’s  turning  round  in  relation  to  his  brother  in  the Sappho

dream.) It is remarkable to observe, moreover, how frequently reversal

is employed precisely in dreams arising from repressed homosexual

impulses.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        797

 

   Incidentally, reversal, or turning a thing into its opposite, is one of

the means of representation most favoured by the dream-work and

one which is capable of employment in the most diverse directions. It

serves in the first place to give expression to the fulfilment of a wish in

reference to some particular element of the dream-thoughts. ‘If only it

had  been  the  other  way  round!’  This  is  often  the  best  way  of

expressing the ego’s reaction to a disagreeable fragment of memory.

Again, reversal is of quite special use as a help to the censorship, for

it  produces  a  mass  of  distortion  in  the  material  which  is  to  be

represented, and this has a positively paralysing effect, to begin with,

on  any  attempt  at  understanding  the  dream.  For  that  reason,  if  a

dream obstinately declines to reveal its meaning, it is always worth

while  to  see  the  effect  of  reversing  some  particular  elements  in  its

manifest  content,  after  which  the  whole  situation  often  becomes

immediately clear.

      And,  apart  from  the  reversal  of  subject-matter, chronological

reversal  must  not  be  overlooked.  Quite  a  common  technique  of

dream-distortion consists in representing the outcome of an event or

the conclusion of a train of thought at the beginning of a dream and of

placing at its end the premises on which the conclusion was based or

the causes which led to the event. Anyone who fails to bear in mind

this technical method adopted by dream-distortion will be quite at a

loss when confronted with the task of interpreting a dream.¹

      In  some  instances,  indeed,  it  is  only  possible  to  arrive  at  themeaning  of  a  dream  after  one  has  carried  out  quite  a  number  of

reversals of its content in various respects. For instance, in the case of

a young obsessional neurotic, there lay concealed behind one of his

dreams the memory of a death-wish dating from his childhood and

directed against his father, of whom he had been afraid. Here is the

text of the dream: His father was scolding him for coming home so

late. The context in which the dream occurred in the psycho-analytic

treatment and the dreamer’s associations showed, however, that the

original wording must have been that he was angry with his father,

and that in his view his father always came home too early (i.e. too

soon). He would have preferred it if his father had not come home at

all, and this was the same thing as a death-wish against his father.

(See p.  733  f.)    For  as  a  small  boy,  during  his  father’s  temporary

absence, he had been guilty of an act of sexual aggression against

someone, and as a punishment had been threatened in these words:

‘Just you wait till your father comes back!’

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] Hysterical attacks sometimes make use of the same kind of

chronological  reversal  in  order  to  disguise  their  meaning  from  observers.  For  instance,  a
hysterical girl needed to represent something in the nature of a brief romance in one of her
attacks - a romance of which she had had a phantasy in her unconscious after an encounter
with someone on the suburban railway. She imagined how the man had been attracted by the
beauty of her foot and had spoken to her while she was reading; whereupon she had gone off
with him and had had a passionate love-scene. Her attack began with a representation of this
love-scene by convulsive twitching of her body, accompanied by movements of her lips to
represent kissing and tightening of her arms to represent embracing. She then hurried into the
next room, sat down on a chair, raised her skirt so as to show her foot, pretended to be
reading a book and spoke to me (that is, answered me). - [Added 1914:] Cf. in this connection
what Artemidorus says: ‘In interpreting the images seen in dreams one must sometimes follow
them from the beginning to the end and sometimes from the end to the beginning . . .’
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        798

 

 

   If we wish to pursue our study of the relations between dream-

content  and  dream-thoughts  further,  the  best  plan  will  be  to  take

dreams  themselves  as  our  point  of  departure  and  consider  what

certain formal  characteristics  of  the  method  of  representation  in

dreams  signify  in  relation  to  the  thoughts  underlying  them.  Mostprominent  among  these  formal  characteristics,  which  cannot  fail  to

impress us in dreams, are the differences in sensory intensity between

particular dream-images and in the distinctness of particular parts of

dreams or of whole dreams as compared with one another.

   The differences in intensity between particular dream-images cover

the whole range extending between a sharpness of definition which

we feel inclined, no doubt unjustifiably, to regard as greater than that

of reality and an irritating vagueness which we declare characteristic

of dreams because it is not completely comparable to any degree of

indistinctness which we ever perceive in real objects. Furthermore we

usually describe an impression which we have of an indistinct object in

a dream as ‘fleeting’, while we feel that those dream-images which are

more distinct have been perceived for a considerable length of time.

The  question  now  arises  what  it  is  in  the  material  of  the  dream-

thoughts  that  determines  these  differences  in  the  vividness  of

particular pieces of the content of a dream.

   We must begin by countering certain expectations which almost

inevitably  present  themselves.  Since  the  material  of  a  dream  may

include real sensations experienced during sleep, it will probably be

presumed that these, or the elements in the dream derived from them,

are given prominence in the dream content by appearing with special

intensity;  or,  conversely,  that  whatever  is  very  specially  vivid  in  a

dream  can  be  traced  back  to  real  sensations  during  sleep.  In  my

experience, however, this has never been confirmed. It is not the case

that the elements of a dream which are derivatives of real impressions

during  sleep  (i.e.  of  nervous  stimuli)  are  distinguished  by  their

vividness from other elements which arise from memories. The factor

of  reality  counts  for  nothing  in  determining  the  intensity  of  dream

images.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        799

 

   Again, it might be expected that the sensory intensity (that is, the

vividness)  of  particular  dream-images  would  be  related  to  the

psychical  intensity  of  the  elements  in  the  dream-thoughtscorresponding to them. In the latter, psychical intensity coincides with

psychical value:  the  most  intense  elements  are  also  the  most

important  ones  -  those  which  form  the  centre-point  of  the  dream-

thoughts. We know, it is true, that these are precisely elements which,

on account of the censorship, cannot as a rule make their way into the

content  of  the  dream;  nevertheless,  it  might  well  be  that  their

immediate derivatives which represent them in the dream might bear a

higher degree of intensity, without necessarily on that account forming

the centre of the dream. But this expectation too is disappointed by a

comparative study of dreams and the material from which they are

derived. The intensity of the elements in the one has no relation to the

intensity  of  the  elements  in  the  other:  the  fact  is  that  a  complete

‘transvaluation  of  all  psychical  values’  takes  place  between  the

material of the dream-thoughts and the dream. A direct derivative of

what occupies a dominating position in the dream-thoughts can often

only be discovered precisely in some transitory element of the dream

which is quite overshadowed by more powerful images.

   The intensity of the elements of a dream turns out to be determined

otherwise - and by two independent factors. In the first place, it is easy

to see that the elements by which the wish-fulfilment is expressed are

represented with special intensity. And in the second place, analysis

shows that the most vivid elements of a dream are the starting-point of

the most numerous trains of thought - that the most vivid elements are

also  those  with  the  most  numerous  determinants.  We  shall  not  be

altering the sense of this empirically based assertion if we put it in

these terms: the greatest intensity is shown by those elements of a

dream on whose formation the greatest amount of condensation has

been expended. We may expect that it will eventually turn out to be

possible to express this determinant and the other (namely relation to

the wish-fulfilment) in a single formula.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        800

 

 

   The problem with which I have just dealt - the causes of the greateror less intensity or clarity of particular elements of a dream - is not to

be  confounded  with  another  problem,  which  relates  to  the  varying

clarity  of  whole  dreams  or  sections  of  dreams.  In  the  former  case

clarity  is  contrasted  with  vagueness,  but  in  the  latter  case  it  is

contrasted with confusion. Nevertheless it cannot be doubted that the

increase and decrease of the qualities in the two scales run parallel. A

section of a dream which strikes us as perspicuous usually contains

intense elements; a dream which is obscure, on the other hand, is

composed of elements of small intensity. Yet the problem presented

by  the  scale  which  runs  from  what  is  apparently  clear  to  what  is

obscure and confused is far more complicated than that of the varying

degrees of vividness of dream-elements. Indeed, for reasons which

will appear later, the former problem cannot yet be discussed.

   In a few cases we find to our surprise that the impression of clarity

or indistinctness given by a dream has no connection at all with the

make-up of the dream itself but arises from the material of the dream-

thoughts and is a constituent of it . Thus I remember a dream of mine

which  struck  me  when  I  woke  up  as  being  so  particularly  well-

constructed, flawless and clear that, while I was still half-dazed with

sleep, I thought of introducing a new category of dreams which were

not subject to the mechanisms of condensation and displacement but

were to be described as ‘phantasies during sleep.’ Closer examination

proved  that  this  rarity  among  dreams  showed  the  same  gaps  and

flaws in its structure as any other; and for that reason I dropped the

category of ‘dream-phantasies.’ ¹ The content of the dream, when it

was arrived at, represented me as laying before my friend a difficult

and long-sought theory of bisexuality; and the wish-fulfilling power of

the  dream  was  responsible  for  our  regarding  this  theory  (which,

incidentally, was not given in the dream) as clear and flawless. Thus

what  I  had  taken  to  be  a  judgement  on  the  completed  dream  was

actually a part, and indeed the essential part, of the dream-content.

The dream-work had in this case encroached, as it were, upon my first

waking thoughts and had conveyed to me as a judgement upon the

dream the part of the material of the dream-thoughts which it had not

succeeded  in  representing  accurately  in  the  dream.  I  once  came

across a precise counterpart to this in a woman patient’s dream during

analysis. To begin with she refused altogether to tell it me, ‘because itwas so indistinct and muddled’. At length, protesting repeatedly that

she felt no certainty that her account was correct, she informed me

that  several  people  had  come  into  the  dream  -  she  herself,  her

husband and her father - and that it was as though she had not known

whether  her  husband  was  her  father,  or  who  her  father  was,  or

something  of  that  sort.  This  dream,  taken  in  conjunction  with  her

associations during the analytic session, showed beyond a doubt that

it was a question of the somewhat commonplace story of a servant-girl

who was obliged to confess that she was expecting a baby but was in

doubts as to ‘who the (baby’s) father really was’. ² Thus here again the

lack of clarity shown by the dream was a part of the material which

instigated the dream: part of this material, that is, was represented in

the form of the dream. The form of a dream, or the form in which it is

dreamt  is  used  with  quite  surprising  frequency  for  representing  its

concealed subject-matter.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1930:] Whether rightly I am now uncertain.

   ² Her accompanying hysterical symptoms were amenorrhoea and great depression (which

was this patient’s chief symptom).
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        801

 

   Glosses on a dream, or apparently innocent comments on it, often

serve to disguise a portion of what has been dreamt in the subtlest

fashion, though in fact betraying it. For instance, a dreamer remarked

that at one point ‘the dream had been wiped away’; and the analysis

led  to  an  infantile  recollection  of  his  listening  to  someone  wiping

himself after defaecating. Or here is another example which deserves

to be recorded in detail. A young man had a very clear dream which

reminded him of some phantasies of his boyhood that had remained

conscious. He dreamt that it was evening and that he was in a hotel at

a summer resort. He mistook the number of his room and went into

one in which an elderly lady and her two daughters were undressing

and going to bed. He proceeded: ‘Here there are some gaps in the

dream;  there’s  something  missing.  Finally  there  was  a  man  in  the

room who tried to throw me out, and I had to have a struggle with him.’He made vain endeavours to recall the gist and drift of the boyish

phantasy to which the dream was evidently alluding; until at last the

truth  emerged  that  what  he  was  in  search  of  was  already  in  his

possession in his remark about the obscure part of the dream. The

‘gaps’ were the genital apertures of the women who were going to

bed; and ‘there’s something missing’ described the principal feature of

the female genitalia. When he was young he had had a consuming

curiosity to see a woman’s genitals and had been inclined to hold to

the  infantile  sexual  theory  according  to  which  women  have  male

organs.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        802

 

      An  analogous  recollection  of  another  dreamer  assumed  a  very

similar shape. He dreamt as follows: ‘I was going into the Volkgarten

Restaurant with Fräulein K. . . . . then came an obscure patch, an

interruption . . ., then I found myself in the salon of a brothel, where I

saw two or three women, one of them in her chemise and drawers.’

   ANALYSIS. - Fräulein K. was the daughter of his former chief, and, as

he himself admitted, a substitute sister of his own. He had seldom had

an opportunity of talking to her, but they once had a conversation in

which ‘it was just as though we had become aware of our sex, it was

as though I were to say: "I’m a man and you’re a woman."' He had

only once been inside the restaurant in question, with his brother-in-

law’s sister, a girl who meant nothing at all to him. Another time he

had gone with a group of three ladies as far as the entrance of the

same restaurant. These ladies were his sister, his sister-in-law and the

brother-in-law’s sister who has just been mentioned. All of them were

highly indifferent to him, but all three fell into the class of ‘sister.’ He

had only seldom visited a brothel - only two or three times in his life.

      The  interpretation  was  based  on  the  ‘obscure  patch’  and  the

‘interruption’ in the dream, and put forward the view that in his boyish

curiosity  he  had  occasionally,  though  only  seldom,  inspected  the

genitals of a sister who was a few years his junior. Some days later he

had a conscious recollection of the misdeed alluded to by the dream. 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        803

 

 

   The content of all dreams that occur during the same night forms

part of the same whole; the fact of their being divided into several

sections, as well as the grouping and number of those sections - all of

this has a meaning and may be regarded as a piece of information

arising  from  the  latent  dream-thoughts.  In  interpreting  dreams

consisting of several main sections or, in general, dreams occurring

during the same night, the possibility should not be overlooked that

separate  and  successive  dreams  of  this  kind  may  have  the  same

meaning,  and  may  be  giving  expression  to  the  same  impulses  in

different material. If so, the first of these homologous dreams to occur

is often the more distorted and timid, while the succeeding one will be

more confident and distinct.

   Pharaoh’s dreams in the Bible of the kine and the ears of corn,

which were interpreted by Joseph, were of this kind. They are reported

more fully by Josephus (Ancient History of the Jews, Book 2, Chapter

5) than in the Bible. After the King had related his first dream, he said:

‘After I had seen this vision, I awaked out of my sleep; and, being in

disorder, and considering with myself what this appearance should be,

I fell asleep again, and saw another dream, more wonderful than the

foregoing, which did more affright and disturb me . . .’ After hearing

the King’s account of the dream, Joseph replied: ‘This dream, O King,

although seen under two forms, signifies one and the same event . . .’

   In his ‘Contribution to the Psychology of Rumour’, Jung (1910b)

describes  how  the  disguised  erotic  dream  of  a  school-girl  was

understood by her school-friends without any interpreting and how it

was further elaborated and modified. He remarks in connection with

one  of  these  dream  stories:  ‘The  final  thought  in  a  long  series  of

dream-images contains precisely what the first image in the series had

attempted to portray. The censorship keeps the complex at a distance

as  long  as  possible  by  a  succession  of  fresh  symbolic  screens,

displacements, innocent disguises, etc.’ (Ibid., 87.) Scherner (1861,166)  was  well  acquainted  with  this  peculiarity  of  the  method  of

representation  in  dreams  and  describes  it,  in  connection  with  his

theory  of  organic  stimuli,  as  a  special  law:  ‘Lastly,  however,  in  all

symbolic dream-structures which arise from particular nervous stimuli,

the imagination observes a general law: at the beginning of a dream it

depicts the object from which the stimulus arises only by the remotest

and most inexact allusions, but at the end, when the pictorial effusion

has exhausted itself, it nakedly presents the stimulus itself, or, as the

case may be, the organ concerned or the function of that organ, and

therewith  the  dream,  having  designated  its  actual  organic  cause,

achieves its end . . .’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        804

 

   Otto Rank (1910) has produced a neat confirmation of this law of

Scherner’s.  A  girl’s  dream  reported  by  him  was  composed  of  two

separate dreams dreamt, with an interval between them, during the

same  night,  the  second  of  which  ended  with  an  orgasm.  It  was

possible to carry out a detailed interpretation of this second dream

even without many contributions from the dreamer; and the number of

connections between the contents of the two dreams made it possible

to see that the first dream represented in a more timid fashion the

same thing as the second. So that the second, the dream with the

orgasm, helped towards the complete explanation of the first. Rank

rightly  bases  upon  this  example  a  discussion  of  the  general

significance  of  dreams  of  orgasm  or  emission  for  the  theory  of

dreaming.

 

      Nevertheless  in  my  experience  it  is  only  rarely  that  one  is  in  a

position  to  interpret  the  clarity  or  confusion  of  a  dream  by  the

presence of certainty or doubt in its material. Later on I shall have to

disclose a factor in dream-formation which I have not yet mentioned

and which exercises the determining influence upon the scale of these

qualities in any particular dream.

    Sometimes, in a dream in which the same situation and setting have

persisted for some time, an interruption will occur which is described

in these words: ‘But then it was as though at the same time it was

another place, and there such and such a thing happened.’ After a

while  the  main  thread  of  the  dream  may  be  resumed,  and  what

interrupted  it  turns  out  to  be  a  subordinate  clause  in  the  dream-

material - an interpolated thought. A conditional in the dream-thoughts

has been represented in the dream by simultaneity: ‘if’ has become

‘when’.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        805

 

 

   What is the meaning of the sensation of inhibited movement which

appears so commonly in dreams and verges so closely upon anxiety?

One tries to move forward but finds oneself glued to the spot, or one

tries to reach something but is held up by a series of obstacles. A train

is on the point of departure but one is unable to catch it. One raises

one’s hand to avenge an insult but finds it powerless and so forth. We

have already met with this sensation in dreams of exhibiting, but have

not  as  yet  made  any  serious  attempt  to  interpret  it.  An  easy  but

insufficient answer would be to say that motor paralysis prevails in

sleep  and  that  we  become  aware  of  it  in  the  sensation  we  are

discussing.  But  it  may  be  asked  why  in  that  case  we  are  not

perpetually  dreaming  of  these  inhibited  movements;  and  it  is

reasonable to suppose that this sensation, though one which can be

summoned up at any moment during sleep, serves to facilitate some

particular  kind  of  representation,  and  is  only  aroused  when  the

material of the dream-thoughts needs to be represented in that way.

      This  ‘not  being  able  to  do  anything’  does  not  always  appear  in

dreams as a sensation but is sometimes simply a part of the content

of  the  dream.  A  case  of  this  sort  seems  to  me  particularly  well

qualified to throw light on the meaning of this feature of dreaming.

Here  is  an  abridged  version  of  a  dream  in  which  I  was  apparently

charged  with  dishonesty. The  place  was  a  mixture  of  a  privatesanatorium and several other institutions. A man-servant appeared to

summon me to an examination. I knew in the dream that something

had been missed and that the examination was due to a suspicion that

I had appropriated the missing article. (The analysis showed that the

examination was to be taken in two senses and included a medical

examination.) Conscious of my innocence and of the fact that I held

the position of a consultant in the establishment, I accompanied the

servant quietly. At the door we were met by another servant who said,

pointing  to  me:  ‘Why  have  you  brought  him?  He’s  a  respectable

person.’  I  then  went,  unattended,  into  a  large  hall,  with  machines

standing  in  it,  which  reminded  me  of  an  Inferno  with  its  hellish

instruments of punishment. Stretched out on one apparatus I saw one

of my colleagues, who had every reason to take some notice of me;

but he paid no attention. I was then told I could go. But I could not find

my hat and could not go after all.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        806

 

      The  wish-fulfilment  of  the  dream  evidently  lay  in  my  being

recognized  as  an  honest  man  and  told  I  could  go.  There  must

therefore  have  been  all  kinds  of  material  in  the  dream-thoughts

containing a contradiction of this. That I could go was a sign of my

absolution. If therefore something happened at the end of the dream

which  prevented  my  going,  it  seems  plausible  to  suppose  that  the

suppressed material containing the contradiction was making itself felt

at  that  point.  My  not  being  able  to  find  my  hat  meant  accordingly:

‘After all you’re not an honest man.’ Thus the ‘not being able to do

something’ in this dream was a way of expressing a contradiction - a

‘no’- so that my earlier statement that dreams cannot express a ‘no’

requires correction.¹

      In  other  dreams,  in  which  the  ‘not  carrying  out’  of  a  movement

occurs as a sensation and not simply as a situation, the sensation of

the inhibition of a movement gives a more forcible expression to the

same  contradiction  -  it  expresses  a  volition  which  is  opposed  by  a

counter-volition. Thus the sensation of the inhibition of a movementrepresents  a conflict  of  will.  We  shall  learn  later  that  the  motor

paralysis  accompanying  sleep  is  precisely  one  of  the  fundamental

determinants  of  the  psychical  process  during  dreaming.  Now  an

impulse  transmitted  along  the  motor  paths  is  nothing  other  than  a

volition, and the fact of our being so certain that we shall feel that

impulse inhibited during sleep is what makes the whole process so

admirably suited for representing an act of volition and a ‘no’ which

opposes it. It is also easy to see, on my explanation of anxiety, why

the sensation of an inhibition of will approximates so closely to anxiety

and is so often linked with it in dreams. Anxiety is a libidinal impulse

which  has  its  origin  in  the  unconscious  and  is  inhibited  by  the

preconscious.² When, therefore, the sensation of inhibition is linked

with anxiety in a dream, it must be a question of an act of volition

which was at one time capable of generating libido - that is, it must be

a question of a sexual impulse.

 

   ¹ In the complete analysis there was a reference to an event in my childhood, reached by

the following chain of association. ‘Der Mohr hat seine Schuldigkeit getan, der Mohr kahn
gehen.’ [‘The Moor has done his duty, the Moor can go.’] Then came a facetious conundrum:
‘How old was the Moor when he had done his duty?’ - ‘One year old, because then he could
go [‘gehen’ - both ‘to go’ and ‘ to walk’].’ (It appears that I came into the world with such a
tangle of black hair that my young mother declared I was a little Moor.) - My not being able to
find my hat was an occurrence from waking life which was used in more than one sense. Our
housemaid, who was a genius at putting things away, had hidden it. -The end of this dream
also concealed a rejection of some melancholy thoughts about death: ‘I am far from having
done my duty, so I must not go yet.’ - Birth and death were dealt with in it, just as they had
been in the dream of Goethe and the paralytic patient, which I had dreamt a short time before.
(See pp. 797, 886 ff.)

   ² [Footnote added 1930:] In the light of later knowledge this statement can no longer stand.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        807

 

 

   I shall deal elsewhere (see below) with the meaning and psychical

significance  of  the  judgement  which  often  turns  up  in  dreams

expressed  in  the  phrase  ‘after  all  this  is  only  a  dream’.  Here  I  will

merely  say  in  anticipation  that  it  is  intended  to  detract  from  the

importance  of  what  is  being  dreamt.  The  interesting  and  alliedproblem, as to what is meant when some of the content of a dream is

described in the dream itself as ‘dreamt’ - the enigma of the ‘dream

within a dream’ - has been solved in a similar sense by Stekel, who

has  analysed  some  convincing  examples.  The  intention  is,  once

again, to detract from the importance of what is ‘dreamt’ in the dream,

to rob it of its reality. What is dreamt in a dream after waking from the

‘dream within a dream’ is what the dream-wish seeks to put in the

place of an obliterated reality. It is safe to suppose, therefore, that

what has been ‘dreamt’ in the dream is a representation of the reality,

the  true  recollection,  while  the  continuation  of  the  dream,  on  the

contrary,  merely  represents  what  the  dreamer  wishes.  To  include

something in a ‘dream within a dream’ is thus equivalent to wishing

that the thing described as a dream had never happened. In other

words, if a particular event is inserted into a dream as a dream by the

dream-work itself, this implies the most decided confirmation of the

reality of the event - the strongest affirmation of it. The dream-work

makes use of dreaming as a form of repudiation, and so confirms the

discovery that dreams are wish-fulfilments.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        808

 

                                          (D)

 

                        CONSIDERATIONS OF REPRESENTABILITY

 

      We  have  been  occupied  so  far  with  investigating  the  means  by

which dreams represent the relations between the dream-thoughts. In

the course of this investigation, however, we have more than once

touched  upon  the  further  topic  of  the  general  nature  of  the

modifications which the material of the dream-thoughts undergoes for

the  purpose  of  the  formation  of  a  dream.  We  have  learnt  that  that

material, stripped to a large extent of its relations, is submitted to a

process  of  compression,  while  at  the  same  time  displacements  of

intensity  between  its  elements  necessarily  bring  about  a  psychical

transvaluation  of  the  material.  The  displacements  we  have  hitherto

considered  turned  out  to  consist  in  the  replacing  of  some  oneparticular idea by another in some way closely associated with it, and

they were used to facilitate condensation in so far as, by their means,

instead  of two  elements,  a  single  common  element  intermediate

between them found its way into the dream. We have not yet referred

to any other sort of displacement. Analyses show us, however, that

another sort exists and that it reveals itself in a change in the verbal

expression  of  the  thoughts  concerned.  In  both  cases  there  is  a

displacement along a chain of associations; but a process of such a

kind can occur in various psychical spheres, and the outcome of the

displacement may in one case be that one element is replaced by

another,  while  the  outcome  in  another  case  may  be  that  a  single

element has its verbal form replaced by another.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        809

 

      This  second  species  of  displacement  which  occurs  in  dream-

formation is not only of great theoretical interest but is also specially

well  calculated  to  explain  the  appearance  of  fantastic  absurdity  in

which dreams are disguised. The direction taken by the displacement

usually results in a colourless and abstract expression in the dream-

thought  being  exchanged  for  a  pictorial  and  concrete  one.  The

advantage, and accordingly the purpose, of such a change jumps to

the eyes. A thing that is pictorial is, from the point of view of a dream,

a thing that is capable of being represented: it can be introduced into a

situation  in  which  abstract  expressions  offer  the  same  kind  of

difficulties to representation in dreams as a political leading article in a

newspaper would offer to an illustrator. But not only representability,

but the interests of condensation and the censorship as well can be

the gainers from this exchange. A dream-thought is unusable so long

as  it  is  expressed  in  an  abstract  form;  but  when  once  it  has  been

transformed into pictorial language, contrasts and identifications of the

kind which the dream-work requires, and which it creates if they are

not  already  present,  can  be  established  more  easily  than  before

between the new form of expression and the remainder of the material

underlying the dream. This is so because in every language concreteterms, in consequence of the history of their development, are richer

in associations than conceptual ones. We may suppose that a good

part of the intermediate work done during the formation of a dream,

which  seeks  to  reduce  the  dispersed  dream-thoughts  to  the  most

succinct and unified expression possible, proceeds along the line of

finding appropriate verbal transformations for the individual thoughts.

Any one thought, whose form of expression may happen to be fixed

for other reasons, will operate in a determinant and selective manner

on the possible forms of expression allotted to the other thoughts, and

it may do so, perhaps, from the very start - as is the case in writing a

poem.  If  a  poem  is  to  be  written  in  rhymes,  the  second  line  of  a

couplet is limited by two conditions: it must express an appropriate

meaning, and the expression of that meaning must rhyme with the first

line. No doubt the best poem will be one in which we fail to notice the

intention of finding a rhyme, and in which the two thoughts have, by

mutual influence, chosen from the very start a verbal expression which

will allow a rhyme to emerge with only slight subsequent adjustment.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        810

 

      In  a  few  instances  a  change  of  expression  of  this  kind  assists

dream-condensation even more directly, by finding a form of words

which owing to its ambiguity is able to give expression to more than

one of the dream-thoughts. In this way the whole domain of verbal wit

is  put  at  the  disposal  of  the  dream-work.  There  is  no  need  to  be

astonished at the part played by words in dream-formation. Words,

since they are the nodal point of numerous ideas, may be regarded as

predestined  to  ambiguity;  and  the  neuroses  (e.g.  in  framing

obsessions and phobias), no less than dreams, make unashamed use

of the advantages thus offered by words for purposes of condensation

and disguise.¹ It is easy to show that dream-distortion too profits from

displacement of expression. If one ambiguous word is used instead of

two unambiguous ones the result is misleading; and if our everyday,

sober  method  of  expression  is  replaced  by  a  pictorial  one,  our

understanding is brought to a halt, particularly since a dream nevertells  us  whether  its  elements  are  to  be  interpreted  literally  or  in  a

figurative sense or whether they are to be connected with the material

of  the  dream-thoughts  directly  or  through  the  intermediary  of  some

interpolated  phraseology.  In  interpreting  any  dream-element  it  is  in

general doubtful

   (a) whether it is to be taken in a positive or negative sense (as an

antithetic relation),

   (b) whether it is to be interpreted historically (as a recollection),

   (c) whether it is to be interpreted symbolically, or

   (d) whether its interpretation is to depend on its wording.

Yet, in spite of all this ambiguity, it is fair to say that the productions of

the dream-work, which, it must be remembered, are not made with the

intention of being understood, present no greater difficulties to their

translators than do the ancient hieroglyphic scripts to those who seek

to read them.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] See my volume on jokes (1905c) and the discussion there of the

use of ‘verbal bridges’ in the solution of neurotic symptoms.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        811

 

   I have already given several examples of representations in dreams

which are only held together by the ambiguity of their wording. (For

instance,  ‘She  opened  her  mouth  properly’  in  the  dream  of  Irma’s

injection and ‘I could not go after all’ in the dream which I last quoted.)

I will now record a dream in which a considerable part was played by

the turning of abstract thought into pictures. The distinction between

dream-interpretation  of  this  kind  and  interpretation  by  means  of

symbolism can still be drawn quite sharply. In the case of symbolic

dream-interpretation the key to the symbolization is arbitrarily chosen

by the interpreter; whereas in our cases of verbal disguise the keys

are  generally  known  and  laid  down  by  firmly  established  linguistic

usage. If one has the right idea at one’s disposal at the right moment,

one can solve dreams of this kind wholly or in part even independently

of information from the dreamer.

    A lady of my acquaintance had the following dream: She was at the

Opera. A Wagner opera was being performed, and had lasted till a

quarter to eight in the morning. There were tables set out in the stalls,

at which people were eating and drinking. Her cousin, who had just

got back from his honeymoon, was sitting at one of the tables with his

young wife, and an aristocrat was sitting beside them. Her cousin’s

wife,  so  it  appeared,  had  brought  him  back  with  her  from  the

honeymoon, quite openly, just as one might bring back a hat. In the

middle of the stalls there was a high tower, which had a platform on

top of it surrounded by an iron railing. High up at the top was the

conductor,  who  had  the  features  of  Hans  Richter.  He  kept  running

round the railing, and was perspiring violently; and from that position

he was conducting the orchestra which was grouped about the base

of the tower. She herself was sitting in a box with a woman friend

(whom I knew). Her younger sister wanted to hand her up a large

lump of coal from the stalls, on the ground that she had not known it

would be so long, and must be simply freezing by now. (As though the

boxes required to be heated during the long performance.)

   Even though the dream was well focused on a single situation, yet in

other respects it was sufficiently senseless: the tower in the middle of

the stalls, for instance, with the conductor directing the orchestra from

the top of it! And above all the coal that her sister handed up to her!  I

deliberately refrained from asking for an analysis of the dream. But

since I had some knowledge of the dreamer’s personal relations, I was

able to interpret certain pieces of it independently of her. I knew she

had had a great deal of sympathy for a musician whose career had

been prematurely cut short by insanity. So I decided to take the tower

in the stalls metaphorically. It then emerged that the man whom she

had wanted to see in Hans Richter’s place towered high above the

other members of the orchestra. The tower might be described as a

composite picture formed by apposition. The lower part of its structure

represented the man’s greatness; the railing at the top, behind which

he was running round like a prisoner or an animal in a cage - this was

an allusion to the unhappy man’s name¹ - represented his ultimate

fate.  The  two  ideas  might  have  been  brought  together  in  the  word

‘Narrenturm’.²

    ¹[Footnote added 1925:] Hugo Wolf.

   ² [Literally ‘Fools’ Tower’ - an old term for an insane asylum.]

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        812

 

   Having thus discovered the mode of representation adopted by the

dream, we might attempt to use the same key for solving its second

apparent absurdity - the coal handed up to the dreamer by her sister.

‘Coal’ must mean  ‘secret love’:

 

                                                                Kein Feuer, keine Kohle
                                                                kann brennen so heiss
                                                                als wie heimliche Liebe,

                                                                von der niemand nichts weiss.¹

 

   She herself and her woman friend had been left unmarried. Her

younger sister, who still had prospects of marriage, handed her up the

coal ‘because she had not known it would be so long’. The dream did

not specify what would be so long. If it were a story, we should say

‘the performance’; but since it is a dream, we may take the phrase as

an independent entity, decide that it was used ambiguously and add

the words ‘before she got married.’  Our interpretation of ‘secret love’

is further supported by the mention of the dreamer’s cousin sitting with

his wife in the stalls, and by the open love-affair attributed to the latter.

The dream was dominated by the antithesis between secret and open

love  and  between  the  dreamer’s  own  fire  and  the  coldness  of  the

young  wife.  In  both  cases,  moreover,  there  was  someone  ‘highly-

placed’ - a term applying equally to the aristocrat and to the musician

on whom such high hopes had been pinned.

 

   ¹[ No fire, no coal

       So hotly glows
       As secret love
       Of which no one knows.]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        813 

 

   The foregoing discussion has led us at last to the discovery of a third

factor whose share in the transformation of the dream thoughts into

the dream-content is not to be underrated: namely, considerations of

representability  in  the  peculiar  psychical  material  of  which  dreams

make use  - for the most part, that is, representability in visual images.

Of the various subsidiary thoughts attached to the essential dream-

thoughts, those will be preferred which admit of visual representation;

and  the  dream-work  does  not  shrink  from  the  effort  of  recasting

unadaptable thoughts into a new verbal form - even into a less usual

one  -  provided  that  that  process  facilitates  representation  and  so

relieves  the  psychological  pressure  caused  by  constricted  thinking.

This pouring of the content of a thought into another mould may at the

same time serve the purposes of the activity of condensation and may

create  connections,  which  might  not  otherwise  have  been  present,

with some other thought; while this second thought itself may already

have  had  its  original  form  of  expression  changed,  with  a  view  to

meeting the first one half-way.

 

      Herbert  Silberer  (1909)  has  pointed  out  a  good  way  of  directly

observing the transformation of thoughts into pictures in the process of

forming dreams and so of studying this one factor of the dream-work

in isolation. If, when he was in a fatigued and sleepy condition, he set

himself some intellectual task, he found that it often happened that the

thought escaped him and that in its place a picture appeared, which

he was then able to recognize as a substitute for the thought. Silberer

describes these substitutes by the not very appropriate term of ‘auto-

symbolic.’ I will here quote a few examples from Silberer’s paper, and

I  shall  have  occasion,  on  account  of  certain  characteristics  of  the

phenomena concerned, to return to them later.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        814

 

    ‘Example 1. - I thought of having to revise an uneven passage in anessay.

    ‘Symbol. - I saw myself planing a piece of wood.’

    ‘Example 5. - I endeavoured to bring home to myself the aim of

certain  metaphysical  studies  which  I  was  proposing  to  make.  Their

aim, I reflected, was to work one’s way through to ever higher forms of

consciousness and layers of existence, in one’s search for the bases

of existence.

    ‘Symbol. - I was pushing a long knife under a cake, as though to lift

out a slice.

   ‘Interpretation. - My motion with the knife meant the "working my

way through" which was in question. . . . Here is the explanation of the

symbolism. It is from time to time my business at meals to cut up a

cake and distribute the helpings. I perform the task with a long, flexible

knife - which demands some care. In particular, to lift out the slices

cleanly  after  they  have  been  cut  offers  certain  difficulties;  the  knife

must be pushed carefully under the slice (corresponding to the slow

"working my way through" to reach the "bases"). But there is yet more

symbolism in the picture. For the cake in the symbol was a "Dobos"

cake - a cake with a number of "layers" through which, in cutting it, the

knife has to penetrate (the "layers" of consciousness and thought).’

   ‘Example 9. - I had lost the thread in a train of thought. I tried to find

it  again,  but  had  to  admit  that  the  starting-point  had  completely

escaped me.

   ‘Symbol. - Part of a compositor’s forme, with the last lines of type

fallen away.’

 

   In view of the part played by jokes, quotations, songs and proverbs

in  the  mental  life  of  educated  people,  it  would  fully  agree  with  our

expectations  if  disguises  of  such  kinds  were  used  with  extreme

frequency for representing dream-thoughts. What, for instance, is the

meaning in a dream of a number of carts, each filled with a different

sort  of  vegetable?  They  stand  for  a  wishful  contrast  to  ‘Kraut  und

Rüben’, that is to say to ‘higgledy-piggledy’, and accordingly signify

‘disorder.’ I am surprised that this dream has only been reported to me

once.¹ A dream-symbolism of universal validity has only emerged in

the case of a few subjects, on the basis of generally familiar allusions

and  verbal  substitutes.  Moreover  a  good  part  of  this  symbolism  isshared  by  dreams  with  psychoneuroses,  legends  and  popular

customs.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1925:] I have in fact never met with this image again; so I have lost

confidence in the correctness of the interpretation.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        815

 

      Indeed,  when  we  look  into  the  matter  more  closely,  we  must

recognize  the  fact  that  the  dream-work  is  doing  nothing  original  in

making substitutions of this kind. In order to gain its ends - in this case

the possibility of a representation hampered by censorship - it merely

follows the paths which it finds already laid down in the unconscious;

and  it  gives  preference  to  those  transformations  of  the  repressed

material  which  can  also  become  conscious  in  the  form  of  jokes  or

allusions and of which the phantasies of neurotic patients are so full.

At this point we suddenly reach an understanding of Scherner’s dream

interpretations,  whose  essential  correctness  I  have  defended

elsewhere. The imagination’s pre-occupation with the subject’s own

body is by no means peculiar to dreams or characteristic only of them.

My  analyses  have  shown  me  that  it  is  habitually  present  in  the

unconscious thoughts of neurotics, and that it is derived from sexual

curiosity, which, in growing youths or girls, is directed to the genitals of

the other sex, and to those of their own as well. Nor, as Scherner and

Volkelt  have  rightly  insisted,  is  a  house  the  only  circle  of  ideas

employed for symbolizing the body; and this is equally true of dreams

and of the unconscious phantasies of neurosis. It is true that I know

patients who have retained an architectural symbolism for the body

and the genitals. ( Sexual interest ranges far beyond the sphere of the

external genitalia.) For these patients pillars and columns represent

the legs (as they do in the Song of Solomon), every gateway stands

for one of the bodily orifices (a ‘hole’), every water-pipe is a reminder

of the urinary apparatus, and so on. But the circle of ideas centring

round plant-life or the kitchen may just as readily be chosen to conceal

sexual images.¹ In the former case the way has been well prepared by

linguistic usage, itself the precipitate of imaginative similes reachingback to remote antiquity: e.g. the Lord’s vineyard, the seed, and the

maiden’s garden in the Song of Solomon. The ugliest as well as the

most intimate details of sexual life may be thought and dreamt of in

seemingly  innocent  allusions  to  activities  in  the  kitchen;  and  the

symptoms  of  hysteria  could  never  be  interpreted  if  we  forgot  that

sexual  symbolism  can  find  its  best  hiding-place  behind  what  is

commonplace  and  inconspicuous.  There  is  a  valid  sexual  meaning

behind the neurotic child’s intolerance of blood or raw meat, or his

nausea at the sight of eggs or macaroni, and behind the enormous

exaggeration  in  neurotics  of  the  natural  human  dread  of  snakes.

Wherever  neuroses  make  use  of  such  disguises  they  are  following

paths  along  which  all  humanity  passed  in  the  earliest  periods  of

civilization  -  paths  of  whose  continued  existence  today,  under  the

thinnest  of  veils,  evidence  is  to  be  found  in  linguistic  usages,

superstitions and customs.

 

     ¹ [Footnote  added  1914:]  Abundant  evidence  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  three

supplementary volumes to Fuchs (1909-12).
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        816

 

   I will now append the ‘flowery’ dream dreamt by one of my women

patients which I have already promised to record. I have indicated in

small  capitals  those  elements  in  it  that  are  to  be  given  a  sexual

interpretation. The dreamer quite lost her liking for this pretty dream

after it had been interpreted.

   (a) INTRODUCTORY DREAM: She went into the kitchen where her two

maidservants were, and found fault with them for not having got her

‘bite  of  food’  ready.  At  the  same  time  she  saw  quite  a  quantity  of

crockery standing upside down to drain, common crockery piled up in

heaps. Later addition: The two maidservants went to fetch some water

and had to step into a kind of river which came right up to the house

into the yard.¹

   (b) MAIN DREAM ²: She was descending from a height³ over some

strangely constructed pallisades or fences, which were put together

                                                                                4
into large panels, and consisted of small squares of wattling. It wasnot intended for climbing over; she had trouble in finding a place to put

her feet in and felt glad that her dress had not been caught anywhere,

                                                                            5
so  that  she  had  stayed  respectable  as  she  went  along. She  was

                                          6
holding a BIG BRANCH in her hand ; actually, it was like a tree, covered

                                                                      7
over with RED BLOSSOMS, branching and spreading out. There was an

idea of their being cherry-BLOSSOMS; but they also looked like double

CAMELLIAS, though of course those do not grow on trees. As she went

                                                                                          8
down, first she had ONE, then suddenly TWO, and  later  again ONE.

When she got down, the lower BLOSSOMS were already a good deal

FADED. Then she saw, after she had got down, a manservant who -

she felt inclined to say - was combing a similar tree, that is to say, he

was using a similar PIECE OF WOOD to drag out some THICK TUFTS OF HAIR

that were hanging down from it like moss. Some other workmen had

cut down some similar BRANCHES from a GARDEN and thrown them into

the ROAD, where they LAY ABOUT, so that A LOT OF PEOPLE TOOK SOME. But

                                                                                          9
she asked whether that was alright - whether she might TAKE ONE TOO.

A young MAN (someone she knew, a stranger) was standing in the

garden; she went up to him to ask him how BRANCHES of that kind

                                                              10
could  be TRANSPLANTED  INTO  HER  OWN  GARDEN. He  embraced  her;

whereupon she struggled and asked him what he was thinking of and

whether he thought people could embrace her like that. He said there

                                              11
was no harm in that: it was allowed. He then said that he was willing

to go up into the OTHER GARDEN with her, to show her how the planting

was  done,  and  added  something  she  could  not  quite  understand:

‘Anyhow, I need three YARDS (later she gave it as: three square yards)

or three fathoms of ground.’ It was as though he were asking her for

something  in  return  for  his  willingness,  as  though  he  intended  to

COMPENSATE HIMSELF IN HER GARDEN, or as though he wanted to CHEAT

some law or other, to get some advantage from it without causing her

harm. Whether he really showed her something, she had no idea.

 

   ¹ For the interpretation of this introductory dream, which is to be interpreted as a causal

dependent clause, see p. 786.

   ² Describing the course of her life.

   ³ Her high descent: a wishful antithesis to the introductory dream.

4
    A composite picture, uniting two localities: what were known as the ‘attics’ of her family

home, where she used to play with her brother, the object of her later phantasies, and a farmbelonging to a bad uncle who used to tease her.
5
    A wishful antithesis to a real recollection of her uncle’s farm, where she used to throw off

her clothes in her sleep.
6
    Just as the angel carries a sprig of lilies in pictures of the Annunciation.

7
    For the explanation of this composite image see p. 789: innocence, menstruation, La

dame aux camélias.
8
    Referring to the multiplicity of the people involved in her phantasy

9
    That is whether she might pull one down, i. e. masturbate.

10
    The branch had long since come to stand for the male genital organ; incidentally it also

made a plain allusion to her family name.
11
    This, as well as what next follows, related to marriage precautions.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        817

 

   This dream, which I have brought forward on account of its symbolic

elements, may be described as a ‘biographical’ one. Dreams of this

kind occur frequently during psycho-analysis, but perhaps only rarely

outside it.¹

   I naturally have at my disposal a superfluity of material of this kind,

but  to  report  it  would  involve  us  too  deeply  in  a  consideration  of

neurotic conditions. It all leads to the same conclusion, namely that

there is no necessity to assume that any peculiar symbolizing activity

of the mind is operating in the dream-work, but that dreams make use

of  any  symbolizations  which  are  already  present  in  unconscious

thinking, because they fit in better with the requirements of dream-

construction on account of their representability and also because as

a rule they escape censorship.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1911:] A similar ‘biographical’ dream will be found below as the third of

my examples of dream-symbolism. Another one has been recorded at length by Rank, and
another, which must be read ‘in reverse’, by Stekel (1909, 486).
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        818

 

                                          (E) 

                        REPRESENTATION BY SYMBOLS IN DREAMS
                        - SOME FURTHER TYPICAL DREAMS

 

   The analysis of this last, biographical, dream is clear evidence that I

recognized  the  presence  of  symbolism  in  dreams  from  the  very

beginning.  But  it  was  only  by  degrees  and  as  my  experience

increased  that  I  arrived  at  a  full  appreciation  of  its  extent  and

significance, and I did so under the influence of the contributions of

Wilhelm Stekel (1911), about whom a few words will not be out of

place here.

   That writer, who has perhaps damaged psycho-analysis as much as

he has benefited it, brought forward a large number of unsuspected

translations of symbols; to begin with they were met with scepticism,

but  later  they  were  for  the  most  part  confirmed  and  had  to  be

accepted. I shall not be belittling the value of Stekel’s services if I add

that the sceptical reserve with which his proposals were received was

not without justification. For the examples by which he supported his

interpretations  were  often  unconvincing,  and  he  made  use  of  a

method which must be rejected as scientifically untrustworthy. Stekel

arrived at his interpretations of symbols by way of intuition, thanks to a

peculiar gift for the direct understanding of them. But the existence of

such  a  gift  cannot  be  counted  upon  generally,  its  effectiveness  is

exempt from all criticism and consequently its findings have no claim

to  credibility.  It  is  as  though  one  sought  to  base  the  diagnosis  of

infectious  diseases  upon  olfactory  impressions  received  at  the

patient’s bedside - though there have undoubtedly been clinicians who

could accomplish more than other people by means of the sense of

smell (which is usually atrophied) and were really able to diagnose a

case of enteric fever by smell.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        819

 

   Advances in psycho-analytic experience have brought to our notice

patients who have shown a direct understanding of dream-symbolism

of  this  kind  to  a  surprising  extent.  They  were  often  sufferers  fromdementia  praecox,  so  that  for  a  time  there  was  an  inclination  to

suspect  every  dreamer  who  had  this  grasp  of  symbols  of  being  a

victim of that disease. But such is not the case. It is a question of a

personal  gift  or  peculiarity  which  has  no  visible  pathological

significance.

   When we have become familiar with the abundant use made of

symbolism for representing sexual material in dreams, the question is

bound to arise of whether many of these symbols do not occur with a

permanently fixed meaning, like the ‘grammalogues’ in shorthand; and

we shall feel tempted to draw up a new ‘dream-book’ on the decoding

principle. On that point there is this to be said: this symbolism is not

peculiar to dreams, but is characteristic of unconscious ideation, in

particular among the people, and it is to be found in folklore, and in

popular  myths,  legends,  linguistic  idioms,  proverbial  wisdom  and

current jokes, to a more complete extent than in dreams.

      It  would  therefore  carry  us  far  beyond  the  sphere  of  dream-

interpretation if we were to do justice to the significance of symbols

and  discuss  the  numerous,  and  to  a  large  extent  still  unsolved,

problems  attaching  to  the  concept  of  a  symbol.¹  We  must  restrict

ourselves here to remarking that representation by a symbol is among

the indirect methods of representation, but that all kinds of indications

warn  us  against  lumping  it  in  with  other  forms  of  indirect

representation without being able to form any clear conceptual picture

of their distinguishing features. In a number of cases the element in

common  between  a  symbol  and  what  it  represents  is  obvious;  in

others it is concealed and the choice of the symbol seems puzzling. It

is precisely these latter cases which must be able to throw light upon

the ultimate meaning of the symbolic relation, and they indicate that it

is of a genetic character. Things that are symbolically connected to-

day  were  probably  united  in  prehistoric  times  by  conceptual  and

linguistic identity.²  The symbolic relation seems to be a relic and a

mark of former identity. In this connection we may observe how in a

number of cases the use of a common symbol extends further than

the  use  of  a  common  language,  as  was  already  pointed  out  by

Schubert (1814).³ A number of symbols are as old as language itself,

while others (e.g. ‘airship’, ‘Zeppelin’) are being coined continuously

down to the present time. 

    ¹ [Footnote added  1911:]  Cf.  the  works  of  Bleuler  and  of  his  Zurich  pupils,  Maeder,

Abraham], etc., on symbolism, and the non-medical writers to whom they refer (Kleinpaul,
etc.). [Added 1914:] What is most to the point on this subject will be found in Rank and Sachs
(1913, Chapter I). [Added 1925:] See further Jones (1916).

   ² [Footnote added 1925:] This view would be powerfully supported by a theory put forward

by Dr. Hans Sperber (1912). He is of the opinion that all primal words referred to sexual things
but afterwards lost their sexual meaning though being applied to other things and activities
which were compared with the sexual ones.

   ³ [Added 1914:] For instance, according to Ferenczi, a ship moving on the water occurs in

dreams of micturition in Hungarian dreamers, though the term ‘schiffen’ is unknown in that
language. (See also p. 829 f. below.) In dreams of speakers of French and other Romance
languages a room is used to symbolize a woman, though these languages have nothing akin
to the German expression ‘Frauenzimmer.’
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        820

 

   Dreams make use of this symbolism for the disguised representation

of  their  latent  thoughts.  Incidentally,  many  of  the  symbols  are

habitually or almost habitually employed to express the same thing.

Nevertheless,  the  peculiar  plasticity  of  the  psychical  material  must

never be forgotten. Often enough a symbol has to be interpreted in its

proper  meaning  and  not  symbolically;  while  on  other  occasions  a

dreamer may derive from his private memories the power to employ

as  sexual  symbols  all  kinds  of  things  which  are  not  ordinarily

employed as such. If a dreamer has a choice open to him between a

number  of  symbols,  he  will  decide  in  favour  of  the  one  which  is

connected  in  its  subject-matter  with  the  rest  of  the  material  of  his

thoughts  -  which,  that  is  to  say,  has  individual  grounds  for  its

acceptance in addition to the typical ones.

   Though the later investigations since the time of Scherner have

made  it  impossible  to  dispute  the  existence  of  dream  symbolism  -

even Havelock Ellis admits that there can be no doubt that our dreams

are full of symbolism - yet it must be confessed that the presence of

symbols  in  dreams  not  only  facilitates  their  interpretation  but  also

makes  it  more  difficult.  As  a  rule  the  technique  of  interpreting

according to the dreamer’s free associations leaves us in the lurch

when  we  come  to  the  symbolic  elements  in  the  dream-content.Regard  for  scientific  criticism  forbids  our  returning  to  the  arbitrary

judgement  of  the  dream-interpreter,  as  it  was  employed  in  ancient

times and seems to have been revived in the reckless interpretations

of Stekel. We are thus obliged, in dealing with those elements of the

dream-content  which  must  be  recognized  as  symbolic,  to  adopt  a

combined technique, which on the one hand rests on the dreamer’s

associations and on the other hand fills the gaps from the interpreter’s

knowledge of symbols. We must combine a critical caution in resolving

symbols  with  a  careful  study  of  them  in  dreams  which  afford

particularly clear instances of their use, in order to disarm any charge

of  arbitrariness  in  dream-interpretation.  The  uncertainties  which  still

attach to our activities as interpreters of dreams spring in part from our

incomplete knowledge, which can be progressively improved as we

advance  further,  but  in  part  from  certain  characteristics  of  dream-

symbols  themselves.  They  frequently  have  more  than  one  or  even

several  meanings,  and,  as  with  Chinese  script,  the  correct

interpretation  can  only  be  arrived  at  on  each  occasion  from  the

context. This ambiguity of the symbols links up with the characteristic

of dreams for admitting of ‘over-interpretation’ - for representing in a

single piece of content thoughts and wishes which are often widely

divergent in their nature.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        821

 

 

   Subject to these qualifications and reservations I will now proceed.

The Emperor and Empress (or the King and Queen) as a rule really

represent the dreamer’s parents; and a Prince or Princess represents

the  dreamer  himself  or  herself.  But  the  same  high  authority  is

attributed to great men as to the Emperor; and for that reason Goethe,

for  instance,  appears  as  a  father-symbol  in  some  dreams

(Hitschmann,  1913.)  -  All  elongated  objects,  such  as  sticks,  tree-

trunks and umbrellas (the opening of these last being comparable to

an erection) may stand for the male organ - as well as all long, sharp

weapons, such as knives, daggers and pikes. Another frequent thoughnot entirely intelligible symbol of the same thing is a nail-file - possibly

on  account  of  the  rubbing  up  and  down.  -  Boxes,  cases,  chests,

cupboards and ovens represent the uterus, and also hollow objects,

ships, and vessels of all kinds. - Rooms in dreams are usually women

(‘Frauenzimmer’);  if  the  various  ways  in  and  out  of  them  are

represented,  this  interpretation  is  scarcely  open  to  doubt.¹  In  this

connection interest in whether the room is open or locked is easily

intelligible. (Cf. Dora’s first dream in my ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a

Case of Hysteria’, 1905e.) There is no need to name explicitly the key

that unlocks the room; in his ballad of Count Eberstein, Uhland has

used the symbolism of locks and keys to construct a charming piece

of bawdry. - A dream of going through a suite of rooms is a brothel or

harem dream. But, as Sachs has shown by some neat examples, it

can also be used (by antithesis) to represent marriage. - We find an

interesting  link  with  the  sexual  researches  of  childhood  when  a

dreamer dreams of two rooms which were originally one, or when he

sees a familiar room divided into two in the dream, or vice versa. In

childhood the female genitals and the anus are regarded as a single

area - the ‘bottom’ (in accordance with the infantile ‘cloaca theory’);

and it is not until later that the discovery is made that this region of the

body comprises two separate cavities and orifices. - Steps, ladders or

staircases, or, as the case may be, walking up or down them, are

representations  of  the  sexual  act.²  -  Smooth  walls  over  which  the

dreamer climbs, the façades of houses, down which he lowers himself

- often in great anxiety - correspond to erect human bodies, and are

probably repeating in the dream recollections of a baby’s climbing up

his  parents  or  nurse.  The  ‘smooth’  walls  are  men;  in  his  fear  the

dreamer often clutches hold of ‘projections’ in the façades of houses.

Tables, tables laid for a meal, and boards also stand for women - no

doubt by antithesis, since the contours of their bodies are eliminated in

the symbols. ‘Wood’ seems, from its linguistic connections, to stand in

general  for  female  ‘material.’  The  name  of  the  Island  of  ‘Madeira’

means  ‘wood’  in  Portuguese.  Since  ‘bed  and  board’  constitute

marriage, the latter often takes the place of the former in dreams and

the sexual complex of ideas is, so far as may be, transposed on to the

eating complex. - As regards articles of clothing, a woman’s hat can

very  often  be  interpreted  with  certainty  as  a  genital  organ,  and,moreover,  as  a man’s.  The  same  is  true  of  an  overcoat  [German

‘Mantel’], though in this case it is not clear to what extent the use of

the symbol is due to a verbal assonance. In men’s dreams a necktie

often appears as a symbol for the penis. No doubt this is not only

because neckties are long, dependent objects and peculiar to men,

but also because they can be chosen according to taste - a liberty

which, in the case of the object symbolized, is forbidden by Nature.³

Men  who  make  use  of  this  symbol  in  dreams  are  often  very

extravagant in ties in real life and own whole collections of them. - It is

highly  probable  that  all  complicated  machinery  and  apparatus

occurring in dreams stand for the genitals (and as a rule male ones -

in describing which dream-symbolism is as indefatigable as the ‘joke-

work.’ Nor is there any doubt that all weapons and tools are used as

symbols for the male organ: e.g. ploughs, hammers, rifles, revolvers,

daggers, sabres, etc. - In the same way many landscapes in dreams,

especially  any  containing  bridges  or  wooded  hills,  may  clearly  be

recognized as descriptions of the genitals. Marcinowski has published

a collection of dreams illustrated by their dreamers with drawings that

ostensibly represent landscapes and other localities occurring in the

dreams. These drawings bring out very clearly the distinction between

a dream’s manifest and latent meaning. Whereas to the innocent eye

they appear as plans, maps, and so on, closer inspection shows that

they represent the human body, the genitals, etc., and only then do

the  dreams  become  intelligible.  (See  in  this  connection  Pfister’s

papers  on  cryptograms  and  puzzle-pictures.)  In  the  case  of

unintelligible neologisms, too, it is worth considering whether they may

not be put together from components with a sexual meaning. -Children

in  dreams  often  stand  for  the  genitals;  and,  indeed,  both  men  and

women are in the habit of referring to their genitals affectionately as

their ‘little ones.’ Stekel is right in recognizing a ‘little brother’ as the

penis.  Playing  with  a  little  child,  beating  it,  etc.,  often  represent

masturbation  in  dreams.  -  To  represent  castration  symbolically,  the

dream-work makes use of baldness, hair-cutting, falling out of teeth

and decapitation. If one of the ordinary symbols for a penis occurs in a

dream doubled or multiplied, it is to be regarded as a warding-off of

castration. The appearance in dreams of lizards - animals whose tails

grow again if they are pulled off - has the same significance. (Cf. thelizard-dream on p. 525 f.) - Many of the beasts which are used as

genital  symbols  in  mythology  and  folklore  play  the  same  part  in

dreams: e.g. fishes, snails, cats, mice (on account of the pubic hair),

and  above  all  those  most  important  symbols  of  the  male  organ  -

snakes.  Small  animals  and  vermin  represent  small  children  -  for

instance, undesired brothers and sisters. Being plagued with vermin is

often a sign of pregnancy. - A quite recent symbol of the male organ in

dreams  deserves  mention:  the  airship,  whose  use  in  this  sense  is

justified  by  its  connection  with  flying  as  well  as  sometimes  by  its

shape.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1919:] ‘One of my patients, who was living in a boarding-house, dreamt

that he met one of the maidservants and asked her what her number was. To his surprise she
answered: "14". He had in fact started a liason with this girl and had paid several visits to her
in  her  bedroom.  She  had  not  unnaturally  been  afraid  that  the  landlady  might  become
suspicious, and, on the day before the dream, she had proposed that they should meet in an
unoccupied room. This room was actually "No. 14", while in the dream it was the woman
herself  who  bore  this  number.  It  would  hardly  be  possible  to  imagine  clearer  proof  of  an
identification between a woman and a room.’ (Jones, 1914a.) Cf. Artemidorus, Oneirocritica,
Book II, Chapter X: ‘Thus, for instance, a bed chamber stands for a wife, if such there be in
the house.’ (Trans, F. S. Krauss, 1881, 110.)

   ² [Footnote added 1911:] I will repeat here what I have written on this subject elsewhere

(Freud, 1910d):  ‘A  little  time  ago  I  heard  that  a  psychologist  whose  views  are  somewhat
different from ours had remarked to one of us that, when all was said and done, we did
undoubtedly exaggerate the hidden sexual significance of dreams: his own commonest dream
was of going upstairs, and surely there could not be anything sexual in that. We were put on
the  alert  by  this  objection,  and  began  to  turn  our  attention  to  the  appearance  of  steps,
staircases and ladders in dreams, and were soon in a position to show that staircases (and
analogous things) were unquestionably symbols of copulation. It is not hard to discover the
basis of the comparison: we come to the top in a series of rhythmical movements and with
increasing breathlessness and then, with a few rapid leaps, we can get to the bottom again.
Thus the rhythmical pattern of copulation is reproduced in going upstairs. Nor must we omit to
bring in the evidence of linguistic usage. It shows us that "mounting" [German "steigen"] is
used as a direct equivalent for the sexual act. We speak of a man as a "Steiger" [a "mounter"]
and of "nachsteigen" ["to run after", literally "to climb after"]. In French the steps on a staircase
are  called  "marches"  and  "un  vieux  marcheur"  has  the  same  meaning  as  our  "ein  alter
Steiger" ["an old rake"].’

   ³ [Footnote added 1914:] Compare the drawing made by a nineteen-year-old manic patient

reproduced in Zbl. Psychoanal, 2, 675. It represents a man with a necktie consisting of a
snake which is turning in the direction of a girl. See also the story of ‘The Bashful Man’ in
Anthropophyteia, 6, 334: A lady went into a bathroom, and there she came upon a gentleman
who scarcely had time to put on his shirt. He was very much embarrassed, but hurriedly
covering his throat with the front part of his shirt, he exclaimed: ‘Excuse me, but I’ve not got
my necktie on.’
                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        822

 

   A number of other symbols have been put forward, with supporting

instances,  by  Stekel,  but  have  not  yet  been  sufficiently  verified.

Stekel’s  writings,  and  in  particular  his Die  Sprache  des  Traumes

(1911),  contain  the  fullest  collection  of  interpretations  of  symbols.

Many of these show penetration, and further examination has proved

them correct: for instance, his section on the symbolism of death. But

this author’s lack of a critical faculty and his tendency to generalization

at all costs throw doubts upon others of his interpretations or render

them  unusable;  so  that  it  is  highly  advisable  to  exercise  caution  in

accepting  his  conclusions.  I  therefore  content  myself  with  drawing

attention to only a few of his findings.

      According  to  Stekel,  ‘right’  and  ‘left’  in  dreams  have  an  ethical

sense. ‘The right-hand path always means the path of righteousness

and  the  left-hand  one  that  of  crime.  Thus  "left"  may  represent

homosexuality,  incest  or  perversion,  and  "right"  may  represent

marriage, intercourse with a prostitute and so on, always looked at

from the subject’s individual moral stand point.’ (Stekel, 1909, 466 ff.) -

Relatives in dreams usually play the part of genitals (ibid., 473). I can

only confirm this in the case of sons, daughters and younger sisters -

that is only so far as they fall into the category of ‘little ones.’ On the

other  hand  I  have  come  across  undoubted  cases  in  which  ‘sisters’

symbolized the breasts and ‘brothers’ the larger hemispheres. -Stekel

explains failing to catch up with a carriage as regret at a difference in

age which cannot be caught up with (ibid., 479). - Luggage that one

travels with is a load of sin, he says, that weighs one down (loc. cit.).

But precisely luggage often turns out to be an unmistakable symbol of

the  dreamer’s  own  genitals.  -  Stekel  also  assigns  fixed  symbolic

meanings  to  numbers,  such  as  often  appear  in  dreams.  But  these

explanations  seem  neither  sufficiently  verified  nor  generally  valid,

though  his  interpretations  usually  appear  plausible  in  the  individual

cases. In any case the number three has been confirmed from many

sides as a symbol of the male genitals.

      One  of  the  generalizations  put  forward  by  Stekel  concerns  the

double significance of genital symbols. ‘Where’, he asks, ‘is there asymbol which - provided that the imagination by any means admits of

it - cannot be employed both in a male and in a female sense?’ In any

case the clause in parenthesis removes much of the certainty from

this assertion, since in fact the imagination does not always admit of it.

But I think it is worth while remarking that in my experience Stekel’s

generalization  cannot  be  maintained  in  the  face  of  the  greater

complexity of the facts. In addition to symbols which can stand with

equal frequency for the male and for the female genitals, there are

some  which  designate  one  of  the  sexes  predominantly  or  almost

exclusively, and yet others which are known only with a male or a

female meaning. For it is a fact that the imagination does not admit of

long, stiff objects and weapons being used as symbols of the female

genitals,  or  of  hollow  objects,  such  as  chests,  cases,  boxes,  etc.,

being used as symbols for the male ones. It is true that the tendency

of dreams and of unconscious phantasies to employ sexual symbols

bisexually  betrays  an  archaic  characteristic;  for  in  childhood  the

distinction between the genitals of the two sexes is unknown and the

same kind of genitals are attributed to both of them. But it is possible,

too,  to  be  misled  into  wrongly  supposing  that  a  sexual  symbol  is

bisexual,  if  one  forgets  that  in  some  dreams  there  is  a  general

inversion of sex, so that what is male is represented as female and

vice versa. Dreams of this kind may, for instance, express a woman’s

wish to be a man.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        823

 

   The genitals can also be represented in dreams by other parts of the

body: the male organ by a hand or a foot and the female genital orifice

by the mouth or an ear or even an eye. The secretions of the human

body - mucus, tears, urine, semen, etc. - can replace one another in

dreams. This last assertion of Stekel’s, which is on the whole correct,

has  been  justifiably  criticized  by  Reitler  (1913b)  as  requiring  some

qualification: what in fact happens is that significant secretions, such

as semen, are replaced by indifferent ones.

    It is to be hoped that these very incomplete hints may serve to

encourage others to undertake a more painstaking general study of

the subject.¹ I myself have attempted to give a more elaborate account

of dream-symbolism in my Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis

(1916-17).

   I shall now append a few examples of the use of these symbols in

dreams, with the idea of showing how impossible it becomes to arrive

at the interpretation of a dream if one excludes dream-symbolism, and

how irresistibly one is driven to accept it in many cases. At the same

time, however, I should like to utter an express warning against over-

estimating the importance of symbols in dream-interpretation, against

restricting  the  work  of  translating  dreams  merely  to  translating

symbols and against abandoning the technique of making use of the

dreamer’s  associations.  The  two  techniques  of  dream-interpretation

must  be  complementary  to  each  other;  but  both  in  practice  and  in

theory the first place continues to be held by the procedure which I

began by describing and which attributes a decisive significance to the

comments made by the dreamer, while the translation of symbols, as I

have explained it, is also at our disposal as an auxiliary method.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1911:] However much Scherner’s view of dream-symbolism may differ

from the one developed in these pages, I must insist that he is to be regarded as the true
discoverer of symbolism in dreams, and that the investigations of psycho-analysis have at last
brought recognition to his book, published as it was so many years ago (in 1861), and for so
long regarded as fantastic.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        824

 

                                            I

 

              A HAT AS A SYMBOL OF A MAN (OR OF MALE GENITALS)

 

      (Extract  from  the  dream  of  a  young  woman  suffering  from

agoraphobia as a result of fears of seduction.)

   ‘I was walking in the street in the summer, wearing a straw hat of

peculiar shape; its middle-piece was bent upwards and its side-pieces

hung downwards’ (the description became hesitant at this point) ‘insuch a way that one side was lower than the other. I was cheerful and

in a self-confident frame of mind; and, as I passed a group of young

officers, I thought: "None of you can do me any harm!"'

      Since  nothing  occurred  to  her  in  connection  with  the  hat  in  the

dream, I said: ‘No doubt the hat was a male genital organ, with its

middle-piece sticking up and its two side-pieces hanging down. It may

seem  strange,  perhaps,  that  a  hat  should  be  a  man,  but  you  will

remember the phrase "Unter die Haube kommen" ["to find a husband"

(literally  "to  come  under  the  cap")].’  I  intentionally  gave  her  no

interpretation of the detail about the two side-pieces hanging down

unevenly; though it is precisely details of this kind that must point the

way in determining an interpretation. I went on to say that as she had

a husband with such fine genitals there was no need for her to be

afraid of the officers - no need, that is, for her to wish for anything from

them,  since  as  a  rule  she  was  prevented  from  going  for  a  walk

unprotected  and  unaccompanied  owing  to  her  phantasies  of  being

seduced. I had already been able to give her this last explanation of

her anxiety on several occasions upon the basis of other material.

   The way in which the dreamer reacted to this material was most

remarkable. She withdrew her description of the hat and maintained

that she had never said that the two side-pieces hung down. I was too

certain of what I had heard to be led astray, and stuck to my guns.

She was silent for a while and then found enough courage to ask what

was meant by one of her husband’s testes hanging down lower than

the other and whether it was the same in all men. In this way the

remarkable  detail  of  the  hat  was  explained  and  the  interpretation

accepted by her.

   At the time my patient told me this dream I had long been familiar

with  the  hat-symbol.  Other,  less  transparent  cases  had  led  me  to

suppose that a hat can also stand for female genitals.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1911:] Cf. an example of this in Kirchgraber (1912). Stekel (1909, 475)

records  a  dream  in  which  a  hat  with  a  feather  standing  up  crooked  in  the  middle  of  it
symbolized an (impotent) man.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        825 

                                            II

 

                      A ‘LITTLE ONE’ AS THE GENITAL ORGAN -
            ‘BEING RUN OVER’ AS A SYMBOL OF SEXUAL INTERCOURSE

 

            (Another dream of the same agoraphobic patient.)

 

   Her mother sent her little daughter away, so that she had to go by

herself. Then she went in a train with her mother and saw her little one

walk straight on to the rails so that she was bound to be run over. She

heard  the  cracking  of  her  bones.  (This  produced  an  uncomfortable

feeling in her but no real horror.) Then she looked round out of the

window of the railway-carriage to see whether the parts could no be

seen behind. Then she reproached her mother for having made the

little one go by herself.

   ANALYSIS. - It is no easy matter to give a complete interpretation of

the dream. It formed part of a cycle of dreams and can only be fully

understood  if  it  is  taken  in  connection  with  the  others.  There  is

difficulty in obtaining in sufficient isolation the material necessary for

establishing the symbolism. - In the first place, the patient declared

that the train journey was to be interpreted historically, as an allusion

to a journey she had taken when she was leaving a sanatorium for

nervous diseases, with whose director, needless to say, she had been

in  love.  Her  mother  had  fetched  her  away,  and  the  doctor  had

appeared at the station and handed her a bouquet of flowers as a

parting  present.  It  had  been  very  awkward  that  her  mother  should

have witnessed this tribute. At this point, then, her mother figured as

interfering with her attempts at a love affair; and this had in fact been

the part played by that severe lady during the patient’s girlhood. - Her

next  association  related  to  the  sentence:  ‘she  looked  round  to  see

whether the parts could not be seen from behind.’ The façade of the

dream  would  of  course  lead  one  to  think  of  the  parts  of  her  little

daughter who had been run over and mangled. But her association led

in quite another direction. She recollected having once seen her father

naked  in  the  bath  room  from  behind;  she  went  on  to  talk  of  the

distinctions  between  the  sexes,  and  laid  stress  on  the  fact  that  a

man’s genitals can be seen even from behind but a woman’s cannot.In this connection she herself interpreted ‘the little one’ as meaning

the genitals and ‘her little one’ - she had a four-year-old daughter - as

her own genitals. She reproached her mother with having expected

her to live as though she had no genitals, and pointed out that the

same reproach was expressed in the opening sentence of the dream:

‘her mother sent her little one away, so that she had to go by herself.’

In her imagination ‘going by herself in the streets’ meant not having a

man, not having any sexual relations (‘coire’ in Latin means literally ‘to

go with’) - and she disliked that. Her accounts all went to show that

when  she  was  a  girl  she  had  in  fact  suffered  from  her  mother’s

jealousy owing to the preference shown her by her father.

      The  deeper  interpretation  of  this  dream  was  shown  by  another

dream of the same night, in which the dreamer identified herself with

her brother. She had actually been a boyish girl, and had often been

told  that  she  should  have  been  a  boy.  This  identification  with  her

brother made it particularly clear that ‘the little one’ meant a genital

organ. Her mother was threatening him (or her) with castration, which

could only have been a punishment for playing with her penis; thus the

identification also proved that she herself had masturbated as a child -

a memory which till then she had only had as applied to her brother.

The information supplied by the second dream showed that she must

have come to know about the male organ at an early age and have

afterwards  forgotten  it.  Further,  the  second  dream  alluded  to  the

infantile  sexual  theory  according  to  which  girls  are  boys  who  have

been  castrated.  When  I  suggested  to  her  that  she  had  had  this

childish belief, she at once confirmed the fact by telling me that she

had heard the anecdote of the little boy’s saying to the little girl: ‘Cut

off?’ and of the little girl’s replying: ‘No, always been like that.’

   Thus the sending away of the little one (of the genital organ) in the

first dream was also related to the threat of castration. Her ultimate

complaint against her mother was for not having given birth to her as a

boy.

   The fact that ‘being run over’ symbolizes sexual intercourse would

not be obvious from this dream, though it has been confirmed from

many other sources.

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        826

 

                                            III

 

        THE GENITALS REPRESENTED BY BUILDINGS, STAIRS AND SHAFTS

 

     He  was  going  for  a  walk  with  his  father  in  a  place  which  must

certainly  have  been  the  Prater,  since  he  saw  the ROTUNDA, with  a

SMALL ANNEX IN FRONT OF IT to which A CAPTIVE BALLOON was attached,

though it looked rather LIMP. His father asked him what all this was for;

he  was  surprised  at  his  asking,  but  explained  it  to  him.  Then  they

came into a courtyard which had a large sheet laid out in it. His father

wanted to PULL OFF a large piece of it, but first looked around to see if

anyone was watching. He told him that he need only tell the foreman

and he could take some without any bother. A STAIRCASE led down from

this  yard  into A  SHAFT, whose  walls  were  cushioned  in  some  soft

material, rather like a leather armchair. A the end of the shaft was a

longish platform and then another SHAFT started . . .

     ANALYSIS.  -This  dreamer  belonged  to  a  type  whose  therapeutic

prospects  are  not  favourable:  up  to  a  certain  point  they  offer  no

resistance  at  all  to  analysis,  but  from  then  onwards  turn  out  to  be

almost inaccessible. He interpreted this dream almost unaided. ‘The

Rotunda’, he said, ‘was my genitals and the captive balloon in front of

it was my penis, whose limpness I have reason to complain of.’ Going

into greater detail, then, we may translate the Rotunda as the bottom

(habitually regarded by children as part of the genitals) and the small

annex in front of it as the scrotum. His father asked him in the dream

what all this was, that is, what was the purpose and function of the

genitals.  It  seemed  plausible  to  reverse  this  situation  and  turn  the

dreamer into the questioner. Since he had in fact never questioned his

father in this way, we had to look upon the dream-thought as a wish,

or take it as a conditional clause, such as: ‘If I had asked my father for

sexual enlightenment. . .’ We shall presently find the continuation of

this thought in another part of the dream.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams                                                                                        827

 

   The courtyard in which the sheet of tin was spread out is not to be

taken  symbolically  in  the  first  instance.  It  was  derived  from  the

business premises of the dreamer’s father. For reasons of discretion I

have substituted ‘tin’ for another material in which his father actually

dealt: but I have made no other change in the wording of the dream.

The dreamer had entered his father’s business and had taken violent

objection  to  the  somewhat  dubious  practices  on  which  the  firm’s

earnings in part depended. Consequently the dream-thought I have

just interpreted may have continued in this way: ‘(If I had asked him),

he would have deceived me just as he deceives his customers.’ As

regards  the  ‘pulling  off’  which  served  to  represent  his  father’s

dishonesty  in  business,  the  dreamer  himself  produced  a  second

explanation - namely that it stood for masturbating. Not only was I

already familiar with this interpretation (see p. 817 n. above), but there

was  something  to  confirm  it  in  the  fact  that  the  secret  nature  of

masturbation was represented by its reverse: it might be done openly.

Just as we should expect, the masturbatory activity was once again

displaced on to the dreamer’s father, like the questioning in the first

scene of the dream. He promptly interpreted the shaft as a vagina,

having regard to the soft cushioning of its walls. I added from my own

knowledge derived elsewhere that climbing down, like climbing up in

other  cases,  described  sexual  intercourse  in  the  vagina.  (See  my

remarks, quoted above, p. 821 n.)

   The dreamer himself gave a biographical explanation of the fact that

the first shaft was followed by a longish platform and then by another

shaft. He had practised intercourse for a time but had then given it up

on account of inhibitions, and he now hoped to be able to resume it by

the  help  of  the  treatment.  The  dream  became  more  indistinct,

however, towards the end, and it must seem probable to anyone who

is familiar with these things that the influence of another topic was

already making itself felt in the second scene of the dream, and was

hinted at by the father’s business, by his deceitful conduct and by the

interpretation  of  the  first  shaft  as  a  vagina:  all  this  pointed  to  a

connection with the dreamer’s mother.

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        828

 

                                            IV

 

              THE MALE ORGAN REPRESENTED BY PERSONS AND THE
                          FEMALE ORGAN BY A LANDSCAPE

 

    (The dream of an uneducated woman whose husband was a

                      policeman, reported by B. Dattner.)

   ‘ . . . Then someone broke into the house and she was frightened

and called out for a policeman. But he had quietly gone into a church

¹, to which a number of steps ² led up, accompanied by two tramps.

                                                                                    4
Behind the church there was a hill ³ and above it a thick wood. The

                                                                            5
policeman was dressed in a helmet, brass collar and cloak. He had a

brown  beard.  The  two  tramps,  who  went  along  peaceably  with  the

                                                                            6
policeman, had sack-like aprons tied around their middles.In front of

the church a path led up to the hill; on both sides of it there grew grass

and brushwood, which became thicker and thicker and, at the top of

the hill, turned into a regular wood.’

 

                                            V

 

                        DREAMS OF CASTRATION IN CHILDREN

 

   (a) A boy aged three years and five months, who obviously disliked

the idea of his father’s returning from the front, woke up one morning

in  a  disturbed  and  excited  state.  He  kept  on  repeating:  ‘Why  was

Daddy carrying his head on a plate? Last night Daddy was carrying

his head on a plate.’

      (b)  A  student  who  is  now  suffering  from  a  severe  obsessional

neurosis  remembers  having  repeatedly  had  the  following  dream

during his sixth year: He went to the hairdresser’s to have his hair cut.

A big, severe-looking woman came up to him and cut his head off. He

recognized the woman as his mother.

 

   ¹ ‘Or chapel (= vagina).’

   ² ‘Symbol of copulation.’   ³ ‘Mons veneris.’

4
    ‘Pubic hair.’

5
    ‘According to an expert, demons in cloaks and hoods are of a phallic character.’

6
    ‘The two halves of the scrotum.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        829

 

                                            VI

 

                                  URINARY SYMBOLISM

 

      The  series  of  drawings  were  found  by  Ferenczi  in  a  Hungarian

comic paper called Fidibusz, and he at once saw how well they could

be  used  to  illustrate  the  theory  of  dreams.  Otto  Rank  has  already

reproduced them in a paper (1912a).

   The drawings bear the title ‘A French Nurse’s Dream’; but it is only

the  last  picture,  showing  the  nurse  being  woken  up  by  the  child’s

screams, that tells us that the seven previous pictures represent the

phases of a dream. The first picture depicts the stimulus which should

have caused the sleeper to wake: the little boy has become aware of a

need and is asking for help in dealing with it. But in the dream the

dreamer, instead of being in the bedroom, is taking the child for a

walk. In the second picture she has already led him to a street corner

where he is micturating - and she can go on sleeping. But the arousal

stimulus continues; indeed, it increases. The little boy, finding he is not

being attended to, screams louder and louder. The more imperiously

he  insists  upon  his  nurse  waking  up  and  helping  him,  the  more

insistent becomes the dream’s assurance that everything is all right

and that there is no need for her to wake up. At the same time, the

dream  translates  the  increasing  stimulus  into  the  increasing

dimensions  of  its  symbols.  The  stream  of  water  produced  by  the

micturating boy becomes mightier and mightier. In the fourth picture it

is  already  large  enough  to  float  a  rowing  boat;  but  there  follow  a

gondola, a sailing-ship and finally a liner. The ingenious artist has in

this way cleverly depicted the struggle between an obstinate craving

for sleep and an inexhaustible stimulus towards waking. 


































 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        830

 

                                            VII

 

                                A STAIRCASE DREAM

                   (Reported and Interpreted by Otto Rank.)

 

   ‘I have to thank a colleague to whom I owe the dream with a dental-

stimulus for an equally transparent emission dream:

   ‘"I was running down the staircase in pursuit of a little girl who had

done something to me, in order to punish her. At the foot of the stairs

someone (a grown-up woman?) stopped the child for me. I caught

hold of her; but I don’t know whether I hit her, for I suddenly found

myself in the middle of the staircase copulating with the child (as it

were in the air). It was not a real copulation; I was only rubbing my

genitals against her external genitals, and while I did so I saw them

extremely distinctly, as well as her head, which was turned upwards

and sideways. During the sexual act I saw hanging above me to my

left  (also  as  it  were  in  the  air)  two  small  paintings  -  landscapes

representing  a  house  surrounded  by  trees.  At  the  bottom  of  the

smaller of these, instead of the painter’s signature, I saw my own first

name, as though it were intended as a birthday-present for me. Then I

saw a label in front of the two pictures, which said that the cheaper

pictures were also to be had. (I then saw myself very indistinctly as

though I were lying in bed on the landing) and I was woken up by the

feeling of wetness caused by the emission I had had."

   ‘INTERPRETATION. -On the evening of the dream-day the dreamer had

been in a book-shop, and as he was waiting to be attended to he had

looked  at  some  pictures  which  were  on  view  there  and  which

represented subjects similar to those in the dream. He went up close

to one small picture which had particularly pleased him, to look at the

artist’s name - but it had been quite unknown to him.

   ‘Later the same evening, when he was with some friends, he had

heard  a  story  of  a  Bohemian  servant-girl  who  boasted  that  her

illegitimate  child  had  been  "made  on  the  stairs."  The  dreamer  had

enquired the details of this rather unusual event and had learnt that

the  servant-girl  had  gone  home  with  her  admirer  to  her  parents’

house, where there had been no opportunity for sexual intercourse,

and in his excitement the man had copulated with her on the stairs.

The dreamer had made a joking allusion to a malicious expression

used to describe adulterated wines, and had said that in fact the child

came of a "cellar-stair vintage". 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        831

 

   ‘So much for the connections with the previous day, which appeared

with some insistence in the dream-content and were reproduced by

the dreamer without any difficulty. But he brought up no less easily an

old fragment of infantile recollection which had also found its use in

the dream. The staircase belonged to the house where he had spent

the greater part of his childhood and, in particular, where he had first

made  conscious  acquaintance  with  the  problems  of  sex.  He  had

frequently played on this staircase and, among other things, used to

slide down the banisters, riding astride on them - which had given him

sexual  feelings.  In  the  dream,  too,  he  rushed  down  the  stairs

extraordinarily fast - so fast, indeed, that, according to his own specific

account, he did not put his feet down on the separate steps but "flew"

down  them,  as  people  say.  If  the  infantile  experience  is  taken  into

account,  the  beginning  part  of  the  dream  seems  to  represent  the

factor of sexual excitement. - But the dreamer had also often romped

in a sexual way with the neighbours’ children on this same staircase

and in the adjacent building, and had satisfied his desires in just the

same way as he did in the dream.

   ‘If we bear in mind that Freud’s researches into sexual symbolism

(1910d) have shown that stairs and going upstairs in dreams almost

invariably stand for copulation, the dream becomes quite transparent.

Its motive force, as indeed was shown by its outcome - an emission -

was of a purely libidinal nature. The dreamer’s sexual excitement was

awakened during his sleep - this being represented in the dream by

his  rushing  down  the  stairs.  The  sadistic  element  in  the  sexual

excitement, based on the romping in childhood, was indicated by the

pursuit  and  overpowering  of  the  child.  The  libidinal  excitement

increased  and  pressed  towards  sexual  action  -  represented  in  the

dream by his catching hold of the child and conveying it to the middle

of  the  staircase.  Up  to  that  point  the  dream  was  only symbolically

sexual and would have been quite unintelligible to any inexperienced

dream-interpreter.  But  symbolic  satisfaction  of  that  kind  was  notenough to guarantee a restful sleep, in view of the strength of the

libidinal excitation. The excitation led to an orgasm and thus revealed

the fact that the whole staircase-symbolism represented copulation. -

The  present  dream  offers  a  specially  clear  confirmation  of  Freud’s

view that one of the reasons for the use of going upstairs as a sexual

symbol is the rhythmical character of both activities: for the dreamer

expressly stated that the most clearly defined element in the whole

dream was the rhythm of the sexual act and its up and down motion.

   ‘I must add a word with regard to the two pictures which, apart from

their real meaning, also figured in a symbolic sense as "Weibsbilder".

This was shown at once by there being a large picture and a small

picture, just as a large (or grown-up) girl and a small one appeared in

the dream. The fact that "cheaper pictures were also to be had" led to

the prostitute complex; while on the other hand the appearance of the

dreamer’s first name on the small picture and the idea of its being

intended  as  a  birthday  present  for  him  were  hints  at  the  parental

complex. ("Born on the stairs" = "begotten by copulation".)

   ‘The indistinct final scene, in which the dreamer saw himself lying in

bed  on  the  landing  and  had  a  feeling  of  wetness,  seems  to  have

pointed the way beyond infantile masturbation still further back into

childhood  and  to  have  had  its  prototype  in  similarly  pleasurable

scenes of bed-wetting.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        832

 

                                            VIII

 

                          A MODIFIED STAIRCASE DREAM

 

   One of my patients, a man whose sexual abstinence was imposed

on him by a severe neurosis, and whose phantasies were fixed upon

his mother, had repeated dreams of going upstairs in her company. I

once remarked to him that a moderate amount of masturbation would

probably do him less harm than his compulsive self-restraint, and this

provoked the following dream:

   His piano-teacher reproached him for neglecting his piano-playing,and for not practising Mocheles’ ‘Etudes’ and Clementi’s ‘Gradus ad

Parnassum.’

   By way of comment, he pointed out that ‘Gradus’ are also ‘steps’;

and that the key-board itself is a staircase, since it contains scales.

   It is fair to say that there is no group of ideas that is incapable of

representing sexual facts and wishes.

 

                                            IX

 

      THE FEELING OF REALITY AND THE REPRESENTATION OF REPETITION

 

   A man who is now thirty-five years old reported a dream which he

remembered clearly and claimed to have had at the age of four. The

lawyer who had charge of his father’s will - he had lost his father when

he was three - brought two large pears. He was given one of them to

eat; the other lay on the window-sill in the sitting-room. He awoke with

a conviction of the reality of what he had dreamt and kept obstinately

asking his mother for the second pear, and insisted that it was on the

window-sill. His mother had laughed at this.

   ANALYSIS. -The lawyer was a jovial old gentleman who, the dreamer

seemed to remember, had really once brought some pears along. The

window-sill was as he had seen it in the dream. Nothing else occurred

to him in connection with it - only that his mother had told him a dream

shortly before. She had had two birds sitting on her head and had

asked herself when they would fly away; they did not fly away, but one

of them flew to her mouth and sucked at it.

   The failure of the dreamer’s associations gave us a right to attempt

an interpretation by symbolic substitution. The two pears - ‘pommes

ou  poires’  -  were  his  mother’s  breasts  which  had  given  him

nourishment; the window-sill was the projection formed by her bosom

- like balconies in dreams of houses (see p. 821). His feeling of reality

after waking was justified, for his mother had really suckled him, and

had  done  so,  in  fact,  for  far  longer  than  the  usual  time  and  his

mother’s  breast  was  still  available  to  him.  The  dream  must  be

translated: ‘Give (or show) me your breast again, Mother, that I used

to drink from in the past.’ ‘In the past’ was represented by his eating

one of the pears; ‘again’ was represented by his longing for the other.

The temporal repetition of an act is regularly shown in dreams by thenumerical multiplication of an object.

   It is most remarkable, of course, that symbolism should already be

playing a part in the dream of a four-year-old child. But this is the rule

and not the exception. It may safely be asserted that dreamers have

symbolism at their disposal from the very first.

   The following uninfluenced recollection by a lady who is now twenty-

seven shows at what an early age symbolism is employed outside

dream-life as well as inside it. She was between three and four years

old.  Her  nurse-maid  took  her  to  the  lavatory  along  with  a  brother

eleven  months  her  junior  and  a  girl  cousin  of  an  age  between  the

other two, to do their small business before going out for a walk. Being

the eldest, she sat on the seat, while the other two sat on chambers.

She asked her cousin: ‘Have you got a purse too? Walter’s got a little

sausage; I’ve got a purse.’ Her cousin replied: ‘Yes, I’ve got a purse

too.’ The nurse-maid heard what they said with much amusement and

reported the conversation to the children’s mother, who reacted with a

sharp reprimand.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        833

 

 

      I  will  here  interpolate  a  dream  (recorded  in  a  paper  by  Alfred

Robitsek, 1912) in which the beautifully chosen symbolism made an

interpretation possible with only slight assistance from the dreamer.

 

                                            X

 

      ‘THE QUESTION OF SYMBOLISM IN THE DREAMS OF NORMAL PERSONS’

 

   ‘One objection which is frequently brought forward by opponents of

psycho-analysis, and which has lately been voiced by Havelock Ellis

(1911, 168), argues that though dream-symbolism may perhaps occur

as  a  product  of  the  neurotic  mind,  it  is  not  to  be  found  in  normal

persons. Now psycho-analytic research finds no fundamental, but only

quantitative, distinctions between normal and neurotic life; and indeed

the analysis of dreams, in which repressed complexes are operativealike in the healthy and the sick, shows a complete identity both in

their  mechanisms  and  in  their  symbolism.  The  naive  dreams  of

healthy  people  actually  often  contain  a  much  simpler,  more

perspicuous  and  more  characteristic  symbolism  than  those  of

neurotics; for in the latter, as a result of the more powerful workings of

the  censorship  and  of  the  consequently  more  far-reaching  dream-

distortion, the symbolism may be obscure and hard to interpret. The

dream recorded below will serve to illustrate this fact. It was dreamt by

a girl who is not neurotic but is of a somewhat prudish and reserved

character. In the course of conversation with her I learnt that she was

engaged,  but  that  there  were  some  difficulties  in  the  way  of  her

marriage which were likely to lead to its postponement. Of her own

accord she told me the following dream.

   ‘"I arrange the centre of a table with flowers for a birthday." In reply

to a question she told me that in the dream she seemed to be in her

own home (where she was not at present living) and had "a feeling of

happiness."

   ‘"Popular" symbolism made it possible for me to translate the dream

unaided. It was an expression of her bridal wishes: the table with its

floral  centre-piece  symbolized  herself  and  her  genitals;  she

represented her wishes for the future as fulfilled, for her thoughts were

already occupied with the birth of a baby; so her marriage lay a long

way behind her.

   ‘I pointed out to her that "the ‘centre’ of a table" was an unusual

expression (which she admitted), but I could not of course question

her further directly on that point. I carefully avoided suggesting the

meaning of the symbols to her, and merely asked her what came into

her head in connection with the separate parts of the dream. In the

course of the analysis her reserve gave place to an evident interest in

the  interpretation  and  to  an  openness  made  possible  by  the

seriousness of the conversation.

      ‘When  I  asked  what  flowers  they  had  been,  her  first  reply  was:

"expensive flowers; one has to pay for them," and then that they had

been "lilies of the valley, violets and pinks or carnations." I assumed

that the word "lily" appeared in the dream in its popular sense as a

symbol of chastity; she confirmed this assumption, for her association

to "lily" was "purity". "Valley" is a frequent female symbol in dreams;so  that  the  chance  combination  of  the  two  symbols  in  the  English

name of the flower was used in the dream-symbolism to stress the

preciousness of her virginity - "expensive flowers, one has to pay for

them" - and to express her expectation that her husband would know

how to appreciate its value. The phrase "expensive flowers, etc.”, as

will be seen, had a different meaning in the case of each of the three

flower-symbols.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        834

 

   ‘"Violets" was ostensibly quite asexual; but, very boldly, as it seemed

to me, I thought I could trace a secret meaning for the word in an

unconscious link with the French word "viol" ["rape"]. To my surprise

the dreamer gave as an association the English word "violate". The

dream had made use of the great chance similarity between the words

"violet" and "violate" - the difference in their pronunciation lies merely

in the different stress upon their final syllables - in order to express "in

the language of flowers" the dreamer’s thoughts on the violence of

defloration (another term that employs flower symbolism) and possibly

also  a  masochistic  trait  in  her  character.  A  pretty  instance  of  the

"verbal bridges" crossed by the paths leading to the unconscious. The

words "one has to pay for them" signified having to pay with her life for

being a wife and a mother.

   ‘In connection with "pinks", which she went on to call "carnations", I

thought  of  the  connection  between  that  word  and  "carnal."  But  the

dreamer’s association to it was "colour". She added that "carnations"

were the flowers which her fiancé gave her frequently and in great

numbers. At the end of her remarks she suddenly confessed of her

own accord that she had not told the truth: what had occurred to her

had not been "colour" but "incarnation"  -  the  word  I  had  expected.

Incidentally "colour" itself was not a very remote association, but was

determined  by  the  meaning  of  "carnation"  (flesh-colour)  -  was

determined,  that  is,  by  the  same  complex.  This  lack  of

straightforwardness showed that it was at this point that resistance

was greatest, and corresponded to the fact that this was where thesymbolism was most clear and that the struggle between libido and its

repression was at its most intense in relation to this phallic theme. The

dreamer’s comment to the effect that her fiancé frequently gave her

flowers of that kind was an indication not only of the double sense of

the word: carnation" but also of their phallic meaning in the dream.

The gift of flowers, an exciting factor of the dream derived from her

current life, was used to express an exchange of sexual gifts: she was

making a gift of her virginity and expected a full emotional and sexual

life in return for it. At this point, too, the words "expensive flowers, one

has to pay for them" must have had what was no doubt literally a

financial meaning. -Thus the flower symbolism in this dream included

virginal  femininity,  masculinity  and  an  allusion  to  defloration  by

violence. It is worth pointing out in this connection that sexual flower

symbolism,  which,  indeed,  occurs  very  commonly  in  other

connections, symbolizes the human organs of sex by blossoms, which

are the sexual organs of plants. It may perhaps be true in general that

gifts of flowers between lovers have this unconscious meaning.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        835

 

   ‘The birthday for which she was preparing in the dream meant, no

doubt, the birth of a baby. She was identifying herself with her fiancé,

and was representing him as "arranging" her for a birth - that is, as

copulating with her. The latent thought may have run: "If I were he, I

wouldn’t wait - I would deflower my fianceé without asking her leave - I

would use violence." This was indicated by the word "violate", and in

this way the sadistic component of the libido found expression.

   ‘In a deeper layer of the dream, the phrase "I arrange . . ." must no

doubt have an auto-erotic, that is to say, an infantile, significance.

   ‘The dreamer also revealed an awareness, which was only possible

to her in a dream, of her physical deficiency: she saw herself like a

table,  without  projections,  and  on  that  account  laid  all  the  more

emphasis on the preciousness of the "centre" - on another occasion

she used the words, "a centre-piece of flowers" - that is to say, on her

virginity. The horizontal attribute of a table must also have contributedsomething to the symbol.

   ‘The concentration of the dream should be observed: there was

nothing superfluous in it, every word was a symbol.

      ‘Later  on  the  dreamer  produced  an  addendum  to  the  dream:  "I

decorate the flowers with green crinkled paper". She added that it was

"fancy paper" of the sort used for covering common flower pots. She

went on: "to hide untidy things, whatever was to be seen, which was

not pretty to the eye; there is a gap, a little space in the flowers. The

paper  looks  like  velvet  or  moss."  -  To  "decorate"  she  gave  the

association "decorum", as I had expected. She said the green colour

predominated, and her association to it was "hope" - another link with

pregnancy.  -In  this  part  of  the  dream  the  chief  factor  was  not

identification with a man; ideas of shame and self-revelation came to

the fore. She was making herself beautiful for him and was admitting

physical defects which she felt ashamed of and was trying to correct.

Her  associations  "velvet"  and  "moss"  were  a  clear  indication  of  a

reference to pubic hair.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        836

 

   ‘This dream, then, gave expression to thoughts of which the girl was

scarcely aware in her waking life - thoughts concerned with sensual

love and its organs. She was being "arranged for a birthday" - that is,

she  was  being  copulated  with.  The  fear  of  being  deflowered  was

finding expression, and perhaps, too, ideas of pleasurable suffering.

She  admitted  her  physical  deficiencies  to  herself  and

overcompensated for them by an over-valuation of her virginity. Her

shame put forward as an excuse for the signs of sensuality the fact

that its purpose was the production of a baby. Material considerations,

too, alien to a lover’s mind, found their way to expression. The affect

attaching to this simple dream - a feeling of happiness - indicated that

powerful emotional complexes had found satisfaction in it.’

   Ferenczi (1917) has justly pointed out that the meaning of symbols

and the significance of dreams can be arrived at with particular ease

from the dreams of precisely those people who are uninitiated intopsycho-analysis.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        837

 

 

   At this point I shall interpose a dream dreamt by a contemporary

historical figure. I am doing so because in it an object that would in

any case appropriately represent a male organ has a further attribute

which established it in the clearest fashion as a phallic symbol. The

fact of a riding whip growing to an endless length could scarcely be

taken  to  mean  anything  but  an  erection.  Apart  from  this,  too,  the

dream  is  an  excellent  instance  of  the  way  in  which  thoughts  of  a

serious  kind,  far  removed  from  anything  sexual,  can  come  to  be

represented by infantile sexual material.

 

                                            XI

 

                              A DREAM OF BISMARCK’S¹

 

   ‘In his Gedanken und Errinnerungen Bismarck quotes a letter written

by him to the Emperor William I on December 18th 1881, in the course

of  which  the  following  passage  occurs:  "Your  Majesty’s

communication encourages me to relate a dream which I had in the

Spring  of  1863,  in  the  hardest  days  of  the  Conflict,  from  which  no

human eye could see any possible way out. I dreamt (as I related the

first thing next morning to my wife and other witnesses) that I was

riding on a narrow Alpine path, precipice on the right, rocks on the left.

The path grew narrower, so that the horse refused to proceed, and it

was  impossible  to  turn  round  or  dismount,  owing  to  lack  of  space.

Then,  with  my  whip  in  my  left  hand,  I  struck  the  smooth  rock  and

called on God. The whip grew to an endless length, the rocky wall

dropped like a piece of stage scenery and opened out a broad path,

with a view over hills and forests, like a landscape in Bohemia; there

were Prussian troops with banners, and even in my dream the thought

came to me at once that I must report it to your Majesty. This dream

was fulfilled, and I woke up rejoiced and strengthened. . . ."'   ‘The action of this dream falls into two sections. In the first part the

dreamer found himself in an impasse from which he was miraculously

rescued in the second part. The difficult situation in which the horse

and its rider were placed is an easily recognizable dream-picture of

the statesman’s critical position, which he may have felt with particular

bitterness  as  he  thought  over  the  problems  of  his  policy  on  the

evening  before  the  dream.  In  the  passage  quoted  above  Bismarck

himself uses the same simile in describing the hopelessness of his

position at the time. The meaning of the dream picture must therefore

have been quite obvious to him. We are at the same time presented

with  a  fine  example  of  Silberer’s  "functional  phenomenon".  The

process taking place in the dreamer’s mind - each of the solutions

attempted by his thoughts being met in turn by insuperable obstacles,

while nevertheless he could not and might not tear himself free from

the  consideration  of  those  problems  -  were  most  appropriately

depicted by the rider who could neither advance not retreat. His pride,

which  forbade  his  thinking  of  surrendering  or  resigning,  was

expressed in the dream by the words "it was impossible to turn round

or dismount." In his quality of a man of action who exerted himself

unceasingly and toiled for the good of others, Bismarck must have

found it easy to liken himself to a horse; and in fact he did so on many

occasions, for instance, in his well-known saying: "A good horse dies

in harness." In this sense the words "the horse refused to proceed"

meant nothing more nor less than that the over-tired statesman felt a

need to turn away from the cares of the immediate present, or, to put it

another way, that he was in the act of freeing himself from the bonds

of the reality principle by sleeping and dreaming. The wish-fulfilment,

which  became  so  prominent  in  the  second  part  of  the  dream,  was

already  hinted  at  in  the  words  "Alpine  path."  No  doubt  Bismarck

already knew at that time that he was going to spend his next vacation

in the Alps - at Gastein; thus the dream, by conveying him thither, set

him free at one blow from all the burdens of State business.

 

   ¹ From a paper by Hanns Sachs.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        838 

      ‘In  the  second  part  of  the  dream,  the  dreamer’s  wishes  were

represented as fulfilled in two ways: undisguisedly and obviously, and,

in addition, symbolically. Their fulfilment was represented symbolically

by the disappearance of the obstructive rock and the appearance in its

place of a broad path - the "way out", which he was in search of, in its

most convenient form; and, it was represented undisguisedly in the

picture  of  the  advancing  Prussian  troops.  In  order  to  explain  this

prophetic vision there is no need whatever for constructing mystical

hypotheses; Freud’s theory of wish-fulfilment fully suffices. Already at

the  time  of  this  dream  Bismarck  desired  a  victorious  war  against

Austria as the best escape from Prussia’s internal conflicts. Thus the

dream was representing this wish as fulfilled, just as is postulated by

Freud, when the dreamer saw the Prussian troops with their banners

in Bohemia, that is, in enemy country. The only peculiarity of the case

was  that  the  dreamer  with  whom  we  are  here  concerned  was  not

content with the fulfilment of his wish in a dream but knew how to

achieve it in reality. One feature which cannot fail to strike anyone

familiar  with  the  psycho-analytic  technique  of  interpretation  is  the

riding whip - which grew to an "endless length." Whips, sticks, lances

and similar objects are familiar to us as phallic symbols; but when a

whip further possesses the most striking characteristic of a phallus, its

extensibility,  scarcely  a  doubt  can  remain.  The  exaggeration  of  the

phenomenon, its growing to an "endless length," seems to hint at a

hypercathexis from infantile sources. The fact that the dreamer took

the whip in his hand was a clear allusion to masturbation, though the

reference  was  not,  of  course,  to  the  dreamer’s  contemporary

circumstances  but  to  childish  desires  in  the  remote  past.  The

interpretation discovered by Dr. Stekel that in dreams "left" stands for

what is wrong, forbidden and sinful is much to the point here, for it

might very well be applied to masturbation carried out in childhood in

the face of prohibition. Between this deepest infantile stratum and the

most  superficial  one,  which  was  concerned  with  the  statesman’s

immediate plans, it is possible to detect an intermediate layer which

was related to both the others. The whole episode of a miraculous

liberation from need by striking a rock and at the same time calling on

God as a helper bears a remarkable resemblance to the Biblical scenein which Moses struck water from a rock for the thirsting Children of

Israel. We may unhesitatingly assume that this passage was familiar

in all its details to Bismarck, who came of a Bible-loving Protestant

family. It would not be unlikely that in this time of conflict Bismarck

should compare himself with Moses, the leader, whom the people he

sought to free rewarded with rebellion, hatred and ingratitude. Here,

then, we should have the connection with the dreamer’s contemporary

wishes.  But  on  the  other  hand  the  Bible  passage  contains  some

details which apply well to a masturbation phantasy. Moses seized the

rod in the face of God’s command and the Lord punished him for this

transgression  by  telling  him  that  he  must  die  without  entering  the

Promised Land. The prohibited seizing of the rod (in the dream an

unmistakably  phallic  one),  the  production  of  fluid  from  its  blow,  the

threat of death - in these we find all the principal factors of infantile

masturbation  united.  We  may  observe  with  interest  the  process  of

revision which has welded together these two heterogeneous pictures

(originating, the one from the mind of a statesman of genius, and the

other from the impulse: of the primitive mind of a child) and which has

by that means succeeded in eliminating all the distressing factors. The

fact that seizing the rod was a forbidden and rebellious act was no

longer  indicated  except  symbolically  by  the  "left"  hand  which

performed it. On the other hand, God was called on in the manifest

content of the dream as though to deny as ostentatiously as possible

any thought of a prohibition or secret. Of the two prophecies made by

God to Moses - that he should see the Promised Land but that he

should not enter it - the first is clearly represented as fulfilled ("the

view over hills and forests"), while the second, highly distressing one

was not mentioned at all. The water was probably sacrificed to the

requirements of secondary revision, which successfully endeavoured

to make this scene and the former one into a single unity; instead of

water, the rock itself fell.

      ‘We  should  expect  that  at  the  end  of  an  infantile  masturbation

phantasy,  which  included  the  theme  of  prohibition,  the  child  would

wish  that  the  people  in  authority  in  his  environment  should  learn

nothing  of  what  had  happened.  In  the  dream  this  wish  was

represented by its opposite, a wish to report to the King immediately

what had happened. But this reversal fitted in excellently and quiteunobtrusively into the phantasy of victory contained in the superficial

layer of dream-thoughts and in a portion of the manifest content of the

dream. A dream such as this of victory and conquest is often a cover

for a wish to succeed in an erotic conquest; certain features of the

dream, such as, for instance, that an obstacle was set in the way of

the  dreamer’s  advance  but  that  after  he  had  made  use  of  the

extensible whip a broad path opened out, might point in that direction,

but they afford an insufficient basis for inferring that a definite trend of

thoughts and wishes of that kind ran though the dream. We have here

a  perfect  example  of  completely  successful  dream-distortion.

Whatever  was  obnoxious  in  it  was  worked  over  so  that  it  never

emerged  through  the  surface  layer  that  was  spread  over  it  as  a

protective covering. In consequence of this it was possible to avoid

any  release  of  anxiety.  The  dream  was  an  ideal  case  of  a  wish

successfully fulfilled without infringing the censorship; so that we may

well  believe  that  the  dreamer  awoke  from  it  "rejoiced  and

strengthened".’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        839

 

As a last example here is

                                            XII

 

                                A CHEMIST’S DREAM

 

   This was dreamt by a young man who was endeavouring to give up

his habit of masturbating in favour of sexual relations with women.

   PREAMBLE.  -  On  the  day  before  he  had  the  dream  he  had  been

instructing a student on the subject of Grignard’s reaction, in which

magnesium is dissolved in absolutely pure ether through the catalytic

action of iodine. Two days earlier, when the same reaction was being

carried out, an explosion had occurred which had burnt the hand of

one of the workers.

   DREAM. - (I) He was supposed to be making phenyl-magnesium-

bromide. He saw the apparatus with particular distinctness, but had

substituted  himself  for  the  magnesium.  He  now  found  himself  in  asingularly  unstable  state.  He  kept  on  saying  to  himself:  ‘This  is  all

right, things are working, my feet are beginning to dissolve already,

my knees are getting soft.’ Then he put out his hands and felt his feet.

Meanwhile (how, he could not tell) he pulled his legs out of the vessel

and said to himself once more: ‘This can’t be right. Yes it is, though.’

At this point he partly woke up and went through the dream to himself,

so as to be able to report it to me. He was positively frightened of the

solution) of the dream. He felt very much excited during this period of

semi-sleep and kept repeating: ‘Phenyl, phenyl.’

   (II) He was at -----ing with his whole family and was due to be at the

Schottentor at half-past eleven to meet a particular lady. But he only

woke at half-past eleven, and said to himself: ‘It’s too late. You can’t

get there before half-past twelve.’ The next moment he saw the whole

family sitting round the table; he saw his mother particularly clearly

and the maidservant carrying the sour-tureen. So he thought: ‘Well, as

we’ve started dinner, its too late for me to go out.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        840

 

   ANALYSIS. - He had no doubt that even the first part of the dream had

some connection with the lady whom he was to meet. (He had had the

dream during the night before the expected rendez-vous.) He thought

the  student  to  whom  he  had  given  the  instructions  a  particularly

unpleasant person. He had said to him: ‘That’s not right’, because the

magnesium showed no signs of being affected. And the student had

replied,  as  though  he  were  quite  unconcerned:  ‘No,  nor  it  is.’  The

student must have stood for himself (the patient), who was just as

indifferent about the analysis as the student was about the synthesis.

The ‘he’ in the dream who carried out the operation stood for me. How

unpleasant I must think him for being so indifferent about the result!

   On the other hand, he (the patient) was the material which was

being used for the analysis (or synthesis). What was in question was

the success of the treatment. The reference to his legs in the dream

reminded him of an experience of the previous evening. He had been

having a dancing-lesson and had met a lady of whom he had beeneager to make a conquest. He clasped her to himself so tightly that on

one occasion she gave a scream. As he relaxed his pressure against

her legs, he felt her strong responsive pressure against the lower part

of his thighs as far down as his knees - the point mentioned in his

dream.  So  that  in  this  connection  it  was  the  woman  who  was  the

magnesium in the retort - things were working at last. He was feminine

in relation to me, just as he was masculine in relation to the woman. If

it was working with the lady it was working with him in the treatment.

His  feeling  himself  and  the  sensations  in  his  knees  pointed  to

masturbation and fitted in with his fatigue on the previous day. -His

appointment with the lady had in fact been for half-past eleven. His

wish to miss it by oversleeping and to stay with his sexual objects at

home  (that  is,  to  keep  to  masturbation)  corresponded  to  his

resistance.

   In connection with his repeating the word ‘phenyl’, he told me that he

had always been very fond of all these radicals ending in ‘-yl’, because

they were so easy to use: benzyl, acetyl, etc. This explained nothing.

But  when  I  suggested  ‘Schlemihl’  to  him  as  another  radical  in  the

series,  he  laughed  heartily  and  told  me  that  in  the  course  of  the

summer he had read a book by Marcel Prevost in which there was a

chapter  on  ‘Les  exclus  de  l’amour’  which  in  fact  included  some

remarks upon ‘les Schlémiliés’. When he read them he had said to

himself: ‘This is just what I’m like.’ - If he had missed the appointment

it would have been another example of his ‘Schlemihlness’.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        841

 

 

   It would seem that the occurrence of sexual symbolism in dreams

has already been experimentally confirmed by some work carried out

by K. Schrötter, on lines proposed by H. Swoboda. Subjects under

deep hypnosis were given suggestions by Schrötter, and these led to

the  production  of  dreams  a  large  part  of  whose  content  was

determined  by  the  suggestions.  If  he  gave  a  suggestion  that  the

subject should dream of normal or abnormal sexual intercourse, thedream, in obeying the suggestion, would make use of symbols familiar

to  us  from  psycho-analysis  in  place  of  the  sexual  material.  For

instance, when a suggestion was made to a female subject that she

should  dream  of  having  homosexual  intercourse  with  a  friend,  the

friend appeared in the dream carrying a shabby hand-bag with a label

stuck on to it bearing the words ‘Ladies only.’ The woman who dreamt

this  was  said  never  to  have  had  any  knowledge  of  symbolism  in

dreams or of their interpretation. Difficulties are, however, thrown in

the way of our forming an opinion of the value of these interesting

experiments  by  the  unfortunate  circumstance  that  Dr.  Schrötter

committed suicide soon after making them. The only record of them is

to  be  found  in  a  preliminary  communication  published  in  the

Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse (Schrötter, 1912).

      Similar  findings  were  published  by  Roffenstein  in  1923.  Some

experiments  made  by  Betlheim  and  Hartmann  (1924)  were  of

particular  interest,  since  they  made  no  use  of  hypnosis.  These

experimenters  related  anecdotes  of  a  coarsely  sexual  character  to

patients  suffering  from  Korsakoff’s  syndrome  and  observed  the

distortions which occurred when the anecdotes were reproduced by

the patients in these confusional states. They found that the symbols

familiar to us from the interpretation of dreams made their appearance

(e.g. going upstairs, stabbing and shooting as symbols of copulation,

and  knives  and  cigarettes  as  symbols  of  the  penis).  The  authors

attached  special  importance  to  the  appearance  of  the  symbol  of  a

staircase, for, as they justly observed, ‘no conscious desire to distort

could have arrived at a symbol of such a kind.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        842

 

 

   It is only now, after we have properly assessed the importance of

symbolism in dreams, that it becomes possible for us to take up the

theme of typical dreams, which was broken off on p. 541 above. I think

we  are  justified  in  dividing  such  dreams  roughly  into  two  classes:

those which really always have the same meaning, and those which,in spite of having the same or a similar content, must nevertheless be

interpreted in the greatest variety of ways. Among typical dreams of

the first class I have already dealt in some detail with examination

dreams.

 

   Dreams of missing a train deserve to be put alongside examination

dreams  on  account  of  the  similarity  of  their  affect,  and  their

explanation shows that we shall be right in doing so. They are dreams

of consolation for another kind of anxiety felt in sleep - the fear of

dying.  ‘Departing’  on  a  journey  is  one  of  the  commonest  and  best

authenticated  symbols  of  death.  These  dreams  say  in  a  consoling

way: ‘Don’t worry, you won’t die (depart)’, just as examination dreams

say soothingly: ‘Don’t be afraid, no harm will come to you this time

either.’ The difficulty of understanding both these kinds of dreams is

due to the fact that the feeling of anxiety is attached precisely to the

expression of consolation.

 

   The meaning of dreams ‘with a dental stimulus’, which I often had to

analyse  in  patients,  escaped  me  for  a  long  time  because,  to  my

surprise,  there  were  invariably  too  strong  resistances  against  their

interpretation. Overwhelming evidence left me at last in no doubt that

in males the motive force of these dreams was derived from nothing

other  than  the  masturbatory  desires  of  the  pubertal  period.  I  will

analyse two dreams of this kind, one of which is also a ‘flying dream.’

They were both dreamt by the same person, a young man with strong

homosexual leanings, which were, however, inhibited in real life.

   He was attending a performance of ‘Fidelio’ and was sitting in the

stalls at the Opera besides L., a man who was congenial to him and

with whom he would have liked to make friends. Suddenly he flew

through the air right across the stalls, put his hand in his mouth and

pulled out two of his teeth.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        843

 

   He himself said of the flight that it was as though he was being‘thrown’ into the air. Since it was a performance of Fidelio, the words:

 

                                                                Wer ein holdes Weib errungen . . .

 

might have seemed appropriate. But the gaining of even the loveliest

woman was not among the dreamer’s wishes. Two other lines were

more to the point:

 

                                                                Wem der grosse Wurf gelungen,

                                                                Eines Freundes Freund zu sein . . .¹

 

The dream in fact contained this ‘great throw’, which, however, was

not only a wish-fulfilment. It also concealed the painful reflection that

the dreamer had often been unlucky in his attempts at friendship, and

had been ‘thrown out’. It concealed, too, his fear that this misfortune

might be repeated in relation to the young man by whose side he was

enjoying  the  performance  of Fidelio.  And  now  followed  what  the

fastidious  dreamer  regarded  as  a  shameful  confession:  that  once,

after being rejected by one of his friends, he had masturbated twice in

succession in the state of sensual excitement provoked by his desire.

   Here is the second dream: He was being treated by two University

professors of his acquaintance instead of by me. One of them was

doing something to his penis. He was afraid of an operation. The other

was pushing against his mouth with an iron rod, so that he lost one or

two of his teeth. He was tied up with four silk cloths.

   It can scarcely be doubted that this dream had a sexual meaning.

The silk cloths identified him with a homosexual whom he knew. The

dreamer had never carried out coitus and had never aimed at having

sexual  intercourse  with  men  in  real  life;  and  he  pictured  sexual

intercourse on the model of the pubertal masturbation with which he

had once been familiar.

 

   ¹ [ Wem der grosse Wurf gelungen,

        Eines Freundes Freund zu sein,
        Wer ein holdes Weib errungen . . .
 
      ‘He who has won the great throw of becoming the friend of a friend, he who has gained a
lovely woman . . .!’]
                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        844

 

   The many modifications of the typical dream with a dental stimulus

(dreams, for instance, of a tooth being pulled out by someone else,

etc.) are, I think, to be explained in the same way.¹ It may, however,

puzzle  us  to  discover  how  ‘dental  stimuli’  have  come  to  have  this

meaning.  But  I  should  like  to  draw  attention  to  the  frequency  with

which sexual repression makes use of transpositions from a lower to

an  upper  part  of  the  body.  Thanks  to  them  it  becomes  possible  in

hysteria for all kinds of sensations and intentions to be put into effect,

if not where they properly belong - in relation to the genitals, at least in

relation to other, unobjectionable parts of the body. One instance of a

transposition of this kind is the replacement of the genitals by the face

in the symbolism of unconscious thinking. Linguistic usage follows the

same line in recognizing the buttocks as homologous to the cheeks,

and by drawing a parallel between the ‘labia’ and the lips which frame

the aperture of the mouth. Comparisons between nose and penis are

common, and the similarity is made more complete by the presence of

hair in both places. The one structure which affords no possibility of an

analogy is the teeth; and it is precisely this combination of similarity

and  dissimilarity  which  makes  the  teeth  so  appropriate  for

representational purposes when pressure is being exercised by sexual

repression.

      I  cannot  pretend  that  the  interpretation  of  dreams  with  a  dental

stimulus  as  dreams  of  masturbation  -  an  interpretation  whose

correctness seems to me beyond doubt - has been entirely cleared

up.² I have given what explanation I can and must leave what remains

unsolved. But I may draw attention to another parallel to be found in

linguistic usage. In our part of the world the act of masturbation is

vulgarly  described  as  ‘sich  einen  ausreissen’  or  ‘sich  einen

herunterreissen’.³ I know nothing of the source of this terminology or

of the imagery on which it is based; but ‘a tooth’ would fit very well into

the first of the two phrases.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] A tooth being pulled out by someone else in a dream is as a rule

to be interpreted as castration (like having one’s hair cut by a barber, according to Stekel). A
distinction  must  in  general  be  made  between  dreams  with  a  dental  stimulus  and  dentistdreams, such as those recorded by Coriat (1913).

   ² [Footnote added 1909:] A communication by C. G. Jung informs us that dreams with a

dental stimulus occurring in women have the meaning of birth dreams. - [Added  1919:] Ernest
Jones has brought forward clear confirmation of this. The element in common between this
interpretation and the one put forward above lies in the fact that in both cases (castration and
birth) what is in question is the separation of a part of the body from the whole.

   ³ [Footnote added 1911:] Cf. the ‘biographical’ dream on p. 817, n. 2.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        845

 

   According to popular belief dreams of teeth being pulled out are to

be interpreted as meaning the death of a relative, but psycho-analysis

can at most confirm this interpretation only in the joking sense I have

alluded to above. In this connection, however, I will quote a dream

with a dental stimulus that has been put at my disposal by Otto Rank.

   ‘A colleague of mine, who has for some time been taking a lively

interest  in  the  problems  of  dream-interpretation,  has  sent  me  the

following contribution to the subject of dreams with a dental stimulus.

   ‘"A short time ago I had a dream that I was at the dentist’s and he

was drilling a back tooth in my lower jaw. He worked on it so long that

the tooth became useless. He then seized it with a forceps and pulled

it out with an effortless ease that excited my astonishment. He told me

not  to  bother  about  it,  for  it  was  not  the  tooth  that  he  was  really

treating, and put it on the table, where the tooth (as it now seemed to

me, an upper incisor) fell apart into several layers. I got up from the

dentist’s chair, went closer to it with a feeling of curiosity, and raised a

medical question which interested me. The dentist explained to me,

while he separated out the various portions of the strikingly white tooth

and crushed them up (pulverized them) with an instrument, that it was

connected with puberty and that it was only before puberty that teeth

came out so easily, and that in the case of women the decisive factor

was the birth of a child.

   ‘"I then became aware (while I was half asleep, I believe) that the

dream  had  been  accompanied  by  an  emission,  which  I  could  not

attach with certainty, however, to any particular part of the dream; I

was most inclined to think that it had already occurred while the tooth

was being pulled out. 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        846

 

   ‘"I then went on to dream of an occurrence which I can no longer

recall, but which ended with my leaving my hat and coat somewhere

(possibly in the dentist’s cloakroom) in the hope that someone would

bring  them  after  me,  and  with  my  hurrying  off,  dressed  only  in  my

overcoat, to catch a train which was starting. I succeeded at the last

moment in jumping on to the hindmost carriage where someone was

already standing. I was not able, though, to make my way into the

inside of the carriage, but was obliged to travel in an uncomfortable

situation, from which I tried, successfully in the end, to escape. We

entered a big tunnel and two trains, going in the opposite direction to

us, passed through our train as if it were the tunnel. I was looking into

a carriage window as though I were outside.

      ‘"The  following  experiences  and  thoughts  from  the  previous  day

provide material for an interpretation of the dream:

   ‘"(I.) I had in fact been having dental treatment recently, and at the

time of the dream I was having continual pain in the tooth in the lower

jaw which was being drilled in the dream and at which the dentist had,

again  in  reality,  worked  longer  than  I  liked.  On  the  morning  of  the

dream-day I had once more been to the dentist on account of the pain;

and he had suggested to me that I should have another tooth pulled

out in the same jaw as the one he had been treating, saying that the

pain probably came from this other one. This was a ‘wisdom tooth’

which  I  was  cutting  just  then.  I  had  raised  a  question  touching  his

medical conscience in that connection.

      ‘"(II.)  On  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day,  I  had  been  obliged  to

apologize to a lady for the bad temper I was in owing to my toothache;

whereupon she had told me she was afraid of having a root pulled out,

the crown of which had crumbled away almost entirely. She thought

that  pulling  out  ‘eye-teeth’  was  especially  painful  and  dangerous,

although on the other hand one of her acquaintances had told her that

it was easier to pull out teeth in the upper jaw, which was where hers

was. This acquaintance had also told her that he had once had thewrong tooth pulled out under an anaesthetic, and this had increased

her  dread  of  the  necessary  operation.  She  had  then  asked  me

whether  ‘eye-teeth’  were  molars  or  canines,  and  what  was  known

about them. I pointed out to her on the one hand the superstitious

element in all these opinions, though at the same time I emphasized

the nucleus of truth in certain popular views. She was then able to

repeat  to  me  what  she  believed  was  a  very  old  and  wide-spread

popular belief - that if a pregnant woman had toothache she would

have a boy.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        847

 

   ‘"(III.) This saying interested me in connection with what Freud says

in his Interpretation of Dreams on the typical meaning of dreams with

a dental stimulus as substitutes for masturbation, since in the popular

saying a tooth and male genitals (or a boy) were also brought into

relation with each other. On the evening of the same day, therefore, I

read through the relevant passage in the Interpretation of Dreams and

found  there  amongst  other  things  the  following  statements  whose

influence upon my dream may be observed just as clearly as that of

the other two experiences I have mentioned. Freud writes of dreams

with a dental stimulus that ‘in males the motive force of these dreams

was derived from nothing other than the masturbatory desires of the

pubertal period’. And further: ‘The many modifications of the typical

dream with a dental stimulus (dreams, for instance, of a tooth being

pulled out by someone else, etc.) are, I think, to be explained in the

same way. It may, however, puzzle us to discover how "dental stimuli"

should have come to have this meaning. But I should like to draw

attention to the frequency with which sexual repression makes use of

transpositions  from  a  lower  to  an  upper  part  of  the  body.’  (In  the

present dream from the lower jaw to the upper jaw.) ‘Thanks to them it

becomes possible in hysteria for all kinds of sensations and intentions

to be put into effect, if not where they properly belong - in relation to

the genitals, at least in relation to other, unobjectionable parts of the

body’. And again: ‘But I may draw attention to another parallel to befound  in  linguistic  usage.  In  our  part  of  the  world  the  act  of

masturbation is vulgarly described as "sich einen ausreissen" or "sich

einen herunterreissen"'. I was already familiar with this expression in

my early youth as a description of masturbation, and no experienced

dream-interpreter will have any difficulty in finding his way from here to

the  infantile  material  underlying  the  dream.  I  will  only  add  that  the

ease  with  which  the  tooth  in  the  dream,  which  after  its  extraction

turned into an upper incisor, came out, reminded me of an occasion in

my childhood on which I myself pulled out a loose upper front tooth

easily and without pain. This event, which I can still remember clearly

to-day in all its details, occurred at the same early period to which my

first conscious attempts at masturbation go back. (This was a screen

memory.)

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        848

 

   ‘"Freud’s reference to a statement by C. G. Jung to the effect that

‘dreams with a dental stimulus occurring in women have the meaning

of birth dreams’, as well as the popular belief in the significance of

toothache in pregnant women, accounted for the contrast drawn in the

dream  between  the  decisive  factor  in  the  case  of  females  and  of

males (puberty). In this connection I recall an earlier dream of mine

which I had soon after a visit to the dentist and in which I dreamt that

the gold crowns which had just been fixed fell out; this annoyed me

very much in the dream on account of the considerable expense in

which I had been involved and which I had not yet quite got over at the

time. This other dream now became intelligible to me (in view of a

certain  experience  of  mine)  as  a  recognition  of  the  material

advantages  of  masturbation  over  object-love:  the  latter,  from  an

economic point of view, was in every respect less desirable (cf. the

gold  crowns);  and  I  believe  that  the  lady’s  remark  about  the

significance of toothache in pregnant women had re-awakened these

trains of thought in me."

   ‘So much for the interpretation put forward by my colleague, which is

most enlightening and to which, I think, no objections can be raised. Ihave  nothing  to  add  to  it,  except,  perhaps,  a  hint  at  the  probable

meaning  of  the  second  part  of  the  dream.  This  seems  to  have

represented  the  dreamer’s  transition  from  masturbation  to  sexual

intercourse, which was apparently accomplished with great difficulty -

(cf.  the  tunnel  through  which  the  trains  went  in  and  out  in  various

directions) as well as the danger of the latter (cf. pregnancy and the

overcoat).  The  dreamer  made  use  for  this  purpose  of  the  verbal

bridges "Zahn-ziehen (Zug)" and "Zahn-reissen (Reisen)".

   ‘On the other hand, theoretically, the case seems to me interesting

in  two  respects.  In  the  first  place,  it  brings  evidence  in  favour  of

Freud’s discovery that ejaculation in a dream accompanies the act of

pulling out a tooth. In whatever form the emission may appear, we are

obliged  to  regard  it  as  a  masturbatory  satisfaction  brought  about

without the assistance of any mechanical stimulation. Moreover, in this

case,  the  satisfaction  accompanying  the  emission  was  not,  as  it

usually is, directed to an object, even if only to an imaginary one, but

had no object, if one may say so; it was completely auto-erotic, or at

the most showed a slight trace of homosexuality (in reference to the

dentist).

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        849

 

   ‘The second point which seems to me to deserve emphasis is the

following. It may plausibly be objected that there is no need at all to

regard the present case as confirming Freud’s view, since the events

of  the  previous  day  would  be  sufficient  in  themselves  to  make  the

content of the dream intelligible. The dreamer’s visit to the dentist, his

conversation  with  the  lady  and  his  reading  of  the Interpretation  of

Dreams would quite sufficiently explain how he came to produce this

dream, especially as his sleep was disturbed by toothache; they would

even explain, if need be, how the dream served to dispose of the pain

which was disturbing his sleep - by means of the idea of getting rid of

the painful tooth and by simultaneously drowning with libido the painful

sensation which the dreamer feared. But even if we make the greatest

possible allowance for all this, it cannot be seriously maintained thatthe mere reading of Freud’s explanations could have established in

the dreamer the connection between pulling out a tooth and the act of

masturbation, or could even have put that connection into operation,

unless  it  had  been  laid  down  long  since,  as  the  dreamer  himself

admits it was (in the phrase "sich einen ausreissen"). This connection

may have been revived not only by his conversation with the lady but

by a circumstance which he reported subsequently. For in reading the

Interpretation of Dreams he had been unwilling, for comprehensible

reasons, to believe in this typical meaning of dreams with a dental

stimulus, and had felt a desire to know whether that meaning applied

to all dreams of that sort. The present dream confirmed the fact that

this was so, at least as far as he was concerned, and thus showed

him why it was that he had been obliged to feel doubts on the subject.

In this respect too, therefore, the dream was the fulfilment of a wish

namely, the wish to convince himself of the range of application and

the validity of this view of Freud’s.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        850

 

 

      The  second  group  of  typical  dreams  include  those  in  which  the

dreamer flies or floats in the air, falls, swims, etc. What is the meaning

of such dreams? It is impossible to give a general reply. As we shall

hear, they mean something different in every instance; it is only the

raw material of sensations contained in them which is always derived

from the same source.

   The information provided by psycho-analyses forces me to conclude

that  these  dreams,  too,  reproduce  impressions  of  childhood;  they

relate, that is, to games involving movement, which are extraordinarily

attractive  to  children.  There  cannot  be  a  single  uncle  who  has  not

shown a child how to fly by rushing across the room with him in his

outstretched arms, or who has not played at letting him fall by riding

him on his knee and then suddenly stretching out his leg, or by holding

him up high and then suddenly pretending to drop him. Children are

delighted by such experiences and never tire of asking to have themrepeated, especially if there is something about them that causes a

little fright or giddiness. In after years they repeat these experiences in

dreams; but in the dreams they leave out the hands which held them

up, so that they float or fall unsupported. The delight taken by young

children in games of this kind (as well as in swings and see-saws) is

well known; when they come to see acrobatic feats in a circus their

memory  of  such  games  is  revived.  Hysterical  attacks  in  boys

sometimes consist merely in reproductions of feats of this kind, carried

out with great skill. It not uncommonly happens that these games of

movement,  though  innocent  in  themselves,  give  rise  to  sexual

feelings.  Childish  romping  [‘Hetzen’],  if  I  may  use  a  word  which

commonly describes all such activities, is what is being repeated in

dreams of flying, falling, giddiness and so on; while the pleasurable

feelings attached to these experiences are transformed into anxiety.

But, often enough, as every mother knows, romping among children

actually ends in squabbling and tears.

      Thus  I  have  good  grounds  for  rejecting  the  theory  that  what

provokes dreams of flying and falling is the state of our tactile feelings

during sleep or sensations of the movement of our lungs, and so on.

In my view these sensations are themselves reproduced as part of the

memory to which the dream goes back: that is to say, they are part of

the content of the dream and not its source.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1930:] These remarks on dreams of movement are repeated here, since

the present context requires them. See above, p. 747 f.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        851

 

   This material, then, consisting of sensations of movement of similar

kinds and derived from the same source, is used to represent dream-

thoughts of every possible sort. Dreams of flying or floating in the air

(as a rule, pleasurably toned) require the most various interpretations;

with  some  people  these  interpretations  have  to  be  of  an  individual

character, whereas with others they may even be of a typical kind.

One of my women patients used very often to dream that she was

floating at a certain height over the street without touching the ground.She was very short, and she dreaded the contamination involved in

contact with other people. Her floating dream fulfilled her two wishes,

by raising her feet from the ground and lifting her head into a higher

stratum  of  air.  In  other  women  I  have  found  that  flying  dreams

expressed a desire ‘to be like a bird’; while other dreamers became

angels  during  the  night  because  they  had  not  been  called  angels

during the day. The close connection of flying with the idea of birds

explains how it is that in men flying dreams usually have a grossly

sensual meaning; and we shall not be surprised when we hear that

some dreamer or other is very proud of his powers of flight.

   Dr. Paul Federn (of Vienna ) has put forward the attractive theory

that a good number of these flying dreams are dreams of erection; for

the  remarkable  phenomenon  of  erection,  around  which  the  human

imagination  has  constantly  played,  cannot  fail  to  be  impressive,

involving as it does an apparent suspension of the laws of gravity. (Cf.

in this connection the winged phalli of the ancients.)

   It is a remarkable fact that Mourly Vold, a sober-minded investigator

of dreams and one who is disinclined to interpretation of any kind, also

supports  the  erotic  interpretation  of  flying  or  floating  dreams  (Vold,

1910-12, 2, 791). He speaks of the erotic factor as ‘the most powerful

motive for floating dreams’, draws attention to the intense feeling of

vibration in the body that accompanies such dreams and points to the

frequency with which they are connected with erections or emissions.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        852

 

   Dreams of falling, on the other hand, are more often characterized

by  anxiety.  Their  interpretation  offers  no  difficulty  in  the  case  of

women, who almost always accept the symbolic use of falling as a

way of describing a surrender to an erotic temptation. Nor have we yet

exhausted the infantile sources of dreams of falling. Almost every child

has fallen down at one time or other and afterwards been picked up

and petted; or if he has fallen out of his cot at night, has been taken

into bed with his mother or nurse.

   People who have frequent dreams of swimming and who feel greatjoy in cleaving their way through the waves, and so on, have as a rule

been bed-wetters and are repeating in their dreams a pleasure which

they have long learnt to forgo. We shall learn presently from more

than one example what it is that dreams of swimming are most easily

used to represent.

   The interpretation of dreams of fire justifies the nursery law which

forbids a child to ‘play with fire’ - so that he shall not wet his bed at

night. For in their case, too, there is an underlying recollection of the

enuresis of childhood. In my ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of

Hysteria’,  I  have  given  a  complete  analysis  and  synthesis  of  a  fire

dream of this kind in connection with the dreamer’s case history, and I

have shown what impulses of adult years this infantile material can be

used to represent.

 

   It would be possible to mention a whole number of other ‘typical’

dreams if we take the term to mean that the same manifest dream-

content is frequently to be found in the dreams of different dreamers.

For  instance  we  might  mention  dreams  of  passing  though  narrow

streets or of walking through whole suites of rooms, and dreams of

burglars - against whom, incidentally, nervous people take precautions

before they go to sleep; dreams of being pursued by wild animals (or

by  bulls  or  horses)  or  of  being  threatened  with  knives,  daggers  or

lances - these last two classes being characteristic of the manifest

content of the dreams of people who suffer from anxiety - and many

more.  An  investigation  specially  devoted  to  this  material  would

thoroughly repay the labour involved. But instead of this I have two

observations to make, though these do not apply exclusively to typical

dreams.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        853

 

 

   The more one is concerned with the solution of dreams, the more

one is driven to recognize that the majority of the dreams of adults

deal  with  sexual  material  and  give  expression  to  erotic  wishes.  Ajudgement  on  this  point  can  be  formed  only  by  those  who  really

analyse  dreams,  that  is  to  say,  who  make  their  way  through  their

manifest  content  to  the  latent  dream-thoughts,  and  never  by  those

who are satisfied with making a note of the manifest content alone

(like Näcke, for instance, in his writings on sexual dreams). Let me say

at once that this fact is not in the least surprising but is in complete

harmony with the principles of my explanation of dreams. No other

instinct has been subjected since childhood to so much suppression

as the sexual instinct with its numerous components (cf. my Three

Essays on the Theory of Sexuality, 1905d); from no other instinct are

so many and such powerful unconscious wishes left over, ready to

produce dreams in a state of sleep. In interpreting dreams we should

never forget the significance of sexual complexes, though we should

also,  of  course,  avoid  the  exaggeration  of  attributing  exclusive

importance to them.

   We can assert of many dreams, if they are carefully interpreted, that

they  are  bisexual,  since  they  unquestionably  admit  of  an  ‘over-

interpretation’  in  which  the  dreamer’s  homosexual  impulses  are

realized - impulses, that is, which are contrary to his normal sexual

activities. To maintain, however, as do Stekel (1911) and Adler (1910,

etc.), that all dreams are to be interpreted bisexually appears to me to

be a generalization which is equally undemonstrable and unplausible

and which I am not prepared to support. In particular, I cannot dismiss

the obvious fact that there are numerous dreams which satisfy needs

other than those which are erotic in the widest sense of the word:

dreams  of  hunger  and  thirst,  dreams  of  convenience,  etc.  So,  too,

such statements as that ‘the spectre of death is to be found behind

every dream’ (Stekel), or that ‘every dream shows an advance from

the  feminine  to  the  masculine  line’  (Adler),  appear  to  me  to  go  far

beyond  anything  that  can  be  legitimately  maintained  in  dream-

interpretation.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        854

 

   The assertion that all dreams require a sexual interpretation, againstwhich critics rage so incessantly, occurs nowhere in my Interpretation

of Dreams. It is not to be found in any of the numerous editions of this

book and is in obvious contradiction to other views expressed in it.

   I have already shown elsewhere that strikingly innocent dreams may

embody crudely erotic wishes, and I could confirm this by many new

instances. But it is also true that many dreams which appear to be

indifferent and which one would not regard as in any respect peculiar

lead  back  on  analysis  to  wishful  impulses  which  are  unmistakably

sexual and often of an unexpected sort. Who, for instance, would have

suspected the presence of a sexual wish in the following dream before

it had been interpreted? The dreamer gave this account of it: Standing

back a little behind two stately palaces was a little house with closed

doors. My wife led me along the piece of street up to the little house

and pushed the door open; I then slipped quickly and easily into the

inside of a court which rose in an incline. Anyone, however, who has

had a little experience in translating dreams will at once reflect that

penetrating into narrow spaces and opening closed doors are among

the commonest sexual symbols, and will easily perceive in this dream

a  representation  of  an  attempt  at coitus  a  tergo  (between  the  two

stately buttocks of the female body). The narrow passage rising in an

incline stood, of course, for the vagina. The assistance attributed by

the dreamer to his wife forces us to conclude that in reality it was only

consideration  for  her  that  restrained  the  dreamer  from  making

attempts of this kind. It turned out that on the dream-day a girl had

come to live in the dreamer’s household who had attracted him and

had given him the impression that she would raise no great objections

to an approach of that kind. The little house between the two palaces

was  a  reminiscence  of  the  Hradshin  in  Prague  and  was  a  further

reference to the same girl, who came from that place.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        855

 

   When I insist to one of my patients on the frequency of Oedipus

dreams, in which the dreamer has sexual intercourse with his own

mother,  he  often  replies:  ‘I  have  no  recollection  of  having  had  anysuch  dream.’    Immediately  afterwards,  however,  a  memory  will

emerge of some other inconspicuous and indifferent dream, which the

patient has dreamt repeatedly. Analysis then shows that this is in fact

a dream with the same content - once more an Oedipus dream. I can

say with certainty that disguised dreams of sexual intercourse with the

dreamer’s mother are many times more frequent than straightforward

ones.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1911:] I have published elsewhere a typical example of a disguised

Oedipus dream of this kind. [Reprinted below.] Another example, with a detailed analysis, has
been published by Otto Rank (1911a). - [Added 1914:] For some other disguised Oedipus
dreams, in which eye-symbolism is prominent, see Rank (1913). Other papers on eye-dreams
and  eye-symbolism,  by  Eder,  Ferenczi  and  Reitler  will  be  found  in  the  same  place.  The
blinding in the legend of Oedipus, as well as elsewhere, stands for castration. - [Added 1911:]
Incidentally, the symbolic interpretation of undisguised Oedipus dreams was not unknown to
the ancients. Rank (1910, 534) writes: ‘Thus Julius Caesar is reported to have had a dream of
sexual  intercourse  with  his  mother  which  was  explained  by  the  dream-interpreters  as  a
favourable augury for his taking possession of the earth (Mother Earth). The oracle given to
the Tarquins is equally well known, which prophesied that the conquest of Rome would fall to
that one of them who should first kiss his mother ("osculum matri tulerit"). This was interpreted
by Brutus as referring to Mother Earth. ("Terram osculo contigit, scilicet quod ea communis
mater omnium mortalium eeset" Livy, I, 56.)' - [Added 1914:] Compare in this connection the
dream of Hippias reported by Herodotus (VI, 107)): ‘As for the Persians, they were guided to
Marathon by Hippias son of Pisistratus. Hippias in the past night had seen a vision in his sleep
wherein he thought that he lay with his own mother; he interpreted this dream to signify that
he should return to Athens and recover his power, and so die an old man in his own mother-
country.’ - [Added 1911:] These myths and interpretations reveal a true psychological insight. I
have found that people who know that they are preferred or favoured by the mother give
evidence in their lives of a peculiar self-reliance and an unshakeable optimism which often
seem like heroic attributes and bring actual success to their possesors.
   [Added 1925:] ‘TYPICAL EXAMPLE OF A DISGUISED OEDIPUS DREAM: A man dreamt
that he had a secret liaison with a lady whom someone else wanted to marry. He was worried
in case this other man might discover the liaison and the proposed marriage came to nothing.
He therefore behaved in a very affectionate way to the man. He embraced him and kissed
him.  - There was only one point of contact between the content of this dream and the facts of
the dreamer’s life. He had a secret liaison with a married woman; and an ambiguous remark
made by her husband, who was a friend of his, led him to suspect that the husband might
have noticed something. But in reality there was something else involved, all mention of which
was avoided in the dream but which alone provided a key to its understanding. The husband’s
life was threatened by an organic illness. His wife was prepared for the possibility of his dying
suddenly, and the dreamer was consciously occupied with an intention to marry the young
widow  after  her  husband’s  death.  This  external  situation  placed  the  dreamer  in  the
constellation of the Oedipus dream. His wish was capable of killing the man in order to get the
woman as his wife. The dream expressed this wish in a hypocritically distorted form. Instead
of her being married already, he made out that someone else wanted to marry her, which
corresponded to his own secret intentions; and his hostile wishes towards her husband were
concealed behind demonstrations of affection which were derived from his memory of hisrelations with his own father in childhood.’
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        856

 

   In some dreams of landscapes or other localities emphasis is laid in

the  dream  itself  on  a  convinced  feeling  of  having  been  there  once

before. (Occurrences of ‘déjà vu’ in dreams have a special meaning.)

These  places  are  invariably  the  genitals  of  the  dreamer’s  mother;

there is indeed no other place about which one can assert with such

conviction that one has been there once before.

   On one occasion only I was perplexed by an obsessional neurotic

who told me a dream in which he was visiting a house that he had

been  in twice  before.  But  this  particular  patient  had  told  me  a

considerable time before of an episode during his sixth year. On one

occasion  he  had  been  sharing  his  mother’s  bed  and  misused  the

opportunity  by  inserting  his  finger  into  her  genitals  while  she  was

asleep.

 

      A  large  number  of  dreams,  often  accompanied  by  anxiety  and

having  as  their  content  such  subjects  as  passing  though  narrow

spaces or being in water, are based upon phantasies of intra-uterine

life, of existence in the womb and of the act of birth. What follows was

the  dream  of  a  young  man  who,  in  his  imagination,  had  taken

advantage  of  an  intra-uterine  opportunity  of  watching  his  parents

copulating.

     He  was  in  a  deep  pit  with  a  window  in  it  like  the  one  in  the

Semmering Tunnel. At first he saw an empty landscape through the

window, but then invented a picture to fit the space, which immediately

appeared and filled in the gap. The picture represented a field which

was being ploughed up deeply by some implement; and the fresh air

together with the idea of hard work which accompanied the scene,

and the blue-black clods of earth, produced a lovely impression. He

then went on further and saw a book upon education open in front of

him . . . and was surprised that so much attention was devoted in it to

the sexual feelings (of children); and this led him to think of me.

   And here is a pretty water dream, dreamt by a woman patient, whichserved  a  special  purpose  in  the  treatment. At  her  summer  holiday

resort, by the Lake of ----, she dived into the dark water just where the

pale moon was mirrored in it.

      Dreams  like  this  one  are  birth  dreams.  Their  interpretation  is

reached by reversing the event reported in the manifest dream; thus,

instead of ‘diving into the water’ we have ‘coming out of the water’, i.e.

being born.¹ We can discover the locality from which a child is born by

calling to mind the slang use of the word ‘lune’ in French. The pale

moon was thus the white bottom which children are quick to guess

that they came out of. What was the meaning of the patient’s wishing

to be born at her summer holiday resort? I asked her and she replied

without hesitation: ‘Isn’t it just as though I had been reborn through the

treatment?’  Thus  the  dream  was  an  invitation  to  me  to  continue

treating her at the holiday resort - that is, to visit her there. Perhaps

there was a very timid hint in it, too, of the patient’s wish to become a

mother herself.²

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] For the mythological significance of birth from the water see Rank

(1909).

    ² [Footnote added  1909:]  It  was  not  for  a  long  time  that  I  learned  to  appreciate  the

importance of phantasies and unconscious thoughts about life in the womb. They contain an
explanation of the remarkable dread that many people have of being buried alive; and they
also afford the deepest unconscious basis for the belief in survival after death, which merely
represents a projection into the future of this uncanny life before birth. Moreover, the act of
birth is the first experience of anxiety, and thus the source and prototype of the affect of
anxiety.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        857

 

   I will quote another birth-dream, together with its interpretation, from

a paper by Ernest Jones.) ‘She stood on the sea-shore watching a

small boy, who seemed to be hers, wading into the water. This he did

till the water covered him and she could only see his head bobbing up

and down near the surface. The scene then changed into a crowded

hall  of  an  hotel.  Her  husband  left  her,  and  she  "entered  into  a

conversation" with a stranger. The second half of the dream revealed

itself in the analysis as representing a flight from her husband and theentering into intimate relations with a third person . . . . The first part of

the  dream  was  a  fairly  evident  birth-phantasy.  In  dreams  as  in

mythology,  the  delivery  of  the  child from  the  uterine  waters  is

commonly presented by distortion as the entry of the child into water;

among many others, the births of Adonis, Osiris, Moses and Bacchus

are well-known illustrations of this. The bobbing up and down of the

head into the water at once recalled to the patient the sensation of

quickening she had experienced in her only pregnancy. Thinking of

the  boy  going  into  the  water  induced  a  reverie  in  which  she  saw

herself taking him out of the water, carrying him to a nursery, washing

him and dressing him, and installing him in her household.

      ‘The  second  half  of  the  dream  therefore  represented  thoughts

concerning  the  elopement,  that  belonged  to  the  first  half  of  the

underlying latent content; the first half of the dream corresponded with

the second half of the latent content, the birth-phantasy. Besides this

inversion  in  order,  further  inversions  took  place  in  each  half  of  the

dream. In the first half the child entered the water, and then his head

bobbed;  in  the  underlying  dream-thoughts  first  the  quickening

occurred and then the child left the water (a double inversion). In the

second half her husband left her; in the dream-thoughts she left her

husband.’

   Abraham (1909, 22 ff.) has reported another birth-dream, dreamt by

a young woman who was facing her first confinement. A subterranean

channel led direct into the water from a place in the floor of her room

(genital canal-amniotic fluid). She raised a trap-door in the floor and a

creature dressed in brown fur, very much resembling a seal, promptly

appeared.  This  creature  turned  out  to  be  the  dreamer’s  younger

brother, to whom she had always been like a mother.

   Rank has shown from a series of dreams that birth-dreams make

use of the same symbolism as dreams with a urinary stimulus. The

erotic stimulus is represented in the latter as a urinary stimulus; and

the stratification of meaning in these dreams corresponds to a change

that has come over the meaning of the symbol since infancy.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        858 

 

   This is an appropriate point at which to return to a topic that was

broken off in an earlier chapter (p. 716): the problem of the part played

in  the  formation  of  dreams  by  organic  stimuli  which  disturb  sleep.

Dreams  which  come  about  under  their  influence  openly  exhibit  not

only the usual tendency to wish-fulfilment and to serving the end of

convenience, but very often a perfectly transparent symbolism as well;

for  it  not  infrequently  happens  that  a  stimulus  awakens  a  dreamer

after a vain attempt has been made to deal with it in a dream under a

symbolic disguise. This applies to dreams of emission or orgasm as

well as to those provoked by a need to micturate or defaecate. ‘The

peculiar nature of emission dreams not only puts us in a position to

reveal  directly  certain  sexual  symbols  which  are  already  known  as

being typical, but which have nevertheless been violently disputed; it

also enables us to convince ourselves that some apparently innocent

situations in dreams are no more than a symbolic prelude to crudely

sexual scenes. The latter are as a rule represented undisguisedly in

the  relatively  rare  emission  dreams,  whereas  they  culminate  often

enough in anxiety dreams, which have the same result of awakening

the sleeper.’

      The  symbolism  of  dreams  with  a  urinary  stimulus  is  especially

transparent  and  has  been  recognized  from  the  earliest  times.  The

view was already expressed by Hippocrates that dreams of fountains

and  springs  indicate  a  disorder  of  the  bladder  (Havelock  Ellis).

Scherner studied the multiplicity of the symbolism of urinary stimuli

and  asserted  that  ‘any  urinary  stimulus  of  considerable  strength

invariably  passes  over  into  stimulation  of  the  sexual  regions  and

symbolic representations of them. . . . Dreams with a urinary stimulus

are often at the same time representatives of sexual dreams.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        859

 

   Otto Rank, whose discussion in his paper on the stratification of

symbols in arousal dreams I am here following, has made it seemhighly probable that a great number of dreams with a urinary stimulus

have in fact been caused by a sexual stimulus which has made a first

attempt to find satisfaction regressively in the infantile form of urethral

erotism. Those cases are particularly instructive in which the urinary

stimulus thus set up leads to awakening and emptying the bladder, but

in  which  the  dream  is  nevertheless  continued  and  the  need  then

expressed in undisguisedly erotic imagery.¹

      Dreams  with  an  intestinal  stimulus  throw  light  in  an  analogous

fashion  on  the  symbolism  involved  in  them,  and  at  the  same  time

confirm  the  connection  between  gold  and  faeces  which  is  also

supported by copious evidence from social anthropology. (See Freud,

1908b;  Rank,  1912a;  Dattner,  1913;  and  Reik,  1915.)  ‘Thus,  for

instance,  a  woman  who  was  receiving  medical  treatment  for  an

intestinal disorder dreamt of someone who was burying a treasure in

the neighbourhood of a little wooden hut which looked like a rustic out-

door closet. There was a second part to the dream in which she was

wiping the behind of her little girl who had dirtied herself.’

 

      Rescue  dreams  are  connected  with  birth  dreams.  In  women’s

dreams, to rescue, and especially to rescue from the water, has the

same significance as giving birth; but the meaning is modified if the

dreamer is a man.²

   Robbers, burglars and ghosts, of whom some people feel frightened

before going to bed, and who sometimes pursue their victims after

they are asleep, all originate from one and the same class of infantile

reminiscence. They are the nocturnal visitors who rouse children and

take them up to prevent their wetting their beds, or who lift the bed-

clothes to make sure where they have put their hands in their sleep.

Analyses of some of these anxiety-dreams have made it possible for

me to identify these nocturnal visitors more precisely. In every case

the  robbers  stood  for  the  sleeper’s  father,  whereas  the  ghosts

corresponded to female figures in white night-gowns.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1919:] ‘The same symbols which occur in their infantile aspect in bladder

dreams, appear with an eminently sexual meaning in their "recent" aspects: Water = urine =
semen = amniotic fluid; ship = "pump ship" (micturate) = uterus (box); to get wet = enuresis =
copulation = pregnancy; to swim = full bladder = abode of the unborn; rain = micturate =
symbol  of  fertility;  travel  (starting,  getting  out)  =  getting  out  of  bed  =  sexual  intercourse(honeymoon); micturate = emission.’ (Rank, 1912a, 95.)

   ² [Footnote added 1911:] A dream of this kind has been reported by Pfister (1909). For the

symbolic meaning of rescuing see Freud, 1910d, and Freud, 1910h. [Added 1914:] See also
Rank (1911b) and Reik (1911). [Added 1919:] See further, Rank (1914).
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        860

 

                                          (F)

 

          SOME EXAMPLES - CALCULATIONS AND SPEECHES IN DREAMS

 

   Before assigning the fourth of the factors which govern the formation

of  dreams  to  its  proper  place,  I  propose  to  quote  a  number  of

examples from my collection. These will serve partly to illustrate the

interplay between the three factors already known to us and partly to

provide  confirmatory  evidence  for  what  have  hitherto  been

unsupported  assertions  or  to  indicate  some  conclusions  which

inevitably follow from them. In giving an account of the dream-work, I

have found very great difficulty in backing my findings by examples.

Instances in support of particular propositions carry conviction only if

they are treated in the context of the interpretation of a dream as a

whole. If they are torn from their context they lose their virtue; while,

on the other hand, a dream-interpretation which is carried even a little

way below the surface quickly becomes so voluminous as to make us

lose  the  thread  of  the  train  of  thought  which  it  was  designed  to

illustrate. This technical difficulty must serve as my excuse if in what

follows I string together all sorts of things, whose only common bond

is their connection with the contents of the preceding sections of this

chapter.

 

   I will begin by giving a few instances of peculiar or unusual modes of

representation in dreams.

   A lady had the following dream: A servant girl was standing on a

ladder as if she were cleaning a window, and had a chimpanzee with

her  and  a  gorilla-cat  (the  dreamer  afterwards  corrected  this  to an

angora cat). She hurled the animals at the dreamer; the chimpanzee

cuddled up to her, which was very disgusting. - This dream achievedits purpose by an extremely simple device: it took a figure of speech

literally and gave an exact representation of its wording. ‘Monkey’, and

animals’ names in general, are used as invectives; and the situation in

the dream meant neither more nor less than ‘hurling invectives’. In the

course of the present series of dreams we shall come upon a number

of other instances of the use of this simple device during the dream-

work.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        861

 

   Another dream adopted a very similar procedure. A woman had a

child with a remarkably deformed skull. The dreamer had heard that

the child had grown like that owing to its position in the uterus. The

doctor  said  that  the  skull  might  be  given  a  better  shape  by

compression,  but  that  that  would  damage  the  child’s  brain.  She

reflected that as he was a boy it would do him less harm. -This dream

contained  a  plastic  representation  of  the  abstract  concept  of

‘impressions  on  children’  which  the  dreamer  had  met  with  in  the

course of the explanations given her during her treatment.

   The dream-work adopted a slightly different method in the following

instance. The dream referred to an excursion to the Hilmteich near

Graz. The weather outside was fearful. There was a wretched hotel,

water was dripping from the walls of the room, the bedclothes were

damp. (The latter part of the dream was reported less directly than I

have  given  it.)  The  meaning  of  the  dream  was  ‘superfluous’.  This

abstract idea, which was present in the dream-thoughts, was in the

first instance given a somewhat forced twist and put into some such

form  as  ‘overflowing’,  ‘flowing  over’  or  ‘fluid’  -  after  which  it  was

represented in a number of similar pictures: water outside, water on

the walls inside, water in the dampness of the bed-clothes-everything

flowing or ‘overflowing.’

      We  shall  not  be  surprised  to  find  that,  for  the  purpose  of

representation in dreams, the spelling of words is far less important

than their sound, especially when we bear in mind that the same rule

holds good in rhyming verse. Rank (1910, 482) has recorded in detail,and analysed very fully, a girl’s dream in which the dreamer described

how  she  was  walking  through  the  fields  and  cutting  off  rich  ears

[‘Ähren’] of barley and wheat. A friend of her youth came towards her,

but  she  tried  to  avoid  meeting  him.  The  analysis  showed  that  the

dream  was  concerned  with  a  kiss  -  an  ‘honourable  kiss’  [‘Kuss  in

Ehren’  pronounced  the  same  as  ‘Ähren’].  In  the  dream  itself  the

‘Ähren’, which had to be cut off, not pulled off, figured as ears of corn,

while, condensed with ‘Ehren’, they stood for a whole number of other

thoughts.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        862

 

   On the other hand, in other cases, the course of linguistic evolution

has made things very easy for dreams. For language has a whole

number of words at its command which originally had a pictorial and

concrete significance, but are used to-day in a colourless and abstract

sense. All that the dream need do is to give these words their former,

full  meaning  or  to  go  back  a  little  way  to  an  earlier  phase  in  their

development. A man had a dream, for instance, of his brother being in

a Kasten  [‘box’].  In  the  course  of  interpretation  the Kasten  was

replaced by a Schrank [‘cupboard’ - also used abstractly for ‘barrier’,

‘restriction’]. The dream-thought had been to the effect that his brother

ought to restrict himself [‘sich einschränken’] - instead of the dreamer

doing so.

   Another man dreamt that he climbed to the top of a mountain which

commanded a quite unusually extensive view. Here he was identifying

himself with a brother of his who was the editor of a survey which

dealt with far Eastern affairs.

   In Der Grüne Heinrich a dream is related in which a mettlesome

horse was rolling about in a beautiful field of oats, each grain of which

was ‘a sweet almond, a raisin and a new penny piece . . . wrapped up

together in red silk and tied up with a bit of pig’s bristle.’ The author (or

dreamer) gives us an immediate interpretation of this dream-picture:

the horse felt agreeably tickled and called out ‘Der Hafer sticht mich!’

   According to Henzen dreams involving puns and turns of speechoccur particularly often in the old Norse sagas, in which scarcely a

dream is to be found which does not contain an ambiguity or a play

upon words.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        863

 

   It would be a work in itself to collect these modes of representation

and to classify them according to their underlying principles. Some of

these representations might almost be described as jokes, and they

give one a feeling that one would never have understood them without

the dreamer’s help.

 

   (1) A man dreamt that he was asked someone’s name but could not

think of it.  He  himself  explained  that  what  this  meant  was  that  ‘he

would never dream of such a thing’.

 

   (2) A woman patient told me a dream in which all the people were

especially big. ‘That means’, she went on, ‘that the dream must be to

do with events in my early childhood, for at that time, of course, all

grown-up people seemed to me enormously big.’ She herself did not

appear in the content of this dream. - The fact of a dream referring to

childhood  may  also  be  expressed  in  another  way,  namely  by  a

translation of time into space. The characters and scenes are seen as

though they were at a great distance, at the end of a long road, or as

though they were being looked at through the wrong end of a pair of

opera-glasses.

 

      (3)  A  man  who  in  his  working  life  tended  to  use  abstract  and

indefinite phraseology, though he was quite sharp-witted in general,

dreamt on one occasion that he arrived at a railway station just as a

train  was  coming  in.  What  then  happened  was  that  the  platform

moved  towards  the  train,  while  the  train  stopped  still  -  an  absurd

reversal of what actually happens. This detail was no more than an

indication  that  we  should  expect  to  find  another  reversal  in  the

dream’s  content.  The  analysis  of  the  dream  led  to  the  patient’srecollecting  some  picture-books  in  which  there  were  illustrations  of

men standing on their heads and walking on their hands.

 

   (4) Another time the same dreamer told me a short dream which

was almost reminiscent of the technique of a rebus. He dreamt that

his uncle gave him a kiss in an automobile. He went on at once to give

me  the  interpretation,  which  I  myself  would  never  have  guessed:

namely that it meant auto-erotism. The content of this dream might

have been produced as a joke in waking life.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        864

 

   (5) A man dreamt that he was pulling a woman out from behind a

bed. The meaning of this was that he was giving her preference.

 

   (6) A man dreamt that he was an officer sitting at a table opposite

the Emperor. This meant that he was putting himself in opposition to

his father.

 

   (7) A man dreamt that he was treating someone for a broken limb.

The analysis showed that the broken bone [‘Knochenbruch’] stood for

a broken marriage [‘Ehebruch’, properly ‘adultery’].

 

   (8) The time of day in dreams very often stands for the age of the

dreamer  at  some  particular  period  in  his  childhood.  Thus,  in  one

dream, ‘a quarter past five in the morning’ meant the age of five years

and three months, which was significant, since that was the dreamer’s

age at the time of the birth of his younger brother.

 

   (9) Here is another method of representing ages in a dream. A

woman dreamt that she was walking with two little girls whose ages

differed by fifteen months. She was unable to recall any family of her

acquaintance  to  whom  this  applied.  She  herself  put  forward  the

interpretation that the two children both represented herself and that

the  dream  was  reminding  her  that  the  two  traumatic  events  of  herchildhood were separated from each other by precisely that interval.

One had occurred when she was three and a half, the other when she

was four and three-quarters.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        865

 

   (10) It is not surprising that a person undergoing psycho-analytic

treatment should often dream of it and be led to give expression in his

dreams to the many thoughts and expectations to which the treatment

gives rise. The imagery most frequently chosen to represent it is that

of a journey, usually by motor-car, as being a modern and complicated

vehicle. The speed of the car will then be used by the patient as an

opportunity for giving vent to ironical comments. -If ‘the unconscious’,

as an element in the subject’s waking thoughts, has to be represented

in a dream, it may be replaced very appropriately by subterranean

regions. -These, where they occur without any reference to analytic

treatment, stand for the female body or the womb. -’Down below’ in

dreams often relates to the genitals, ‘up above’, on the contrary, to the

face, mouth or breast. -Wild beasts are as a rule employed by the

dream-work to represent passionate impulses of which the dreamer is

afraid,  whether  they  are  his  own  or  those  of  other  people.  (It  then

needs  only  a  slight  displacement  for  the  wild  beasts  to  come  to

represent the people who are possessed by these passions. We have

not  far  to  go  from  here  to  cases  in  which  a  dreaded  father  is

represented by a beast of prey or a dog or wild horse - a form of

representation  recalling  totemism.)  It  might  be  said  that  the  wild

beasts are used to represent the libido, a force dreaded by the ego

and combated by means of repression. It often happens, too, that the

dreamer separates off his neurosis, his ‘sick personality’, from himself

and depicts it as an independent person.

 

   (11) Here is an example recorded by Hanns Sachs (1911): ‘We

know  from  Freud’s Interpretation  of  Dreams  that  the  dream-work

makes use of different methods for giving a sensory form to words or

phrases. If, for instance, the expression that is to be represented is anambiguous  one,  the  dream-work  may  exploit  the  fact  by  using  the

ambiguity as a switch-point: where one of the meanings of the word is

present in the dream-thoughts the other one can be introduced into

the manifest dream. This was the case in the following short dream in

which  ingenious  use  was  made  for  representational  purposes  of

appropriate impressions of the previous day. I was suffering from a

cold on the "dream-day", and I had therefore decided in the evening

that, if I possibly could, I would avoid getting out of bed during the

night. I seemed in the dream merely to be continuing what I had been

doing during the day. I had been engaged in sticking press-cuttings

into an album and had done my best to put each one in the place

where it belonged. I dreamt that I was trying to paste a cutting into the

album. But it wouldn’t go on to the page ["er geht nicht auf die Seite"],

which caused me much pain. I woke up and became aware that the

pain in the dream persisted in the form of a pain in my inside, and I

was compelled to abandon the decision I had made before going to

bed. My dream, in its capacity of guardian of my sleep, had given me

the illusion of a fulfilment of my wish to stop in bed, by means of a

plastic representation of the ambiguous phrase "er geht nicht auf die

Seite" ["he isn’t going to the lavatory"].’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        866

 

 

   We can go so far as to say that the dream-work makes use, for the

purpose of giving a visual representation of the dream-thoughts, of

any methods within its reach, whether waking criticism regards them

as legitimate or illegitimate. This lays the dream-work open to doubt

and derision on the part of everyone who has only heard of dream-

interpretation but never practised it. Stekel’s book, Die Sprache des

Traumes (1911), is particularly rich in examples of this kind. I have,

however, avoided quoting instances from it, on account of the author’s

lack  of  critical  judgement  and  of  the  arbitrariness  of  his  technique,

which give rise to doubts even if unprejudiced minds.

    (12) The following examples are taken from a paper by V. Tausk

(1914) on the use of clothes and colours in dreaming.

   (a) A. dreamt of seeing a former governess of his in a dress of black

lustre [‘Lüster’] which fitted very tight across her buttocks. - This was

explained as meaning that the governess was lustful [‘lüstern’].

   (b) C. dreamt of seeing a girl on the ----Road, who was bathed in

white light and was wearing a white blouse. - The dreamer had had

intimate relations with a Miss White for the first time on this road.

   (c) Frau D. dreamt of seeing the eighty-year-old Viennese actor

Blasel lying on a sofa in full armour [‘in voller Rüstung’]. He began

jumping over tables and chairs, drew a dagger, looked at himself in

the looking-glass and brandished the dagger in the air as though he

was  fighting  an  imaginary  enemy.  -  Interpretation:  The  dreamer

suffered from a long-standing affection of the bladder [‘Blase’]. She lay

on a sofa for her analysis; when she looked at herself in a looking-

glass, she thought privately that in spite of her age and illness she still

looked hale and hearty [‘rüsting’].

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        867

 

 

   (13) A ‘GREAT ACHIEVEMENT’ IN A DREAM. - A man dreamt that he was a

pregnant  woman  lying  in  bed.  He  found  the  situation  very

disagreeable. He called out: ‘I’d rather be . . .’ (during the analysis,

after  calling  to  mind  a  nurse,  he  completed  the  sentence  with  the

words ‘breaking stones’). Behind the bed there was hanging a map,

the bottom edge of which was kept stretched by a strip of wood. He

tore the strip of wood down by catching hold of its two ends. It did not

break across but split into two halves lengthways. This action relieved

him and at the same time helped on delivery.

      Without  any  assistance  he  interpreted  tearing  down  the  strip

[‘Leiste’] as a great achievement [‘Leistung’]. He was escaping from

his uncomfortable situation (in the treatment) by tearing himself out of

his feminine attitude . . . . The absurd detail of the strip of wood not

simply  breaking  but  splitting  lengthways  was  explained  thus:  thedreamer recalled that this combination of doubling and destroying was

an allusion to castration. Dreams very often represent castration by

the presence of two penis symbols as the defiant expression of an

antithetical wish. Incidentally, the ‘Leiste’ [‘groin’] is a part of the body

in the neighbourhood of the genitals. The dreamer summed up the

interpretation of the dream as meaning that he had got the better of

the  threat  of  castration  which  had  led  to  his  adopting  a  feminine

attitude.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        868

 

 

   (14) In an analysis which I was conducting in French a dream came

up for interpretation in which I appeared as an elephant. I naturally

asked  the  dreamer  why  I  was  represented  in  that  form.  ‘Vous  me

trompez’ [‘you are deceiving me’] was his reply (‘trompe’ = ‘trunk’).

 

   The dream-work can often succeed in representing very refractory

material, such as proper names, by a far-fetched use of out-of-the-way

associations. In one of my dreams old Brücke had set me the task of

making  a  dissection;  .  .  .  I  fished  something  out  that  looked  like  a

piece of crumpled silver-paper. (I shall return to this dream later.) The

association  to  this  (at  which  I  arrived  with  some  difficulty)  was

‘stanniol.’ I then perceived that I was thinking of the name of Stannius,

the author of a dissertation on the nervous system of fish, which I had

greatly admired in my youth. The first scientific task which my teacher

set  me  was  in  fact  concerned  with  the  nervous  system  of  a  fish,

Ammocoetes. It was clearly impossible to make use of the name of

this fish in a picture puzzle.

 

   At this point I cannot resist recording a very peculiar dream, which

also deserves to be noticed as having been dreamt by a child, and

which can easily be explained analytically. ‘I remember having often

dreamt  when  I  was  a  child’,  said  a  lady,  ‘that  God  wore  a  paper

cocked-hat on his head. I used very often to have a hat of that sort puton my head at meals, to prevent my being able to look at the other

children’s plates, to see how big their helpings were. As I had heard

that God was omniscient, the meaning of the dream was that I knew

everything - even in spite of the hat that had been put on my head.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        869

 

 

   The nature of the dream-work and the way in which it plays about

with its material, the dream-thoughts, are instructively shown when we

come  to  consider  numbers  and  calculations  that  occur  in  dreams.

Moreover, numbers in dreams are regarded superstitiously as being

especially significant in regard to the future. I shall therefore select a

few instances of this kind from my collection.

 

                                            I

 

   Extract from a dream dreamt by a lady shortly before her treatment

came to an end: She was going to pay for something. Her daughter

took  3  florins  and  65  kreuzers  from  her  (the  mother’s)  purse.  The

dreamer said to her: ‘What are you doing? It only costs 21 kreuzers.’

Owing to my knowledge of the dreamer’s circumstances, this bit of

dream was intelligible to me without any further explanation on her

part. The lady came from abroad and her daughter was at school in

Vienna. She was in a position to carry on her treatment with me as

long as her daughter remained in Vienna. The girl’s school year was

due to end in three weeks and this also meant the end of the lady’s

treatment. The day before the dream, the headmistress had asked her

whether she would not consider leaving her daughter at school for

another  year.  From  this  suggestion  she  had  evidently  gone  on  to

reflect that in that case she might also continue her treatment. This

was what the dream referred to. One year is equal to 365 days. The

three  weeks  which  remained  both  of  the  school-year  and  of  the

treatment were equivalent to 21 days (though the hours of treatment

would be less than this). The numbers, which in the dream-thoughts

referred to periods of time, were attached in the dream itself to sumsof money - not but what there was a deeper meaning involved, for

‘time  is  money.’  365  kreuzers  only  amount  to  3  florins  and  65

kreuzers; and the smallness of the sums that occurred in the dream

was  obviously  the  result  of  wish-fulfilment.  The  dreamer’s  wish

reduced the cost both of the treatment and of the year’s school-fees.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        870

 

                                            II

 

      The  numbers  which  occurred  in  another  dream  involved  more

complicated circumstances. A lady who, though she was still young,

had  been  married  for  a  number  of  years,  received  news  that  an

acquaintance  of  hers,  Elise  L.,  who  was  almost  exactly  her

contemporary,  had  just  become  engaged.  Thereupon  she  had  the

following dream. She was at the theatre with her husband. One side of

the stalls was completely empty. Her husband told her that Elise L.

and her fiancé had wanted to go too; but had only been able to get

bad seats - three for 1 florin 50 kreuzers - and of course they could not

take those. She thought it would not really have done any harm if they

had.

   What was the origin of the 1 florin 50 kreuzers? It came from what

was in fact an indifferent event of the previous day. Her sister-in-law

had been given a present of 150 florins by her husband and had been

in a hurry to get rid of them by buying a piece of jewellery. It is to be

noticed that 150 florins is a hundred  times  as  much  as  1  florin  50

kreuzers. Where did the three come from which was the number of the

theatre tickets? The only connection here was that her newly-engaged

friend  was  the  same  number  of  months  - three  -  her  junior.  The

solution of the dream was arrived at with the discovery of the meaning

of  the  empty  stalls.  They  were  an  unmodified  allusion  to  a  small

incident which had given her husband a good excuse for teasing her.

She had planned to go to one of the plays that had been announced

for the coming week and had taken the trouble to buy tickets several

days ahead, and had therefore had to pay a booking fee. When they

got to the theatre they found that one side of the house was almostempty. There had been no need for her to be in such a hurry.

   Let me now put the dream-thoughts in place of the dream. ‘It was

absurd to marry so early. There was no need for me to be in such a

hurry. I see from Elise L.’s example that I should have got a husband

in the end. Indeed, I should have got one a hundred times better’ (a

treasure ) ‘if I had only waited’ (in antithesis to her sister-in-law’s hurry

). ‘My money’ (or dowry) ‘could have bought three men just as good.’

   It will be observed that the meaning and context of the numbers

have been altered to a far greater extent in this dream than in the

former one. The processes of modification and distortion have gone

further here; and this is to be explained by the dream-thoughts in this

case  having  to  overcome  a  specially  high  degree  of  endopsychic

resistance  before  they  could  obtain  representation.  Nor  should  we

overlook the fact that there was an element of absurdity in the dream,

namely the three seats being taken by two people. I will anticipate my

discussion  of  absurdity  in  dreams  by  pointing  out  that  this  absurd

detail in the content of the dream was intended to represent the most

strongly  emphasized  of  the  dream-thoughts,  viz.,  ‘it  was absurd  to

marry so early.’ The absurdity which had to find a place in the dream

was ingeniously supplied by the number 3, which was itself derived

from a quite immaterial point of distinction between the two people

under comparison - the 3 months’ difference between their ages. The

reduction of the actual 150 florins to 1 florin 50 corresponded to the

low value assigned by the dreamer to her husband (or treasure), in

her suppressed thoughts.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        871

 

                                            III

 

   The next example exhibits the methods of calculation employed by

dreams, which have brought them into so much disrepute. A man had

a dream that he was settled in a chair at the B.’s - a family with which

he had been formerly acquainted - and said to them: ‘It was a great

mistake your not letting me have Mali.’ - ‘How old are you?’ he then

went on to ask the girl. - ‘I was born in 1882’, she replied. - ‘Oh, soyou’re 28, then.’

      Since  the  dream  dates  from  1898  this  was  evidently  a

miscalculation, and the dreamer’s inability to do sums would deserve

to  be  compared  with  that  of  a  general  paralytic  unless  it  could  be

explained  in  some  other  way.  My  patient  was  one  of  those  people

who, whenever they happen to catch sight of a woman, cannot let her

alone  in  their  thoughts.  The  patient  who  for  some  months  used

regularly to come next after him in my consulting room, and whom he

thus ran into, was a young lady; he used constantly to make enquiries

about her and was most anxious to create a good impression with her.

It was she whose age he estimated at 28 years. So much by way of

explanation  of  the  result  of  the  ostensible  calculation.  1882,

incidentally, was the year in which the dreamer had married. - I may

add that he was unable to resist entering into conversation with the

two other members of the female sex whom he came across in my

house - the two maids (neither of them by any means youthful), one or

other of whom used to open the door to him; he explained their lack of

response as being due to their regarding him as an elderly gentleman

of settled habits.

 

                                            IV

 

   Here is another dream dealing with figures, which is characterized

by  the  clarity  of  the  manner  in  which  it  was  determined,  or  rather,

overdetermined. I owe both the dream and its interpretation to Dr. B.

Dattner. ‘The landlord of my block of flats, who is a police-constable,

dreamt that he was on street-duty. (This was a wish-fulfilment.) An

inspector came up to him, who had the number 22 followed by 62 or

26, on his collar. At any rate there were several twos on it.

   ‘The mere fact that in reporting the dream the dreamer broke up the

number 2262 showed that its components had separate meanings. He

recalled that the day before there had been some talk at the police

station about the men’s length of service. The occasion for it was an

inspector  who  had  retired  on  his  pension  at  the  age  of  62.  The

dreamer had only served for 22 years, and it would be 2 years and 2

months  before  he  would  be  eligible  for  a  90  percent  pension.  The

dream represented in the first place the fulfilment of a long-cherishedwish  of  the  dreamer’s  to  reach  the  rank  of  inspector.  The  superior

officer with "2262" on his collar was the dreamer himself. He was on

street  duty  -  another  favourite  wish  of  his  -  he  had  served  his

remaining  2  years  and  2  months  and  now,  like  the  62-year-old

inspector, he could retire on a full pension.’¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] For analyses of other dreams containing numbers, see Jung,

Marcinowski and others. These often imply very complicated operations with numbers, which
have been carried out by the dreamer with astonishing accuracy. See also Jones (1912a)
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        872

 

 

   When we take together these and some other examples which I

shall give later, we may safely say that the dream-work does not in

fact carry out any calculations at all, whether correctly or incorrectly; it

merely  throws  into  the form  of  a  calculation  numbers  which  are

present in the dream-thoughts and can serve as allusions to matter

that  cannot  be  represented  in  any  other  way.  In  this  respect  the

dream-work is treating numbers as a medium for the expression of its

purpose  in  precisely  the  same  way  as  it  treats  any  other  idea,

including  proper  names  and  speeches  that  occur  recognizably  as

verbal presentations.

      For  the  dream-work  cannot  actually create  speeches.  However

much  speeches  and  conversations,  whether  reasonable  or

unreasonable in themselves, may figure in dreams, analysis invariably

proves that all that the dream has done is to extract from the dream-

thoughts  fragments  of  speeches  which  have  really  been  made  or

heard. It deals with these fragments in the most arbitrary fashion. Not

only does it drag them out of their context and cut them in pieces,

incorporating  some  portions  and  rejecting  others,  but  it  often  puts

them together in a new order, so that a speech which appears in the

dream to be a connected whole turns out in analysis to be composed

of three or four detached fragments. In producing this new version, a

dream will often abandon the meaning that the words originally had in

the dream-thoughts and give them a fresh one.¹ If we look closely intoa speech that occurs in a dream, we shall find that it consists on the

one hand of relatively clear and compact portions and on the other

hand of portions which serve as connecting matter and have probably

been filled in at a later stage, just as, in reading, we fill in any letters or

syllables that may have been accidentally omitted. Thus speeches in

dreams have a structure similar to that of breccia, in which largish

blocks of various kinds of stone are cemented together by a binding

medium.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] In this respect neuroses behave exactly like dreams. I know a

patient  one  of  whose  symptoms  is  that,  involuntarily  and  against  her  will  she  hears  -  i.e.
hallucinates - songs or fragments of songs, without being able to understand what part they
play in her mental life. (Incidentally, she is certainly not paranoic.) Analysis has shown that, by
allowing herself a certain amount of licence, she puts the text of these songs to false uses.
For instance in the lines ‘Leise, leise, Fromme Weise!’ [literally, ‘Softly, softly, devout melody’]
the last word was taken by her unconscious as though it was spelt ‘Waise’ [= ‘orphan’, thus
making the lines read ‘Softly, softly, pious orphan’], the orphan being herself. Again ‘O du
selige, o du fröhliche’ [‘Oh thou blessed and happy . . .’] is the opening of a Christmas carol;
by not continuing the quotation to the word ‘Christmastide’ she turned it into a bridal song. -
The  same  mechanism  of  distortion  can  also  operate  in  the  occurrence  of  an  idea
unaccompanied by hallucination. Why was it that one of my patients was pestered by the
recollection of a poem that he had had to learn in his youth: ‘Nächtlich am Busento lispeln . . .’
[‘By night on the Busento whispering . . .’]? Because his imagination went no further than the
first part of this quotation: ‘Nächtlich am Busen’ [‘By night on the bosom’].
   We are familiar with the fact that this same technical trick is used by parodists. Included in a
series of ‘Illustrations to the German Classics’ published in Fliegende Blätter was one which
illustrated Schiller’s ‘Siegesfest’, with the following quotation attached to it:
 
                                                                Und des frisch erkämpften Weibes
                                                                Freut sich der Atrid und strickt. . .
 
                                                                [The conqu’ring son of Atreus sits
                                                                At his fair captive’s side and knits . . .]
 
Here the quotation broke off. In the original the lines continue:
 
                                                                . . . Um den Reiz des schönen Leibes
                                                                Seine Arme hochbeglückt.
 
                                                                [.  . . His joyful and triumphant arms
                                                                About her body’s lovely charms. ]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        873

    Strictly speaking, this description applies only to such speeches in

dreams as possess something of the sensory quality of speech, and

which are described by the dreamer himself as being speeches. Other

sorts of speeches, which are not, as it were, felt by him as having

been  heard  or  spoken  (that  is,  which  have  no  acoustic  or  motor

accompaniments in the dream), are merely thoughts such as occur in

our waking thought-activity and are often carried over unmodified into

our dreams. Another copious source of undifferentiated speeches of

this  kind,  though  one  which  it  is  difficult  to  follow  up,  seems  to  be

provided  by  material  that  has  been read.  But  whatever  stands  out

markedly in dreams as a speech can be traced back to real speeches

which have been spoken or heard by the dreamer.

   Instances showing that speeches in dreams have this origin have

already been given by me in the course of analysing dreams which I

have quoted for quite other purposes. Thus, in the ‘innocent’ market

dream reported on p. 670, the spoken words ‘that’s not obtainable any

longer’ served to identify me with the butcher, while one portion of the

other  speech,  ‘I  don’t  recognize  that;  I  won’t  take  it’,  was  actually

responsible for making the dream an ‘innocent’ one. The dreamer, it

will be remembered, having had some suggestion made to her on the

previous  day  by  her  cook,  had  replied  with  the  words:  ‘I  don’t

recognize that; behave yourself properly!’ The innocent-sounding first

part of this speech was taken into the dream by way of allusion to its

second part, which fitted excellently into the phantasy underlying the

dream, but would at the same time have betrayed it.

 

   Here is another example, which will serve instead of many, all of

them leading to the same conclusion.

   The dreamer was in a big courtyard in which some dead bodies

were being burnt. ‘I’m off’, he said, ‘I can’t bear the sight of it.’ (This

was definitely a speech.) He then met two butcher’s boys. ‘Well’, he

asked, ‘did it taste nice?’ ‘No’, one of them answered, ‘not a bit nice’ -

as though it had been human flesh.

   The innocent occasion of the dream was as follows. The dreamer

and his wife had paid a visit after supper to their neighbours, who

were excellent people but not precisely appetizing. The hospitable old

lady was just having her supper and had tried to force him (there is aphrase with a sexual sense used jokingly among men to render this

idea¹) to taste some of it. He had declined, saying he had no appetite

left: ‘Get along!’ she had replied, ‘you can manage it’, or words to that

effect.  He  had  therefore  been  obliged  to  taste  it  and  had

complimented  her  on  it  saying:  ‘that  was  very  nice.’  When  he  was

once more alone with his wife he had grumbled at his neighbour’s

insistence and also at the quality of the food. The thought, ‘I can’t bear

the sight of it’, which in the dream too failed to emerge as a speech in

the strict sense, was an allusion to the physical charms of the lady

from which the invitation had come, and it must be taken as meaning

that he had no desire to look at them.

 

   ¹ [‘Notzüchtigen’, ‘to force sexually’, ‘to rape’, is so used in place of ‘nötigen’, ‘to force’ (in

the ordinary sense).]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        874

 

 

   More instruction can be derived from another dream, which I shall

report in this connection on account of the very distinct speech which

formed its centre-point, although I shall have to put off explaining it

fully till I come to discuss affect in dreams. I had a very clear dream. I

had gone to Brücke’s laboratory at night, and, in response to a gentle

knock on the door, I opened it to (the late) Professor Fleischl, who

came  in  with  a  number  of  strangers  and,  after  exchanging  a  few

words, sat down at his table. This was followed by a second dream.

My friend Fl. had come to Vienna unobtrusively in July. I met him in

the street in conversation with my (deceased) friend P., and went with

them to some place where they sat opposite each other as though

they were at a small table. I sat in front at its narrow end. Fl. spoke

about his sister and said that in three quarters of an hour she was

dead, and added some such words as ‘that was the threshold.’ As P.

failed to understand him, Fl. turned to me and asked me how much I

had  told  P.  about  his  affairs.  Whereupon,  overcome  by  strange

emotions,  I  tried  to  explain  to  Fl,  that  P.  (could  not  understand

anything  at  all,  of  course,  because  he)  was  not  alive.  But  what  Iactually said - and I myself noticed the mistake - was, ‘NON VIXIT’. I then

gave P. a piercing look. Under my gaze he turned pale; his form grew

indistinct and his eyes a sickly blue - and finally he melted away. I was

highly delighted at this and I now realized that Ernst Fleischl, too, had

been no more than an apparition, a ‘revenant’; and it seemed to me

quite possible that people of that kind only existed as long as one liked

and could be got rid of if someone else wished it.

   This fine specimen includes many of the characteristics of dreams -

the  fact  that  I  exercised  my  critical  faculties  during  the  dream  and

myself noticed my mistake when I said ‘Non vixit’ instead of ‘Non vivit’,

my  unconcerned  dealings  with  people  who  were  dead  and  were

recognized as being dead in the dream itself, the absurdity of my final

inference and the great satisfaction it gave me. This dream exhibits so

many of these puzzling features, indeed, that I would give a great deal

to be able to present the complete solution of its conundrums. But in

point of fact I am incapable of doing so - of doing, that is to say, what I

did in the dream, of sacrificing to my ambition people whom I greatly

value. Any concealment, however, would destroy what I know very

well to be the dream’s meaning; and I shall therefore content myself,

both  here  and  in  a  later  context,  with  selecting  only  a  few  of  its

elements for interpretation.

   The central feature of the dream was a scene in which I annihilated

P. with a look. His eyes changed to a strange and uncanny blue and

he melted away. This scene was unmistakably copied from one which

I had actually experienced. At the time I have in mind I had been a

demonstrator at the Physiological Institute and was due to start work

early  in  the  morning.  It  came  to  Brücke’s  ears  that  I  sometimes

reached  the  students’  laboratory  late.  One  morning  he  turned  up

punctually at the hour of opening and awaited my arrival. His words

were brief and to the point. But it was not they that mattered. What

overwhelmed me were the terrible blue eyes with which he looked at

me and by which I was reduced to nothing - just as P. was in the

dream, where, to my relief, the roles were reversed. No one who can

remember the great man’s eyes, which retained their striking beauty

even in his old age, and who has ever seen him in anger, will find it

difficult to picture the young sinner’s emotions.

   It was a long time, however, before I succeeded in tracing the originof the ‘Non vixit’ with which I passed judgement in the dream. But at

last  it  occurred  to  me  that  these  two  words  possessed  their  high

degree of clarity in the dream, not as words heard or spoken, but as

words seen.  I  then  knew  at  once  where  they  came  from.  On  the

pedestal of the Kaiser Josef Memorial in the Hofburg in Vienna the

following impressive words are inscribed:

 

                                                                Saluti patriae vixit

                                                                non diu sed totus.¹

 

I extracted from this inscription just enough to fit in with hostile train of

ideas among the dream-thoughts, just enough to imply that ‘this fellow

has no say in the matter - he isn’t even alive.’ And this reminded me

that  I  had  the  dream  only  a  few  days  after  the  unveiling  of  the

memorial to Fleischl in the cloisters of the University. At that time I had

seen  the  Brücke  memorial  once  again  and  must  have  reflected

(unconsciously) with regret on the fact that the premature death of my

brilliant friend P., whose whole life had been devoted to science, had

robbed  him  of  a  well-merited  claim  to  a  memorial  in  these  same

precincts. Accordingly, I gave him this memorial in my dream; and,

incidentally, as I remembered, his first name was Josef.²

 

   ¹ [‘For the well-being of his country he lived not long but wholly.’  - Footnote added 1925:]

The actual wording of the inscription is:
 
                                                                Saluti publicae vixit
                                                                non diu sed totus.
 
The reason for my mistake in putting ‘patriae’ for ‘publicae’ has probably been rightly guessed
by Wittels.

   ² I may add as an example of over-determination that my excuse for arriving too late at the

laboratory lay in the fact that after working far into the night I had in the morning to cover the
long distance between the Kaiser Josef Strasse and the Währinger Strasse.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        875

 

 

   By the rules of dream-interpretation I was even now not entitled topass  from  the Non vixit  derived  from  my  recollection  of  the  Kaiser

Josef Memorial to the Non vixit required by the sense of the dream-

thoughts. There must have been some other element in the dream-

thoughts  which  would  help  to  make  the  transition  possible.  It  then

struck me as noticeable that in the scene in the dream there was a

convergence of a hostile and an affectionate current of feeling towards

my friend P., the former being on the surface and the latter concealed,

but both of them being represented in the single phrase Non vixit. As

he had deserved well of science I built him a memorial; but as he was

guilty of an evil wish (which was expressed at the end of the dream) I

annihilated him. I noticed that this last sentence had a quite special

cadence, and I must have had some model in my mind. Where was an

antithesis  of  this  sort  to  be  found,  a  juxtaposition  like  this  of  two

opposite reactions towards a single person, both of them claiming to

be completely justified and yet not incompatible? Only in one passage

in literature - but a passage which makes a profound impression on

the  reader:  in  Brutus’s  speech  of  self-justification  in  Shakespeare’s

Julius  Caesar,  ‘As  Caesar  loved  me,  I  weep  for  him;  as  he  was

fortunate, I rejoice at it; as he was valiant, I honour him; but, as he

was  ambitious,  I  slew  him.’  Were  not  the  formal  structure  of  these

sentences and their antithetical meaning precisely the same as in the

dream-thought I had uncovered? Thus I had been playing the part of

Brutus in the dream. If only I could find one other piece of evidence in

the  content  of  the  dream  to  confirm  this  surprising  collateral

connecting link! A possible one occurred to me. ‘My friend Fl. came to

Vienna in July.’  There  was  no  basis  in  reality  for  this  detail  of  the

dream. So far as I knew, my friend Fl. had never been in Vienna in

July. But the month of July was named after Julius Caesar and might

therefore very well represent the allusion I wanted to the intermediate

thought of my playing the part of Brutus.¹

 

   ¹ There was the further connection between ‘Caesar’ and ‘Kaiser’ .

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        876

 

   Strange to say, I really did once play the part of Brutus. I once actedin  the  scene  between  Brutus  and  Caesar  from  Schiller  before  an

audience of children. I was fourteen years old at the time and was

acting with a nephew who was a year my senior. He had come to us

on a visit from England; and he, too, was a revenant, for it was the

playmate of my earliest years who had returned in him. Until the end

of my third year we had been inseparable. We had loved each other

and fought with each other; and this childhood relationship, as I have

already  hinted  above,  had  a  determining  influence  on  all  my

subsequent relations with contemporaries. Since that time my nephew

John has had many reincarnations which revived now one side and

now  another  of  his  personality,  unalterably  fixed  as  it  was  in  my

unconscious memory. There must have been times when he treated

me  very  badly  and  I  must  have  shown  courage  in  the  face  of  my

tyrant; for in my later years I have often been told of a short speech

made by me in my own defence when my father, who was at the same

time  John’s  grandfather,  had  said  to  me  accusingly:  ‘Why  are  you

hitting John? My reply - I was not yet two years old at the time - was ‘I

hit  him  ‘cos  he  hit  me.’  It  must  have  been  this  scene  from  my

childhood which diverted ‘Non vivit’ into ‘Non vixit’, for in the language

of later childhood the word for to hit is ‘wichsen’. The dream-work is

not ashamed to make use of links such as this one. There was little

basis in reality for my hostility to my friend P., who was very greatly

my superior and for that reason was well fitted to appear as a new

edition  of  my  early  playmate.  This  hostility  must  therefore  certainly

have gone back to my complicated childhood relations to John.

   As I have said, I shall return to this dream later.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        877

 

                                          (G)

 

              ABSURD DREAMS - INTELLECTUAL ACTIVITY IN DREAMS

 

   In the course of our dream-interpretations we have so often come

across the element of absurdity that we cannot postpone any longer

the moment of investigating its source and significance, if it has any.For it will be remembered that the absurdity of dreams has provided

those  who  deny  the  value  of  dreams  with  one  of  their  principal

arguments in favour of regarding them as the meaningless product of

a reduced and fragmentary mental activity.

   I shall begin by giving a few examples in which the absurdity is only

an apparent one and disappears as soon as the meaning of the dream

is more closely examined. Here are two or three dreams which deal

(by chance, as it may seem at first sight) with the dreamer’s dead

father.

 

                                            I

 

   This is the dream of a patient who had lost his father six years

earlier. His  father  had  met  with  a  grave  calamity.  He  had  been

travelling by the night train, which had been derailed. The carriage

seats were forced together and his head was compressed from side to

side. The dreamer then saw him lying in bed with a wound over his left

eyebrow  which  ran  in  a  vertical  direction.  He  was  surprised  at  his

father’s having met with a calamity (since he was already dead, as he

added in telling me the dream). How clear his eyes were!

   According to the ruling theory of dreams we should have to explain

the  content  of  this  dream  as  follows.  To  begin  with,  we  should

suppose, while the dreamer was imagining the accident, he must have

forgotten that his father had been in his grave for several years; but,

as the dream proceeded, the recollection must have emerged, and led

to  his  astonishment  at  his  own  dream  while  he  was  still  asleep.

Analysis teaches us, however, that it is eminently useless to look for

explanations of this kind. The dreamer had commissioned a bust of

his father from a sculptor and had seen it for the first time two days

before the dream. It was this that he had thought of as a calamity. The

sculptor had never seen his father and had worked from photographs.

On  the  day  immediately  before  the  dream  the  dreamer,  in  his  filial

piety, had sent an old family servant to the studio to see whether he

would form the same opinion of the marble head, namely, that it was

too narrow from side to side at the temples. He now proceeded to

recall  from  his  memory  the  material  which  had  gone  to  the

construction  of  the  dream.  Whenever  his  father  was  tormented  bybusiness  worries  or  family  difficulties,  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of

pressing his hands to the sides of his forehead, as though he felt that

his head was too wide and wanted to compress it. -When the patient

was  four  years  old  he  had  been  present  when  a  pistol,  which  had

been accidentally loaded, had been discharged and had blackened his

father’s  eyes.  (‘How  clear  his  eyes  were!’)  -  At  the  spot  on  his

forehead at which the dream located his father’s injury, a deep furrow

showed during his lifetime whenever he was thoughtful or sad. The

fact that this furrow was replaced in the dream by a wound led back to

the second exciting cause of the dream. The dreamer had taken a

photograph of his little daughter. The plate had slipped through his

fingers,  and  when  he  picked  it  up  showed  a  crack  which  ran

perpendicularly down the little girl’s forehead as far as her eyebrow.

He could not help feeling superstitious about this, since a few days

before his mother’s death he had broken a photographic plate with her

portrait on it.

   The absurdity of this dream was thus no more than the result of a

piece of carelessness in verbal expression which failed to distinguish

the bust and the photograph from the actual person. We might any of

us say: ‘There’s something wrong with Father, don’t you think?’ The

appearance of absurdity in the dream could easily have been avoided;

and  if  we  were  to  judge  from  this  single  example,  we  should  be

inclined  to  think  that  the  apparent  absurdity  had  been  permitted  or

even designed.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        878

 

                                            II

 

   Here is another, almost exactly similar, example from a dream of my

own. (I lost my father in 1896.) After his death my father played a

political part among the Magyars and brought them together politically.

Here I saw a small and indistinct picture: a crowd of men as though

they were in the Reichstag; someone standing on one or two chairs,

with other people round him. I remembered how like Garibaldi he had

looked on his death-bed, and fell glad that that promise had cometrue.

   What could be more absurd than this? It was dreamt at a time at

which the Hungarians had been driven by parliamentary obstruction

into a state of lawlessness and were plunged into the crisis from which

they were rescued by Koloman Széll. The trivial detail of the scene in

the dream appearing in pictures of such a small size was not without

relevance  to  its  interpretation.  Our  dream-thoughts  are  usually

represented in visual pictures which appear to be more or less life-

size.  The  picture  which  I  saw  in  my  dream,  however,  was  a

reproduction of a woodcut inserted in an illustrated history of Austria,

which showed Maria Theresa at the Reichstag of Pressburg in the

famous episode of ‘Moriamur pro rege nostro’. [‘We will die for our

king!’]¹ Like Maria Theresa in the picture, so my father stood in the

dream surrounded by the crowd. But he was standing on one or two

chairs [‘chair’ = ‘Stuhl’]. He had brought them together, and was thus a

presiding judge [‘Stuhlrichter’, literally ‘chair-judge’]. (A connecting link

was  provided  by  the  common  phrase  ‘we  shall  need  no  judge.’)  -

Those of us who were standing round had in fact remarked how like

Garibaldi  my  father  looked  on  his  death  bed.  He  had  had  a post

mortem rise of temperature, his cheeks had been flushed more and

more deeply red. . . . As I recalled this, my thoughts involuntarily ran

on:

 

                                                                Und hinter ihm in wesenlosem Scheine

                                                                Lag, was uns alle bändigt, das Gemeine.²

 

   ¹ I cannot remember where I read an account of a dream which was filled with unusually

small figures, and the source of which turned out to be one of Jacques Callot’s etchings seen
by the dreamer during the day. These etchings do in fact contain a large number of very small
figures. One series of them depicts the horrors of the Thirty Years’ War.

   ² [‘Behind him, a shadowy illusion, lay what holds us all in bondage - the things that are

common.’]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        879

 

   These elevated thoughts prepared the way for the appearance of

something that was common [‘gemein’] in another sense. My father’spost mortem rise of temperature corresponded to the words ‘after his

death’ in the dream. His most severe suffering had been caused by a

complete  paralysis  (obstruction)  of  the  intestines  during  his  last

weeks. Disrespectful thoughts of all kinds followed from this. One of

my  contemporaries  who  lost  his  father  while  he  was  still  at  his

secondary school - on that occasion I myself had been deeply moved

and had offered to be his friend - once told me scornfully of how one

of his female relatives had had a painful experience. Her father had

fallen dead in the street and had been brought home; when his body

was  undressed  it  was  found  that  at  the  moment  of  death,  or post

mortem, he had passed a stool [‘Stuhl’]. His daughter had been so

unhappy about this that she could not prevent this ugly detail from

disturbing her memory of her father. Here we have reached the wish

that was embodied in this dream. ‘To stand before one’s children’s

eyes, after one’s death, great and unsullied’ - who would not desire

this? What has become of the absurdity of the dream? Its apparent

absurdity is due only to the fact that it gave a literal picture of a figure

of speech which is itself perfectly legitimate and in which we habitually

overlook any absurdity involved in the contradiction between its parts.

In this instance, once again, it is impossible to escape an impression

that the apparent absurdity is intentional and has been deliberately

produced.

 

   The frequency with which dead people appear in dreams and act

and  associate  with  us  as  though  they  were  alive  has  caused

unnecessary  surprise  and  has  produced  some  remarkable

explanations  which  throw  our  lack  of  understanding  of  dreams  into

strong relief. Yet the explanation of these dreams is a very obvious

one.  It  often  happens  that  we  find  ourselves  thinking:  ‘If  my  father

were alive, what would he say to this?’ Dreams are unable to express

an ‘if’ of this kind except by representing the person concerned as

present in some particular situation. Thus, for instance, a young man

who had been left a large legacy by his grandfather, dreamt, at a time

when he was feeling self-reproaches for having spent a considerable

sum of money, that his grandfather was alive again and calling him to

account. And when, from our better knowledge, we protest that after

all the person in question is dead, what we look upon as a criticism ofthe dream is in reality either a consoling thought that the dead person

has not lived to witness the event, or a feeling of satisfaction that he

can no longer interfere in it.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        880

 

   There is another kind of absurdity, which occurs in dreams of dead

relatives but which does not express ridicule and derision. It indicates

an  extreme  degree  of  repudiation,  and  so  makes  it  possible  to

represent  a  repressed  thought  which  the  dreamer  would  prefer  to

regard as utterly unthinkable. It seems impossible to elucidate dreams

of  this  kind  unless  one  bears  in  mind  the  fact  that  dreams  do  not

differentiate between what is wished and what is real. For instance, a

man who had nursed his father during his last illness and had been

deeply grieved by his death, had the following senseless dream some

time afterwards. His father was alive once more and talking to him in

his usual way, but (the remarkable thing was that) he had really died,

only he did not know it. This dream only becomes intelligible if, after

the words ‘but he had really died’ we insert ‘in consequence of the

dreamer’s wish’, and if we explain that what ‘he did not know’ was that

the dreamer had had this wish. While he was nursing his father he had

repeatedly wished his father were dead; that is to say, he had had

what was actually a merciful thought that death might put an end to his

sufferings.  During  his  mourning,  after  his  father’s  death,  even  this

sympathetic wish became a subject of unconscious self-reproach, as

though by means of it he had really helped to shorten the sick man’s

life. A stirring up of the dreamer’s earliest infantile impulses against his

father made it possible for this self-reproach to find expression as a

dream; but the fact that the instigator of the dream and the daytime

thoughts were such worlds apart was precisely what necessitated the

dream’s absurdity.¹

   It is true that dreams of dead people whom the dreamer has loved

raise difficult problems in dream-interpretation and that these cannot

always be satisfactorily solved. The reason for this is to be found in

the  particularly  strongly  marked  emotional  ambivalence  whichdominates  the  dreamer’s  relation  to  the  dead  person.  It  very

commonly  happens  that  in  dreams  of  this  kind  the  dead  person  is

treated to begin with as though he were alive, that he then suddenly

turns out to be dead and that in a subsequent part of the dream he is

alive once more. This has a confusing effect, It eventually occurred to

me that this alternation between death and life is intended to represent

indifference  on  the  part  of  the  dreamer.  (‘It’s  all  the  same  to  me

whether he’s alive or dead.’) This indifference is, of course, not real

but merely desired; it is intended to help the dreamer to repudiate his

very intense and often contradictory emotional attitudes and it thus

becomes a dream-representation of his ambivalence. -In other dreams

in which the dreamer associates with dead people, the following rule

often helps to give us our bearings. If there is no mention in the dream

of the fact that the dead man is dead, the dreamer is equating himself

with him: he is dreaming of his own death. If, in the course of the

dream, the dreamer suddenly says to himself in astonishment, ‘why,

he  died  ever  so  long  ago’,  he  is  repudiating  this  equation  and  is

denying  that  the  dream  signifies  his  own  death.  -  But  I  willingly

confess  to  a  feeling  that  dream-interpretation  is  far  from  having

revealed all the secrets of dreams of this character.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1911:] Cf. my paper on the two principles of mental functioning (1911b).

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        881

 

                                            III

 

   In the example which I shall next bring forward I have been able to

catch  the  dream-work  in  the  very  act  of  intentionally  fabricating  an

absurdity for which there was absolutely no occasion in the material. It

is  taken  from  the  dream  which  arose  from  my  meeting  with  Count

Thun as I was starting for my holidays. I was driving in a cab and

ordered the driver to drive me to a station. ‘Of course I can’t drive with

you  along  the  railway  line  itself’,  I  said,  after  he  had  raised  some

objection, as though I had overtired him. It was as if I had already

driven with him for some of the distance one normally travels by train.The analysis produced the following explanations of this confused and

senseless story. The day before, I had hired a cab to take me to an

out-of-the-way  street  in  Dornbach.  The  driver,  however,  had  not

known where the street was and, as these excellent people are apt to

do,  had  driven  on  and  on  until  at  last  I  had  noticed  what  was

happening  and  had  told  him  the  right  way,  adding  a  few  sarcastic

comments. A train of thought, to which I was later in the analysis to

return, led from this cab-driver to aristocrats. For the moment it was

merely the passing notion that what strikes us bourgeois plebs about

the aristocracy is the preference they have for taking the driver’s seat.

Count Thun, indeed, was the driver of the State Coach of Austria. The

next sentence in the dream, however, referred to my brother, whom I

was thus identifying with the cab-driver. That year I had called off a

trip I was going to make with him to Italy. (‘I can’t drive with you along

the  railway  line  itself.’)  And  this  cancellation  had  been  a  kind  of

punishment for the complaints he used to make that I was in the habit

of overtiring him on such trips (this appeared in the dream unaltered)

by insisting upon moving too rapidly from place to place and seeing

too many beautiful things in a single day. On the evening of the dream

my brother had accompanied me to the station; but he had jumped out

shortly before we got there, at the suburban railway station adjoining

the  main  line  terminus,  in  order  to  travel  to  Purkersdorf  by  the

suburban line. I had remarked to him that he might have stayed with

me a little longer by travelling to Purkersdorf by the main line instead

of the suburban one. This led to the passage in the dream in which I

drove in the cab for some of the distance one normally travels by train.

This was an inversion of what had happened in reality - a kind of ‘tu

quoque’ argument. What I had said to my brother was: ‘you can travel

on the main line in my company for the distance you would travel by

the suburban line.’ I brought about the whole confusion in the dream

by putting ‘cab’ instead of ‘suburban line’ (which, incidentally, was of

great help in bringing together the figures of the cab-driver and my

brother). In this way I succeeded in producing something senseless in

the dream, which it seems scarcely possible to disentangle and which

was almost a direct contradiction of an earlier remark of mine in the

dream  (‘I  can’t  drive  with  you  along  the  railway  line  itself.’)  Since,

however,  there  was  no  necessity  whatever  for  me  to  confuse  thesuburban railway and a cab, I must have arranged the whole of this

enigmatic business in the dream on purpose.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        882

 

   But for what purpose?  We are now to discover the significance of

absurdity in dreams and the motives which lead to its being admitted

or even created. The solution of the mystery in the present dream was

as follows. It was necessary for me that there should be something

absurd  and  unintelligible  in  this  dream  in  connection  with  the  word

‘fahren’¹ because the dream-thoughts included a particular judgement

which called for representation. One evening, while I was at the house

of the hospitable and witty lady who appeared as the ‘housekeeper’ in

one of the other scenes in the same dream, I had heard two riddles

which I had been unable to solve. Since they were familiar to the rest

of the company, I cut a rather ludicrous figure in my vain attempts to

find  the  answers.  They  depended  upon  puns  on  the  words

‘Nachkommen’ and ‘Vorfahren’ and, I believe, ran as follows:

 

                                                                Der Herr befiehlt’s,
                                                                Der Kutscher tut’s.
                                                                Ein jeder hat’s,
                                                                Im Grabe ruht’s.

 

                                                                [With the master’s request
                                                                The driver complies:
                                                                By all men possessed
                                                                In the graveyard it lies.]

 

(Answer: ‘Vorfahren’  [‘Drive  up’  and  ‘Ancestry’;  more  literally  ‘go  in

front’ and ‘predecessors’].)

   It was particularly confusing that the first half of the second riddle

was identical with that of the first:

 

                                                                Der Herr befiehlt’s,
                                                                Der Kutscher tut’s.
                                                                Nicht jeder hat’s,
                                                                In der Wiege ruht’s. 

                                                                [With the master’s request
                                                                The driver complies:
                                                                Not by all men possessed
                                                                In the cradle it lies.]

 

(Answer: ‘Nachkommen’[‘Follow after’ and ‘Progeny’; more literally ‘come

after’ and ‘successors’].)

 

   ¹ [The German word ‘fahren’’, which has already been used repeatedly in the dream and

the analysis, is used for the English ‘drive’ (in a cab) and ‘travel’ (in a train) and has had to be
translated by both of those words in different contexts.]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        883

 

      When  I  saw  Count  Thun drive  up  so  impressively  and  when  I

thereupon  fell  into  the  mood  of  Figaro,  with  his  remarks  on  the

goodness of great gentlemen in having taken the trouble to be born (to

become progeny), these two riddles were adopted by the dream-work

as intermediate thoughts. Since aristocrats could easily be confused

with drivers and since there was a time in our part of the world when a

driver was spoken of as ‘Schwager’ [‘coachman’ and ‘brother-in-law’],

the work of condensation was able to introduce my brother into the

same  picture.  The  dream-thought,  however,  which  was  operating

behind  all  this  ran  as  follows:  ‘It  is  absurd  to  be  proud  of  one’s

ancestry; it is better to be an ancestor oneself.’ This judgement, that

something ‘is absurd’, was what produced the absurdity in the dream.

And this also clears up the remaining enigma in this obscure region of

the dream, namely why it was that I thought I had already driven with

the  driver before  [vorhergefahren  (‘driven  before’)  - vorgefahren

(‘driven up’) -’Vorfahren’ (‘ancestry’)].

 

   A dream is made absurd, then, if a judgement that something ‘is

absurd’ is among the elements included in the dream thoughts - that is

to say, if any one of the dreamer’s unconscious trains of thought has

criticism or ridicule as its motive. Absurdity is accordingly one of the

methods  by  which  the  dream-work  represents  a  contradiction  -alongside such other methods as the reversal in the dream-content of

some material relation in the dream-thoughts, or the exploitation of the

sensation of motor inhibition. Absurdity in a dream, however, is not to

be translated by a simple ‘no’; it is intended to reproduce the mood of

the  dream-thoughts,  which  combines  derision  or  laughter  with  the

contradiction. It is only with such an aim in view that the dream-work

produces anything ridiculous. Here once again it is a giving a manifest

form to a portion of the latent content.¹

   Actually we have already come across a convincing example of an

absurd dream with this kind of meaning: the dream - I interpreted it

without any analysis - of the performance of a Wagner opera which

lasted till a quarter to eight in the morning and in which the orchestra

was conducted from a tower, and so on (see p. 811 f.). It evidently

meant to say: ‘This is a topsy-turvy world and a crazy society; the

person who deserves something doesn’t get it, and the person who

doesn’t care about something does get it’ - and there the dreamer was

comparing her fate with her cousin’s. - Nor is it by any means a matter

of chance that our first examples of absurdity in dreams related to a

dead father. In such cases, the conditions for creating absurd dreams

are found together in characteristic fashion. The authority wielded by a

father provokes criticism from his children at an early age, and the

severity of the demands he makes upon them leads them, for their

own relief, to keep their eyes open to any weakness of their father’s;

but  the  filial  piety  called  up  in  our  minds  by  the  figure  of  a  father,

particularly after his death, tightens the censorship which prohibits any

such criticism from being consciously expressed.

 

   ¹ The dream-work is thus parodying the thought that has been presented to it as something

ridiculous, by the method of creating something ridiculous in connection with that thought.
Heine adopted the same line when he wanted to ridicule some wretched verses written by the
King of Bavaria. He did so in still more wretched ones:
 
                                                                Herr Ludwig ist ein grosser Poet,
                                                                Und singt er, so stürzt Apollo
                                                                Vor ihm auf die Kniee und bittet und fleht,
                                                                ‘Halt ein! ich werde sonst toll, o!’
 
                                                                [Sir Ludwig is a magnificent bard
                                                                And, as soon as he utters, Apollo
                                                                Goes down on his knees and begs him: ‘Hold hard!                                                                Or I’II shortly become a clod-poll oh!’

                                                                                                Lobgesänge auf König Ludwig, I]

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        884

 

                                            IV

 

   Here is another absurd dream about a dead father. I received a

communication from the town council of my birthplace concerning the

fees due for someone’s maintenance in the hospital in the year 1851,

which had been necessitated by an attack he had had in my house. I

was amused by this since, in the first place, I was not yet alive in 1851

and, in the second place, my father, to whom it might have related,

was already dead. I went to him in the next room, where he was lying

on his bed, and told him about it. To my surprise, he recollected that in

1851 he had once got drunk and had had to be locked up or detained.

It was at a time at which he had been working for the firm of T----. ‘So

you used to drink as well?’ I asked; ‘did you get married soon after

that?’ I calculated of course, I was born in 1856, which seemed to be

the year which immediately followed the year in question.

      We  should  conclude  from  the  preceding  discussion  that  the

insistence with which this dream exhibited its absurdities could only be

taken  as  indicating  the  presence  in  the  dream-thoughts  of  a

particularly embittered and passionate polemic. We shall therefore be

all the more astonished to observe that in this dream the polemic was

carried on in the open and that my father was the explicit object of the

ridicule. Openness of this kind seems to contradict our assumptions

as  regards  the  working  of  the  censorship  in  connection  with  the

dream-work.  The  position  will  become  clearer,  however,  when  it  is

realized that in this instance my father was merely put forward as a

show  figure,  and  that  the  dispute  was  really  being  carried  on  with

someone else, who only appeared in the dream in a single allusion.

Whereas normally a dream deals with rebellion against someone else,

behind whom the dreamer’s father is concealed, the opposite was true

here. My father was made into a man of straw, in order to screen

someone  else;  and  the  dream  was  allowed  to  handle  in  thisundisguised  way  a  figure  who  was  as  a  rule  treated  as  sacred,

because at the same time I knew with certainty that it was not he who

was really meant. That this was so was shown by the exciting cause

of the dream. For it occurred after I had heard that a senior colleague

of  mine,  whose  judgement  was  regarded  as  beyond  criticism,  had

given voice to disapproval and surprise at the fact that the psycho-

analytic treatment of one of my patients had already entered its fifth

year. The first sentences of the dream alluded under a transparent

disguise to the fact that for some time this colleague had taken over

the  duties  which  my  father  could  no  longer  fulfil  (’fees  due’,

‘maintenance in the hospital’), and that, when our relations began to

be  less  friendly,  I  became  involved  in  the  same  kind  of  emotional

conflict which, when a misunderstanding arises between a father and

son,  is  inevitably  produced  owing  to  the  position  occupied  by  the

father and the assistance formerly given by him. The dream-thoughts

protested bitterly against the reproach that I was not getting on faster -

a  reproach  which,  applying  first  to  my  treatment  of  the  patient,

extended later to other things. Did he know anyone, I thought, who

could get on more quickly? Was he not aware that, apart from my

methods of treatment, conditions of that kind are altogether incurable

and last a life-time? What were four or five years in comparison with a

whole life-time, especially considering that the patient’s existence had

been so very much eased during the treatment?

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        885

 

   A great part of the impression of absurdity in this dream was brought

about by running together sentences from different parts of the dream-

thoughts without any transition. Thus the sentence ‘I went to him in the

next  room’,  etc.,  dropped  the  subject  with  which  the  preceding

sentences  had  been  dealing  and  correctly  reproduced  the

circumstances in which I informed my father of my having become

engaged  to  be  married  without  consulting  him.  This  sentence  was

therefore reminding me of the admirable unselfishness displayed by

the old man on that occasion, and contrasting it with the behaviour ofsomeone else - of yet another person. It is to be observed that the

dream  was  allowed  to  ridicule  my  father  because  in  the  dream-

thoughts he was held up in unqualified admiration as a model to other

people. It lies in the very nature of every censorship that of forbidden

things it allows those which are untrue to be said rather than those

which are true. The next sentence, to the effect that he recollected

‘having  once  got  drunk  and  been  locked  up  for  it’,  was  no  longer

concerned with anything that related to my father in reality. Here the

figure  for  whom  he  stood  was  no  less  a  person  than  the  great

Meynert, in whose footsteps I had trodden with such deep veneration

and whose behaviour towards me, after a short period of favour, had

turned  to  undisguised  hostility.  The  dream  reminded  me  that  he

himself had told me that at one time in his youth he had indulged in

the habit of making himself intoxicated with chloroform and that on

account of it he had had to go into a home. It also reminded me of

another incident with him shortly before his death. I had carried on an

embittered  controversy  with  him  in  writing,  on  the  subject  of  male

hysteria, the existence of which he denied. When I visited him during

his fatal illness and asked after his condition, he spoke at some length

about his state and ended with these words: ‘You know, I was always

one of the clearest cases of male hysteria.’ He was thus admitting, to

my satisfaction and astonishment, what he had for so long obstinately

contested. But the reason why I was able in this scene of the dream to

use my father as a screen for Meynert did not lie in any analogy that I

had discovered between the two figures. The scene was a concise but

entirely  adequate  representation  of  a  conditional  sentence  in  the

dream-thoughts,  which  ran  in  full:  ‘If  only  I  had  been  the  second

generation, the son of a professor or Hofrat, I should certainly have

got  on  faster.’  In  the  dream  I  made  my  father  into  a  Hofrat  and

professor.  -The  most  blatant  and  disturbing  absurdity  in  the  dream

resides in its treatment of the date 1851, which seemed to me not to

differ from 1856, just as though a difference of five years was of no

significance whatever.  But  this  last  was  precisely  what  the  dream-

thoughts sought to express. Four or five years was the length of time

during which I enjoyed the support of the colleague whom I mentioned

earlier in this analysis; but it was also the length of time during which I

made my fiancée wait for our marriage; and it was also, by a chancecoincidence which was eagerly exploited by the dream-thoughts, the

length of time during which I made my patient of longest standing wait

for  a  complete  recovery.  ‘What  are  five  years?’  asked  the  dream-

thoughts; ‘that’s no time at all, so far as I am concerned; it doesn’t

count. I have time enough in front of me. And just as I succeeded in

the end in that, though you would not believe it, so I shall achieve this,

too.’ Apart from this, however, the number 51 by itself, without the

number of the century, was determined in another, and indeed, in an

opposite sense; and this, too, is why it appeared in the dream several

times. 51 is the age which seems to be a particularly dangerous one

to men; I have known colleagues who have died suddenly at that age,

and amongst them one who, after long delays, had been appointed to

a professorship only a few days before his death.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        886

 

                                            V

 

   Here is yet another absurd dream which plays about with numbers.

One of my acquaintances, Herr M., had been attacked in an essay

with an unjustifiable degree of violence, as we all thought - by no less

a person than Goethe. Herr M. was naturally crushed by the attack.

He complained of it bitterly to some company at table; his veneration

for  Goethe  had  not  been  affected,  however,  by  this  personal

experience.  I  tried  to  throw  a  little  light  on  the  chronological  data,

which  seemed  to  me  improbable.  Goethe  died  in  1832.  Since  his

attack on Herr M. must naturally have been made earlier than that,

Herr M. must have been quite a young man at the time. It seemed to

be  a  plausible  notion  that  he  was  eighteen.  I  was  not  quite  sure,

however, what year we were actually in, so that my whole calculation

melted  into  obscurity.  Incidentally,  the  attack  was  contained  in

Goethe’s well-known essay on ‘Nature’.

   We shall quickly find means of justifying the nonsense in this dream.

Herr M., whom I had got to know among some company at table, had

not long before asked me to examine his brother, who was showing

signs of general paralysis. The suspicion was correct; on the occasionof  this  visit  an  awkward  episode  occurred,  for  in  the  course  of  his

conversation the patient for no accountable reason gave his brother

away by talking of his youthful follies. I had asked the patient the year

of his birth and made him do several small sums so as to test the

weakness of his memory - though, incidentally, he was still able to

meet the tests quite well. I could already see that I myself behaved

like a paralytic in the dream. (I was not quite sure what year we were

in.)  Another  part  of  the  material  of  the  dream  was  derived  from

another recent source. The editor of a medical journal, with whom I

was on friendly terms, had printed a highly unfavourable, a ‘crushing’

criticism  of  my  Berlin  friend  Fl.’s  last  book.  The  criticism  had  been

written by a very youthful reviewer who possessed small judgement. I

thought I had a right to intervene and took the editor to task over it. He

expressed lively regret at having published the criticism but would not

undertake to offer any redress. I therefore severed my connection with

the journal, but in my letter of resignation expressed a hope that our

personal relations would not be affected by the event. The third source

of the dream was an account I had just heard from a woman patient of

her brother’s mental illness, and of how he had broken out in a frenzy

with  cries  of  ‘Nature!  Nature!’  The  doctors  believed  that  his

exclamation came from his having read Goethe’s striking essay on

that subject and that it showed he had been overworking at his studies

in natural philosophy. I myself preferred to think of the sexual sense in

which the word is used even by the less educated people here. This

idea of mine was at least not disproved by the fact that the unfortunate

young man subsequently mutilated his own genitals. He was eighteen

at the time of his outbreak.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        887

 

      I  may  add  that  my  friend’s  book  which  had  been  so  severely

criticized  (‘one  wonders  whether  it  is  the  author  or  oneself  who  is

crazy’, another reviewer had said) dealt with the chronological data of

life and showed that the length of Goethe’s life was a multiple of a

number that has a significance in biology. So it is easy to see that inthe dream I was putting myself in my friend’s place. (I tried to throw a

little light on the chronological data.) But I behaved like a paralytic,

and the dream was a mass of absurdities. Thus the dream-thoughts

were saying ironically: ‘Naturally, it’s he who is the crazy fool, and it’s

you who are the men of genius and know better. Surely it can’t by any

chance  be  the  reverse?’  There  were  plenty  of  examples  of  this

reversal in the dream. For instance, Goethe attacked the young man,

which is absurd, whereas it is still easy for quite a young man to attack

Goethe,  who  is  immortal.  And  again,  I  calculated  from  the  year  of

Goethe’s death, whereas I had made the paralytic calculate from the

year of his birth.

   But I have also undertaken to show that no dream is prompted by

motives other than egoistic ones. So I must explain away the fact that

in the present dream I made my friend’s cause my own and put myself

in his place. The strength of my critical conviction in waking life is not

enough to account for this. The story of the eighteen-year-old patient,

however, and the different interpretations of his exclaiming ‘Nature!’

were  allusions  to  the  opposition  in  which  I  found  myself  to  most

doctors  on  account  of  my  belief  in  the  sexual  aetiology  of  the

psychoneuroses. I could say to myself: ‘The kind of criticism that has

been applied to your friend will be applied to you - indeed, to some

extent it already has been.’ The ‘he’ in the dream can therefore be

replaced  by  ‘we’:  ‘Yes,  you’re  quite  right,  it’s we  who  are  the

fools.’  There  was  a  very  clear  reminder  in  the  dream  that  ‘mea

resagitur’,  in  the  allusion  to  Goethe’s  short  but  exquisitely  written

essay; for when at the end of my school-days I was hesitating in my

choice of a career, it was hearing that essay read aloud at a public

lecture that decided me to take up the study of natural science.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        888

 

                                            VI

 

   Earlier in this volume I undertook to show that another dream in

which  my  own  ego  did  not  appear  was  nevertheless  egoistic.  On

p. 746 I reported a short dream to the effect that Professor M. said:‘My son, the Myops . . .’, and I explained that the dream was only an

introductory one, preliminary to another in which I did play a part. Here

is  the  missing  main  dream,  which  introduces  an  absurd  and

unintelligible verbal form which requires an explanation.

     On  account  of  certain  events  which  had  occurred  in  the  city  of

Rome, it had become necessary to remove the children to safety, and

this  was  done.  The  scene  was  then  in  front  of  a  gateway,  double

doors  in  the  ancient  style  (the  ‘Porta  Romana’  at  Siena,  as  I  was

aware during the dream itself). I was sitting on the edge of a fountain

and was greatly depressed and almost in tears. A female figure - an

attendant or nun - brought two boys out and handed them over to their

father, who was not myself. The elder of the two was clearly my eldest

son; I did not see other one’s face. The woman who brought out the

boy asked him to kiss her good-bye. She was noticeable for having a

red nose. The boy refused to kiss her, but, holding out his hand in

farewell, said ‘AUF GESERES’ to her, and then ‘AUF UNGESERES’ to the two

of us (or to one of us). I had a notion that this last phrase denoted a

preference.¹

 

   ¹ [The words ‘Geseres’ and ‘Ungeseres’, neither of them German, are discussed below.]

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        889

 

   This dream was constructed on a tangle of thoughts provoke by a

play which I had seen, called Das neue Ghetto. The Jewish problem,

concern about the future of one’s children, to whom one cannot give a

country of their own, concern about educating them in such a way that

they  can  move  freely  across  frontiers  -  all  of  this  was  easily

recognizable among the relevant dream-thoughts.

   ‘By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept.’ Siena, like Rome,

is famous for its beautiful fountains. If Rome occurred in one of my

dreams, it was necessary for me to find a substitute for it from some

locality known to me (see p. 679 f.). Near the Port Romana in Siena

we had seen a large and brightly lighted building. We learned that it

was  the Manicomio,  the  insane  asylum.  Shortly  before  I  had  the

dream I had heard that a man of the same religious persuasion asmyself had been obliged to resign the position which he had painfully

achieved in a State asylum.

   Our interest is aroused by the phrase ‘Auf geseres’ (at a point at

which the situation in the dream would have led one to expect ‘Auf

Wiedersehen’)  as  well  as  its  quite  meaningless  opposite  ‘Auf

Ungeseres.’  According  to  information  I  have  received  from

philologists, ‘Geseres’ is a genuine Hebrew word derived from a verb

‘goiser’, and is best translated by ‘imposed sufferings’ or ‘doom.’ The

use of the word in slang would incline one to suppose that it meant

‘weeping and wailing.’ ‘Ungeseres’ was a private neologism of my own

and was the first word to catch my attention, but to begin with I could

make nothing of it. But the short remark at the end of the dream to the

effect that ‘Ungeseres’ denoted a preference over ‘Geseres’ opened

the door to associations and at the same time to an elucidation of the

word.  An  analogous  relationship  occurs  in  the  case  of  caviare;

unsalted [‘ungesalzen’] caviare is esteemed more highly that salted

[‘gesalzen’]. ‘Caviare to the general’, aristocratic pretensions; behind

this lay a joking allusion to a member of my household who, since she

was younger than I, would, I hoped look after my children in the future.

This tallied with the fact that another member of my household, our

excellent nurse, was recognizably portrayed in the female attendant or

nun  in  the  dream.  There  was  still,  however,  no  transitional  idea

between  ‘salted  -  unsalted’  and  ‘Geseres  -  Ungeseres.’  This  was

provided by ‘leavened - unleavened’ [‘gesäuert - ungesäuert’]. In their

flight out of Egypt the Children of Israel had not time to allow their

dough to rise and, in memory of this, they eat unleavened bread to

this day at Easter. At this point I may insert a sudden association that

occurred to me during this portion of the analysis. I remembered how,

during the previous Easter, my Berlin friend and I had been walking

through the streets of Breslau, a town in which we were strangers. A

little girl asked me the way to a particular street, and I was obliged to

confess that I did not know; and I remarked to my friend: ‘It is to be

hoped  that  when  she  grows  up  that  little  girl  will  show  more

discrimination in her choice of the people whom she gets to direct her.’

Shortly afterwards, I caught sight of a door-plate bearing the words

‘Dr. Herodes. Consulting hours:. . .’ ‘Let us hope’, I remarked, ‘that our

colleague does not happen to be a children’s doctor.’ At this sametime  my  friend  had  been  telling  me  his  views  on  the  biological

significance of bilateral symmetry and had begun a sentence with the

words ‘If we had an eye in the middle of our foreheads like a Cyclops .

. .’ This led to the Professor’s remark in the introductory dream, ‘My

son, the Myops . . .’¹ and I had now been led to the principal source of

‘Geseres’. Many years before, when this son of Professor M.’s, to-day

an  independent  thinker,  was  still  sitting  at  his  school-desk,  he  was

attacked by a disease of the eyes which, the doctor declared, gave

cause for anxiety. He explained that so long as it remained on one

side it was of no importance, but that if it passed over to the other eye

it would be a serious matter. The affection cleared up completely in

the one eye; but shortly afterwards signs in fact appeared of the other

one being affected. The boy’s mother, terrified, at once sent for the

doctor to the remote spot in the country where they were staying. The

doctor,  however,  now  went  over to  the  other  side.  ‘Why  are  you

making such a "Geseres"?’ he shouted at the mother, ‘if one side has

got well, so will the other.’ And he was right.

 

   ¹ [The German ‘Myop’ is an ad hoc form constructed on the pattern of ‘Zyklop’.]

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        890

 

   And now we must consider the relation of all this to me and my

family.  The  school-desk  at  which  Professor  M.’s  son  took  his  first

steps in knowledge was handed over by his mother as a gift to my

eldest son, into whose mouth I put the farewell phrases in the dream.

It is easy to guess one of the wishes to which this transference gave

rise. But the construction of the desk was also intended to save the

child from being short-sighted and one-sided. Hence the appearance

in the dream of ‘Myops’ (and, behind it, ‘Cyclops’) and the reference to

bilaterality.  My  concern  about  one-sidedness  had  more  than  one

meaning: it would refer not only to physical one-sidedness but also to

one sidedness of intellectual development. May it not even be that it

was precisely this concern which, in its crazy way, the scene in the

dream was contradicting? After the child had turned to one side to say

farewell words, he turned to the other side  to  say  the  contrary,  asthough to restore the balance. It was as though he was acting with

due attention to bilateral symmetry!

   Dreams, then, are often most profound when they seem most crazy.

In every epoch of history those who have had something to say but

could not say it without peril have eagerly assumed a fool’s cap. The

audience at whom their forbidden speech was aimed tolerated it more

easily if they could at the same time laugh and flatter themselves with

the reflection that the unwelcome words were clearly nonsensical. The

Prince in the play, who had to disguise himself as a madman, was

behaving just as dreams do in reality; so that we can say of dreams

what Hamlet said of himself, concealing the true circumstances under

a  cloak  of  wit  and  unintelligibility:  ‘I  am  but  mad  north-north-west:

when the wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a hand-saw!’¹

 

   Thus I have solved the problem of absurdity in dreams by showing

that the dream-thoughts are never absurd - never, at all events, in the

dreams of sane people - and that the dream-work produces absurd

dreams and dreams containing individual absurd elements if it is faced

with  the  necessity  of  representing  any  criticism,  ridicule  or  derision

which may be present in the dream-thoughts.

 

   ¹ This dream also provides a good example of the generally valid truth that dreams which

occur during the same night, even though they are recollected as separate, spring from the
ground-work of the same thoughts. Incidentally, the situation in the dream of my removing my
children to safety from the City of Rome was distorted by being related back to an analogous
event that occurred in my own childhood: I was envying some relatives who, many years
earlier, had had an opportunity of removing their children to another country.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        891

 

 

   My next task is to show that the dream-work consists in nothing

more than a combination of the three factors I have mentioned - and

of a fourth which I have still to mention; that it carries out no other

function than the translation of dream-thoughts in accordance with the

four conditions to which it is subject; and that the question whether the

mind operates in dreams with all its intellectual faculties or with only apart  of  them  is  wrongly  framed  and  disregards  the  facts.  Since,

however, there are plenty of dreams in whose content judgements are

passed,  criticisms  made,  and  appreciations  expressed,  in  which

surprise  is  felt  at  some  particular  element  of  the  dream,  in  which

explanations  are  attempted  and  argumentations  embarked  upon,  I

must now proceed to meet the objections arising from facts of this kind

by producing some chosen examples.

   My reply is as follows: Everything that appears in dreams as the

ostensible activity of the function of judgement is to be regarded not

as an intellectual achievement of the dream-work but as belonging to

the  material  of  the  dream-thoughts  and  as  having  been  lifted  from

them  into  the  manifest  content  of  the  dream  as  a  ready-made

structure. I can even carry this assertion further. Even the judgements

made after waking upon a dream that has been remembered, and the

feelings called up in us by the reproduction of such a dream, form

part, to a great extent, of the latent content of the dream and are to be

included in its interpretation.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        892

 

                                            I

 

   I have already quoted a striking example of this. A woman patient

refused to tell me a dream of hers because ‘it was not clear enough.’

She had seen someone in the dream but did not know whether it was

her  husband  or  her  father.  There  then  followed  a  second  piece  of

dream in which a dust-bin [Misttrügerl] appeared, and this gave rise to

the following recollection. When she had first set up house she had

jokingly remarked on one occasion in the presence of a young relative

who was visiting in the house that her next job was to get hold of a

new dust-bin. The next morning one arrived for her, but it was filled

with lilies of the valley. This piece of the dream served to represent a

common phrase ‘not grown on my own manure’.¹ When the analysis

was completed, it turned out that the dream-thoughts were concerned

with the after-effects of a story, which the dreamer had heard when

she was young, of how a girl had had a baby and of how it was notclear who the father really was. Here, then, the dream-representation

had overflowed into the waking thoughts: one of the elements of the

dream-thoughts  had  found  representation  in  a  waking  judgement

passed upon the dream as a whole.

 

                                            II

 

   Here is a similar case. One of my patients had a dream which struck

him as interesting, for immediately after waking he said to himself: ‘I

must tell the doctor that.’ The dream was analysed and produced the

clearest  allusions  to  a liaison  which  he  had  started  during  the

treatment and which he had decided to himself not to tell me about.²

 

   ¹ [’Nicht auf meinem eigenen Mist gewachsen’ - meaning ‘I am not responsible for that’, or

‘It’s not my baby.’ The German word ‘Mist’, properly meaning manure, is used in slang for
‘rubbish’ and occurs in this sense in the Viennese term for a dust-bin: ‘Misttrügerl.’]

   ² [Footnote added 1909:] If in the actual course of a dream dreamt during psycho-analytic

treatment the dreamer says to himself: ‘I must tell the doctor that’, it invariably implies the
presence  of  a  strong  resistance  against  confessing  the  dream  -  which  is  not  infrequently
thereupon forgotten.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        893

 

                                            III

 

   Here is a third example, one from my own experience. I was going

to the hospital with P. through a district in which there were houses

and gardens. At the same time I had a notion that I had often seen this

district before in dreams. I did not know my way about very well. He

showed me a road that led round the corner to a restaurant (indoors,

not a garden). There I asked for Frau Doni and was told that she lived

at the back in a small room with three children. I went towards it, but

before I got there met an indistinct figure with my two little girls; I took

them with me after I had stood with them for a little while. Some sort of

reproach against my wife, for having left them there.

   When I woke up I had a feeling of great satisfaction, the reason for

which I explained to myself as being that I was going to discover fromthis  analysis  the  meaning  of  ‘I’ve  dreamt  of  that  before.’¹  In  fact,

however, the analysis taught me nothing of the kind; what it did show

me  was  that  the  satisfaction  belonged  to  the  latent  content  of  the

dream and not to any judgement upon it. My satisfaction was with the

fact  that  my  marriage  had  brought  me  children.  P.  was  a  person

whose course in life lay for some time alongside mine, who then out

distanced me both socially and materially, but whose marriage was

childless.  The  two  events  which  occasioned  the  dream  will  serve,

instead  of  a  complete  analysis,  to  indicate  its  meaning.  The  day

before, I had read in a newspaper the announcement of the death of

Frau Dona A----y (which I turned into ‘Doni’ in the dream), who had

died in childbirth. My wife told me that the dead woman had been

looked after by the same midwife who had attended her at the birth of

our two youngest children. The name ‘Dona’ had struck me because I

had met it for the first time a short while before in an English novel.

The  second  occasion  for  the  dream  was  provided  by  the  date  on

which it occurred. It was on the night before the birthday of my eldest

boy - who seems to have some poetic gifts.

 

   ¹ A protracted discussion on this subject has run through recent volumes of the Revue

Philosophique under the title of ‘Paramnesia in Dreams.’
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        894

 

                                            IV

 

   I was left with the same feeling of satisfaction when I woke from the

absurd dream of my father having played a political part among the

Magyars after his death; and the reason I gave myself for this feeling

was that it was a continuation of the feeling that accompanied the last

piece of the dream. I remembered how like Garibaldi he had looked on

his death-bed and felt glad that it had come true. . . . (There was a

continuation which I had forgotten). The analysis enabled me to fill in

this gap in the dream. It was a mention of my second son, to who I

had given the first name of a great historical figure who had powerfully

attracted  me  in  my  boyhood,  especially  since  my  visit  to  England.During the year before the child’s birth I had made up my mind to use

this name if it were a son and I greeted the new-born baby with it with

a feeling of high satisfaction. (It is easy to see how the suppressed

megalomania  of  fathers  is  transferred  in  their  thoughts  on  to  their

children, and it seems quite probable that this is one of the ways in

which the suppression of that feeling, which becomes necessary in

actual life, is carried out.) The little boy’s right to appear in the context

of this dream was derived from the fact that he had just had the same

misadventure - easily forgivable both in a child and in a dying man - of

soiling  his  bed-clothes.  Compare  in  this  connection Stuhlrichter

[‘presiding  judge’,  literally  ‘chair-'  or  ‘stool-judge’]  and  the  wish

expressed in the dream to stand before one’s children’s eyes great

and unsullied. ]

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        895

 

                                            V

 

      I  now  turn  to  consider  expressions  of  judgement  passed  in  the

dream itself but not continued into waking life or transposed into it. In

looking for examples of these, my task will be greatly assisted if I may

make use of dreams which I have already recorded with other aims in

view. The dream of Goethe’s attack on Herr M. appears to contain a

whole number of acts of judgement. ‘I tried to throw a little light on the

chronological data, which seemed to me improbable.’ This has every

appearance of being a criticism of the absurd idea that Goethe should

have made a literary attack on a young man of my acquaintance. ‘It

seemed to be a plausible notion that he was eighteen.’ This, again,

sounds exactly like the outcome of a calculation, though, it is true, of a

feeble-minded one. Lastly, ‘I was not quite sure what year we were in’

seems like an instance of uncertainty or doubt in a dream.

   Thus all of these seemed to be acts of judgement made for the first

time  in  the  dream.  But  analysis  showed  that  their  wording  can  be

taken in another way, in the light of which they become indispensable

for the dream’s interpretation, while at the same time every trace of

absurdity is removed. The sentence ‘I tried to throw a little light on thechronological data’ put me in the place of my friend who was in fact

seeking to throw light on the chronological data of life. This deprives

the sentence of its significance as a judgement protesting against the

absurdity of the preceding sentences. The interpolated phrase, ‘which

seemed  to  me  improbable’,  belonged  with  the  subsequent  one,  ‘It

seemed to be a plausible notion’. I had used almost these precise

words to the lady who had told her brother’s case-history. ‘It seems to

me  an  improbable  notion  that  his  cries  of  "Nature!  Nature  !"  had

anything to do with Goethe; it seems to me far more plausible that the

words had the sexual meaning you are familiar with.’ It is true that

here a judgement was passed - not in the dream, however, but in

reality, and on an occasion which was recollected and exploited by the

dream-thoughts. The content of the dream took over this judgement

just like any other fragment of the dream-thoughts. The number ‘18' to

which the judgement in the dream was senselessly attached, retains a

trace of the real context from which the judgement was torn. Lastly, ‘I

was not quite sure what year we were in’ was intended merely to carry

further my identification with the paralytic patient in my examination of

whom this point had really arisen.

   The resolution of what are ostensibly acts of judgement in dreams

may serve to remind us of the rules laid down at the beginning of this

book for carrying out the work of interpretation: namely, that we should

disregard the apparent coherence between a dream’s constituents as

an unessential illusion, and that we should trace back the origin of

each of its elements on its own account. A dream is a conglomerate

which, for purposes of investigation, must be broken up once more

into fragments. On the other hand, however, it will be observed that a

psychical  force  is  at  work  in  dreams  which  creates  this  apparent

connectedness, which, that is to say, submits the material produced

by the dream-work to a ‘secondary revision’. This brings us face to

face  with  the  manifestations  of  a  force  whose  importance  we  shall

later assess as the fourth of the factors concerned in the construction

of dreams.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        896 

                                            VI

 

   Here is a further instance of a process of judgement at work in a

dream  that  I  have  already  recorded.  In  the  absurd  dream  of  the

communication from the town council I asked: ‘Did you get married

soon after that?’ I calculated that, of course, I was born in 1856, which

seemed  to  be  the  year  which  immediately  followed  the  year  in

question.  All  of  this  was  clothed  in  the  form  of  a  set  of  logical

conclusions.  My  father  had  married  in  1851,  immediately  after  his

attack; I, of course, was the eldest of the family and had been born in

1856;  Q.E.D.  As  we  know,  this  false  conclusion  was  drawn  in  the

interests of wish-fulfilment; and the predominant dream-thought ran:

‘Four or five years; that’s no time at all; it doesn’t count.’ Every step in

this set of logical conclusions, however alike in their content and their

form, could be explained in another way as having been determined

by the dream-thoughts. It was the patient, of whose long analysis my

colleague had fallen foul, who had decided to get married immediately

the treatment was finished. The manner of my interview with my father

in the dream was like an interrogation or examination, and reminded

me  too  of  a  teacher  at  the  University  who  used  to  take  down

exhaustive  particulars  from  the  students  who  were  enrolling

themselves for his lectures: ‘Date of birth?’ - ‘1856.’ - ‘Patre?’ In reply

to this, one gave one’s father’s first name with a Latin termination; and

we students assumed that the Hofrat drew conclusions from the first

name of the father which could not always be drawn from that of the

student himself. Thus the drawing of the conclusion in the dream was

no  more  than  a  repetition  of  the drawing  of  a  conclusion  which

appeared as a piece of the material of the dream-thoughts. Something

new emerges from this. If a conclusion appears in the content of the

dream there is no question that it is derived from the dream-thoughts;

but it may either be present in these as a piece of recollected material

or it may link a series of dream-thoughts together in a logical chain. In

any case, however, a conclusion in a dream represents a conclusion

in the dream-thoughts.¹

      At  this  point  we  may  resume  our  analysis  of  the  dream.  The

interrogation by the professor led to a recollection of the register ofUniversity Students (which in my time was drawn up in Latin). It led

further to thoughts upon the course of my academic studies. The five

years which are prescribed for medical studies were once again too

few for me. I quietly went on with my work for several more years; and

in my circle of acquaintances I was regarded as an idler and it was

doubted  whether  I  should  ever  get  through.  Thereupon  I quickly

decided to take my examinations and I got through them in spite of the

delay.  Here  was  a  fresh  reinforcement  of  the  dream-thoughts  with

which I was defiantly confronting my critics: ‘Even though you won’t

believe it because I’ve taken my time, I shall get through: I shall bring

my medical training to a conclusion. Things have often turned out like

that before.’

 

   ¹ These findings are in some respects a correction of what I have said above (p. 783) on

the representation of logical relations in dreams. This earlier passage describes the general
behaviour of the dream-work but takes no account of the finer and more precise details of its
functioning.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        897

 

   This same dream in its opening passage contained some sentences

which  could  hardly  be  refused  the  name  of  an  argument.  This

argument was not even absurd; it might just as well have occurred in

waking thought: I  was  amused  in  the  dream  at  the  communication

from the town council since, in the first place, I was not yet in the world

in 1851 and, in the second place, my father, to whom it might have

related, was already dead. Both of these statements were not only

correct in themselves but agreed precisely with the real arguments

that I should bring up if I were actually to receive a communication of

that kind. My earlier analysis of the dream showed that it grew out of

deeply  embittered  and  derisive  dream-thoughts.  If  we  may  also

assume that there were strong reasons present for the activity of the

censorship,  we  shall  understand  that  the  dream-work  had  every

motive  for  producing a  perfectly  valid  refutation  of  an  absurd

suggestion  on  the  model  contained  in  the  dream-thoughts.  The

analysis showed, however, that the dream-work did not have a freehand in framing this parallel but was obliged, for that purpose, to use

material from the dream-thoughts. It was just as though there were an

algebraic equation containing (in addition to numerals) plus and minus

signs, indices and radical signs, and as though someone were to copy

out  the  equation  without  understanding  it,  taking  over  both  the

operational symbols and the numerals into his copy but mixing them

all  up  together.  The  two  arguments  could  be  traced  back  to  the

following material. It was distressing to me to think that some of the

premises  which  underlay  my  psychological  explanations  of  the

psychoneuroses were bound to excite scepticism and laughter when

they were first met with. For instance, I had been driven to assume

that impressions from the second year of life, and sometimes even

from the first, left a lasting trace on the emotional life of those who

were later to fall ill, and that these impressions - though distorted and

exaggerated in many ways by the memory - might constitute the first

and deepest foundation for hysterical symptoms. Patients, to whom I

explained this at some appropriate moment, used to parody this newly

gained  knowledge  by  declaring  that  they  were  ready  to  look  for

recollections dating from a time at which they were not yet alive. My

discovery of the unexpected part played by their father in the earliest

sexual impulses of female patients might well be expected to meet

with  a  similar  reception  (see  the  discussion  on p.  736  f.).

Nevertheless, it was my well-grounded conviction that both of these

hypotheses were true. By way of confirmation I called to mind some

instances in which the death of the father occurred while the child was

at a very early age and in which later events, otherwise inexplicable,

proved  that  the  child  had  nevertheless  retained  unconsciously

recollections of the figure which had disappeared so early in his life. I

was aware that these two assertions of mine rested on the drawing of

conclusions  whose  validity  would  be  disputed.  It  was  therefore  an

achievement of wish-fulfilment when the material of precisely those

conclusions which I was afraid would be contested was employed by

the dream-work for drawing conclusions which it was impossible to

contest.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams                                                                                        898

 

                                            VII

 

   At the beginning of a dream, which I have so far hardly touched

upon,  there  was  a  clear  expression  of  astonishment  at  the  subject

which  had  cropped  up. Old  Brücke  must  have  set  me  some  task;

STRANGELY ENOUGH, it related to a dissection of the lower part of my

own body, my pelvis and legs which I saw before me as though in the

dissecting-room, but without noticing their absence in myself and also

without  a  trace  of  any  gruesome  feeling.  Louise  N.  was  standing

beside  me  and  doing  the  work  with  me.  The  pelvis  had  been

eviscerated, and it was visible now in its superior, now in its inferior,

aspect,  the  two  being  mixed  together.  Thick  flesh-coloured

protuberances  (which,  in  the  dream  itself,  made  me  think  of

haemorrhoids) could be seen. Something which lay over it and was

like crumpled silver-paper¹had also to be carefully fished out. I was

then once more in possession of my legs and was making my way

through the town. But (being tired) I took a cab. To my astonishment

the  cab  drove  in  through  the  door  of  a  house,  which  opened  and

allowed it to pass along a passage which turned a corner at its end

and finally led into the open air again.² Finally I was making a journey

through a changing landscape with an Alpine guide who was carrying

my belongings. Part of the way he carried me too, out of consideration

for my tired legs. The ground was boggy; we went round the edge;

people were sitting on the ground like Red Indians or gypsies - among

them a girl. Before this I had been making my own way forward over

the slippery ground with a constant feeling of surprise that I was able

to do it so well after the dissection. As we reached a small wooden

house at the end of which was an open window. There the guide set

me down and laid two wooden boards, which were standing ready,

upon  the  window-sill,  so  as  to  bridge  the  chasm  which  had  to  be

crossed over from the window. At that point I really became frightened

about my legs, but instead of the expected crossing, I saw two grown-

up men lying on wooden benches that were along the walls of the hut,

and what seemed to be two children sleeping beside them. It was as

though what was going to make the crossing possible was not the

boards but the children. I awoke in a mental fright. 

   ¹ Stanniol, which was an allusion to the book by Stannius on the nervous system of fishes.

(Cf. loc. cit.)

   ² It was the place on the ground-floor of my block of flats where the tenants keep their

perambulators; but it was over-determined in several other ways.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        899

 

   Anyone who has formed even the slightest idea of the extent of

condensation in dreams will easily imagine what a number of pages

would be filled by a full analysis of this dream. Fortunately, however,

in  the  present  context  I  need  only  take  up  one  point  in  it,  which

provides an example of astonishment in dreams, as exhibited in the

interpolation ‘strangely enough’. The following was the occasion of the

dream. Louise N., the lady who was assisting me in my job in the

dream, had been calling on me. ‘Lend me something to read’, she had

said. I offered her Rider Haggard’s She. ‘A strange book, but full of

hidden meaning’, I began to explain to her; ‘the eternal feminine, the

immortality of our emotions . . .’ Here she interrupted me: ‘I know it

already.  Have  you  nothing  of  your  own?’  -  ‘No,  my  own  immortal

works have not yet been written.’ - ‘Well, when are we to expect these

so-called ultimate explanations of yours which you’ve promised even

we shall find readable?’ she asked, with a touch of sarcasm. At that

point  I  saw  that  someone  else  was  admonishing  me  through  her

mouth and I was silent. I reflected on the amount of self-discipline it

was costing me to offer the public even my book upon dreams - I

should have to give away so much of my own private character in it.

 

                                                                Das Beste was du wissen kannst,
                                                                Darfst du den Buben doch nicht sagen.

 

The task which was imposed on me in the dream of carrying out a

dissection of my own body was thus my self-analysis which was linked

up with my giving an account of my dreams. Old Brücke came in here

appropriately; even in the first years of my scientific work it happened

that  I  allowed  a  discovery  of  mine  to  lie  fallow  until  an  energetic

remonstrance  on  his  part  drove  me  into  publishing  it.  The  furtherthoughts which were started up by my conversation with Louise N.

went  too  deep  to  become  conscious.  They  were  diverted  in  the

direction of the material that had been stirred up in me by the mention

of Rider Haggard’s She. The judgement ‘strangely enough’ went back

to that book and to another one, Heart of the World,  by  the  same

author; and numerous elements of the dream were derived from these

two imaginative novels. The boggy ground over which people had to

be  carried,  and  the  chasm  which  they  had  to  cross  by  means  of

boards  brought  along  with  them,  were  taken  from She;  the  Red

Indians, the girl and the wooden house were taken from Heart of the

World. In both novels the guide is a woman; both are concerned with

perilous journeys; while She describes an adventurous road that had

scarcely  ever  been  trodden  before,  leading  into  an  undiscovered

region. The tired feeling in my legs, according to a note which I find I

made upon the dream, had been a real sensation during the day-time.

It probably went along with a tired mood and a doubting thought: ‘How

much longer will my legs carry me?’ The end of the adventure in She

is  that  the  guide,  instead  of  finding  immortality  for  herself  and  the

others, perishes in the mysterious subterranean fire. A fear of that kind

was unmistakably active in the dream-thoughts. The ‘wooden house’

was also, no doubt, a coffin, that is to say, the grave. But the dream-

work  achieved  a  masterpiece  in  its  representation  of  this  most

unwished-for  of  all  thoughts  by  a  wish-fulfilment.  For  I  had  already

been in a grave once, but it was an excavated Etruscan grave near

Orvieto, a narrow chamber with two stone benches along its walls, on

which the skeletons of two grown-up men were lying. The inside of the

wooden  house  in  the  dream  looked  exactly  like  it,  except  that  the

stone was replaced by wood. The dream seems to have been saying:

‘If you must rest in a grave, let it be the Etruscan one.’ And, by making

this replacement, it transformed the gloomiest of expectations into one

that was highly desirable. Unluckily, as we are soon to hear, a dream

can  turn  into  its  opposite  the idea  accompanying  an  affect  but  not

always the affect itself. Accordingly, I woke up in a ‘mental fright’, even

after the successful emergence of the idea that children may perhaps

achieve what their father has failed to - a fresh allusion to the strange

novel  in  which  a  person’s  identity  is  retained  through  a  series  of

generations for over two thousand years. 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        900

 

                                            VIII

 

   Included in yet another of my dreams there was an expression of

surprise at something I had experienced in it; but the surprise was

accompanied  by  such  a  striking,  far-fetched  and  almost  brilliant

attempt at an explanation that, if only on its account, I cannot resist

submitting the whole dream to analysis, quite apart from the dream’s

possessing  two  other  points  to  attract  our  interest.  I  was  travelling

along the Südbahn railway line during the night of July 18-19th, and in

my sleep I heard: ‘Hollthurn, ten minutes’ being called out. I at once

thought of holothurians - of a natural history museum - that this was

the spot at which valiant men had fought in vain against the superior

power of the ruler of their country - yes, the Counter-Reformation in

Austria - it was as though it were a place in Styria or the Tyrol. I then

saw indistinctly a small museum, in which the relics or belongings of

these  men  were  preserved.  I  should  have  liked  to  get  out,  but

hesitated to do so. There were women with fruit on the platform. They

were crouching on the ground and holding up their baskets invitingly. -

I hesitated because I was not sure whether there was time, but we

were still not moving. - I was suddenly in another compartment, in

which  the  upholstery  and  seats  were  so  narrow  that  one’s  back

pressed directly against the back of the carriage.1Iwas surprised by

this, but I reflected that I MIGHT HAVE CHANGED CARRIAGES WHILE I WAS IN A

SLEEPING  STATE. There  were  several  people,  including  an  English

brother and sister; a row of books were distinctly visible on a shelf on

the wall. I saw ‘The Wealth of Nations’ and ‘Matter and Motion’ (by

Clerk-Maxwell), a thick volume and bound in brown cloth. The man

asked his sister about a book by Schiller, whether she had forgotten it.

It seemed as though the books were sometimes mine and sometimes

theirs. I felt inclined at that point to intervene in the conversation in a

confirmatory or substantiating sense. . . . I woke up perspiring all over

because  all  the  windows  were  shut.  The  train  was  drawn  up  at

Marburg.   While I was writing the dream down a new piece of it occurred to

me, which my memory had tried to pass over. I said to the brother and

sister,  referring  to  a  ‘articular  work:  ‘It  is  from  .  .  .’,  but  corrected

myself: ‘It is by . . .’ ‘Yes’, the man commented to his sister’,he said

that right.’

 

   ¹ This description was unintelligible even to myself; but I have followed the fundamental rule

of reporting a dream in the words which occurred to me as I was writing it down. The wording
chosen is itself part of what is represented by the dream.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        901

 

   The dream opened with the name of the station, which must no

doubt  have  partly  woken  me  up.  I  replaced  its  name, Marburg, by

Hollthurn. The fact that I heard ‘Marburg’ when it was first called out,

or  perhaps  later,  was  proved  by  the  mentioning  in  the  dream  of

Schiller, who was born at Marburg, though not at the one in Styria.¹ I

was making my journey on that occasion, although I was travelling first

class, under very uncomfortable conditions. The train was packed full,

and  in  my  compartment  I  had  found  a  lady  and  gentleman  who

appeared to be very aristocratic and had not the civility, or did not

think it worth the trouble, to make any disguise of their annoyance at

my intrusion. My polite greeting met with no response. Although the

man and his wife were sitting side by side (with their backs to the

engine) the woman nevertheless made haste, under my very eyes, to

engage the window-seat facing her by putting an umbrella on it. The

door  was  shut  immediately,  and  pointed  remarks  were  exchanged

between them on the subject of opening windows. They had probably

seen at once that I was longing for some fresh air. It was a hot night

and  the  atmosphere  in  the  completely  closed  compartment  soon

became suffocating. My experiences of travelling have taught me that

conduct  of  this  ruthless  and  overbearing  kind  is  a  characteristic  of

people  who  are  travelling  on  a  free  or  half-price  ticket.  When  the

ticket-collector came and I showed him the ticket I had bought at such

expense,  there  fell  from  the  lady’s  mouth,  in  haughty  and  almost

menacing tones, the words: ‘My husband has a free pass.’ She wasan imposing figure with discontented features, of an age not far from

the time of the decay of feminine beauty; the man uttered not a word

but sat there motionless. I attempted to sleep. In my dream I took

fearful  vengeance  on  my  disagreeable  companions;  no  one  could

suspect what insults and humiliations lay concealed behind the broken

fragments of the first half of the dream. When this need had been

satisfied a second wish made itself felt - to change compartments. The

scene  is  changed  so  often  in  dreams,  and  without  the  slightest

objection  being  raised,  that  it  would  not  have  been  in  the  least

surprising  if  I  had  promptly  replaced  my  travelling  companions  by

more agreeable ones derived from my memory. But here was a case

in  which  something  resented  the  change  of  scene  and  thought  it

necessary to explain it. How did I suddenly come to be in another

compartment? I had no recollection of having changed. There could

be only one explanation: I must have left the carriage while I was in a

sleeping state - a rare event, of which, however, examples are to be

found in the experience of a neuropathologist. We know of people who

have gone upon railway journeys in a twilight state, without betraying

their abnormal condition by any signs, till at some point in the journey

they have suddenly come to themselves completely and been amazed

at  the  gap  in  their  memory.  In  the  dream  itself,  accordingly,  I  was

declaring  myself  to  be  one  of  these  cases  of  ‘automotisme

ambulatoire’.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] Schiller was not born at any Marburg, but at Marbach, as every

German school-boy knows, and as I knew myself. This was one more of those mistakes (see
above, p. 681 n.) which slip in as a substitute for an intentional falsification at some other
point, and which I have tried to explain in my Psychopathology of Everyday Life.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        902

 

   Analysis made it possible to find another solution. The attempt at an

explanation, which seemed so striking when I was obliged to ascribe it

to the dream-work, was not an original one of my own, but was copied

from  the  neurosis  of  one  of  my  patients.  I  have  already  spoken

elsewhere of a highly educated and, in real life, soft-hearted man who,shortly after the death of his parents, began to reproach himself with

having  murderous  inclinations,  and  then  fell  a  victim  to  the

precautionary  measures  which  he  was  obliged  to  adopt  as  a

safeguard.  It  was  a  case  of  severe  obsessions  accompanied  by

complete insight. To begin with, walking through the streets was made

a burden to him by a compulsion to make certain where every single

person  he  met  disappeared  to;  if  anyone  suddenly  escaped  his

watchful eye, he was left with a distressing feeling and the idea that he

might possibly have got rid of him. What lay behind this was, among

other things, a ‘Cain’ phantasy - for ‘all men are brothers.’ Owing to

the impossibility of carrying out this task, he gave up going for walks

and spent his life incarcerated between his own four walls. But reports

of murders which had been committed outside were constantly being

brought  into  his  room  by  the  newspapers,  and  his  conscience

suggested to him, in the form of a doubt, that he might be the wanted

murderer. The certainty that he had in fact not left his house for weeks

protected  him  from  these  charges  for  a  while,  till  one  day  the

possibility came into his head that he might have left his house while

he was in an unconscious state and have thus been able to commit

the murder without knowing anything about it. From that time onwards

he locked the front door of the house and gave the key to his old

housekeeper with strict instructions never to let it fall into his hands

even if he asked for it.

   This, then, was the origin of my attempted explanation to the effect

that I had changed carriages while I was in an unconscious state; it

had been carried over ready-made into the dream from the material of

the dream-thoughts, and was evidently intended in the dream to serve

the  purpose  of  identifying  me  with  the  figure  of  this  patient.  My

recollection of him had been aroused by an easy association. My last

night-journey, a few weeks earlier, had been made in the company of

this  very  man.  He  was  cured,  and  was  travelling  with  me  into  the

provinces  to  visit  his  relatives,  who  had  sent  for  me.  We  had  a

compartment to ourselves; we left all the windows open all through the

night and had a most entertaining time for as long as I stayed awake. I

knew that the root of his illness had been hostile impulses against his

father, dating from his childhood and involving a sexual situation. In so

far, therefore, as I was identifying myself with him, I was seeking toconfess to something analogous. And in fact the second scene of the

dream ended in a somewhat extravagant phantasy that my two elderly

travelling  companions  had  treated  me  in  such  a  stand-offish  way

because my arrival had prevented the affectionate exchanges which

they had planned for the night. This phantasy went back, however, to

a  scene  of  early  childhood  in  which  the  child,  probably  driven  by

sexual curiosity, had forced his way into his parents’ bedroom and

been turned out of it by his father’s orders.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        903

 

 

   It is unnecessary, I think, to accumulate further examples. They

would merely serve to confirm what we have gathered from those I

have already quoted - that an act of judgement in a dream is only a

repetition  of  some  prototype  in  the  dream-thoughts.  As  a  rule,  the

repetition is ill-applied and interpolated into an inappropriate context,

but occasionally, as in our last instances, it is so neatly employed that

to begin with it may give the impression of independent intellectual

activity in the dream. From this point we might turn our attention to the

psychical activity which, though it does not appear to accompany the

construction  of  dreams  invariably,  yet,  whenever  it  does  so,  is

concerned  to  fuse  together  elements  in  a  dream  which  are  of

disparate origin into a whole which shall make sense and be without

contradiction. Before approaching that subject, however, we are under

an urgent necessity to consider the expressions of affect which occur

in  dreams  and  to  compare  them  with  the  affects  which  analysis

uncovers in the dream-thoughts.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        904

 

                                          (H)

 

                                  AFFECTS IN DREAMS 

   A shrewd observation made by Stricker has drawn our attention to

the fact that the expression of affect in dreams cannot be dealt with in

the  same  contemptuous  fashion  in  which,  after  waking,  we  are

accustomed to dismiss their content. ‘If I am afraid of robbers in a

dream, the robbers, it is true, are imaginary - but the fear is real.’ And

this is equally true if I feel glad in a dream. Our feeling tells us that an

affect experienced in a dream is in no way inferior to one of equal

intensity  experienced  in  waking  life;  and  dreams  insist  with  greater

energy  upon  their  right  to  be  included  among  our  real  mental

experiences  in  respect  to  their  affective  than  in  respect  to  their

ideational content. In our waking state, however, we cannot in fact

include  them  in  this  way,  because  we  cannot  make  any  psychical

assessment  of  an  affect  unless  it  is  linked  to  a  piece  of  ideational

material. If the affect and the idea are incompatible in their character

and intensity, our waking judgement is at a loss.

   It has always been a matter for surprise that in dreams the ideational

content is not accompanied by the affective consequences that we

should regard as inevitable in waking thought. Strümpell declared that

in dreams ideas are denuded of their psychical values. But there is no

lack  in  dreams  of  instances  of  a  contrary  kind,  where  an  intense

expression of affect appears in connection with subject-matter which

seems to provide no occasion for any such expression. In a dream I

may  be  in  a  horrible,  dangerous  and  disgusting  situation  without

feeling any fear or repulsion; while another time, on the contrary, I

may be terrified at something harmless and delighted at something

childish.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        905

 

      This  particular  enigma  of  dream-life  vanishes  more  suddenly,

perhaps, and more completely than any other, as soon as we pass

over from the manifest to the latent content of the dream. We need not

bother about the enigma, since it no longer exists. Analysis shows us

that the  ideational  content  has  undergone  displacements  andsubstitutions, whereas the affects have remained unaltered. It is small

wonder  that  the  ideational  material,  which  has  been  changed  by

dream-distortion,  should  no  longer  be  compatible  with  the  affect,

which is retained unmodified; nor is there anything left to be surprised

at  after  analysis  has  put  the  right  material  back  into  its  former

position.¹

      In  the  case  of  a  psychical  complex  which  has  come  under  the

influence of the censorship imposed by resistance, the affects are the

constituent which is least influenced and which alone can give us a

pointer as to how we should fill in the missing thoughts. This is seen

even more clearly in the psychoneuroses than in dreams. Their affects

are always appropriate, at least in their quality though we must allow

for their intensity being increased owing to displacements of neurotic

attention. If a hysteric is surprised at having to be so frightened of

something trivial or if a man suffering from obsessions is surprised at

such distressing self-reproaches arising out of a mere nothing, they

have both gone astray, because they regard the ideational content -

the triviality or the mere nothing - as what is essential; and they put up

an unsuccessful fight because they take this ideational content as the

starting-point of their thought-activity. Psycho-analysis can put them

upon the right path by recognizing the affect as being, on the contrary,

justified and by seeking out the idea which belongs to it but has been

repressed and replaced by a substitute. A necessary premise to all

this  is  that  the  release  of  affect  and  the  ideational  content  do  not

constitute the indissoluble organic unity as which we are in the habit of

treating  them,  but  that  these  two  separate  entities  may  be  merely

soldered  together  and  can  thus  be  detached  from  each  other  by

analysis. Dream-interpretation shows that this is in fact the case.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1919:] If I am not greatly mistaken, the first dream that I was able to pick

up from my grandson, at the age of one year and eight months, revealed a state of affairs in
which the dream-work had succeeded in transforming the material of the dream-thoughts into
a wish-fulfilment, whereas the affect belonging to them persisted unchanged during the state
of sleep. On the night before the day on which his father was due to leave for the front, the
child  cried  out,  sobbing  violently:  ‘Daddy!  Daddy!  -  baby!’  This  can  only  have  meant  that
Daddy and baby were remaining together; whereas the tears recognized the approaching
farewell.  At  that  time  the  child  was  already  quite  well  able  to  express  the  concept  of
separation. ‘Fort’ [‘gone’] (replaced by a long-drawn-out and peculiarly stressed ‘o-o-o’) had
been one of his first words, and several months before this first dream he had played at ‘gone’
with all his toys. This game went back to a successful piece of self-discipline which he hadachieved at an early age in allowing his mother to leave him and be ‘gone.’
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        906

 

 

   I shall begin by giving an example in which analysis explained the

apparent  absence  of  affect  in  a  case  where  the  ideational  content

should have necessitated its release.

 

                                            I

 

   She saw three lions in a desert, one of which was laughing; but she

was not afraid of them. Afterwards, however, she must have run away

from them, for she was trying to climb up a tree; but she found that her

cousin, who was a French mistress, was up there already, etc.

      The  analysis  brought  up  the  following  material.  The  indifferent

precipitating  cause  of  the  dream  was  a  sentence  in  her  English

composition: ‘The mane is the ornament of the lion.’ Her father wore a

beard which framed his face like a mane. Her English mistress was

called  Miss  Lyons.  An  acquaintance  had  sent  her  the  ballads  of

Loewe. These, then, were the three lions; why should she be afraid of

them? - She had read a story in which a negro, who had stirred up his

companions to revolt, was hunted with blood hounds and climbed up a

tree to save himself. She went on, in the highest spirits, to produce a

number of fragmentary recollections, such as the advice on how to

catch lions from Fliegende Blätter: ‘Take a desert and put it through a

sieve and the lions will be left over.’ And again, the highly amusing but

not very proper anecdote of an official who was asked why he did not

take more trouble to ingratiate himself with the head of his department

and replied that he had tried to make his way in, but his superior was

up  there  already.  The  whole  material  became  intelligible  when  it

turned out that the lady had had a visit on the dream-day from her

husband’s superior. He had been very polite to her and had kissed her

hand and she had not been in the least bit afraid of him, although he

was a very ‘big bug’, and played the part of a ‘social lion’ in the capital

of  the  country  she  came  from.  So  this  lion  was  like  the  lion  in AMidsummer  Night’s  Dream  that  concealed  the  figure  of  Snug  the

joiner; and the same is true of all dream-lions of which the dreamer is

not afraid.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        907

 

                                            II

 

   As my second example I may quote the dream of the young girl who

saw her sister’s little son lying dead in his coffin, but who, as I may

now add, felt neither pain nor grief. We know from the analysis why

this was. The dream merely disguised her wish to see the man she

was in love with once more; and her affect had to be in tune with her

wish and not with its disguise. There was thus no occasion for grief.

 

   In some dreams the affect does at least remain in contact with the

ideational material which has replaced that to which the affect was

originally attached. In others, the dissolution of the complex has gone

further. The affect makes its appearance completely detached from

the idea which belongs to it and is introduced at some other point in

the dream, where it fits in with the new arrangement of the dream-

elements. The situation is then similar to the one we have found in the

case of acts of judgement in dreams. If an important conclusion is

drawn in the dream-thoughts, the dream also contains one; but the

conclusion  in  the  dream  may  be  displaced  on  to  quite  different

material. Such a displacement not infrequently follows the principle of

antithesis.

   This last possibility is exemplified in the following dream, which I

have submitted to a most exhaustive analysis.

 

                                            III

 

   A castle by the sea; later it was no longer immediately on the sea,

but on a narrow canal leading to the sea. The Governor was a Herr P.

I was standing with him in a big reception room - with three windows in

front  of  which  there  rose  buttresses  with  what  looked  likecrenellations. I had been attached to the garrison as something in the

nature of a volunteer naval officer. We feared the arrival of enemy

warships, since we were in a state of war. Herr P. intended to leave,

and gave me instructions as to what was to be done if the event that

we feared took place. His invalid wife was with their children in the

threatened castle. If the bombardment began, the great hall was to be

evacuated. He breathed heavily and turned to go; I held him back and

asked him how I was to communicate with him in case of necessity.

He  added  something  in  reply,  but  immediately  fell  down  dead.  No

doubt I had put an unnecessary strain upon him with my questions.

After his death, which made no further impression on me, I wondered

whether his widow would remain in the castle, whether I should report

his  death  to  the  Higher  Command  and  whether  I  should  take  over

command of the castle as being next in order of rank. I was standing

at the window, and observing the ships as they went past. They were

merchant vessels rushing past rapidly through the dark water, some of

them with several funnels and others with bulging decks (just like the

station buildings in the introductory dream - not reported here). Then

my brother was standing beside me and we were both looking out of

the window at the canal. At the sight of one ship we were frightened

and cried out: ‘Here comes the warship!’ But it turned out that it was

only the same ships that I already knew returning. There now came a

small ship, cut off short, in a comic fashion, in the middle. On its deck

some  curious  cup-shaped  or  box-shaped  objects  were  visible.  We

called out with one voice: ‘That’s the breakfast-ship!’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        908

 

   The rapid movements of the ships, the deep dark blue of the water

and the brown smoke from the funnels - all of this combined to create

a tense and sinister impression.

   The localities in the dream were brought together from several trips

of mine to the Adriatic (to Miramare, Duino, Venice and Aquileia). A

short but enjoyable Easter trip which I had made to Aquileia with my

brother a few weeks before the dream was still fresh in my memory.The  dream  also  contained  allusions  to  the maritime  war  between

America and Spain and to anxieties to which it had given rise about

the fate of my relatives in America. At two points in the dream affects

were in question. At one point an affect that was to be anticipated was

absent: attention was expressly drawn to the fact that the Governor’s

death made no impression on me. At another point, when I thought I

saw the warship, I was frightened and felt all the sensations of fright in

my sleep. In this well-constructed dream the affects were distributed in

such a way that any striking contradiction was avoided. There was no

reason why I should be frightened at the death of the Governor and it

was quite reasonable that as Commandant of the Castle I should be

frightened at the sight of the warship. The analysis showed, however,

that Herr P. was only a substitute for my own self. (In the dream I was

the substitute for him.) I was the Governor who suddenly died. The

dream-thoughts dealt with the future of my family after my premature

death. This was the only distressing one among the dream-thoughts;

and it must have been from it that the fright was detached and brought

into  connection  in  the  dream  with  the  sight  of  the  warship.  On  the

other hand, the analysis showed that the region of the dream-thoughts

from which the warship was taken was filled with the most cheerful

recollections. It was a year earlier, in Venice, and we were standing

one magically beautiful day at the windows of our room on the Riva

degli Schiavoni and were looking across the blue lagoon on which that

day  there  was  more  movement  than  usual.  English  ships  were

expected and were to be given a ceremonial reception. Suddenly my

wife cried out gaily as a child: ‘Here comes the English warship!’ In the

dream I was frightened at these same words. (We see once again that

speeches in a dream are derived from speeches in real life; I shall

show shortly that the element ‘English’ in my wife’s exclamation did

not  elude  the  dream-work  either.)  Here,  then,  in  the  process  of

changing the dream-thoughts into the manifest dream-content, I have

transformed  cheerfulness  into  fear,  and  I  need  only  hint  that  this

transformation was itself giving expression to a portion of the latent

dream-content. This example proves, however, that the dream-work is

at  liberty  to  detach  an  affect  from  its  connections  in  the  dream-

thoughts and introduce it at any other point it chooses in the manifest

dream. 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        909

 

   I take this opportunity of making a somewhat detailed analysis of the

‘breakfast-ship’, the appearance of which in the dream brought such a

nonsensical conclusion to a situation which had up to then been kept

at a rational level. When subsequently I called the dream-object more

precisely to mind, it struck me that it was black and that, owing to the

fact that it was cut off short where it was broadest in the middle, it bore

a  great  resemblance  at  that  end  to  a  class  of  objects  which  had

attracted our interest in the museums in the Etruscan towns. These

were rectangular trays of black pottery, with two handles, on which

there stood things like coffee- or tea-cups, not altogether unlike one of

our modern breakfast-sets. In response to our enquiries we learned

that  this  was  the  ‘toilette’  [toilet-set]  of  an  Etruscan  lady,  with

receptacles  for  cosmetics  and  powder  on  it,  and  we  had  jokingly

remarked that it would be a good idea to take one home with us for

the lady of the house. The object in the dream meant, accordingly, a

black ‘toilette’, i.e. mourning dress, and made a direct reference to a

death. The other end of the dream-object reminded me of the funeral

boats¹ in which in early times dead bodies were placed and committed

to the sea for burial. This led on to the point which explained why the

ships returned in the dream:

 

                  Still, auf gerettetem Boot, treibt in den Hafen der Greis.²

 

It was the return after a shipwreck [‘Schiffbruch’, literally ‘ship-break’] -

the breakfast-ship was broken off short in the middle. But what was

the  origin  of  the  name  ‘breakfast’-ship?  It  was  here  that  the  word

‘English’ came in, which was left over from the warships. The English

word  ‘breakfast’  means  ‘breaking  fast’.  The  ‘breaking’  related  once

more to the shipwreck [‘ship-break’] and the fasting was connected

with the black dress or toilette.

      But  it  was  only  the name  of  the  breakfast-ship  that  was  newly

constructed by the dream. The thing had existed and reminded me ofone of the most enjoyable parts of my last trip. Mistrusting the food

that would be provided at Aquileia, we had brought provisions with us

from  Gorizia  and  had  bought  a  bottle  of  excellent  Istrian  wine  at

Aquileia. And while the little mail steamer made its way slowly through

the ‘Canale delle Mee’ across the empty lagoon to Grado we, who

were the only passengers, ate our breakfast on deck in the highest

spirits,  and  we  had  rarely  tasted  a  better  one.  This,  then,  was  the

‘breakfast-ship’, and it was precisely behind this memory of the most

cheerful joie de vivre that the dream-concealed the gloomiest thoughts

of an unknown and uncanny future.

 

   ¹ ‘Nachen’ [in German], a word which is derived, as a philological friend tells me, from the

root ‘necnx‘ [corpse].

   ² [Safe on his ship, the old man quietly sails into port.]

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        910

 

 

      The  detachment  of  affects  from  the  ideational  material  which

generated them is the most striking thing which occurs to them during

the  formation  of  dreams;  but  it  is  neither  the  only  nor  the  most

essential alteration undergone by them on their path from the dream-

thoughts  to  the  manifest  dream.  If  we  compare  the  affects  of  the

dream-thoughts with those in the dream, one thing at once becomes

clear. Whenever there is an affect in the dream, it is also to be found

in  the  dream-thoughts.  But  the  reverse  is  not  true.  A  dream  is  in

general  poorer  in  affect  than  the  psychical  material  from  the

manipulation of which it has proceeded. When I have reconstructed

the  dream-thoughts,  I  habitually  find  the  most  intense  psychical

impulses in them striving to make themselves felt and struggling as a

rule against others that are sharply opposed to them. If I then turn

back to the dream, it not infrequently appears colourless, and without

emotional tone of any great intensity. The dream-work has reduced to

a level of indifference not only the content but often the emotional tone

of my thoughts as well. It might be said that the dream-work brings

about a suppression of affects. Let us, for instance, take the dream ofthe botanical monograph. The thoughts corresponding to it consisted

of a passionately agitated plea on behalf of my liberty to act as I chose

to act and to govern my life as seemed right to me and me alone. The

dream that arose from them has an indifferent ring about it: ‘I had

written a monograph; it lay before me; it contained coloured plates;

dried plants accompanied each copy.’ This reminds one of the peace

that has descended upon a battle field strewn with corpses; no trace is

left of the struggle which raged over it.

   Things can be otherwise: lively manifestations of affect can make

their way into the dream itself. For the moment, however, I will dwell

upon the incontestable fact that large numbers of dreams appear to be

indifferent,  whereas  it  is  never  possible  to  enter  into  the  dream-

thoughts without being deeply moved.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        911

 

      No  complete  theoretical  explanation  can  here  be  given  of  this

suppression of affect in the course of the dream-work. It would require

to be preceded by a most painstaking investigation of the theory of

affects and of the mechanism of repression. I will only permit myself a

reference to two points. I am compelled - for other reasons - to picture

the release of affects as a centrifugal process directed towards the

interior  of  the  body  and  analogous  to  the  processes  of  motor  and

secretory innervation. Now just as in the state of sleep the sending out

of  motor  impulses  towards  the  external  world  appears  to  be

suspended, so it may be that the centrifugal calling-up of affects by

unconscious thinking may become more difficult during sleep. In that

case the affective impulses occurring during the course of the dream-

thoughts  would  from  their  very  nature  be  weak  impulses,  and

consequently those which found their was into the dream would be no

less weak. On this view, then, the ‘suppression of affect’ would not in

any way be the consequence of the dream-work but would result from

the state of sleep. This may be true, but it cannot be the whole truth.

We must also bear in mind that any relatively complex dream turns out

to be a compromise produced by a conflict between psychical forces.For  one  thing,  the  thoughts  constructing  the  wish  are  obliged  to

struggle against the opposition of a censoring agency; and for another

thing,  we  have  often  seen  that  in  unconscious  thinking  itself  every

train of thought is yoked with its contradictory opposite. Since all of

these trains of thought are capable of carrying an affect, we shall by

and large scarcely be wrong if we regard the suppression of affect as

a consequence of the inhibition which these contraries exercise upon

each other and which the censorship exercises upon the impulsions

suppressed  by  it. The  inhibition  of  affect,  accordingly,  must  be

considered as the second consequence of the censorship of dreams,

just as dream-distortion is its first consequence.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        912

 

      I  will  here  give  as  an  instance  a  dream  in  which  the  indifferent

feeling-tone  of  the  content  of  the  dream  can  be  explained  by  the

antithesis between the dream-thoughts. It is a short dream, which will

fill every reader with disgust.

 

                                            IV

 

   A hill, on which there was something like an open-air closet: a very

long seat with a large hole at the end of it. Its back edge was thickly

covered  with  small  heaps  of  faeces  of  all  sizes  and  degrees  of

freshness. There were bushes behind the seat. I micturated on the

seat; a long stream of urine washed everything clean; the lumps of

faeces came away easily and fell into the opening. It was as though at

the end there was still some left.

   Why did I feel no disgust during this dream?

   Because, as the analysis showed, the most agreeable and satisfying

thoughts  contributed  to  bringing  the  dream  about.  What  at  once

occurred to me in the analysis were the Augean stables which were

cleansed by Hercules. This Hercules was I. The hill and bushes came

from  Aussee,  where  my  children  were  stopping  at  the  time.  I  had

discovered the infantile aetiology of the neuroses and had thus saved

my own children from falling ill. The seat (except, of course, for thehole) was an exact copy of a piece of furniture which had been given

to me as a present by a grateful woman patient. It thus reminded me

of how much my patients honoured me. Indeed, even the museum of

human excrement could be given an interpretation to rejoice my heart.

However much I might be disgusted by it in reality, in the dream it was

a  reminiscence  of  the  fair  land  of  Italy  where,  as  we  all  know,  the

W.C.s  in  the  small  towns  are  furnished  in  precisely  this  way.  The

stream of urine which washed everything clean was an unmistakable

sign of greatness. It was in that way that Gulliver extinguished the

great fire in Lilliput though incidentally this brought him into disfavour

with its tiny queen. But Gargantua, too, Rabelais’ superman, revenged

himself in the same way on the Parisians by sitting astride on Notre

Dame and turning his stream of urine upon the city. It was only on the

previous evening before going to sleep that I had been turning over

Garnier’s illustrations to Rabelais. And, strangely enough, here was

another piece of evidence that I was the superman. The platform of

Notre Dame was my favourite resort in Paris; every free afternoon I

used to clamber about there on the towers of the church between the

monsters and the devils. The fact that all the faeces disappeared so

quickly under the stream recalled the motto: ‘Afflavit et dissipati sunt’,

which I intended one day to put at the head of a chapter upon the

therapy of hysteria.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        913

 

   And now for the true exciting cause of the dream. It had been a hot

summer afternoon; and during the evening I had delivered my lecture

on  the  connection  between  hysteria  and  the  perversions,  and

everything I had had to say displeased me intensely and seemed to

me completely devoid of any value. I was tired and felt no trace of

enjoyment  in  my  difficult  work;  I  longed  to  be  away  from  all  this

grubbing about in human dirt and to be able to join my children and

afterwards  visit  the  beauties  of  Italy.  In  this  mood  I  went  from  the

lecture room to a café, where I had a modest snack in the open air,

since I had no appetite for food. One of my audience, however, wentwith me and he begged leave to sit by me while I drank my coffee and

choked over my crescent roll. He began to flatter me: telling me how

much he had learnt from me, how he looked at everything now with

fresh  eyes,  how  I  had  cleansed  the Augean  stables  of  errors  and

prejudices in my theory of the neuroses. He told me, in short, that I

was a very great man. My mood fitted ill with this paean of praise; I

fought against my feeling of disgust, went home early to escape from

him, and before going to sleep turned over the pages of Rabelais and

read one of Conrad Ferdinand Meyer’s short stories, ‘Die Leiden eines

Knaben’ [‘A Boy’s Sorrows’].

   Such was the material out of which the dream emerged. Meyer’s

short story brought up in addition a recollection of scenes from my

childhood. (Cf. the last episode in the dream about Count Thun.) The

day-time mood of revulsion and disgust persisted into the dream in so

far as it was able to provide almost the entire material of its manifest

content. But during the night a contrary mood of powerful and even

exaggerated self-assertiveness arose and displaced the former one.

The content of the dream had to find a form which would enable it to

express both the delusions of inferiority and the megalomania in the

same  material.  The  compromise  between  them  produced  an

ambiguous dream-content; but it also resulted in an indifferent feeling-

tone owing to the mutual inhibition of these contrary impulses.

   According to the theory of wish-fulfilment, this dream would not have

become  possible  if  the  antithetical  megalomanic  train  of  thought

(which, it is true, was suppressed, but had a pleasurable tone) had not

emerged in addition to the feeling of disgust. For what is distressing

may not be represented in a dream; nothing in our dream-thoughts

which is distressing can force an entry into a dream unless it at the

same time lends a disguise to the fulfilment of a wish.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        914

 

 

   There is yet another alternative way in which the dream-work can

deal with affects in the dream-thoughts, in addition to allowing themthrough  or  reducing  them  to  nothing.  It  can turn  them  into  their

opposite. We have already become acquainted with the interpretative

rule according to which every element in a dream can, for purposes of

interpretation, stand for its opposite just as easily as for itself. We can

never tell beforehand whether it stands for the one or for the other;

only the context can decide. A suspicion of this truth has evidently

found its way into popular consciousness: ‘dream books’ very often

adopt the principle of contraries in their interpretation of dreams. This

turning of a thing into its opposite is made possible by the intimate

associative chain which links the idea of a thing with its opposite in our

thoughts. Like my other kind of displacement it can serve the ends of

the censorship; but it is also frequently a product of wish-fulfilment, for

wish-fulfilment  consists  in  nothing  else  than  a  replacement  of  a

disagreeable thing by its opposite. Just as ideas of things can make

their appearance in dreams turned into their opposite, so too can the

affects  attaching  to  dream-thoughts;  and  it  seems  likely  that  this

reversal of affect is brought about as a rule by the dream-censorship.

In social life, which has provided us with our familiar analogy with the

dream-censorship, we also make use of the suppression and reversal

of affect, principally for purposes of dissimulation. If I am talking to

someone whom I am obliged to treat with consideration while wishing

to  say  something  hostile  to  him,  it  is  almost  more  important  that  I

should  conceal  any  expression  of  my affect  from  him  than  that  I

should mitigate the verbal form of my thoughts. If I were to address

him in words that were not impolite, but accompanied them with a look

or gesture of hatred and contempt, the effect which I should produce

on him would not be very different from what it would have been if I

had  thrown  my  contempt  openly  in  his  face.  Accordingly,  the

censorship  bids  me  above  all  suppress  my  affects;  and,  if  I  am  a

master  of  dissimulation,  I  shall  assume  the opposite  affect  -  smile

when I am angry and seem affectionate when I wish to destroy.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        915

 

   We have already come across an excellent example of a reversal ofaffect  of  this  kind  carried  out  in  a  dream  on  behalf  of  the  dream-

censorship. In the dream of ‘my uncle with the yellow beard’ I felt the

greatest affection for my friend R., whereas and because the dream-

thoughts called him a simpleton. It was from this example of reversal

of affect that we derived our first hint of the existence of a dream-

censorship. Nor is it necessary to assume, in such cases either, that

the dream-work creates contrary affects of this kind out of nothing; it

finds them as a rule lying ready to hand in the material of the dream-

thoughts, and merely intensifies them with the psychical force arising

from a motive of defence, till they can predominate for the purposes of

dream-formation.  In  the  dream  of  my  uncle  which  I  have  just

mentioned, the antithetical, affectionate affect probably arose from an

infantile source (as was suggested by the later part of the dream), for

the  uncle-nephew  relationship,  owing  to  the  peculiar  nature  of  the

earliest experiences of my childhood (cf. the analysis on p. 876 f.) had

become the source of all my friendships and all my hatreds.

   An excellent example of a reversal of affect of this kind will be found

in a dream recorded by Ferenczi (1916): ‘An elderly gentleman was

awakened one night by his wife, who had become alarmed because

he  was  laughing  so  loudly  and  unrestrainedly  in  his  sleep.

Subsequently the man reported that he had had the following dream: I

was lying in bed and a gentleman who was known to me entered the

room; I tried to turn on the light but was unable to: I tried over and over

again, but in vain. Thereupon my wife got out of bed to help me, but

she could not manage it either. But as she felt awkward in front of the

gentleman owing to being "en négligé", she finally gave it up and went

back to bed. All of this was so funny that I couldn’t help roaring with

laughter  at  it.  My  wife  said,  ‘Why  are  you  laughing?  why  are  you

laughing?’  but  I  went  on  laughing  till  I  woke  up.  -  Next  day  the

gentleman  was  very  depressed  and  had  a  headache:  so  much

laughing had upset him, he thought.

   ‘The dream seems less amusing when it is considered analytically.

The  "gentleman  known  to  him"  who  entered  the  room  was,  in  the

latent dream-thoughts, the picture of Death as the "great Unknown" - a

picture which had been called up in his mind during the previous day.

The old gentleman, who suffered from arterio-sclerosis, had had good

reason the day before for thinking of dying. The unrestrained laughtertook the place of sobbing and weeping at the idea that he must die. It

was  the  light  of  life  that  he  could  no  longer  turn  on.  This  gloomy

thought may have been connected with attempts at copulation which

he had made shortly before but which had failed even with the help of

his wife en négligé. He realized that he was already going down hill.

The  dream-work  succeeded  in  transforming  the  gloomy  idea  of

impotence and death into a comic scene, and his sobs into laughter.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        916

 

 

   There is one class of dreams which have a particular claim to be

described as ‘hypocritical’ and which offer a hard test to the theory of

wish-fulfilment.  My  attention  was  drawn  to  them  when  Frau  Dr.  M.

Hilferding  brought  up  the  following  record  of  a  dream  of  Peter

Rosegger’s for discussion by the Vienna Psycho-Analytical Society.

   Rosegger writes in his story ‘Fremd gemacht!’ [‘Dismissed!’]¹ ‘As a

rule I am a sound sleeper but many a night I have lost my rest - for,

along with my modest career as a student and man of letters, I have

for many years dragged around with me, like a ghost from which I

could not set myself free, the shadow of a tailor’s life.

   ‘It is not as though in the day-time I had reflected very often or very

intensely on my past. One who had cast off the skin of a Philistine and

was seeking to conquer Earth and Heaven had other things to do. Nor

would I, when I was a dashing young fellow, have given more than a

thought to my nightly dreams. Only later, when the habit had come to

me  of  reflecting  upon  everything,  or  when  the  Philistine  within  me

began to stir a trifle, did I ask myself why it should be that, if I dreamt

at all, I was always a journeyman tailor and that I spent so long a time

as such with my master and worked without pay in his workshop. I

knew well enough, as I sat like that beside him, sewing and ironing,

that my right place was no longer there and that as a townsman I had

other things to occupy me. But I was always on vacation, I was always

having summer holidays, and so it was that I sat beside my master as

his assistant. It often irked me and I felt sad at the loss of time inwhich I might well have found better and more useful things to do.

Now and then, when something went awry, I had to put up with a

scolding from my master, though there was never any talk of wages.

Often, as I sat there with bent back in the dark workshop, I thought of

giving notice and taking my leave. Once I even did so; but my master

paid no heed and I was soon sitting beside him again and sewing.

 

   ¹  In the second volume of Waldheimat, p. 303.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        917

 

      ‘After  such  tedious  hours,  what  a  joy  it  was  to  wake!  And  I

determined that if this persistent dream should come again I would

throw  it  from  me  with  energy  and  call  aloud:  "This  is  mere  hocus-

pocus, I am lying in bed and want to sleep. . . ." But next night I was

once more sitting in the tailor’s workshop.

      ‘And  so  it  went  on  for  years  with  uncanny  regularity.  Now  it

happened once that my master and I were working at Alpelhofer’s (the

peasant in whose house I had worked when I was first apprenticed)

and my master showed himself quite especially dissatisfied with my

work.  "I’d  like  to  know  where  you’re  wool-gathering,"  he  said,  and

looked at me darkly. The most reasonable thing to do, I thought, would

be to stand up and tell him that I was only with him to please him and

then go off. But I did not do so. I made no objection when my master

took on an apprentice and ordered me to make room for him on the

bench. I moved into the corner and sewed. The same day another

journeyman  was  taken  on  as  well,  a  canting  hypocrite  -  he  was  a

Bohemian - who had worked at our place nineteen years before, and

had fallen into the brook once on his way back from the inn. When he

looked  for  a  seat  there  was  no  more  room.  I  turned  to  my  master

questioningly, and he said to me: "You’ve no gift for tailoring, you can

go!  you’re  dismissed!"  My  fright  at  this  was  so  overpowering  that  I

awoke.

   ‘The grey light of morning was glimmering through the uncurtained

windows into my familiar home. Works of art surrounded me; there in

my handsome book-case stood the eternal Homer, the gigantic Dante,the  incomparable  Shakespeare,  the  glorious  Goethe-all  the

magnificent immortals. From the next room rang out the clear young

voices  of  the  awakening  children  joking  with  their  mother.  I  felt  as

though I had found afresh this idyllically sweet, this peaceful, poetic,

spiritual life in which I had so often and so deeply felt a meditative

human happiness. Yet it vexed me that I had not been beforehand

with my master in giving him notice, but had been dismissed by him.

   ‘And how astonished I was! From the night on which my master

dismissed me, I enjoyed peace; I dreamt no more of the tailoring days

which lay so far back in my past-days which had been so cheerfully

unassuming but had thrown such a long shadow over my later years.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        918

 

      In  this  series  of  dreams  dreamt  by  an  author  who  had  been  a

journeyman tailor in his youth, it is hard to recognize the dominance of

wish-fulfilment.  All  the  dreamer’s  enjoyment  lay  in  his  day-time

existence, whereas in his dreams he was still haunted by the shadow

of an unhappy life from which he had at last escaped. Some dreams

of my own of a similar kind have enabled me to throw a little light on

the  subject.  As  a  young  doctor  I  worked  for  a  long  time  at  the

Chemical Institute without ever becoming proficient in the skills which

that science demands; and for that reason in my waking life I have

never liked thinking of this barren and indeed humiliating episode in

my  apprenticeship.  On  the  other  hand  I  have  a  regularly  recurring

dream of working in the laboratory, of carrying out analyses and of

having various experiences there. These dreams are disagreeable in

the  same  way  as  examination  dreams  and  they  are  never  very

distinct.  While  I  was  interpreting  one  of  them,  my  attention  was

eventually attracted by the word ‘analysis’, which gave me a key to

their understanding. Since those days I have become an ‘analyst’, and

I now carry out analyses which are very highly spoken of, though it is

true that they are ‘psycho-analyses’. It was now clear to me: if I have

grown proud of carrying out analyses of that kind in my daytime life

and feel inclined to boast to myself of how successful I have become,my dreams remind me during the night of those other, unsuccessful

analyses  of  which  I  have  no  reason  to  feel  proud.  They  are  the

punishment dreams of a parvenu, like the dreams of the journeyman

tailor who had grown into a famous author. But how does it become

possible for a dream, in the conflict between a parvenu’s pride and his

self-criticism,  to  side  with  the  latter,  and  choose  as  its  content  a

sensible  warning  instead  of  an  unlawful  wish-fulfilment?  As  I  have

already said, the answer to this question raises difficulties. We may

conclude  that  the  foundation  of  the  dream  was  formed  in  the  first

instance by an exaggeratedly ambitious phantasy, but that humiliating

thoughts that poured cold water on the phantasy found their way into

the dream instead. It may be remembered that there are masochistic

impulses in the mind, which may be responsible for a reversal such as

this.  I  should  have  no  objection  to  this  class  of  dreams  being

distinguished  from  ‘wish-fulfilment  dreams’  under  the  name  of

‘punishment  dreams’.  I  should  not  regard  this  as  implying  any

qualification of the theory of dreams which I have hitherto put forward;

it  would  be  no  more  than  a  linguistic  expedient  for  meeting  the

difficulties of those who find it strange that opposites should converge.

But a closer examination of some of these dreams brings something

more  to  light.  In  an  indistinct  part  of  the  background  of  one  of  my

laboratory dreams I was of an age which placed me precisely in the

gloomiest and most unsuccessful year of my medical career. I was still

without a post and had no idea how I could earn my living; but at the

same  time  I  suddenly  discovered  that  I  had  a  choice  open  to  me

between several women whom I might marry! So I was once more

young, and, more than everything, she was once more young - the

woman  who  had  shared  all  these  difficult  years  with  me.  The

unconscious instigator of the dream was thus revealed as one of the

constantly gnawing wishes of a man who is growing older. The conflict

raging  in  other  levels  of  the  mind  between  vanity  and  self-criticism

had, it is true, determined the content of the dream; but it was only the

more deeply-rooted wish for youth that had made it possible for that

conflict  to  appear  as  a  dream.  Even  when  we  are  awake  we

sometimes say to ourselves: ‘Things are going very well to-day and

times were hard in the old days; all the same, it was lovely then - I was

still young.’¹ 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1930:] Since psycho-analysis has divided the personality into an ego and

a super-ego (Freud, 1921c ), it has become easy to recognize in these punishment dreams
fulfilments of the wishes of the super-ego.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        919

 

   Another group of dreams, which I have often come across in myself

and recognized as hypocritical, have as their content a reconciliation

with people with whom friendly relations have long since ceased. In

such  cases  analysis  habitually  reveals  some  occasion  which  might

urge me to abandon the last remnant of consideration for these former

friends  and  to  treat  them  as  strangers  or  enemies.  The  dream,

however, prefers to depict the opposite relationship.

   In forming any judgement upon dreams recorded by an imaginative

writer it is reasonable to suppose that he may have omitted from his

account  details  in  the  content  of  the  dream  which  he  regards  as

unessential or distracting. His dreams will in that case raise problems

which would be quickly solved if their content were reported in full.

   Otto Rank has pointed out to me that the Grimms’ fairy tale of ‘The

Little Tailor, or Seven at a Blow’ contains an exactly similar dream of a

parvenu. The tailor, who has become a hero and the son-in-law of the

King, dreams one night of his former handicraft, as he lies beside his

wife, the Princess. She, becoming suspicious, posts armed guards the

next night to listen to the dreamer’s words and to arrest him. But the

little tailor is warned, and sees to it that his dream is corrected.

 

   The complicated process of elimination, diminution and reversal, by

means  of  which  the  affects  in  the  dream-thoughts  are  eventually

turned  into  those  in  the  dream,  can  be  satisfactorily  followed  in

suitable syntheses of dreams that have been completely analysed. I

will quote a few more examples of affects in dreams where some of

the possibilities I have enumerated will be found realized.

 

                                            V

    If we turn back to the dream about the strange task set me by old

Brücke of making a dissection of my own pelvis, it will be recalled that

in  the  dream  itself  I  missed  the  gruesome  feeling  [‘Grauen’]

appropriate  to  it.  Now  this  was  a  wish-fulfilment  in  more  than  one

sense. The dissection meant the self-analysis which I was carrying

out, as it were, in the publication of this present book about dreams - a

process  which  had  been  so  distressing  to  me  in  reality  that  I  had

postponed the printing of the finished manuscript for more than a year.

A wish then arose that I might get over this feeling of distaste; hence it

was  that  I  had  no  gruesome  feeling  [‘Grauen’]  in  the  dream.  But  I

should also have been very glad to miss growing grey - ‘Grauen’ in the

other sense of the word. I was already growing quite grey, and the

grey of my hair was another reminder that I must not delay any longer.

And, as we have seen, the thought that I should have to leave it to my

children to reach the goal of my difficult journey forced its way through

to representation at the end of the dream.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        920

 

 

   Let us next consider the two dreams in which an expression of

satisfaction was transposed to the moment after waking. In the one

case the reason given for the satisfaction was an expectation that I

should now discover what was meant by ‘I’ve dreamt of that before’,

while the satisfaction really referred to the birth of my first children. In

the  other  case  the  ostensible  reason  was  my  conviction  that

something that had been ‘prognosticated’ was now coming true, while

the real reference was similar to that in the former dream: it was the

satisfaction with which I greeted the birth of my second son. Here the

affects which dominated the dream-thoughts persisted in the dreams;

but it is safe to say that in no dream can things be as simple as all

that. If we go a little more deeply into the two analyses we find that

this  satisfaction  which  had  escaped  censorship  had  received  an

accession  from  another  source.  This  other  source  had  grounds  for

fearing the censorship, and its affect would undoubtedly have arousedopposition if it had not covered itself by the similar, legitimate affect of

satisfaction, arising from the permissible source, and slipped in, as it

were, under its wing.

   Unfortunately, I cannot demonstrate this in the actual case of these

dreams,  but  an  instance  taken  from  another  department  of  life  will

make my meaning clear. Let us suppose the following case. There is a

person  of  my  acquaintance  whom  I  hate,  so  that  I  have  a  lively

inclination to feel glad if anything goes wrong with him. But the moral

side of my nature will not give way to this impulse. I do not dare to

express a wish that he should be unlucky, and if he meets with some

undeserved  misfortune,  I  suppress  my  satisfaction  at  it  and  force

myself to manifestations and thoughts of regret. Everyone must have

found  himself  in  this  situation  at  some  time  or  other.  What  now

happens, however, is that the hated person, by a piece of misconduct

of his own, involves himself in some well-deserved unpleasantness;

when that happens, I may give free rein to my satisfaction that he has

met with a just punishment and in this I find myself in agreement with

many other people who are impartial. I may observe, however, that my

satisfaction seems more intense than that of these other people; it has

received an accession from the source of my hatred, which till then

has  been  prevented  from  producing  its  affect,  but  in  the  altered

circumstances is no longer hindered from doing so. In social life this

occurs  in  general  wherever  antipathetic  people  or  members  of  an

unpopular  minority  put  themselves  in  the  wrong.  Their  punishment

does  not  as  a  rule  correspond  to  their  wrongdoing  but  to  their

wrongdoings plus  the  ill-feeling  directed  against  them  which  has

previously been without any consequences. It is no doubt true that

those who inflict the punishment are committing an injustice in this; but

they are prevented from perceiving it by the satisfaction resulting from

the removal of a suppression which has long been maintained within

them. In cases such as this the affect is justified in its quality but not in

its quantity; and self-criticism which is set at rest on the one point is

only too apt to neglect examination of the second one. When once a

door has been opened, it is easy for more people to push their way

through it than there had originally been any intention of letting in.

      A  striking  feature  in  neurotic  characters  -  the  fact  that  a  cause

capable of releasing an affect is apt to produce in them a result whichis qualitatively justified but quantitatively excessive is to be explained

along these same lines, in so far as it admits of any psychological

explanation at all. The excess arises from sources of affect which had

previously  remained  unconscious  and  suppressed.  These  sources

have  succeeded  in  setting  up  an  associative  link  with  the real

releasing cause, and the desired path from the release of their own

affect  has  been  opened  by  the other  source  of  affect,  which  is

unobjectionable and legitimate. Our attention is thus drawn to the fact

that  in  considering  the  suppressed  and  suppressing  agencies,  we

must  not  regard  their  relation  as  being  exclusively  one  of  mutual

inhibition. Just as much regard must be paid to cases in which the two

agencies bring about a pathological effect by working side by side and

by intensifying each other.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        921

 

   Let us now apply these hints upon psychical mechanisms to an

understanding of the expressions of affect in dreams. A satisfaction

which  is  exhibited  in  a  dream  and  can,  of  course,  be  immediately

referred  to  its  proper  place  in  the  dream-thoughts  is  not  always

completely elucidated by this reference alone. It is as a rule necessary

to look for another source of it in the dream-thoughts, a source which

is under the pressure of the censorship. As a result of that pressure,

this source would normally have produced, not satisfaction, but the

contrary  affect.  Owing  to  the  presence  of  the  first  source  of  affect,

however,  the  second  source  is  enabled  to  withdraw  its  affect  of

satisfaction from repression and allow it to act as an intensification of

the satisfaction from the first source. Thus it appears that affects in

dreams are fed from a confluence of several sources and are over-

determined in their reference to the material of the dream-thoughts.

During  the  dream-work,  sources  of  affect  which  are  capable  of

producing the same affect come together in generating it.¹

 

      We  can  gain  a  little  insight  into  these  complications  from  the

analysis of that fine specimen of a dream of which the words ‘NonVixit’  formed  the  centre-point.  (See p.  874  ff.)  In  that  dream

manifestations of affect of various qualities were brought together at

two points in its manifest content. Hostile and distressing feelings -

‘overcome by strange emotions’ were the words used in the dream

itself - were piled up at the point at which I annihilated my opponent

and friend with two words. And again, at the end of the dream, I was

highly  delighted,  and  I  went  on  to  approve  the  possibility,  which  in

waking life I knew was absurd, of there being revenants who could be

eliminated by a mere wish.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] I have given an analogous explanation of the extraordinarily

powerful pleasurable effect of tendentious jokes.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        922

 

   I have not yet related the exciting cause of the dream. It was of great

importance and led deep into an understanding of the dream. I had

heard from my friend in Berlin, whom I have referred to as ‘Fl.’, that he

was about to undergo an operation and that I should get further news

of his condition from some of his relatives in Vienna. The first reports I

received after the operation were not reassuring and made me feel

anxious. I should have much preferred to go to him myself, but just at

that  time  I  was  the  victim  of  a  painful  complaint  which  made

movement  of  any  kind  a  torture  to  me.  The  dream-thoughts  now

informed me that I feared for my friend’s life. His only sister, whom I

had never known, had, as I was aware, died in early youth after a very

brief illness. (In the dream Fl. spoke about his sister and said that in

three quarters of an hour she was dead.) I must have imagined that

his constitution was not much more resistant than his sister’s and that,

after  getting  some  much  worse  news  of  him,  I  should  make  the

journey after all - and arrive too late, for which I might never cease to

reproach  myself.¹  This  reproach  for  coming  too  late  became  the

central point of the dream but was represented by a scene in which

Brücke,  the  honoured  teacher  of  my  student  years,  levelled  this

reproach at me with a terrible look from his blue eyes. It will soon

appear  what  it  was  that  caused  the  situation  to  be  switched  on  tothese lines. The scene itself could not be reproduced by the dream in

the form in which I experienced it. The other figure in the dream was

allowed to keep the blue eyes, but the annihilating role was allotted to

me - a reversal which was obviously the work of wish-fulfilment. My

anxiety about my friend’s recovery, my self-reproaches for not going to

see him, the shame I felt about this - he had come to Vienna (to see

me) ‘unobtrusively’ - the need I felt to consider that I was excused by

my illness - all of this combined to produce the emotional storm which

was clearly perceived in my sleep and which raged in this region of

the dream-thoughts.

 

   ¹ It was this phantasy, forming part of the unconscious dream-thoughts, which so insistently

demanded ‘Non vivit’ instead of ‘Non vixit’: ‘You have come too late, he is no longer alive’. I
have already explained on pp. 874‑875 that ‘Non vivit’ was also required by the manifest
situation in the dream.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        923

 

   But there was something else in the exciting cause of the dream,

which  had  a  quite  opposite  effect  upon  me.  Along  with  the

unfavourable reports during the first few days after the operation, I

was given a warning not to discuss the matter with anyone. I had felt

offended  by  this  because  it  implied  an  unnecessary  distrust  of  my

discretion. I was quite aware that these instructions had not emanated

from my friend but were due to tactlessness or over-anxiety on the

part of the intermediary, but I was very disagreeably affected by the

veiled reproach because it was - not wholly without justification. As we

all  know,  it  is  only  reproaches  which  have  something  in  them  that

‘stick’;  it  is  only  they  that  upset  us.  What  I  have  in  mind  does  not

relate, it is true, to this friend, but to a much earlier period of my life.

On that occasion I caused trouble between two friends (both of whom

had chosen to honour me, too, with that name ) by quite unnecessarily

telling one of them, in the course of conversation, what the other had

said about him. At that time, too, reproaches had been levelled at me,

and they were still in my memory. One of the two friends concerned

was Professor Fleischl; I may describe the other by his first name of‘Josef’  -  which  was  also  that  of  P.,  my  friend  and  opponent  in  the

dream.

      The  reproach  of  being  unable  to  keep  anything  to  myself  was

attested  in  the  dream  by  the  element  ‘unobtrusive’  and  by  Fl.’s

question as to how much I had told P. about his affairs. But it was the

intervention of this memory that transported the reproach against me

for coming too late from the present time to the period at which I had

worked in Brücke’s laboratory. And, by turning the second person in

the scene of annihilation in the dream into a Josef, I made the scene

represent not only the reproach against me for coming too late but

also the far more strongly repressed reproach that I was unable to

keep a secret. Here the processes of condensation and displacement

at work in the dream, as well as the reasons for them, are strikingly

visible.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        924

 

   My present-day anger, which was only slight, over the warning I had

been given not to give anything away received reinforcements from

sources in the depth of my mind and thus swelled into a current of

hostile feelings against persons of whom I was in reality fond. The

source of this reinforcement flowed from my childhood. I have already

shown  how  my  warm  friendships  as  well  as  my  enmities  with

contemporaries went back to my relations in childhood with a nephew

who  was  a  year  my  senior;  how  he  was  my  superior,  how  I  early

learned  to  defend  myself  against  him,  how  we  were  inseparable

friends,  and  how,  according  to  the  testimony  of  our  elders,  we

sometimes  fought  with  each  other  and  -  made  complaints  to  them

about  each  other.  All  my  friends  have  in  a  certain  sense  been  re-

incarnations of this first figure who ‘früh sich einst dem trüben Blick

gezeigt’¹: they have been revenants. My nephew himself re-appeared

in my boyhood, and at that time we acted the parts of Caesar and

Brutus together. My emotional life has always insisted that I should

have an intimate friend and a hated enemy. I have always been able

to  provide  myself  afresh  with  both,  and  it  has  not  infrequentlyhappened that the ideal situation of childhood has been so completely

reproduced  that  friend  and  enemy  have  come  together  in  a  single

individual  -  though  not,  of  course,  both  at  once  or  with  constant

oscillations, as may have been the case in my early childhood.

      I  do  not  propose  at  this  point  to  discuss  how  it  is  that  in  such

circumstances as these a recent occasion for the generation of an

affect can hark back to an infantile situation and be replaced by that

situation as far as the production of affect is concerned. This question

forms part of the psychology of unconscious thinking, and would find

its proper place in a psychological elucidation of the neuroses. For the

purposes  of  dream-interpretation  let  us  assume  that  a  childhood

memory  arose,  or  was  constructed  in  phantasy,  with  some  such

content as the following. The two children had a dispute about some

object. (What the object was may be left an open question, though the

memory or pseudo-memory had a quite specific one in view.)  Each of

them claimed to have got there before the other and therefore to have

a better right to it. They came to blows and might prevailed over right.

On the evidence of the dream, I may myself have been aware that I

was in the wrong (‘I myself noticed the mistake’). However, this time I

was  the  stronger  and  remained  in  possession  of  the  field.  The

vanquished  party  hurried  to  his  grandfather  -  my  father  -  and

complained about me, and I defended myself in the words which I

know from my father’s account: ‘I hit him ‘cos he hit me.’ This memory,

or  more  probably  phantasy,  which  came  into  my  mind  while  I  was

analysing the dream - without further evidence I myself could not tell

how  -  constituted  an  intermediate  element  in  the  dream-thoughts,

which gathered up the emotions raging in them as a well collects the

water that flows into it. From this point the dream-thoughts proceeded

along some such lines as these: ‘It serves you right if you had to make

way for me. Why did you try to push me out of the way? I don’t need

you, I can easily find someone else to play with’, and so on. These

thoughts now entered upon the paths which led to their representation

in the dream. There had been a time when I had had to reproach my

friend  Josef  for  an  attitude  of  this  same  kind:  ‘Ôte-toi  que  je  m’y

mette!’ He had followed in my footsteps as demonstrator in Brücke’s

laboratory,  but  promotion  there  was  slow  and  tedious.  Neither  of

Brücke’s  two  assistants  was  inclined  to  budge  from  his  place,  andyouth was impatient. My friend, who knew that he could not expect to

live long, and whom no bonds of intimacy attached to his immediate

superior,  sometimes  gave  loud  expression  to  his  impatience,  and,

since this superior was seriously ill, P.’s wish to have him out of the

way might have an uglier meaning than the mere hope for the man’s

promotion. Not unnaturally, a few years earlier, I myself had nourished

a  still  livelier  wish  to  fill  a  vacancy.  Wherever  there  is  rank  and

promotion  the  way  lies  open  for  wishes  that  call  for  suppression.

Shakespeare’s  Prince  Hal  could  not,  even  at  his  father’s  sick-bed,

resist  the  temptation  of  trying  on  the  crown.  But,  as  was  to  be

expected, the dream punished my friend, and not me, for this callous

wish.²

   ‘As he was ambitious, I slew him.’ As he could not wait for the

removal of another man, he was himself removed. These had been

my  thoughts  immediately  after  I  attended  the  unveiling  at  the

University of the memorial - not to him but to the other man. Thus a

part of the satisfaction I felt in the dream was to be interpreted: ‘A just

punishment! It serves you right!’

 

   ¹ [‘. . . long since appeared before my troubled gaze’]

   ² It will be noticed that the name Josef plays a great part in my dreams (cf. the dream about

my uncle). My own ego finds it very easy to hide itself behind people of that name, since
Joseph was the name of a man famous in the Bible as an interpreter of dreams.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        925

 

   At my friend’s funeral, a young man had made what seemed to be

an  inopportune  remark  to  the  effect  that  the  speaker  who  had

delivered the funeral oration had implied that without this one man the

world would come to an end. He was expressing the honest feelings

of someone whose pain was being interfered with by an exaggeration.

But this remark of his was the starting-point of the following dream-

thoughts: ‘It’s quite true that no one’s irreplaceable. How many people

I’ve followed to the grave already! But I’m still alive. I’ve survived them

all; I’m left in possession of the field.’ A thought of this kind, occurring

to me at a moment at which I was afraid might not find my friend aliveif I made the journey to him, could only be construed as meaning that I

was delighted because I had once more survived someone, because it

was he and not I who had died, because I was left in possession of

the field, as I had been in the phantasied scene from my childhood.

This satisfaction, infantile in origin, at being in possession of the field

constituted the major part of the affect that appeared in the dream. I

was delighted to survive, and I gave expression to my delight with all

the naïve egoism shown in the anecdote of the married couple one of

whom said to the other: ‘If one of us dies, I shall move to Paris.’ So

obvious was it to me that I should not be the one to die.

      It  cannot  be  denied  that  to  interpret  and  report  one’s  dreams

demands a high degree of self-discipline. One is bound to emerge as

the only villain among the crowd of noble characters who share one’s

life. Thus it seemed to me quite natural that the revenants should only

exist for just so long as one likes and should be removable at a wish.

We  have  seen  what  my  friend  Josef  was  punished  for.  But  the

revenants  were  a  series  of  reincarnations  of  the  friend  of  my

childhood. It was therefore also a source of satisfaction to me that I

had always been able to find successive substitutes for that figure;

and I felt I should be able to find a substitute for the friend whom I was

now on the point of losing: no one was irreplaceable.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        926

 

   But what had become of the dream-censorship? Why had it not

raised  the  most  energetic  objections  against  this  blatantly  egoistic

train  of  thought?  And  why  had  it  not  transformed  the  satisfaction

attached  to  that  train  of  thought  into  severe  unpleasure?  The

explanation was, I think, that other, unobjectionable, trains of thought

in connection with the same people found simultaneous satisfaction

and  screened  with their  affect  the  affect  which  arose  from  the

forbidden infantile source. In another stratum of my thoughts, during

the ceremonial unveiling of the memorial, I had reflected thus: ‘What a

number  of  valued  friends  I  have  lost,  some  through  death,  some

through a breach of our friendship! How fortunate that I have found asubstitute for them and that I have gained one who means more to me

than  ever  the  others  could,  and  that,  at  a  time  of  life  when  new

friendships  cannot  easily  be  formed,  I  shall  never  lose  his!’  My

satisfaction at having found a substitute for these lost friends could be

allowed to enter the dream without interference; but there slipped in,

along with it, the hostile satisfaction derived from the infantile source.

It  is  no  doubt  true  that  infantile  affection  served  to  reinforce  my

contemporary  and  justified  affection.  But  infantile  hatred,  too,

succeeded in getting itself represented.

   In addition to this, however, the dream-contained a clear allusion to

another train of thought which could legitimately lead to satisfaction. A

short time before, after long expectation, a daughter had been born to

my friend. I was aware of how deeply he had mourned the sister he

had so early lost and I wrote and told him I was sure he would transfer

the love he felt for her on to the child, and that the baby girl would

allow him at last to forget his irreparable loss.

   Thus this group of thoughts was connected once again with the

intermediate thought in the latent content of the dream from which the

associative  paths  diverged  in  contrary  directions:  ‘No  one  is

irreplaceable!’ ‘There are nothing but revenants: all those we have lost

come back!’ And now the associative links between the contradictory

components of the dream-thoughts were drawn closer by the chance

fact that my friend’s baby daughter had the same name as the little girl

I used to play with as a child, who was of my age and the sister of my

earliest  friend  and  opponent.  It  gave  me  great satisfaction  when  I

heard that the baby was to be called ‘Pauline.’ And as an allusion to

this coincidence, I had replaced one Josef by another in the dream

and found it impossible to suppress the similarity between the opening

letters of the names ‘Fleischl’ and ‘FI.’ From here my thoughts went on

to the subject of the names of my own children. I had insisted on their

names being chosen, not according to the fashion of the moment, but

in  memory  of  people  I  have  been  fond  of.  Their  names  made  the

children  into revenants.  And  after  all,  I  reflected,  was  not  having

children our only path to immortality?

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams                                                                                        927

 

 

   I have only a few more remarks to add on the subject of affect in

dreams  from  another  point  of  view.  A  dominating  element  in  a

sleeper’s  mind  may  be  constituted  by  what  we  call  a  ‘mood’  -  or

tendency  to  some  affect  -  and  this  may  then  have  a  determining

influence upon his dreams. A mood of this kind may arise from his

experiences or thoughts during the preceding day, or its sources may

be  somatic.  In  either  case  it  will  be  accompanied  by  the  trains  of

thought appropriate to it. From the point of view of dream-construction

it is a matter of indifference whether, as sometimes happens, these

ideational contents of the dream-thoughts determine the mood in a

primary fashion, or whether they are themselves aroused secondarily

by  the  dreamer’s  emotional  disposition  which  is  in  its  turn  to  be

explained on a somatic basis. In any case the construction of dreams

is subject to the condition that it can only represent something which is

the fulfilment of a wish and that it is only from wishes that it can derive

its psychical motive force. A currently active mood is treated in the

same way as a sensation arising and becoming currently active during

sleep (cf. p. 714), which can be either disregarded or given a fresh

interpretation  in  the  sense  of  a  wish-fulfilment.  Distressing  moods

during sleep can become the motive force of a dream by arousing

energetic wishes which the dream is supposed to fulfil. The material to

which  moods  are  attached  is  worked  over  until  it  can  be  used  to

express the fulfilment of a wish. The more intense and dominating a

part  is  played  in  the  dream-thoughts  by  the  distressing  mood,  the

more  certain  it  becomes  that  the  most  strongly  suppressed  wishful

impulses  will  make  use  of  the  opportunity  in  order  to  achieve

representation. For, since the unpleasure which they would otherwise

necessarily  produce  themselves  is  already  present,  they  find  the

harder  part  of  their  task  -  the  task  of  forcing  their  way  through  to

representation - already accomplished for them. Here once more we

are brought up against the problem of anxiety-dreams; and these, as

we shall find, form a marginal case in the function of dreaming.

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        928

 

                                            (I)

 

                                  SECONDARY REVISION

 

   And now at last we can turn to the fourth of the factors concerned in

the  construction  of  dreams.  If  we  pursue  our  investigation  of  the

content of dreams in the manner in which we have begun it - that is,

by  comparing  conspicuous  events  in  the  dream-content  with  their

sources  in  the  dream-thoughts,  we  shall  come  upon  elements  the

explanation of which calls for an entirely new assumption. What I have

in  mind  are  cases  in  which  the  dreamer  is  surprised,  annoyed  or

repelled in the dream, and, moreover, by a piece of the dream-content

itself. As I have shown in a number of instances, the majority of these

critical feelings in dreams are not in fact directed against the content

of the dream, but turn out to be portions of the dream-thoughts which

have  been  taken  over  and  used  to  an  appropriate  end.  But  some

material  of  this  kind  does  not  lend  itself  to  this  explanation;  its

correlate in the material of the dream-thoughts is nowhere to be found.

What, for instance, is the meaning of a critical remark found so often

in dreams: ‘This is only a dream’? Here we have a genuine piece of

criticism of the dream, such as might be made in waking life. Quite

frequently, too, it is actually a prelude to waking up; and still more

frequently it has been preceded by some distressing feeling which is

set at rest by the recognition that the state is one of dreaming. When

the thought ‘this is only a dream’ occurs during a dream, it has the

same  purpose  in  view  as  when  the  words  are  pronounced  on  the

stage by la belle Hélène in Offenbach’s comic opera of that name: it is

aimed at reducing the importance of what has just been experienced

and at making it possible to tolerate what is to follow. It serves to lull a

particular  agency  to  sleep  which  would  have  every  reason  at  that

moment to bestir itself and forbid the continuance of the dream - or the

scene in the opera. It is more comfortable, however, to go on sleeping

and tolerate the dream, because, after all, ‘it is only a dream.’ In my

view the contemptuous critical judgement, ‘it’s only a dream’, appears

in a dream when the censorship, which is never quite asleep, feelsthat it has been taken unawares by a dream which has already been

allowed  through.  It  is  too  late  to  suppress  it,  and  accordingly  the

censorship uses these words to meet the anxiety or the distressing

feeling aroused by it. The phrase is an example of esprit d’escalier on

the part of the psychical censorship.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        929

 

   This instance, however, provides us with convincing evidence that

not  everything  contained  in  a  dream  is  derived  from  the  dream-

thoughts,  but  that  contributions  to  its  content  may  be  made  by  a

psychical  function  which  is  indistinguishable  from  on  our  waking

thoughts.  The  question  now  arises  whether  this  only  occurs  in

exceptional cases, or whether the psychical agency which otherwise

operates only as a censorship plays a habitual part in the construction

of dreams.

      We  can  have  no  hesitation  in  deciding  in  favour  of  the  second

alternative. There can be no doubt that the censoring agency, whose

influence we have so far only recognized in limitations and omissions

in  the  dream-content,  is  also  responsible  for  interpolations  and

additions in it. The interpolations are easy to recognize. They are often

reported with hesitation, and introduced by an ‘as though’; they are not

in themselves particularly vivid and are always introduced at points at

which  they  can  serve  as  links  between  two  portions  of  the  dream-

content or to bridge a gap between two parts of the dream. They are

less  easily  retained  in  the  memory  than  genuine  derivatives  of  the

material of the dream-thoughts; if the dream is to be forgotten they are

the first part of it to disappear, and I have a strong suspicion that the

common  complaint  of  having  dreamt  a  lot,  but  of  having  forgotten

most of it and of having only retained fragments, is based upon the

rapid  disappearance  precisely  of  these  connecting  thoughts.  In  a

complete analysis these interpolations are sometimes betrayed by the

fact that no material connected with them is to be found in the dream-

thoughts. But careful examination leads me to regard this as the less

frequent  case;  as  a  rule  the  connecting  thoughts  lead  backnevertheless to material in the dream-thoughts, but to material which

could  have  no  claim  to  acceptance  in  the  dream  either  on  its  own

account or owing to its being over-determined. Only in extreme cases,

it seems, does the psychical function in dream-formation which we are

now considering proceed to make new creations. So long as possible,

it employs anything appropriate that it can find in the material of the

dream-thoughts.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        930

 

   The thing that distinguishes and at the same time reveals this part of

the dream-work is its purpose. This function behaves in the manner

which the poet maliciously ascribes to philosophers: it fills up the gaps

in  the  dream-structure  with  shreds  and  patches.  As  a  result  of  its

efforts,  the  dream  loses  its  appearance  of  absurdity  and

disconnectedness  and  approximates  to  the  model  of  an  intelligible

experience.  But  its  efforts  are  not  always  crowned  with  success.

Dreams  occur  which,  at  a  superficial  view,  may  seem  faultlessly

logical and reasonable; they start from a possible situation, carry it on

through  a  chain  of  consistent  modifications  and  -  though  far  less

frequently - bring it to a conclusion which causes no surprise. Dreams

which  are  of  such  a  kind  have  been  subjected  to  a  far-reaching

revision by this psychical function that is akin to waking thought; they

appear to have a meaning, but that meaning is as far removed as

possible  from  their  true  significance.  If  we  analyse  them,  we  can

convince  ourselves  that  it  is  in  these  dreams  that  the  secondary

revision has played about with the material the most freely, and has

retained the relations present in that material to the least extent. They

are  dreams  which  might  be  said  to  have  been  already  interpreted

once, before being submitted to waking interpretation. In other dreams

this tendentious revision has only partly succeeded; coherence seems

to rule for a certain distance, but the dream then becomes senseless

or confused, while perhaps later on in its course it may for a second

time  present  an  appearance  of  rationality.  In  yet  other  dreams  the

revision  has  failed  altogether;  we  find  ourselves  hopelessly  face  toface with a heap of fragmentary material.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        931

 

   I do not wish to deny categorically that this fourth power in dream-

construction - which we shall soon recognize as all old acquaintance,

since in fact it is the only one of the four with which we are familiar in

other connections - I do not wish to deny that this fourth factor has the

capacity to create new contributions to dreams. It is certain, however,

that, like the others, it exerts its influence principally by its preferences

and selections from psychical material in the dream-thoughts that has

already been formed. Now there is one case in which it is to a great

extent spared the labour of, as it were, building up a façade for the

dream - the case, namely, in which a formation of that kind already

exists, available for use in the material of the dream-thoughts. I am in

the habit of describing the element in the dream-thoughts which I have

in mind as a ‘phantasy.’ I shall perhaps avoid misunderstanding if I

mention the ‘day-dream’ as something analogous to it in waking life.¹

The part played in our mental life by these structures has not yet been

fully recognized and elucidated by psychiatrists, though M. Benedikt

has made what seems to me a very promising start in that direction.

The importance of day-dreams has not escaped the unerring vision of

imaginative  writers;  there  is,  for  instance,  a  well-known  account  by

Alphonse Daudet in Le Nabab of the day-dreams of one of the minor

characters in that story. The study of the psychoneuroses leads to the

surprising  discovery  that  these  phantasies  or  day-dreams  are  the

immediate forerunners of hysterical symptoms, or at least of a whole

number  of  them.  Hysterical  symptoms  are  not  attached  to  actual

memories,  but  to  phantasies  erected  on  the  basis  of  the  basis  of

memories. The frequent occurrence of conscious daytime phantasies

brings  these  structures  to  our  knowledge;  but  just  as  there  are

phantasies  of  this  kind  which  are  conscious,  so,  too,  there  are

unconscious  ones  in  great  numbers,  which  have  to  remain

unconscious  on  account  of  their  content  and  of  their  origin  from

repressed material. Closer investigation of the characteristics of theseday-time  phantasies  shows  us  how  right  it  is  that  these  formations

should bear the same name as we give to the products of our thought

during the night - the name, that is, of ‘dreams.’ They share a large

number of their properties with night-dreams, and their investigation

might, in fact, have served as the shortest and best approach to an

understanding of night-dreams.

 

   ¹ ‘Rêve’, ‘petit roman’, - ‘day-dream’, ‘[continuous] story’.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        932

 

   Like dreams, they are wish-fulfilments; like dreams, they are based

to a great extent on impressions of infantile experiences; like dreams,

they  benefit  by  a  certain  degree  of  relaxation  of  censorship.  If  we

examine their structure, we shall perceive the way in which the wishful

purpose that is at work in their production has mixed up the material of

which they are built, has rearranged it and has formed it into a new

whole.  They  stand  in  much  the  same  relation  to  the  childhood

memories from which they are derived as do some of the Baroque

palaces of Rome to the ancient ruins whose pavements and columns

have provided the material for the more recent structures.

   The function of ‘secondary revision’, which we have attributed to the

fourth  of  the  factors  concerned  in  shaping  the  content  of  dreams,

shows us in operation once more the activity which is able to find free

vent in the creation of day-dreams without being inhibited by any other

influences. We might put it simply by saying that this fourth factor of

ours seeks to mould the material offered to it into something like a

day-dream. If, however, a day-dream of this kind has already been

formed within the nexus of the dream-thoughts, this fourth factor in the

dream-work  will  prefer  to  take  possession  of  the  ready-made  day-

dream and seek to introduce it into the content of the dream. There

are some dreams which consist merely in the repetition of a day-time

phantasy which may perhaps have remained unconscious: such, for

instance,  as  the  boy’s  dream  of  driving  in  a  war-chariot  with  the

heroes of the Trojan War. In my ‘Autodidasker’ dream the second part

at  all  events  was  a  faithful  reproduction  of  a  daytime  phantasy,innocent in itself, of a conversation with Professor N. In view of the

complicated conditions which a dream has to satisfy when it comes

into  existence,  it  happens  more  frequently  that  the  ready-made

phantasy forms only a portion of the dream, or that only a portion of

the phantasy forces its way into the dream. Thereafter, the phantasy is

treated in general like any other portion of the latent material, though it

often remains recognizable as an entity in the dream. There are often

parts  of  my  dreams  which  stand  out  as  producing  a  different

impression from the rest. They strike me as being, as it were, more

fluent, more connected and at the same time more fleeting than other

parts of the same dream. These, I know, are unconscious phantasies

which have found their way into the fabric of the dream, but I have

never succeeded in pinning down a phantasy of this kind. Apart from

this,  these  phantasies,  like  any  other  component  of  the  dream-

thoughts, are compressed, condensed, superimposed on one another,

and so on. There are, however, transitional cases, between the case

in  which  they  constitute  the  content  (or  at  least  the  façade)  of  the

dream  unaltered  and  the  extreme  opposite  in  which  they  are

represented in the content of the dream only by one of their elements

or by a distant allusion. What happens to phantasies present in the

dream-thoughts is evidently also determined by any advantages they

may have to offer the requirements of the censorship and of the urge

towards condensation.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        933

 

 

      In  selecting  examples  of  dream-interpretation  I  have  so  far  as

possible avoided dreams in which unconscious phantasies play any

considerable part, because the introduction of this particular psychical

element  would  have  necessitated  lengthy  discussions  on  the

psychology  of  unconscious  thinking.  Nevertheless,  I  cannot

completely escape a consideration of phantasies in this connection,

since they often make their way complete into dreams and since still

more often clear glimpses of them can be seen behind the dream. Iwill therefore quote one more dream, which seems to be composed of

two different and opposing phantasies which coincide with each other

at a few points and of which one is superficial while the second is, as it

were, an interpretation of the first.¹

   The dream - it is the only one of which I possess no careful notes -

ran roughly as follows. The dreamer, a young unmarried man, was

sitting  in  the  restaurant  at  which  he  usually  ate  and  which  was

presented realistically in the dream. Several people then appeared, in

order to fetch him away, and one of them wanted to arrest him. He

said to his companions at table: ‘I’ll pay later; I’ll come back.’ But they

exclaimed with derisive smiles: ‘We know all about that; that’s what

they  all  say!’  One  of  the  guests  called  out  after  him:  ‘There  goes

another one!’ He was then led into a narrow room in which he found a

female figure carrying a child. One of the people accompanying him

said: ‘This is Herr Müller.’ A police inspector, or some such official,

was  turning  over  a  bundle  of  cards  or  papers  and  as  he  did  so

repeated  ‘Müller,  Müller,  Müller.’  Finally  he  asked  the  dreamer  a

question, which he answered with an ‘I will.’ He then turned round to

look at the female figure and observed that she was now wearing a

big beard.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] In my ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’ (1905e), I

have  analysed  a  good  specimen  of  a  dream  of  this  sort,  made  up  of  a  number  of
superimposed phantasies. Incidentally, I underestimated the importance of the part played by
these phantasies in the formation of dreams so long as I was principally working on my own
dreams, which are usually based on discussions and conflict of thought and comparatively
rarely on day-dreams. In the case of other people it is often much easier to demonstrate the
complete  analogy  between  night-dreams  and  day-dreams.  With  hysterical  patients,  a
hysterical attack can often be replaced by a dream; and it is then easy to convince oneself
that the immediate forerunner of both these psychical structures was a day-dream phantasy.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        934

 

   Here there is no difficulty in separating the two components. The

superficial one was a phantasy of arrest which appears as though it

had been freshly constructed by the dream-work. But behind it some

material  is  visible  which  had  been  only  slightly  re-shaped  by  the

dream-work:  a phantasy  of  marriage.  Those  features  which  werecommon to both phantasies emerge with special clarity, in the same

way as in one of Galton’s composite photographs. The promise made

by the young man (who up till then had been a bachelor) that he would

come back and join his fellow-diners at their table, the scepticism of

his  boon-companions  (whom  experience  had  taught  better),  the

exclamation ‘there goes another one '- all of these features fitted in

easily with the alternative interpretation. So, too, did the ‘I will’ with

which he replied to the official’s question. The turning over the bundle

of  papers,  with  the  constant  repetition  of  the  same  name

corresponded to a less important but recognizable feature of wedding

festivities,  namely  the  reading  out  of  a  bundle  of  telegrams  of

congratulation, all of them with addresses bearing the same names.

The phantasy of marriage actually scored a victory over the covering

phantasy  of  arrest  in  the  fact  of  the  bride’s  making  a  personal

appearance in the dream. I was able to discover from an enquiry - the

dream was not analysed - why it was that at the end of it the bride

wore a beard. On the previous day the dreamer had been walking in

the street with a friend who was as shy of marrying as he was himself,

and he had drawn his friend’s attention to a darkhaired beauty who

had passed them. ‘Yes’, his friend had remarked, ‘if only women like

that didn’t grow beards like their fathers’ in a few years’ time.’ This

dream did not, of course, lack elements in which dream-distortion had

been carried deeper. It may well be, for instance, that the words ‘I’ll

pay  later’  referred  to  what  he  feared  might  be  his  father-in-law’s

attitude on the subject of a dowry. In fact, all kinds of qualms were

evidently  preventing  the  dreamer  from  throwing  himself  into  the

phantasy of marriage with any enjoyment. One of these qualms, a fear

that  marriage  might  cost  him  his  freedom,  was  embodied  in  the

transformation into a scene of arrest.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        935

 

 

   If we return for a moment to the point that the dream-work is glad to

make use of a ready-made phantasy instead of putting one togetherout  of  the  material  of  the  dream-thoughts,  we  may  perhaps  find

ourselves in a position to solve one of the most interesting puzzles

connected with dreams. On pp. 568 f. I told the well-known anecdote

of how Maury, having been struck in his sleep on the back of his neck

by a piece of wood, woke up from a long dream which was like a full-

length story set in the days of the French Revolution. Since the dream,

as reported, was a coherent one and was planned entirely with an eye

to providing an explanation of the stimulus which woke him and whose

occurrence  he  could  not  have  anticipated,  the  only  possible

hypothesis seems to be that the whole elaborate dream must have

been composed and must have taken place in the short period of time

between the contact of the board with Maury’s cervical vertebrae and

his consequent awakening. We should never dare to attribute such

rapidity to thought-activity in waking life, and we should therefore be

driven to conclude that the dream-work possesses the advantage of

accelerating our thought-processes to a remarkable degree.

      Strong  objections  have  been  raised  to  what  quickly  became  a

popular conclusion by some more recent writers (Le Lorrain, 1894 and

1895, Egger, 1895, and others). On the one hand they throw doubts

upon the accuracy of Maury’s account of his dream; and on the other

hand they attempt to show that the rapidity of the operations of our

waking  thoughts  is  no  less  than  in  this  dream  when  exaggerations

have been discounted. The discussion raised questions of principle

which do not seem to me immediately soluble. But I must confess that

the arguments brought forward (by Egger, for instance), particularly

against  Maury’s  guillotine  dream,  leave  me  unconvinced.  I  myself

would propose the following explanation of this dream. Is it so highly

improbable  that  Maury’s  dream  represents  a  phantasy  which  had

been stored up ready-made in his memory for many years and which

was aroused - or I would rather say ‘alluded to’ - at the moment at

which he became aware of the stimulus which woke him? If this were

so, we should have escaped the whole difficulty of understanding how

such a long story with all its details could have been composed in the

extremely short period of time which was at the dreamer’s disposal -

for the story would have been composed already. If the piece of wood

had struck the back of Maury’s neck while he was awake, there would

have been an opportunity for some such thought as: ‘That’s just likebeing guillotined.’ But since it was in his sleep that he was struck by

the  board,  the  dream-work  made  use  of  the  impinging  stimulus  in

order rapidly to produce a wish-fulfilment; it was as though it thought

(this is to he taken purely figuratively): ‘Here’s a good opportunity of

realizing a wishful phantasy which was formed at such and such a

time in the course of reading.’ It can hardly be disputed, I think, that

the dream-story was precisely of a sort likely to be constructed by a

young  man  under  the  influence  of  powerfully  exciting  impressions.

Who  -  least  of  all  what  Frenchman  or  student  of  the  history  of

civilization  -  could  fail  to  be  gripped  by  narratives  of  the  Reign  of

Terror, when the men and women of the aristocracy, the flower of the

nation,  showed  that  they  could  die  with  a  cheerful  mind  and  could

retain the liveliness of their wit and the elegance of their manners till

the very moment of the fatal summons? How tempting for a young

man  to  plunge  into  all  this  in  his  imagination  -  to  picture  himself

bidding a lady farewell - kissing her hand and mounting the scaffold

unafraid! Or, if ambition were the prime motive of the phantasy, how

tempting for him to take the place of one of those formidable figures

who,  by  the  power  alone  of  their  thoughts  and  flaming  eloquence,

ruled the city in which the heart of humanity beat convulsively in those

days - who were led by their convictions to send thousands of men to

their  death  and  who  prepared  the  way  for  the  transformation  of

Europe, while all the time their own heads were insecure and destined

to fall one day beneath the knife of the guillotine - how tempting to

picture  himself  as  one  of  the  Girondists,  perhaps,  or  as  the  heroic

Danton! There is one feature in Maury’s recollection of the dream, his

being ‘led to the place of execution, surrounded by an immense mob’,

which seems to suggest that his phantasy was in fact of this ambitious

type.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        936

 

   Nor is it necessary that this long-prepared phantasy should have

been gone through during sleep; it would have been sufficient for it to

be merely touched on. What I mean is this. If a few bars of music areplayed  and  someone  comments  that  it  is  from  Mozart’s Figaro  (as

happens in Don Giovanni) a number of recollections are roused in me

all at once, none of which can enter my consciousness singly at the

first moment. The key-phrase serves as a port of entry through which

the whole network is simultaneously put in a state of excitation. It may

well be the same in the case of unconscious thinking. The rousing

stimulus excites the psychical port of entry which allows access to the

whole guillotine phantasy. But the phantasy is not gone through during

sleep but only in the recollection of the sleeper after his awakening.

After waking he remembers in all its details the phantasy which was

stirred up as a whole in his dream. One has no means of assuring

oneself in such a case that one is really remembering something one

has dreamt. This same explanation - that it is a question of ready-

made phantasies which are brought into excitation as a whole by the

rousing stimulus - can be applied to other dreams which are focused

upon  a  rousing  stimulus,  such,  for  instance,  as  Napoleon’s  battle

dream before the explosion of the infernal machine.

      Among  the  dreams  collected  by  Justine  Tobowolska  in  her

dissertation  on  the  apparent  passage  of  time  in  dreams,  the  most

informative seems to me to be the one reported by Macario (1857 ) as

having  been  dreamt  by  a  dramatic  author,  Casimir  Bonjour.  One

evening Bonjour wanted to attend the first performance of one of his

pieces;  but  he  was  so  fatigued  that  as  he  was  sitting  behind  the

scenes he dozed off just at the moment the curtain went up. During

his  sleep  he  went  through  the  whole  five  acts  of  the  play,  and

observed  all  the  various  signs  of  emotion  shown  by  the  audience

during the different scenes. At the end of the performance he was

delighted  to  hear  his  name  being  shouted  with  the  liveliest

demonstrations  of  applause.  Suddenly  he  woke  up.  He  could  not

believe either his eyes or his ears, for the performance had not gone

beyond the first few lines of the first scene; he could not have been

asleep for longer than two minutes. It is surely not too rash to suppose

in the case of this dream that the dreamer’s going through all five acts

of  the  play  and  observing  the  attitude  of  the  public  to  different

passages  in  it  need  not  have  arisen  from  any  fresh  production  of

material  during  his  sleep,  but  may  have  reproduced  a  piece  of

phantasy-activity (in the sense I have described) which had alreadybeen completed. Tobowolska, like other writers, emphasizes the fact

that dreams with an accelerated passage of ideas have the common

characteristic  of  seeming  specially  coherent,  quite  unlike  other

dreams, and that the recollection of them is summary far more than

detailed.  This  would  indeed  be  a  characteristic  which  ready-made

phantasies of this kind, touched upon by the dream-work, would be

bound  to  possess,  though  this  is  a  conclusion  which  the  writers  in

question fail to draw. I do not assert, however, that all arousal dreams

admit  of  this  explanation,  or  that  the  problem  of  the  accelerated

passage of ideas in dreams can be entirely dismissed in this fashion.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        937

 

 

      At  this  point  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  considering  the  relation

between  this  secondary  revision  of  the  content  of  dreams  and  the

remaining  factors  of  the  dream-work.  Are  we  to  suppose  that  what

happens is that in the first instance the dream-constructing factors -

the  tendency  towards  condensation,  the  necessity  for  evading  the

censorship,  and  considerations  of  representability  by  the  psychical

means open to dreams - put together a provisional dream-content out

of the material provided, and that this content is subsequently re-cast

so  as  to  conform  so  far  as  possible  to  the  demands  of  a  second

agency! This is scarcely probable. We must assume rather that from

the very first the demands of this second factor constitute one of the

conditions which the dream must satisfy and that this condition, like

those  laid  down  by  condensation,  the  censorship  imposed  by

resistance,  and  representability,  operates  simultaneously  in  a

conducive and selective sense upon the mass of material present in

the dream-thoughts. In any case, however, of the four conditions for

the formation of dreams, the one we have come to know last is the

one whose demands appear to have the least cogent influence on

dreams.

      The  following  consideration  makes  it  highly  probable  that  the

psychical function which carries out what we have described as thesecondary revision of the content of dreams is to be identified with the

activity  of  our  waking  thought.  Our  waking  (preconscious)  thinking

behaves towards any perceptual material with which it meets in just

the  same  way  in  which  the  function  we  are  considering  behaves

towards the content of dreams. It is the nature of our waking thought

to establish order in material of that kind, to set up relations in it and to

make it conform to our expectations of an intelligible whole. In fact, we

go too far in that direction. An adept in sleight of hand can trick us by

relying upon this intellectual habit of ours. In our efforts at making an

intelligible pattern of the sense-impressions that are offered to us, we

often fall into the strangest errors or even falsify the truth about the

material before us.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        938

 

   The evidences of this are too universally known for there to be any

need  to  insist  upon  them  further.  In  our  reading  we  pass  over

misprints which destroy the sense, and have the illusion that what we

are reading is correct. The editor of a popular French periodical is said

to have made a bet that he would have the words ‘in front’ or ‘behind’

inserted by the printer in every sentence of a long article without a

single one of his readers noticing it. He won his bet. Many years ago I

read in a newspaper a comic instance of a false connection. On one

occasion during a sitting of the French Chamber a bomb thrown by an

anarchist  exploded  in  the  Chamber  itself  and  Dupuy  subdued  the

consequent panic with the courageous words: ‘La séance continue.’

The  visitors  in  the  gallery  were  asked  to  give  their  impressions  as

witnesses  of  the  outrage.  Among  them  were  two  men  from  the

provinces.  One  of  these  said  that  it  was  true  that  he  had  heard  a

detonation at the close of one of the speeches but had assumed that it

was  a  parliamentary  usage  to  fire  a  shot  each  time  a  speaker  sat

down.  The  second  one,  who  had  probably  already  heard several

speeches, had come to the same conclusion, except that he supposed

that  a  shot  was  only  fired  as  a  tribute  to  a  particularly  successful

speech.   There is no doubt, then, that it is our normal thinking that is the

psychical  agency  which  approaches  the  content  of  dreams  with  a

demand  that  it  must  be  intelligible,  which  subjects  it  to  a  first

interpretation  and  which  consequently  produces  a  complete

misunderstanding  of  it.  For  the  purposes  of our  interpretation  it

remains  an  essential  rule  invariably  to  leave  out  of  account  the

ostensible continuity of a dream as being of suspect origin, and to

follow the same path back to the material of the dream-thoughts, no

matter whether the dream itself is clear or confused.

   We now perceive, incidentally, on what it is that the range in the

quality of dreams between confusion and clarity which was discussed

on p. 779 f. depends. Those parts of a dream on which the secondary

revision has been able to produce some effect are clear, while those

parts on which its efforts have failed are confused. Since the confused

parts of a dream are so often at the same time the less vivid parts, we

may  conclude  that  the  secondary  dream-work  is  also  to  be  held

responsible for a contribution to the plastic intensity of the different

dream-elements.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        939

 

   If I look around for something with which to compare the final form

assumed by a dream as it appears after normal thought has made its

contribution,  I  can  think  of  nothing  better  than  the  enigmatic

inscriptions with which Fliegende Blätter has for so long entertained its

readers. They are intended to make the reader believe that a certain

sentence  -  for  the  sake  of  contrast,  a  sentence  in  dialect  and  as

scurrilous  as  possible  -  is  a  Latin  inscription.  For  this  purpose  the

letters contained in the words are torn out of their combination into

syllables and arranged in a new order. Here and there a genuine Latin

word appears; at other points we seem to see abbreviations of Latin

words before us; and at still other points in the inscription we may

allow ourselves to be deceived into overlooking the senselessness of

isolated letters by parts of the inscription seeming to be defaced or

showing lacunae. If we are to avoid being taken in by the joke, wemust disregard everything that makes it seem like an inscription, look

firmly at the letters, pay no attention to their ostensible arrangement,

and so combine them into words belonging to our own mother tongue.

 

   Secondary revision is the one factor in the dream-work which has

been observed by the majority of writers on the subject and of which

the significance has been appreciated. Havelock Ellis (1911, 10-11)

has  given  an  amusing  account  of  its  functioning:  ‘Sleeping

consciousness  we  may  even  imagine  as  saying  to  itself  in  effect:

"Here comes our master, Waking Consciousness, who attaches such

mighty  importance  to  reason  and  logic  and  so  forth.  Quick!  gather

things up, put them in order - any order will do - before he enters to

take possession."'

   The identity of its method of working with that of waking thought has

been  stated  with  particular  clarity  by  Delacroix  (1904,  926):  ‘Cette

fonction d’interprétation n’est pas particulère au rêve; c’est le même

travail de coordination logique que nous faisons sur nos sensations

pendant  la  veille.’¹  James  Sully  is  of  the  same  opinion.  So,  too,  is

Tobowolska  (1900,  93):  ‘Sur  ces  successions  incohérentes

d’hallucinations,  l’esprit  s’efforce  de  faire  le  même  travail  de

coordination logique qu’il fait pendant la veille sur les sensations. Il

relie entre elles par un lien imaginaire toutes ces images décousues et

bouche les écarts trop grands qui se trouvaient entre elles.’²

 

   ¹ [‘This interpretative function is not peculiar to dreams. It is the same work of logical co-

ordination which we carry out upon our sensations while we are awake.’]

   ² [‘The mind endeavours to carry out upon these incoherent trains of hallucinations the

same work of logical co-ordination that it carries out upon sensations during the daytime. It
connects up all these detached images by an imaginary link and stops up any excessively
wide gaps between them.’]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        940

 

   According to some writers, this process of arranging and interpreting

begins  during  the  dream  itself  and  is  continued  after  waking.  Thus

Paulhan  (1894,  546):  ‘Cependant  j’ai  souvent  pensé  qu’il  pouvait  y

avoir une certaine déformation, ou plutôt reformation, du rêve dans lesouvenir. . . . La tendence systématisante de l’imagination pourrait fort

bien achever après le réveil ce qu’elle a ébauché pendant le sommeil.

De  la  sorte,  la  rapidité  réelle  de  la  pensée  serait  augmentée  en

apparence  par  les  perfectionnements  dus  à  l’imagination  éveillée.’¹

Bernard-Leroy  and  Tobowolska  (1901,  592):  ‘Dans  le  rêve,  au

contraire, l’interprétation et la coordination se font non selllement à

l’aide des données du rêve, mais encore à l’aide de celles de la veille.

. . .’²

   Inevitably, therefore, this one recognized factor in the formation of

dreams has had its importance over-estimated, so that it has been

credited with the whole achievement of the creation of dreams. This

act of creation, as Goblot (1896, 280 f.) and still more Foucault (1906)

suppose, is performed at the moment of waking; for these two writers

attribute to waking thought an ability to construct a dream out of the

thoughts  that  emerge  during  sleep.  Bernard-Leroy  and  Tobowolska

(1901)  comment  on  this  view:  ‘On  a  cru  pouvoir  placer  le  rêve  au

moment du réveil, et ils ont attribué à la pensée de la veille la fonction

de construire le rêve avec les images présentes dans li pensée du

sommeil.’³

 

   ¹ [‘I have often thought, however, that dreams may be to some extent misshaped, or rather

reshaped, in memory. . . . The tendency of the imagination towards systematization might
very well complete after waking what it had started upon in sleep. In that way the real speed
of  thought  would  be  given  an  apparent  increase  by  the  improvements  due  to  the  waking
imagination.’]

   ² [‘In a dream, on the contrary, interpretation and co-ordination are carried out by the help

not only of the data presented in the dream, but of the data available in waking life. . . .’]

   ³ [‘It has been thought possible to locate dreams at the moment of waking, and have

ascribed to waking thought the function of constructing dreams out of the images present in
sleeping thought.’]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        941

 

 

   From this discussion of secondary revision I will go on to consider a

further factor in the dream-work which has recently been brought to

light  by  some  finely  perceptive  observations  carried  out  by  HerbertSilberer. As I have mentioned earlier (p. 814 ff.), Silberer has, as it

were, caught in the very act the process of transforming thoughts into

images, by forcing himself into intellectual activity while he was in a

state of fatigue and drowsiness. At such moments the thought with

which he was dealing vanished and was replaced by a vision which

turned out to be a substitute for what were as a rule abstract thoughts,

(Cf. the examples in the passage just referred to.) Now it happened

during  these  experiments  that  the  image  which  arose,  and  which

might be compared to an element of a dream, sometimes represented

something other than the thought that was being dealt with - namely,

the fatigue itself, the difficulty and unpleasure involved in the work. It

represented,  that  is  to  say,  the  subjective  state  and  mode  of

functioning of the person making the effort instead of the object of his

efforts. Silberer described occurrences of this kind, which were very

frequent in his case, as a ‘functional phenomenon’ in contrast to the

‘material phenomenon’ which would have been expected.

      For  instance:  ‘One  afternoon  I  was  lying  on  my  sofa  feeling

extremely  sleepy;  nevertheless  I  forced  myself  to  think  over  a

philosophical  problem.  I  wanted  to  compare  the  views  of  Kant  and

Schopenhauer upon Time. As a result of my drowsiness I was unable

to keep the arguments of both of them before my mind at once, which

was necessary in order to make the comparison. After a number of

vain  attempts,  I  once  more  impressed  Kant’s  deductions  upon  my

mind with all the strength of my will, so that I might apply them to

Schopenhauer’s statement of the problem. I then directed my attention

to the latter; but when I tried to turn back again to Kant, I found that his

argument had once more escaped me and I tried vainly to pick it up

once more. This vain effort at recovering the Kant dossier which was

stored away somewhere in my head was suddenly represented before

my closed eyes as a concrete and plastic symbol, as though it were a

dream-picture: I  was  asking  for  information  from  a  disobliging

secretary  who  was  bent  over  his  writing-table  and  refused  to  put

himself out at my insistent demand. He half straightened himself and

gave me a disagreeable and uncomplying look’. (Silberer, 1909, 513

f.)

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        942

 

      Here  are  some  other  instances,  which  relate  to  the  oscillation

between sleeping and waking:

   ‘Example No. 2. - Circumstances: In the morning, at waking. While I

was at a certain depth of sleep (a twilight state) and reflecting over a

previous  dream  and  in  a  sort  of  way  continuing  to  dream  it,  I  felt

myself  approaching  nearer  to  waking  consciousness  but  wanted  to

remain in the twilight state.

   ‘Scene: I was stepping across a brook with one foot but drew it back

again at once with the intention of remaining on this side.’ (Silberer,

1912, 625.)

   ‘Example No. 6. - Conditions as in example No. 4' (in which he had

wanted  to  lie  in  bed  a  little  longer,  though  without  oversleeping).  ‘I

wanted to give way to sleep for a little longer.

   ‘Scene: I was saying good-bye to someone and was arranging with

him (or her) to meet him (or her) again soon.’ (Ibid., 627.)

   The ‘functional’ phenomenon, ‘the representation of a state instead

of  an  object’,  was  observed  by  Silberer  principally  in  the  two

conditions of falling asleep and waking up. It is obvious that dream-

interpretation is only concerned with the latter case. Silberer has given

examples  which  show  convincingly  that  in  many  dreams  the  last

pieces  of  the  manifest  content,  which  are  immediately  followed  by

waking, represent nothing more nor less than an intention to wake or

the process of waking. The representation may be in terms of such

images as crossing a threshold (‘threshold symbolism’), leaving one

room and entering another, departure, home-coming, parting with a

companion,  diving  into  water,  etc.  I  cannot,  however,  refrain  from

remarking  that  I  have  come  across  dream-elements  which  can  be

related to threshold symbolism, whether in my own dreams or in those

of subjects whom I have analysed, far less frequently than Silberer’s

communications would have led one to expect.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        943

    It is by no means inconceivable or improbable that this threshold

symbolism might throw light upon some elements in the middle of the

texture of dreams - in places, for instance, where there is a question of

oscillations in the depth of sleep and of an inclination to break off the

dream.  Convincing  instances  of  this,  however,  have  not  been

produced.  What  seem  to  occur  more  frequently  are  cases  of

overdetermination, in which a part of a dream which has derived its

material  content  from  the  nexus  of  dream-thoughts  is  employed  to

represent in addition some state of mental activity.

      This  very  interesting  functional  phenomenon  of  Silberer’s  has,

through no fault of its discoverer’s, led to many abuses; for it has been

regarded as lending support to the old inclination to give abstract and

symbolic interpretations to dreams. The preference for the ‘functional

category’  is  carried  so  far  by  some  people  that  they  speak  of  the

functional  phenomenon  wherever  intellectual  activities  or  emotional

processes occur in the dream-thoughts, although such material has

neither more nor less right than any other kind to find its way into a

dream as residues of the previous day.

      We  are  ready  to  recognize  the  fact  that  Silberer’s  phenomena

constitute a second contribution on the part of waking thought to the

construction of dreams; though it is less regularly present and less

significant than the first one, which has already been introduced under

the name of ‘secondary revision.’ It has been shown that a part of the

attention  which  operates  during  the  day  continues  to  be  directed

towards dreams during the state of sleep, that it keeps a check on

them and criticizes them and reserves the power to interrupt them. It

has seemed plausible to recognize in the mental agency which thus

remains awake the censor to whom we have had to attribute such a

powerful restricting influence upon the form taken by dreams. What

Silberer’s observations have added to this is the fact that in certain

circumstances a species of self-observation plays a part in this and

makes  a  contribution  to  the  content  of  the  dream.  The  probable

relations  of  this  self-observing  agency,  which  may  be  particularly

prominent  in  philosophical  minds,  to  endopsychic  perception,  to

delusions of observation, to conscience and to the censor of dreams

can be more appropriately treated elsewhere.¹

    ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] ‘On Narcissism’ (Freud, 1914c).

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        944

 

 

   I will now try to sum up this lengthy disquisition on the dream-work.

We were faced by the question whether the mind employs the whole

of  its  faculties  without  reserve  in  constructing  dreams  or  only  a

functionally restricted fragment of them. Our investigations led us to

reject entirely the form in which the question was framed as being

inadequate to the circumstances. If, however, we had to reply to the

question on the basis of the terms in which it was stated, we should be

obliged  to  reply  in  the  affirmative  to both  the  alternatives,  mutually

exclusive though they appear to be. Two separate functions may be

distinguished in mental activity during the construction of a dream: the

production  of  the  dream-thoughts,  and  their  transformation  into  the

content of the dream. The dream-thoughts are entirely rational and are

constructed with an expenditure of all the psychical energy of which

we are capable. They have their place among thought-processes that

have  not  become  conscious  -  processes  from  which,  after  some

modification,  our  conscious  thoughts,  too,  arise.  However  many

interesting and puzzling questions the dream-thoughts may involve,

such questions have, after all, no special relation to dreams and do

not call for treatment among the problems of dreams.¹On the other

hand,  the  second  function  of  mental  activity  during  dream-

construction, the transformation of the unconscious thoughts into the

content of the dream, is peculiar to dream-life and characteristic of it.

This dream-work proper diverges further from our picture of waking

thought  than  has  been  supposed  even  by  the  most  determined

depreciator of psychical functioning during the formation of dreams.

The dream-work is not simply more careless, more irrational, more

forgetful and more incomplete than waking thought; it is completely

different  from  it  qualitatively  and  for  that  reason  not  immediately

comparable with it. It does not think, calculate or judge in any way at

all;  it  restricts  itself  to  giving  things  a  new  form.  It  is  exhaustively

described by an enumeration of the conditions which it has to satisfyin  producing  its  result.  That  product,  the  dream,  has  above  all  to

evade  the  censorship,  and  with  that  end  in  view  the  dream-work

makes use of a displacement of psychical intensities to the point of a

transvaluation  of  all  psychical  values.  The  thoughts  have  to  be

reproduced exclusively or predominantly in the material of visual and

acoustic memory-traces, and this necessity imposes upon the dream-

work considerations of representability which it meets by carrying out

fresh displacements. Greater intensities have probably to be produced

than are available in the dream-thoughts at night, and this purpose is

served by the extensive condensation which is carried out with the

constituents  of  the  dream-thoughts.  Little  attention  is  paid  to  the

logical relations between the thoughts; those relations are ultimately

given a disguised representation in certain formal  characteristics  of

dreams.  Any  affect  attached  to  the  dream-thoughts  undergoes  less

modification than their ideational content. Such affects are as a rule

suppressed; when they are retained, they are detached from the ideas

that  properly  belong  to  them,  affects  of  a  similar  character  being

brought together. Only a single portion of the dream-work and one

which operates to an irregular degree, the working over of the material

by partly aroused waking thought, tallies to some extent with the view

which  other  writers  have  sought  to  apply  to  the  entire  activity  of

dream-construction.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1925:] I used at one time to find it extraordinarily difficult to accustom

readers  to  the  distinction  between  the  manifest  content  of  dreams  and  the  latent  dream-
thoughts. Again and again arguments and objections would be brought up based upon some
uninterpreted dream in the form in which it had been retained in the memory, and the need to
interpret  it  would  be  ignored.  But  now  that  analysts  at  least  have  become  reconciled  to
replacing the manifest dream by the meaning revealed by its interpretation, many of them
have become guilty of falling into another confusion which they cling to with equal obstinacy.
They seek to find the essence of dreams in their latent content and in so doing they overlook
the distinction between the latent dream-thoughts and the dream-work. At bottom, dreams are
nothing other than a particular form of thinking, made possible by the conditions of the state of
sleep. It is the dream-work which creates that form, and it alone is the essence of dreaming -
the explanation of its peculiar nature. I say this in order to make it possible to assess the value
of the notorious ‘prospective purpose’ of dreams. The fact that dreams concern themselves
with attempts at solving the problems by which our mental life is faced is no more strange
than that our conscious waking life should do so; beyond this it merely tells us that that activity
can also be carried on in the preconscious - and this we already knew.
                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        945

 

                                    CHAPTER VII

 

          THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM PROCESSES

 

Among the dreams which have been reported to me by other people,

there is one which has special claims upon our attention at this point.

It was told to me by a woman patient who had herself heard it in a

lecture on dreams: its actual source is still unknown to me. Its content

made an impression on the lady, however, and she proceeded to ‘re-

dream’ it, that is, to repeat some of its elements in a dream of her

own,  so  that,  by  taking  it  over  in  this  way,  she  might  express  her

agreement with it on one particular point.

   The preliminaries to this model dream were as follows. A father had

been watching beside his child’s sick-bed for days and nights on end.

After the child had died, he went into the next room to lie down, but left

the door open so that he could see from his bedroom into the room in

which his child’s body was laid out, with tall candles standing round it.

An old man had been engaged to keep watch over it, and sat beside

the body murmuring prayers. After a few hours’ sleep, the father had a

dream that his child was standing besides his bed, caught him by the

arm and whispered to him reproachfully: ‘Father, don’t you see I’m

burning?’ He woke up, noticed a bright glare of light from the next

room, hurried into it and found that the old watchman had dropped off

to sleep and that the wrappings and one of the arms of his beloved

child’s dead body had been burned by a lighted candle that had fallen

on them.

   The explanation of this moving dream is simple enough and, so my

patient told me, was correctly given by the lecturer. The glare of light

shone though the open door into the sleeping man’s eyes and led him

to  the  conclusion  which  he  would  have  arrived  at  if  he  had  been

awake, namely that a candle had fallen over and set something alight

in the neighbourhood of the body. It is even possible that he had felt

some concern when he went to sleep as to whether the old man might

not be incompetent to carry out his task. 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        946

 

   Nor have I any changes to suggest in this interpretation except to

add that the content of the dream must have been overdetermined

and that the words spoken by the child must have been made up of

words which he had actually spoken in his lifetime and which were

connected with important events in the father’s mind. For instance,

‘I’m burning’ may have been spoken during the fever of the child’s last

illness,  and  ‘Father,  don’t  you  see?’  may  have  been  derived  from

some other highly emotional situation of which we are in ignorance.

      But,  having  recognized  that  the  dream  was  a  process  with  a

meaning, and that it can be inserted into the chain of the dreamer’s

psychical experiences, we may still wonder why it was that a dream

occurred at all in such circumstances, when the most rapid possible

awakening was called for. And here we shall observe that this dream,

too, contained the fulfilment of a wish. The dead child behaved in the

dream like a living one: he himself warned his father, came to his bed,

and  caught  him  by  the  arm,  just  as  he  had  probably  done  on  the

occasion from the memory of which the first part of the child’s words in

the dream were derived. For the sake of the fulfilment of this wish the

father prolonged his sleep by one moment. The dream was preferred

to a waking reflection because it was able to show the child as once

more  alive.  If  the  father  had  woken  up  first  and  then  made  the

inference that led him to go into the next room, he would, as it were,

have shortened his child’s life by that moment of time.

   There can be no doubt what the peculiar feature is which attracts

our  interest  to  this  brief  dream.  Hitherto  we  have  been  principally

concerned  with  the  secret  meaning  of  dreams  and  the  method  of

discovering it and with the means employed by the dream-work for

concealing  it.  The  problems  of  dream-interpretation  have  hitherto

occupied the centre of the picture. And now we come upon a dream

which raises no problem of interpretation and the meaning of which is

obvious,  but  which,  as  we  see,  nevertheless  retains  the  essential

characteristics that differentiate dreams so strikingly from waking lifeand  consequently  call  for  explanation.  It  is  only  after  we  have

disposed of everything that has to do with the work of interpretation

that we can begin to realize the incompleteness of our psychology of

dreams.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        947

 

   But before starting off along this new path, it will be well to pause

and look around, to see whether in the course of our journey up to this

point  we  have  overlooked  anything  of  importance.  For  it  must  be

clearly understood that the easy and agreeable portion of our journey

lies behind us. Hitherto, unless I am greatly mistaken, all the paths

along which we have travelled have led us towards the light - towards

elucidation and fuller understanding. But as soon as we endeavour to

penetrate more deeply into the mental process involved in dreaming,

every path will end in darkness. There is no possibility of explaining

dreams  as  a  psychical  process,  since  to  explain  a  thing  means  to

trace it back to something already known, and there is at the present

time no established psychological knowledge under which we could

subsume what the psychological examination of dreams enables us to

infer as a basis for their explanation. On the contrary, we shall be

obliged to set up a number of fresh hypotheses which touch tentatively

upon the structure of the apparatus of the mind and upon the play of

forces  operating  in  it.  We  must  be  careful,  however,  not  to  pursue

these hypotheses too far beyond their first logical links, or their value

will be lost in uncertainties. Even if we make no false inferences and

take  all  the  logical  possibilities  into  account,  the  probable

incompleteness of our premises threatens to bring our calculation to a

complete  miscarriage.  No  conclusions  upon  the  construction  and

working methods of the mental instrument can be arrived at or at least

fully proved from even the most painstaking investigation of dreams or

of any other mental function taken in isolation. To achieve this result, it

will be necessary to correlate all the established implications derived

from a comparative study of a whole series of such functions. Thus

the psychological hypotheses to which we are led by an analysis ofthe processes of dreaming must be left, as it were, in suspense, until

they can be related to the findings of other enquiries which seek to

approach the kernel of the same problem from another angle.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        948

 

                                          (A)

 

                            THE FORGETTING OF DREAMS

 

   I suggest, therefore, that we should first turn to a topic that raises a

difficulty  which  we  have  not  hitherto  considered  but  which  is

nevertheless capable of cutting the ground from under all our efforts at

interpreting dreams. It has been objected on more than one occasion

that we have in fact no knowledge of the dreams that we set out to

interpret, or, speaking more correctly, that we have no guarantee that

we know them as they actually occurred.(See p. 555 ff.)

      In  the  first  place,  what  we  remember  of  a  dream  and  what  we

exercise  our  interpretative  arts  upon  has  been  mutilated  by  the

untrustworthiness  of  our  memory,  which  seems  quite  especially

incapable of retaining a dream and may well have lost precisely the

most important parts of its content. It quite frequently happens that

when  we  seek  to  turn  our  attention  to  one  of  our  dreams  we  find

ourselves regretting the fact that, though we dreamt far more, we can

remember nothing but a single fragment which is itself recollected with

peculiar uncertainty.

      Secondly,  there  is  every  reason  to  suspect  that  our  memory  of

dreams is not only fragmentary but positively inaccurate and falsified.

On the one hand it may be doubted whether what we dreamt was

really as disconnected and hazy as our recollection of it; and on the

other hand it may also be doubted whether a dream was really as

connected as it is in the account we give of it, whether in attempting to

reproduce it we do not fill in what was never there, or what has been

forgotten, with new and arbitrarily selected material, whether we do

not add embellishments and trimmings and round it off so that there is

no  possibility  of  deciding  what  its  original  content  may  have  been.Indeed one author, Spitta (1882),¹ goes to the point of suggesting that

in so far as a dream shows any kind of order or coherence, these

qualities are only introduced into it when we try to recall it to mind.

Thus there seems to be a danger that the very thing whose value we

have undertaken to assess may slip completely through our fingers.

 

   ¹ So too Foucault and Talmery.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        949

 

   Hitherto in interpreting dreams we have disregarded such warnings.

On the contrary, we have accepted it as being just as important to

interpret  the  smallest,  least  conspicuous  and  most  uncertain

constituents of the content of dreams as those that are most clearly

and certainly preserved. The dream of Irma’s injection contained the

phrase ‘I at once called in Dr. M.’; and we assumed that even this

detail would not have found its way into the dream unless it had had

some particular origin. It was thus that we came upon the story of the

unfortunate  patient  to  whose  bedside  I  had  ‘at  once’  called  in  my

senior colleague. In the apparently absurd dream which treated the

difference between 51 and 56 as a negligible quantity, the number 51

was mentioned several times. Instead of regarding this as a matter of

course or as something indifferent, we inferred from it that there was a

second line of thought in the latent content of the dream leading to the

number 51; and along this track we arrived at my fears of 51 years

being the limit of my life, in glaring contrast to the dream’s dominant

train of thought which was lavish in its boasts of a long life. In the ‘Non

vixit’dream  there  was  an  inconspicuous  interpolation  which  I

overlooked at first: ‘As P. failed to understand him, Fl. asked me’, etc.

When the interpretation was held up, I went back to these words and it

was they that led me on to the childhood phantasy which turned out to

be  an  intermediate  nodal  point  in  the  dream-thoughts.  This  was

arrived at by way of the lines:

 

                                                                Selten habt ihr mich verstanden,
                                                                Selten auch verstand ich Euch,                                                                Nur wenn wir im Kot uns fanden,

                                                                So verstanden wir uns gleich.¹

 

   Examples could be found in every analysis to show that precisely

the  most  trivial  elements  of  a  dream  are  indispensable  to  its

interpretation and that the work in hand is held up if attention is not

paid  to  these  elements  until  too  late.  We  have  attached  no  less

importance in interpreting dreams to every shade of the form of words

in which they were laid before us. And even when it happened that the

text of the dream as we had it was meaningless or inadequate - as

though the effort to give a correct account of it had been unsuccessful

- we have taken this defect into account as well. In short, we have

treated  as  Holy  Writ  what  previous  writers  have  regarded  as  an

arbitrary  improvisation,  hurriedly  patched  together  in  the

embarrassment of the moment. This contradiction stands in need of

an explanation.

 

   ¹ [Literally: ‘Rarely have you understood me, and rarely too have I understood you. Not until

we both found ourselves in the mud did we promptly understand each other.’ Heine, Buch der
Lieder, ‘Die Heimkehr’, LXXVIII.]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        950

 

 

   The explanation is in our favour, though without putting the other

writers in the wrong. In the light of our newly-won understanding of the

origin of dreams the contradiction disappears completely. It is true that

we distort dreams in attempting to reproduce them; here we find at

work  once  more  the  process  which  we  have  described  as  the

secondary  (and  often  ill-conceived)  revision  of  the  dream  by  the

agency which carries out normal thinking. But this distortion is itself no

more  than  a  part  of  the  revision  to  which  the  dream-thoughts  are

regularly  subjected  as  a  result  of  the  dream-censorship.  The  other

writers  have  at  this  point  noticed  or  suspected  the  part  of  dream-

distortion which operates manifestly; we are less interested, since we

know that a much more far-reaching process of distortion, though aless obvious one, has already developed the dream out of the hidden

dream-thoughts. The only mistake made by previous writers has been

in supposing that the modification of the dream in the course of being

remembered and put into words is an arbitrary one and cannot be

further  resolved  and  that  it  is  therefore  calculated  to  give  us  a

misleading picture of the dream. They have underestimated the extent

to which psychical events are determined. There is nothing arbitrary

about them. It can be shown quite generally that if an element is left

undetermined by one train of thought, its determination is immediately

effected by a second one. For instance. I may try to think of a number

arbitrarily. But this is impossible: the number that occurs to me will be

unambiguously  and  necessarily  determined  by  thoughts  of  mine,

though  they  may  be  remote  from  my  immediate  intention.¹  The

modifications to which dreams are submitted under the editorship of

waking life are just as little arbitrary. They are associatively linked to

the material which they replace, and serve to show us the way to that

material, which may in its turn be a substitute for something else.

      In  analysing  the  dreams  of  my  patients  I  sometimes  put  this

assertion to the following test, which has never failed me. If the first

account given me by a patient of a dream is too hard to follow I ask

him to repeat it. In doing so he rarely uses the same words. But the

parts of the dream which he describes in different terms are by that

fact revealed to me as the weak spot in the dream’s disguise: they

serve my purpose just as Hagen’s was served by the embroidered

mark on Siegfried’s cloak. That is the point at which the interpretation

of the dream can be started. My request to the patient to repeat his

account of the dream has warned him that I was proposing to take

special pains in solving it; under pressure of the resistance, therefore,

he hastily covers the weak spots in the dream’s disguise by replacing

any  expressions  that  threaten  to  betray  its  meaning  by  other  less

revealing ones. In this way he draws my attention to the expression

which  he  has  dropped  out.  The  trouble  taken  by  the  dreamer  in

preventing the solution of the dream gives me a basis for estimating

the care with which its cloak has been woven.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] See my Psychopathology of Everyday Life.

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        951

 

 

   Previous writers have had less justification in devoting so much

space to the doubt with which our judgement receives accounts of

dreams. For this doubt has no intellectual warrant. There is in general

no guarantee of the correctness of our memory; and yet we yield to

the  compulsion  to  attach  belief  to  its  data  far  more  often  than  is

objectively justified. Doubt whether a dream or certain of its details

have been correctly reported is once more a derivative of the dream-

censorship, of resistance to the penetration of the dream-thoughts into

consciousness. This resistance has not been exhausted even by the

displacements and substitutions it has brought about; it persists in the

form  of  doubt  attaching  to  the  material  which  has  been  allowed

through. We are especially inclined to misunderstand this doubt since

it is careful never to attack the more intense elements of a dream but

only the weak and indistinct ones. As we already know, however, a

complete  reversal  of  all  psychical  values  takes  place  between  the

dream-thoughts and the dream. Distortion is only made possible by a

withdrawal  of  psychical  value;  it  habitually  expresses  itself  by  that

means and is occasionally content to require nothing more. If, then, an

indistinct  element  of  a  dream’s  content  is  in  addition  attacked  by

doubt,  we  have  a  sure  indication  that  we  are  dealing  with  a

comparatively  direct  derivative  of  one  of  the  proscribed  dream-

thoughts.  The  state  of  things  is  what  it  was  after  some  sweeping

revolution in one of the republics of antiquity or the Renaissance. The

noble  and  powerful  families  which  had  previously  dominated  the

scene  were  sent  into  exile  and  all  the  high  offices  were  filled  by

newcomers. Only the most impoverished and powerless members of

the vanquished families, or their remote dependants, were allowed to

remain in the city; and even so they did not enjoy full civic rights and

were viewed with distrust. The distrust in this analogy corresponds to

the doubt in the case we are considering. That is why in analysing a

dream I insist that the whole scale of estimates of certainty shall be

abandoned and that the faintest possibility that something of this or

that sort may have occurred in the dream shall be treated as completecertainty. In tracing any element of a dream it will be found that unless

this attitude is firmly adopted the analysis will come to a standstill. If

any doubt is thrown upon the value of the element in question, the

psychical  result  in  the  patient  is  that  none  of  the  involuntary  ideas

underlying that element comes into his head. This result is not a self-

evident one. It would not make nonsense if someone were to say: ‘I

don’t know for certain whether such and such a thing came into the

dream, but here is what occurs to me in connection with it.’ But in fact

no  one  ever  does  say  this;  and  it  is  precisely  the  fact  that  doubt

produces this interrupting effect upon an analysis that reveals it as a

derivative and tool of psychical resistance. Psycho-analysis is justly

suspicious. One of its rules is that whatever interrupts the progress of

analytic work is a resistance.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1925:] The proposition laid down in these peremptory terms - ‘whatever

interrupts the progress of analytic work is a resistance’ is easily open to misunderstanding. It
is  of  course  only  to  be  taken  as  a  technical  rule,  as  a  warning  to  analysts.  It  cannot  be
disputed that in the course of an analysis various events may occur the responsibility for
which  cannot  be  laid  upon  the  patient’s  intentions.  His  father  may  die  without  his  having
murdered him; or a war may break out which brings the analysis to an end. But behind its
obvious exaggeration the proposition is asserting something both true and new. Even if the
interrupting event is a real one and independent of the patient, it often depends on him how
great an interruption it causes; and resistance shows itself unmistakably in the readiness with
which he accepts an occurrence of this kind or the exaggerated use which he make of it.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        952
 

 

   The forgetting of dreams, too, remains inexplicable unless the power

of  the  psychical  censorship  is  taken  into  account.  In  a  number  of

cases the feeling of having dreamt a great deal during the night and of

only having retained a little of it may in fact have some other meaning,

such  as  that  the  dream-work  has  been  perceptibly  proceeding  all

through the night but has only left a short dream behind. It is no doubt

true  that  we  forget  dreams  more  and  more  as  time  passes  after

waking; we often forget them in spite of the most painstaking efforts to

recall them. But I am of opinion that the extent of this forgetting is as a

rule overestimated; and there is a similar overestimation of the extentto  which  the  gaps  in  a  dream  limit  our  knowledge  of  it.  It  is  often

possible by means of analysis to restore all that has been lost by the

forgetting of the dream’s content; at least, in quite a number of cases

one can reconstruct from a single remaining fragment not, it is true,

the dream - which is in any case a matter of no importance - but all the

dream-thoughts. This demands a certain amount of attention and self-

discipline in carrying out the analysis; that is all - but it shows that

there was no lack of a hostile purpose at work in the forgetting of the

dream.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1919:] I may quote the following dream from my Introductory Lectures as

an example of the meaning of doubt and uncertainty in a dream and of its content being at the
same  time  shrunk  down  to  a  single  element;  in  spite  of  this  the  dream  was  successfully
analysed after a short delay:
   ‘A sceptical woman patient had a longish dream in the course of which some people told her
about my book on jokes and praised it highly. Something came in then about a "channel",
perhaps it was another book that mentioned a channel, or something else about a channel . . .
she didn’t know . . . it was all so indistinct.
   ‘No doubt you will be inclined to expect that the element "channel," since it was so indistinct,
would be inaccessible to interpretation. You are right in suspecting a difficulty; but the difficulty
did  not  arise  from  the  indistinctness:  both  the  difficulty  and  the  indistinctness  arose  from
another cause. Nothing occurred to the dreamer in connection with "channel," and I could of
course throw no light on it. A little later - it was the next day, in point of fact - she told me that
she had thought of something that might have something to do with it. It was a joke, too - a
joke she had heard. On the steamer between Dover and Calais a well-known author fell into
conversation with an Englishman. The latter had occasion to quote the phrase: "Du sublime
au ridicule il n’y a qu’un pas. [It is only a step from the sublime to the ridiculous.]" Yes, replied
the  author,  "le  Pas  de  Calais"  -  meaning  that  he  thought  France  sublime  and  England
ridiculous. But the Pas de Calais is a channel - the English Channel. You will ask whether I
think this had anything to do with the dream. Certainly I think so; and it provides the solution of
the puzzling element of the dream. Can you doubt that this joke was already present before
the dream occurred, as the unconscious thought behind the element "channel"? Can you
suppose  that  it  was  introduced  as  a  subsequent  invention?  The  association  betrayed  the
scepticism which lay concealed behind the patient’s ostensible admiration; and her resistance
against revealing this was no doubt the common cause both of her delay in producing the
association and of the indistinctness of the dream-element concerned. Consider the relation of
the  dream-element  to  its  unconscious  background:  it  was,  as  it  were,  a  fragment  of  that
background, an allusion to it, but it was made quite incomprehensible by being isolated.’
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        953

 

      Convincing  evidence  of  the  fact  that  the  forgetting  of  dreams  is

tendentious and serves the purpose of resistance¹ is afforded when itis possible to observe in analyses a preliminary stage of forgetting. It

not  infrequently  happens  that  in  the  middle  of  the  work  of

interpretation an omitted portion of the dream comes to light and is

described as having been forgotten till that moment. Now a part of a

dream that has been rescued from oblivion in this way is invariably the

most important part; it always lies on the shortest road to the dream’s

solution  and  has  for  that  reason  been  exposed  to  resistance  more

than any other part. Among the specimen dreams scattered through

this volume, there is one in which a part of its content was added like

this  as  an  after-thought.  It  is  the  travel  dream  in  which  I  revenged

myself on two disagreeable fellow-travellers and which I had to leave

almost uninterpreted on account of its gross indecency. The omitted

portion ran as follows: ‘I said, referring to one of Schiller’s works: "It is

from . . ." but, noticing the mistake, I corrected myself: "It is by . . ."

"Yes", the man commented to his sister, "he said that right."‘²

 

   ¹ On the purposes of forgetting in general see my short paper on the psychical mechanism

of  forgetting  (Freud,  1898b).  [Added  1909:]  Later  included  as  the  first  chapter  in  my
Psychopathology of Everyday Life (Freud, 1901b)

   ² [Footnote added 1914:] Corrections such as this in the usages of foreign languages are

not infrequent in dreams but are more often attributed to other people. Maury (1878, 143)
once dreamt, at a time when he was learning English, that, in telling someone that he had
visited him the day before, he used the words ‘I called for you yesterday.’ Whereupon the
other answered correctly: ‘You should have said "I called on you yesterday".’
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        954

 

      Self-corrections  in  dreams,  which  seem  so  marvellous  to  some

writers,  need  not  occupy  our  attention.  I  will  indicate  instead  the

recollection  which  served  as  the  model  for  my  verbal  error  in  this

dream. When I was nineteen years old I visited England for the first

time and spent a whole day on the shore of the Irish Sea. I naturally

revelled in the opportunity of collecting the marine animals left behind

by the tide and I was occupied with a starfish - the words ‘Hollthurn’

and ‘holothurians [sea-slugs]’ occurred at the beginning of the dream -

when a charming little girl came up to me and said: ‘Is it a starfish? Is

it alive?’ ‘Yes’, I replied, ‘he is alive’, and at once, embarrassed at mymistake,  repeated  the  sentence  correctly  [‘It  is  alive’].  The  dream

replaced the verbal error which I then made by another into which a

German is equally liable to fall. ‘Das Buch ist von Schiller’ should be

translated not with a ‘from’ but with a ‘by.’ After all that we have heard

of the purposes of the dream-work and its reckless choice of methods

for attaining them, we shall not be surprised to hear that it effected this

replacement because of the magnificent piece of condensation that

was made possible by the identity of sound of the English ‘from’ and

the  German  adjective  ‘fromm’  [‘pious’].  But  how  did  my  blameless

memory of the sea-shore come to be in the dream? It served as the

most innocent possible example of my using a word indicating gender

or sex in the wrong place - of my bringing in sex (the word ‘he’) where

it did not belong. This, incidentally, was one of the keys to the solution

of the dream. No one who has heard, furthermore, the origin attributed

to  the  title  of  Clerk-Maxwell’s  ‘Matter  and Motion’  will  have  any

difficulty in filling in the gaps: Moliere’s ‘Le Malade Imaginaire’ - ‘La

matière est-elle laudable?’¹ - A motion of the bowels.

 

   ¹ [‘Is the matter laudable?’ - Old medical terminology for ‘Is the excretion healthy?’ - The

next phrase is in English in the original.]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        955

 

   Moreover I am in a position to offer an ocular demonstration of the

fact  that  the  forgetting  of  dreams  is  to  a  great  extent  a  product  of

resistance. One of my patients will tell me he has had a dream but has

forgotten every trace of it: it is therefore just as though it had never

happened. We proceed with our work. I come up against a resistance;

I  therefore  explain  something  to  the  patient  and  help  him  by

encouragement  and  pressure  to  come  to  terms  with  some

disagreeable  thought.  Hardly  have  I  succeeded  in  this  than  he

exclaims:  ‘Now  I  remember  what  it  was  I  dreamt.’  The  same

resistance  which  interfered  with  our  work  that  day  also  made  him

forget the dream. By overcoming this resistance I have recalled the

dream to his memory.

   In just the same way, when a patient reaches some particular pointin  his  work,  he  may  be  able  to  remember  a  dream  which  he  had

dreamt three or four or even more days before and which had hitherto

remained forgotten.¹

   Psycho-analytic experience has provided us with yet an other proof

that the forgetting of dreams depends far more upon resistance than

upon  the  fact,  stressed  by  the  authorities,  that  the  waking  and

sleeping states are alien to each other. It not infrequently happens to

me, as well as to other analysts and to patients under treatment, that,

having been woken up, as one might say, by a dream, I immediately

afterwards, and in full possession of my intellectual powers, set about

interpreting it. In such cases I have often refused to rest till I have

arrived  at  a  complete  understanding  of  the  dream;  yet  it  has

sometimes  been  my  experience  that  after  finally  waking  up  in  the

morning I have entirely forgotten both my interpretative activity and the

content of the dream, though knowing that I have had a dream and

interpreted  it.  It  happens  far  more  often  that  the  dream  draws  the

findings of my interpretative activity back with it into oblivion than that

my  intellectual  activity  succeeds  in  preserving  the  dream  in  my

memory. Yet there is no such psychical gulf between my interpretative

activity and my waking thoughts as the authorities suppose to account

for the forgetting of dreams.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] Ernest Jones has described an analogous case which often

occurs: while a dream is being analysed the patient may recollect a second one which was
dreamt during the same night but whose very existence had not been suspected.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        956

 

      Morton  Prince  (1910)  has  objected  to  my  explanation  of  the

forgetting of dreams on the ground that that forgetting is only a special

case of the amnesia attaching to dissociated mental states, that it is

impossible to extend my explanation of this special amnesia to other

types and that my explanation is consequently devoid of value even

for its immediate purpose. His readers are thus reminded that in the

course of all his descriptions of these dissociated states he has never

attempted to discover a dynamic explanation of such phenomena. Ifhe  had,  he  would  inevitably  have  found  that  repression  (or,  more

precisely,  the  resistance  created  by  it)  is  the  cause  both  of  the

dissociations and of the amnesia attaching to their psychical content.

   An observation which I have been able to make in the course of

preparing this manuscript has shown me that dreams are no more

forgotten than other mental acts and can be compared, by no means

to their disadvantage, with other mental functions in respect of their

retention in the memory. I had kept records of a large number of my

own dreams which for one reason or another I had not been able to

interpret completely at the time or had left entirely uninterpreted. And

now, between one and two years later, I have attempted to interpret

some of them for the purpose of obtaining more material in illustration

of my views. These attempts have been successful in every instance;

indeed the interpretation may be said to have proceeded more easily

after this long interval than it did at the time when the dream was a

recent  experience.  A  possible  explanation  of  this  is  that  in  the

meantime  I  have  overcome  some  of  the  internal  resistances  which

previously  obstructed  me.  When  making  these  subsequent

interpretations I have compared the dream-thoughts that I elicited at

the time of the dream with the present, usually far more copious, yield,

and I have always found that the old ones are included among the

new. My astonishment at this was quickly halted by the reflection that I

had long been in the habit of getting my patients, who sometimes tell

me dreams dating from earlier years, to interpret them - by the same

procedure and with the same success - as though they had dreamt

them the night before. When I come to discuss anxiety-dreams I shall

give two examples of postponed interpretations like these. I was led

into  making  my  first  experiment  of  this  kind  by  the  justifiable

expectation that in this as in other respects dreams would behave like

neurotic symptoms. When I treat a psychoneurotic - a hysteric, let us

say - by psycho-analysis, I am obliged to arrive at an explanation for

the earliest and long since vanished symptoms of his illness no less

than  for  the  contemporary  ones  which  brought  him  to  me  for

treatment; and I actually find the earlier problem easier to solve than

the  immediate  one.  As  long  ago  as  in  1895  I  was  able  to  give  an

explanation in Studies on Hysteria of the first hysterical attack which a

woman of over forty had had in her fifteenth year.¹ 

   ¹ [Added in the text in 1919 and transferred to a footnote in 1930:] Dreams which occur in

the earliest years of childhood and are retained in the memory for dozens of years, often with
complete  sensory  vividness,  are  almost  always  of  great  importance  in  enabling  us  to
understand the history of the subject’s mental development and of his neurosis. Analysis of
such dreams protects the physician from errors and uncertainties which may lead, among
other things, to theoretical confusion.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        957

 

 

      And  here  I  will  mention  a  number  of  further,  somewhat

disconnected, points on the subject of interpreting dreams, which may

perhaps help to give readers their bearings should they feel inclined to

check my statements by subsequent work upon their own dreams.

   No one should expect that an interpretation of his dreams will fall

into his lap like manna from the skies. Practice is needed even for

perceiving endoptic phenomena or other sensations from which our

attention is normally withheld; and this is so even though there is no

psychical  motive  fighting  against  such  perceptions.  It  is  decidedly

more difficult to get hold of ‘involuntary ideas.’ Anyone who seeks to

do  so  must  familiarize  himself  with  the  expectations  raised  in  the

present volume and must, in accordance with the rules laid down in it,

endeavour during the work to refrain from any criticism, any parti pris,

and any emotional or intellectual bias. He must bear in mind Claude

Bernard’s  advice  to  experimenters  in  a  physiological  laboratory:

‘travailler  comme  une  bête’  -  he  must  work,  that  is,  with  as  much

persistence as an animal and with as much disregard of the result. If

this advice is followed, the task will no longer be a hard one.

   The interpretation of a dream cannot always be accomplished at a

single sitting. When we have followed a chain of associations, it not

infrequently  happens  that  we  feel  our  capacity  exhausted;  nothing

more is to be learnt from the dream that day. The wisest plan then is

to break off and resume our work another day: another part of the

dream’s content may then attract our attention and give us access to

another  stratum  of  dream-thoughts.  This  procedure  might  be

described as ‘fractional’ dream-interpretation.   It is only with the greatest difficulty that the beginner in the business

of interpreting dreams can be persuaded that his task is not at an end

when he has a complete interpretation in his hands - an interpretation

which makes sense, is coherent and throws light upon every element

of  the  dream’s  content.  For  the  same  dream  may  perhaps  have

another  interpretation  as  well,  an  ‘over-interpretation’,  which  has

escaped him. It is, indeed, not easy to form any conception of the

abundance  of  the  unconscious  trains  of  thought,  all  striving  to  find

expression, which are active in our minds. Nor is it easy to credit the

skill  shown  by  the  dream-work  in  always  hitting  upon  forms  of

expression that can bear several meanings - like the Little Tailor in the

fairy story who hit seven flies at a blow. My readers will always be

inclined  to  accuse  me  of  introducing  an  unnecessary  amount  of

ingenuity into my interpretations; but actual experience would teach

them better.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        958

 

      On  the  other  hand,  I  cannot  confirm  the  opinion,  first  stated  by

Silberer,  that  all  dreams  (or  many  dreams,  or  certain  classes  of

dreams) require two different interpretations, which are even stated to

bear a fixed relation to each other. One of these interpretations, which

Silberer calls the ‘psycho-analytic’ one, is said to give the dream some

meaning or other, usually of an infantile-sexual kind; the other and

more  important  interpretation,  to  which  he  gives  the  name  of

‘anagogic’,  is  said  to  reveal  the  more  serious  thoughts,  often  of

profound  import,  which  the  dream-work  has  taken  as  its  material.

Silberer has not given evidence in support of this opinion by reporting

a series of dreams analysed in the two directions. And I must object

that  the  alleged  fact  is  non-existent.  In  spite  of  what  he  says,  the

majority  of  dreams  require  no  ‘over-interpretation’  and,  more

particularly, are insusceptible to an anagogic interpretation. As in the

case  of  many  other  theories  put  forward  in  recent  years,  it  is

impossible to overlook the fact that Silberer’s views are influenced to

some extent by a purpose which seeks to disguise the fundamentalcircumstances in which dreams are formed and to divert interest from

their instinctual roots. In a certain number of cases I have been able to

confirm Silberer’s statements. Analysis showed that in such cases the

dream-work found itself faced with the problem of transforming into a

dream a series of highly abstract thoughts from waking life which were

incapable of being given any direct representation. It endeavoured to

solve  the  problem  by  getting  hold  of  another  group  of  intellectual

material, somewhat loosely related (often in a manner which might be

described as ‘allegorical’) to the abstract thoughts, and at the same

time capable of being represented with fewer difficulties. The abstract

interpretation of a dream that has arisen in this way is given by the

dreamer without any difficulty; the correct interpretation of the material

that  has  been  interpolated  must  be  looked  for  by  the  technical

methods which are now familiar to us.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        959

 

   The question whether it is possible to interpret every dream must be

answered in the negative. It must not be forgotten that in interpreting a

dream  we  are  opposed  by  the  psychical  forces  which  were

responsible for its distortion. It is thus a question of relative strength

whether  our  intellectual  interest,  our  capacity  for  self-discipline,  our

psychological  knowledge  and  our  practice  in  interpreting  dreams

enable us to master our internal resistances. It is always possible to

go some distance: far enough, at all events, to convince ourselves that

the dream is a structure with a meaning, and as a rule far enough to

get  a  glimpse  of  what  that  meaning  is.  Quite  often  an  immediately

succeeding  dream  allows  us  to  confirm  and  carry  further  the

interpretation we have tentatively adopted for its predecessor. A whole

series  of  dreams,  continuing  over  a  period  of  weeks  or  months,  is

often  based  upon  common  ground  and  must  accordingly  be

interpreted  in  connection  with  one  another.  In  the  case  of  two

consecutive dreams it can often be observed that one takes as its

central point something that is only on the periphery of the other and

vice  versa,  so  that  their  interpretations  too  are  mutuallycomplementary.  I  have  already  given  instances  which  show  that

different dreams dreamt on the same night are, as a quite general

rule, to be treated in their interpretation as a single whole.

   There is often a passage in even the most thoroughly interpreted

dream which has to be left obscure; this is because we become aware

during the work of interpretation that at that point there is a tangle of

dream-thoughts which cannot be unravelled and which moreover adds

nothing  to  our  knowledge  of  the  content  of  the  dream.  This  is  the

dream’s navel, the spot where it reaches down into the unknown. The

dream-thoughts to which we are led by interpretation cannot, from the

nature of things, have any definite endings; they are found to branch

out in every direction into the intricate network of our world of thought.

It is at some point where this meshwork is particularly close that the

dream-wish grows up, like a mushroom out of its mycelium.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        960

 

 

   But we must return to the facts concerning the forgetting of dreams,

for we have failed to draw one important conclusion from them. We

have seen that waking life shows an unmistakable inclination to forget

any dream that has been formed in the course of the night - whether

as a whole directly after waking, or bit by bit in the course of the day;

and  we  have  recognized  that  the  agent  chiefly  responsible  for  this

forgetting  is  the  mental  resistance  to  the  dream  which  has  already

done what it could against it during the night. But if all this is so, the

question arises how it comes about that a dream can be formed at all

in the face of this resistance. Let us take the most extreme case, in

which  waking  life  has  got  rid  of  a  dream  as  though  it  had  never

occurred. A consideration of the interplay of psychical forces in this

case  must  lead  us  to  infer  that  the  dream  would  in  fact  not  have

occurred at all if the resistance had been as strong during the night as

during the day. We must conclude that during the night the resistance

loses some of its power, though we know it does not lose the whole of

it, since we have shown the part it plays in the formation of dreams asa distorting agent. But we are driven to suppose that its power may be

diminished  at  night  and  that  this  makes  the  formation  of  dreams

possible. This makes it easy to understand how, having regained its

full strength at the moment of waking, it at once proceeds to get rid of

what  it  was  obliged  to  permit  while  it  was  weak.  Descriptive

psychology tells us that the principal sine qua non for the formation of

dreams is that the mind shall be in a state of sleep; and we are now

able to explain this fact: the state of sleep makes the formation of

dreams  possible  because  it  reduces  the  power  of  the  endopsychic

censorship.

   It is no doubt tempting to regard this as the only possible inference

that can be drawn from the facts of the forgetting of dreams, and to

make it the basis for further conclusions as to the conditions of energy

prevailing during sleeping and waking. For the moment, however, we

will stop at this point. When we have entered a little more deeply into

the  psychology  of  dreams  we  shall  find  that  the  factors  making

possible the formation of dreams can be viewed in another way as

well.  It  may  be  that  the  resistance  against  the  dream-thoughts

becoming  conscious  can  be  evaded  without  any  reduction  having

taken place in its power. And it seems a plausible idea that both of the

two factors favouring the formation of dreams - the reduction and the

evasion of the resistance - are simultaneously made possible by the

state of sleep. I will break off here, though I shall pick up the argument

again presently.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        961

 

 

      There  is  another  set  of  objections  to  our  method  of  interpreting

dreams  with  which  we  must  now  deal.  Our  procedure  consists  in

abandoning  all  those  purposive  ideas  which  normally  govern  our

reflections, in focusing our attention on a single element of the dream

and in then taking note of whatever involuntary thoughts may occur to

us in connection with it. We then take the next portion of the dream

and repeat the process with it. We allow ourselves to be led on by ourthoughts regardless of the direction in which they carry us and drift on

in this way from one thing to another. But we cherish a confident belief

that in the end, without any active intervention on our part, we shall

arrive at the dream-thoughts from which the dream originated.

      Our  critics  argue  against  this  along  the  following  lines.  There  is

nothing wonderful in the fact that a single element of the dream should

lead us somewhere; every idea can be associated with something.

What  is  remarkable  is  that  such  an  aimless  and  arbitrary  train  of

thought  should  happen  to  bring  us  to  the  dream-thoughts.  The

probability is that we are deceiving ourselves. We follow a chain of

associations from one element, till, for one reason or another, it seems

to break off. If we then take up a second element, it is only to be

expected that the originally unrestricted character of our associations

will be narrowed. For we still have the earlier chain of thoughts in our

memory, and for that reason, in analysing the second dream-idea, we

are  more  likely  to  hit  upon  associations  which  have  something  in

common  with  associations  from  the  first  chain.  We  then  delude

ourselves into thinking that we have discovered a thought which is a

connecting point between two elements of the dream. Since we give

ourselves  complete  liberty  to  connect  thoughts  as  we  please  and

since in fact the only transitions from one idea to another which we

exclude are those which operate in normal thinking, we shall find no

difficulty in the long run in concocting out of a number of ‘intermediate

thoughts’ something which we describe as the dream-thoughts and

which  -  though  without  any  guarantee,  since  we  have  no  other

knowledge  of  what  the  dream-thoughts  are  -  we  allege  to  be  the

psychical substitute for the dream. But the whole thing is completely

arbitrary; we are merely exploiting chance connections in a manner

which gives an effect of ingenuity. In this way anyone who cares to

take such useless pains can worry out any interpretation he pleases

from any dream.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        962

 

   If we were in fact met by objections such as these, we might defendourselves by appealing to the impression made by our interpretations,

to the surprising connections with other elements of the dream which

emerge in the course of our pursuing a single one of its ideas, and to

the  improbability  that  anything  which  gives  such  an  exhaustive

account of the dream could have been arrived at except by following

up  psychical  connections  which  had  already  been  laid  down.  We

might also point out in our defence that our procedure in interpreting

dreams is identical with the procedure by which we resolve hysterical

symptoms;; and there the correctness of our method is warranted by

the coincident emergence and disappearance of the symptoms, or, to

use a simile, the assertions made in the text are borne out by the

accompanying illustrations. But we have no reason for evading the

problem of how it is possible to reach a pre-existing goal by following

the  drift  of  an  arbitrary  and  purposeless  chain  of  thoughts;  since,

though we may not be able to solve the problem, we can completely

cut the ground from under it.

      For  it  is  demonstrably  untrue  that  we  are  being  carried  along  a

purposeless stream of ideas when, in the process of interpreting a

dream, we abandon reflection and allow involuntary ideas to emerge.

It can be shown that all that we can ever get rid of are purposive ideas

that are known to us; as soon as we have done this, unknown - or, as

we inaccurately say, ‘unconscious’ - purposive ideas take charge and

thereafter determine the course of the involuntary ideas. No influence

that we can bring to bear upon our mental processes can ever enable

us to think without purposive ideas; nor am I aware of any states of

psychical confusion which can do so.¹ Psychiatrists have been far too

ready in this respect to abandon their belief in the connectedness of

psychical processes. I know for a fact that trains of thought without

purposive ideas no more occur in hysteria and paranoia than they do

in the formation or resolution of dreams. It may be that they do not

occur in any of the endogenous psychical disorders. Even the deliria

of confusional states may have a meaning, if we are to accept Leuret’s

brilliant suggestion that they are only unintelligible to us owing to the

gaps in them. I myself have formed the same opinion when I have had

the opportunity of observing them. Deliria are the work of a censorship

which no longer takes the trouble to conceal its operation; instead of

collaborating in producing a new version that shall be unobjectionable,it ruthlessly deletes whatever it disapproves of, so that what remains

becomes  quite  disconnected.  This  censorship  acts  exactly  like  the

censorship of newspapers at the Russian frontier, which allows foreign

journals to fall into the hands of the readers whom it is its business to

protect only after a quantity of passages have been blacked out.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] It was not until later that my attention was drawn to the fact that

Eduard  von  Hartmann  takes  the  same  view  on  thus  important  matter  of  psychology:  ‘In
discussing  the  part  played  by  the  unconscious  in  artistic  creation,  Eduard  von  Hartmann
(1890, 1, Section B, Chapter V) made a clear statement of the law in accordance with which
the association of ideas is governed by unconscious purposive ideas, though he was unaware
of  the  scope  of  the  law.  He  set  out  to  prove  that  "every  combination  of  sensuous
presentations, when it is not left purely to chance, but is led to a definite end, requires the help
of  the  unconscious",  and  that  the  part  played  by  conscious  interest  is  to  stimulate  the
unconscious to select the most appropriate idea among the countless possible ones. It is the
unconscious which makes the appropriate selection of a purpose for the interest and this
"holds good of the association of ideas in abstract thinking as well as in sensuous imagining
and artistic combination" and in the production of jokes. For this reason a limitation of the
association of ideas to an exciting idea and an excited idea (in the sense of a pure association
psychology) can not be upheld. Such a limitation could be justified "only if there are conditions
in human life in which man is free not only from every conscious purpose, but also from the
sway or co-operation of every unconscious interest, every passing mood. This is, however, a
condition hardly ever occurring, for even if one in appearance completely abandons his train
of thought to accident, or if one abandons oneself entirely to the involuntary dreams of fancy,
yet always other leading interests, dominant feelings and moods prevail at one time rather
than at another, and these will always exert an influence on the association of ideas." "In
semi-conscious dreams always only such ideas as correspond to the main interest of the
moment occur." The emphasis thus laid upon the influence of feelings and moods on the free
sequence of thoughts make it possible to justify the methodological procedure of psycho-
analysis completely from the standpoint of Hartmann’s psychology.’ (Pohorilles, 1913.) - Du
Prel (1885, 107) refers to the fact that after we have vainly tried to recall a name, it often
comes into our heads again suddenly and without any warning. He concludes from this that
unconscious but none the less purposeful thinking has taken place and that its result has
suddenly entered consciousness.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        963

 

      It  may  be  that  free  play  of  ideas  with  a  fortuitous  chain  of

associations is to be found in destructive organic cerebral processes;

what  is  regarded  as  such  in  the  psychoneuroses  can  always  be

explained as an effect of the censorship’s influence upon a train of

thought  which  has  been  pushed  into  the  foreground  by  purposive

ideas  that  have  remained  hidden.¹  It  has  been  regarded  as  anunfailing sign of an association being uninfluenced by purposive ideas

if the associations (or images) in question seem to be interrelated in

what  is  described  as  a  ‘superficial’  manner  -  by  assonance,  verbal

ambiguity, temporal coincidence without connection in meaning, or by

any  association  of  the  kind  that  we  allow  in  jokes  or  in  play  upon

words. This characteristic is present in the chains of thought which

lead from the elements of a dream to the intermediate thoughts and

from these to the dream-thoughts proper; we have seen instances of

this  -  not  without  astonishment  -  in  many  dream-analyses.  No

connection was too loose, no joke too bad, to serve as a bridge from

one thought to another. But the true explanation of this easy-going

state  of  things  is  soon  found. Whenever  one  psychical  element  is

linked  with  another  by  an  objectionable  or  superficial  association,

there  is  also  a  legitimate  and  deeper  link  between  them  which  is

subjected to the resistance of the censorship.

   The real reason for the prevalence of superficial associations is not

the  abandonment  of  purposive  ideas  but  the  pressure  of  the

censorship.  Superficial  associations  replace  deep  ones  if  the

censorship makes the normal connecting paths impassable. We may

picture, by way of analogy, a mountain region, where some general

interruption of traffic (owing to floods, for instance) has blocked the

main,  major  roads,  but  where  communications  are  still  maintained

over  inconvenient  and  steep  footpaths  normally  used  only  by  the

hunter.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added  1909:]  This  assertion  has  received  striking  confirmation  from  C.  G.

Jung’s analyses in cases of dementia praecox. (Jung, 1907.)
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        964

 

   Two cases may here be distinguished, though in essence they are

the same. In the first of these, the censorship is directed only against

the connection  between  two  thoughts,  which  are  unobjectionable

separately.  If  so,  the  two  thoughts  will  enter  consciousness  in

succession; the connection between them will remain concealed, but,

instead, a superficial link between them will occur to us, of which weshould otherwise never have thought. This link is usually attached to

some part of the complex of ideas quite other than that on which the

suppressed and essential connection is based. The second case is

where the two thoughts are in themselves subject to censorship on

account  of  their  content.  If  so,  neither  of  them  appears  in  its  true

shape  but  only  in  a  modified  one  which  replaces  it;  and  the  two

replacing  thoughts  are  chosen  in  such  a  way  that  they  have  a

superficial  association  that  repeats  the  essential  connection  which

relates the two thoughts that have been replaced. In both these cases

the pressure of the censorship has resulted in a displacement from a

normal and serious association to a superficial and apparently absurd

one.

   Since we are aware that displacements of this kind occur, we have

no  hesitation  when  we  are  interpreting  dreams  in  relying  upon

superficial associations as much as upon others.¹

 

   In the psycho-analysis of neuroses the fullest use is made of these

two theorems - that, when conscious purposive ideas are abandoned,

concealed purposive ideas assume control of the current of ideas, and

that superficial associations are only substitutes by displacement for

suppressed deeper ones. Indeed, these theorems have become basic

pillars  of  psycho-analytic  technique.  When  I  instruct  a  patient  to

abandon reflection of any kind and to tell me whatever comes into his

head, I am relying firmly on the presumption that he will not be able to

abandon  the  purposive  ideas  inherent  in  the  treatment  and  I  feel

justified  in  inferring  that  what  seem  to  be  the  most  innocent  and

arbitrary  things  which  he  tells  me  are  in  fact  related  to  his  illness.

There is another purposive idea of which the patient has no suspicion

- one relating to myself. The full estimate of the importance of these

two theorems, as well as more detailed information about them, fall

within the province of an account of the technique of psycho-analysis.

Here, then, we have reached one of the frontier posts at which, in

accordance with our programme, we must drop the subject of dream-

interpretation.²

 

   ¹ The  same  considerations  apply  equally,  of  course,  to  cases  in  which  the  superficial

associations appear openly in the content of the dream, as, for instance, in the two dreams of
Maury’s quoted above on page 59. (Pélerinage - Pelletier- pelle; kilomètre - kilogramme -Gilolo - Lobelia - Lopez - lotto.) My work with neurotic patients has taught me the nature of the
memories of which this is a favourite method of representation. They are occasions on which
the subject has turned over the pages of encyclopaedias or dictionaries in order (like most
people at the inquisitive age of puberty) to satisfy their craving for an answer to the riddles of
sex.

   ² [Footnote added 1909:] These two theorems, which sounded most unplausible at the time

they were made, have since been experimentally employed and confirmed by Jung and his
pupils in their studies in word association.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        965

 

 

      There  is  one  true  conclusion  that  we  may  glean  from  these

objections, namely that we need not suppose that every association

that occurs during the work of interpretation had a place in the dream-

work during the night. It is true that in carrying out the interpretation in

the waking state we follow a path which leads back from the elements

of the dream to the dream-thoughts and that the dream-work followed

one  in  the  contrary  direction.  But  it  is  highly  improbable  that  these

paths are passable both ways. It appears, rather, that in the daytime

we drive shafts which follow along fresh chains of thought and that

these  shafts  make  contact  with  the  intermediate  thoughts  and  the

dream-thoughts now at one point and now at another. We can see

how  in  this  manner  fresh  daytime  material  inserts  itself  into  the

interpretative chains. It is probable, too, that the increase in resistance

that has set in since the night makes new and more devious detours

necessary. The number and nature of the collaterals that we spin in

this way during the day is of no psychological importance whatever, so

long as they lead us to the dream-thoughts of which we are in search.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        966

 

                                          (B)

 

                                        REGRESSION

    Having now repelled the objections that have been raised against

us, or having at least indicated where our defensive weapons lie, we

must no longer postpone the task of setting about the psychological

investigations for which we have so long been arming ourselves. Let

us summarize the principal findings of our enquiry so far as it has

gone.  Dreams  are  psychical  acts  of  as  much  significance  as  any

others; their motive force is in every instance a wish seeking fulfilment;

the  fact  of  their  not  being  recognizable  as  wishes  and  their  many

peculiarities and absurdities are due to the influence of the psychical

censorship to which they have been subjected during the process of

their formation; apart from the necessity of evading this censorship,

other factors which have contributed to their formation are a necessity

for  the  condensation  of  their  psychical  material,  a  regard  for  the

possibility of its being represented in sensory images and - though not

invariably - a demand that the structure of the dream shall have a

rational and intelligible exterior. Each of these propositions opens a

way  to  fresh  psychological  postulates  and  speculations;  the  mutual

relations between the wish which is the dream’s motive force and the

four conditions to which the dream’s formation is subject, a well as the

interrelations between the latter, require to be investigated; and the

place of dreams in the nexus of mental life has to be assigned.

   It was with a view to reminding us of the problems which have still to

be  solved  that  I  opened  the  present  chapter  with  an  account  of  a

dream. There was no difficulty in interpreting that dream - the dream

of the burning child - even though it interpretation was not given fully

in our sense. I raised the question of why the dreamer dreamt it at all

instead of waking up, and recognized that one of his motives was a

wish to represent his child as still alive. Our further discussions will

show us that yet another wish also played a part. Thus it was in the

first instance for the sake of fulfilling a wish that the process of thought

during sleep was transformed into a dream.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        967

 

   If we eliminate the wish-fulfilment, we shall see that only one featureis  left  to  distinguish  the  two  forms  of  psychical  event.  The  dream-

thought would have run: ‘I see a glare coming from the room where

the dead body is lying. Perhaps a candle has fallen over and my child

may be burning.’ The dream repeated these reflections unaltered, but

it  represented  them  in  a  situation  which  was  actually  present  and

which  could  be  perceived  through  the  senses  like  a  waking

experience.  Here  we  have  the  most  general  and  the  most  striking

psychological  characteristic  of  the  process  of  dreaming:  a  thought,

and as a rule a thought of something that is wished, is objectified in

the  dream,  is  represented  as  a  scene,  or,  as  it  seems  to  us,  is

experienced.

   How, then, are we to explain this characteristic peculiarity of the

dream-work, or, to put the question more modestly, how are we to find

a place for it in the nexus of psychical processes?

   If we look into the matter more closely we shall observe that two

almost independent features stand out as characteristic of the form

taken by this dream. One is the fact that the thought is represented as

an immediate situation with the ‘perhaps’ omitted, and the other is the

fact that the thought is transformed into visual images and speech.

   In this particular dream the change made in the thoughts by the

conversion  of  the  expectation  expressed  by  them  into  the  present

tense may not seem particularly striking. This is because of what can

only  be  described  as  the  unusually  subordinate  part  played  in  this

dream by wish-fulfilment. Consider instead another one, in which the

dream-wish  was  not  detached  from  the  waking  thoughts  that  were

carried over into sleep - for instance, the dream of Irma’s injection.

There the dream-thought that was represented was in the optative: ‘If

only Otto were responsible for Irma’s illness!’ The dream repressed

the optative and replaced it by a straightforward present: ‘Yes, Otto is

responsible  for  Irma’s  illness.’  This,  then,  is  the  first  of  the

transformations which is brought about in the dream-thoughts even by

a  distortionless  dream.  We  need  not  linger  long  over  this  first

peculiarity  of  dreams.  We  can  deal  with  it  by  drawing  attention  to

conscious  phantasies  -  to  day-dreams  -  which  treat  their  ideational

content in just the same manner. While Daudet’s Monsieur Joyeuse

was wandering, out of work, through the streets of Paris (though his

daughters believed that he had a job and was sitting in an office), hewas dreaming of developments that might bring him influential help

and  lead  to  his  finding  employment  -  and  he  was  dreaming  in  the

present  tense.  Thus  dreams  make  use  of  the  present  tense  in  the

same  manner  and  by  the  same  right  as  day-dreams.  The  present

tense is the one in which wishes are represented as fulfilled.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        968

 

   But dreams differ from day-dreams in their second characteristic:

namely, in the fact of their ideational content being transformed from

thoughts into sensory images, to which belief is attached and which

appear to be experienced. I must add at once that not every dream

exhibits this transformation from idea into sensory image. There are

dreams  which  consist  only  of  thoughts  but  which  cannot  on  that

account be denied the essential nature of dreams. My ‘Autodidasker’

dream was of that kind; it included scarcely more sensory elements

than if I had thought its content in the daytime. And in every dream of

any considerable length there are elements which have not, like the

rest,  been  given  a  sensory  form,  but  which  are  simply  thought  or

known, in the kind of way in which we are accustomed to think or

know things in waking life. It should also be remembered here that it is

not  only  in  dreams  that  such  transformations  of  ideas  into  sensory

images occur: they are also found in hallucinations and visions, which

may  appear  as  independent  entities,  so  to  say,  in  health  or  as

symptoms in the psychoneuroses. In short, the relation which we are

examining now is not in any respect an exclusive one. Nevertheless it

remains true that it would be impossible for us to imagine the dream-

world without it. But in order to arrive at an understanding of it we

must embark upon a discussion that will take us far afield.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        969

 

 

   As the starting-point for our enquiry, I should like to pick out onefrom  among  many  remarks  made  upon  the  theory  of  dreaming  by

those  who  have  written  on  the  subject.  In  the  course  of  a  short

discussion on the topic of dreams, the great Fechner (1889, 2, 520-1)

puts forward the idea that the scene of action of dreams is different

from  that  of  waking  ideational  life.  This  is  the  only  hypothesis  that

makes the special peculiarities of dream-life intelligible.

   What is presented to us in these words is the idea of psychical

locality. I shall entirely disregard the fact that the mental apparatus

with which we are here concerned is also known to us in the form of

an anatomical preparation, and I shall carefully avoid the temptation to

determine psychical locality in any anatomical fashion. I shall remain

upon  psychological  ground,  and  I  propose  simply  to  follow  the

suggestion that we should picture the instrument which carries out our

mental  functions  as  resembling  a  compound  microscope  or  a

photographic  apparatus,  or  something  of  the  kind.  On  that  basis,

psychical locality will correspond to a point inside the apparatus at

which one of the preliminary stages of an image comes into being. In

the  microscope  and  telescope,  as  we  know,  these  occur  in  part  at

ideal points, regions in which no tangible component of the apparatus

is situated. I see no necessity to apologize for the imperfections of this

or of any similar imagery. Analogies of this kind are only intended to

assist  us  in  our  attempt  to  make  the  complications  of  mental

functioning  intelligible  by  dissecting  the  function  and  assigning  its

different constituents to different component parts of the apparatus.

So far as I know, the experiment has not hitherto been made of using

this method of dissection in order to investigate the way in which the

mental instrument is put together, and I can see no harm in it. We are

justified, in my view, in giving free rein to our speculations so long as

we  retain  the  coolness  of  our  judgement  and  do  not  mistake  the

scaffolding  for  the  building.  And  since  at  our  first  approach  to

something unknown all that we need is the assistance of provisional

ideas, I shall give preference in the first instance to hypotheses of the

crudest and most concrete description.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        970 

 

   Accordingly, we will picture the mental apparatus as a compound

instrument,  to  the  components  of  which  we  will  give  the  name  of

‘agencies’,  or  (for  the  sake  of  greater  clarity)  ‘systems.’  It  is  to  be

anticipated, in the next place, that these systems may perhaps stand

in a regular spatial relation to one another, in the same kind of way in

which  the  various  systems  of  lenses  in  a  telescope  are  arranged

behind  one  another.  Strictly  speaking  there  is  no  need  for  the

hypothesis  that  the  psychical  systems  are  actually  arranged  in  a

spatial order. It would be sufficient if a fixed order were established by

the  fact  that  in  a  given  psychical  process  the  excitation  passes

through  the  systems  in  a  particular temporal  sequence.  In  other

processes the sequence may perhaps be a different one; that is a

possibility that we shall leave open. For the sake of brevity we will in

future speak of the components of the apparatus as ‘Ψ-systems.’

   The first thing that strikes us is that this apparatus, compounded of

Ψ-systems, has a sense or direction. All our psychical activity starts

from stimuli (whether internal or external) and ends in innervations.

Accordingly,  we  shall  ascribe  a  sensory  and  a  motor  end  to  the

apparatus.  At  the  sensory  end  there  lies  a  system  which  receives

perceptions;  at  the  motor  end  there  lies  another,  which  opens  the

gateway  to  motor  activity.  Psychical  processes  advance  in  general

from  the  perceptual  end  to  the  motor  end.  Thus  the  most  general

schematic picture of the psychical apparatus may be represented thus

(Fig. 1):

 








 

                                          Fig. 1.

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        971

 

   This, however, does no more than fulfil a requirement with which we

have long been familiar, namely that the psychical apparatus must be

constructed  like  a  reflex  apparatus.  Reflex  processes  remain  the

model of every psychical function.

   Next, we have grounds for introducing a first differentiation at the

sensory  end.  A  trace  is  left  in  our  psychical  apparatus  of  the

perceptions  which  impinge  upon  it.  This  we  may  describe  as  a

‘memory-trace’; and to the function relating to it we give the name of

‘memory.’ If we are in earnest over our plan of attaching psychical

processes to systems, memory-traces can only consist in permanent

modifications  of  the  elements  of  the  systems.  But,  as  has  already

been pointed out elsewhere, there are obvious difficulties involved in

supposing  that  one  and  the  same  system  can  accurately  retain

modifications of its elements and yet remain perpetually open to the

reception of fresh occasions for modification. In accordance, therefore,

with the principle which governs our experiment, we shall distribute

these two functions on to different systems. We shall suppose that a

system  in  the  very  front  of  the  apparatus  receives  the  perceptual

stimuli but retains no trace of them and thus has no memory, while

behind it there lies a second system which transforms the momentary

excitations of the first system into permanent traces. The schematic

picture of our psychical apparatus would then be as follows (Fig. 2):

 








 

                                          Fig. 2.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        972 

   It is a familiar fact that we retain permanently something more than

the mere content of the perceptions which impinge upon the system

Pcpt. Our perceptions are linked with one another in our memory - first

and foremost according to simultaneity of occurrence. We speak of

this fact as ‘association.’ It is clear, then, that, if the Pcpt. system has

no  memory  whatever  it  cannot  retain  any  associative  traces;  the

separate Pcpt. elements would be intolerably obstructed in performing

their function if the remnant of an earlier connection were to exercise

an influence upon a fresh perception. We must therefore assume the

basis of association lies in the mnemic systems. Association would

thus consist in the fact that, as a result of a diminution in resistances

and of the laying down of facilitating paths, an excitation is transmitted

from a given Mnem. element more readily to one Mnem. element than

to another.

      Closer  consideration  will  show  the  necessity  for  supposing  the

existence not of one but of several such Mnem. elements, in which

one  and  the  same  excitation,  transmitted  by  the Pcpt.  elements,

leaves  a  variety  of  different  permanent  records.  The  first  of  these

Mnem.  systems  will  naturally  contain  the  record  of  association  in

respect to simultaneity in time; while the same perceptual material will

be  arranged  in  the  later  systems  in  respect  to  other  kinds  of

coincidence,  so  that  one  of  these  later  systems,  for  instance,  will

record relations of similarity, and so on with the others. It would of

course be a waste of time to try to put the psychical significance of a

system of this kind into words. Its character would lie in the intimate

details of its relations to the different elements of the raw material of

memory, that is - if we may hint at a theory of a more radical kind - in

the degrees of conductive resistance which it offered to the passage

of excitation from those elements.

   At this point I will interpolate a remark of a general nature which may

perhaps have important implications. It is the Pcpt. system, which is

without  the  capacity  to  retain  modifications  and  is  thus  without

memory, that provides our consciousness with the whole multiplicity of

sensory qualities. On the other hand, our memories - not excepting

those  which  are  most  deeply  stamped  on  our  minds  -  are  in

themselves unconscious. They can be made conscious; but there canbe  no  doubt  that  they  can  produce  all  their  effects  while  in  an

unconscious condition. What we describe as our ‘character’ is based

on  the  memory-traces  of  our  impressions;  and,  moreover,  the

impressions which have had the greatest effect on us - those of our

earliest youth - are precisely the ones which scarcely ever become

conscious. But if memories become conscious once more they exhibit

no sensory quality or a very slight one in comparison with perceptions.

A most promising light would be thrown on the conditions governing

the excitation of neurone if it could be confirmed that the Ψ-systems

of  memory  and  the  quality  that  characterizes  consciousness  are

mutually exclusive.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1925:] I have since suggested that consciousness actually arises instead

of the memory-trace. See my ‘Note upon the "Mystic Writing-Pad"' (1925a).
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        973

 

   The assumptions we have so far put forward as to the construction

of the psychical apparatus at its sensory end have been made without

reference to dreams or to the psychological information that we have

been  able  to  infer  from  them.  Evidence  afforded  by  dreams  will,

however,  help  us  towards  understanding  another  portion  of  the

apparatus.  We  have  seen  that  we  were  only  able  to  explain  the

formation of dreams by venturing upon the hypothesis of there being

two  psychical  agencies,  one  of  which  submitted  the  activity  of  the

other to a criticism which involved its exclusion from consciousness.

The  critical  agency,  we  concluded,  stands  in  a  closer  relation  to

consciousness  than  the  agency  criticized:  it  stands  like  a  screen

between the latter and consciousness. Further we found reasons for

identifying the critical agency with the agency which directs our waking

life and determines our voluntary, conscious actions. If, in accordance

with our assumptions, we replace these agencies by systems, then

our last conclusion must lead us to locate the critical system at the

motor end of the apparatus. We will now introduce the two system into

our schematic picture and give them names to express their relation to

consciousness (Fig. 3): 








 

                                          Fig. 3.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        974

 

   We will describe the last of the systems at the motor end as ‘the

preconscious’, to indicate that the excitatory processes occurring in it

can  enter  consciousness  without  further  impediment  provided  that

certain  other  conditions  are  fulfilled:  for  instance,  that  they  reach  a

certain  degree  of  intensity,  that  the  function  which  can  only  be

described as ‘attention’ is distributed in a particular way, and so on.

This is at the same time the system which holds the key to voluntary

movement.  We  will  describe  the  system  that  lies  behind  it  as  ‘the

unconscious’, because it has no access to consciousness except via

the preconscious, in passing through which its excitatory process is

obliged to submit to modifications.¹

   In which of these systems, then, are we to locate the impetus to the

construction of dreams? For simplicity’s sake, in the system Ucs. It is

true that in the course of our future discussion we shall learn that this

is  not  entirely  accurate,  and  that  the  process  of  forming  dreams  is

obliged  to  attach  itself  to  dream-thoughts  belonging  to  the

preconscious system. But when we consider the dream-wish, we shall

find  that  the  motive  force  for  producing  dreams  is  supplied  by  the

Ucs.;  and  owing  to  this  latter  factor  we  shall  take  the  unconscious

system as the starting-point of dream-formation. Like all other thought

structures, this dream-instigator will make an effort to advance into the

Pcs. and from there to obtain access to consciousness.

    ¹ [Footnote added 1919:] If we attempted to proceed further with this schematic picture, in

which the systems are set out in linear succession, we should have to reckon with the fact that
the system next beyond the Pcs. is the one to which consciousness must be ascribed - in
other words, that Pcpt. = Cs.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        975

 

      Experience  shows  us  that  this  path  leading  through  the

preconscious to consciousness is barred to the dream-thoughts during

the daytime by the censorship imposed by resistance. During the night

they  are  able  to  obtain  access  to  consciousness;  but  the  question

arises as to how they do so and thanks to what modification. If what

enabled the dream-thoughts to achieve this were the fact that at night

there is a lowering of the resistance which guards the frontier between

the unconscious and the preconscious, we should have dreams which

were in the nature of ideas and which were without the hallucinatory

quality in which we are at the moment interested. Thus the lowering of

the  censorship  between  the  two  systems Ucs.  and Pcs.  can  only

explain dreams formed like ‘Autodidasker’ and not dreams like that of

the  burning  child  which  we  took  as  the  starting-point  of  our

investigations.

      The  only  way  in  which  we  can  describe  what  happens  in

hallucinatory  dreams  is  by  saying  that  the  excitation  moves  in  a

backward  direction.  Instead  of  being  transmitted  towards  the motor

end of the apparatus it moves towards the sensory end and finally

reaches  the  perceptual  system.  If  we  describe  as  ‘progressive’  the

direction taken by psychical processes arising from the unconscious

during  waking  life,  then  we  may  speak  of  dreams  as  having  a

‘regressive’ character.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] The first hint at the factor of regression is to be found as far back

as in Albertus Magnus. The ‘imaginatio’, he tells us, constructs dreams out of the stored-up
images of sensory objects; and the process is carried out in a reverse direction to that in
waking life. (Quoted by Diepgen, 1912, 14.) - Hobbes writes in the Leviathan (1651, Pt. I,
Chapter 2): ‘In sum, our dreams are the reverse of our waking imaginations, the motion, when
we are awake, beginning at one end, and when we dream at another.’ (Quoted by Havelock
Ellis, 1911, 109.)
                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        976

 

      This  regression,  then,  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  psychological

characteristics  of  the  process  of  dreaming;  but  we  must  remember

that it does not occur only in dreams. Intentional recollection and other

constituent processes of our normal thinking involve a retrogressive

movement in the psychical apparatus from a complex ideational act

back to the raw material of the memory-traces underlying it. In the

waking  state,  however,  this  backward  movement  never  extends

beyond  the  mnemic  images;  it  does  not  succeed  in  producing  a

hallucinatory revival of the perceptual images. Why is it otherwise in

dreams?  When  we  were  considering  the  work  of  condensation  in

dreams we were driven to suppose that the intensities attaching to

ideas can be completely transferred by the dream-work from one idea

to  another.  It  is  probably  this  alteration  in  the  normal  psychical

procedure which makes possible the cathexis of the system Pcpt. in

the reverse direction, starting from thoughts, to the pitch of complete

sensory vividness.

   We must not delude ourselves into exaggerating the importance of

these considerations. We have done no more than give a name to an

inexplicable phenomenon. We call it ‘regression’ when in a dream an

idea is turned back into the sensory image from which it was originally

derived. But even this step requires justification. What is the point of

this nomenclature if it teaches us nothing new? I believe the name

‘regression’ is of help to us in so far as it connects a fact that was

already known to us with our schematic picture, in which the mental

apparatus was given a sense or direction. And it is at this point that

that  picture  begins  to  repay  us  for  having  constructed  it.  For  an

examination  of  it,  without  any  further  reflection,  reveals  a  further

characteristic  of  dream-formation.  If  we  regard  the  process  of

dreaming  as  a  regression  occurring  in  our  hypothetical  mental

apparatus,  we  at  once  arrive  at  the  explanation  of  the  empirically

established fact that all the logical relations belonging to the dream-

thoughts  disappear  during  the  dream-activity  or  can  only  find

expression with difficulty. According to our schematic picture, these

relations  are  contained  not  in  the first Mnem.  systems  but  in laterones;  and  in  case  of  regression  they  would  necessarily  lose  any

means of expression except in perceptual images. In regression the

fabric of the dream-thoughts is resolved into its raw material.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        977

 

      What  modification  is  it  that  renders  possible  a  regression  which

cannot occur in daytime? We must be content with some conjectures

on this point. No doubt it is a question of changes in the cathexes of

energy attaching to the different systems, changes which increase or

diminish the facility with which those systems can be passed through

by the excitatory process. But in any apparatus of this kind the same

results upon the passage of excitations might be produced in more

than one way. Our first thoughts will of course be of the state of sleep

and the changes in cathexis which it brings about at the sensory end

of the apparatus. During the day there is a continuous current from the

Pcpt. Ψ-system  flowing  in  the  direction  of  motor  activity;  but  this

current ceases at night and could no longer form an obstacle to a

current of excitation flowing in the opposite sense. Here we seem to

have the ‘shutting-out of the external world’, which some authorities

regard  as  the  theoretical  explanation  of  the  psychological

characteristics of dreams. (See p. 560.)

   In explaining regression in dreams, however, we must bear in mind

the regressions which also occur in pathological waking states; and

here the explanation just given leaves us in the lurch. For in those

cases regression occurs in spite of a sensory current flowing without

interruption in a forward direction. My explanation of hallucinations in

hysteria and paranoia and of visions in mentally normal subjects is

that they are in fact regressions - that is, thoughts transformed into

images - but that the only thoughts that undergo this transformation

are those which are intimately linked with memories that have been

suppressed of have remained unconscious.

   For instance, one of my youngest hysterical patients, a twelve-year-

old boy, was prevented from falling asleep by ‘green faces with red

eyes’  which  terrified  him.  The  source  of  this  phenomenon  was  asuppressed, though at one time conscious, memory of a boy whom he

had often seen four years earlier. This boy had presented him with an

alarming  picture  of  the  consequences  of  bad  habits  in  children,

including  masturbation  -  a  habit  with  which  my  patient  was  now

reproaching himself in retrospect. His mother had pointed out at the

time that the ill-behaved boy had a greenish face and red (i.e. red-

rimmed) eyes. Here was the origin of his bogey, whose only purpose,

incidentally, was to remind him of another of his mother’s predictions -

that boys of that sort grow into idiots, can learn nothing at school and

die young. My little patient had fulfilled one part of the prophecy, for he

was making no progress at his school, and, as was shown from his

account  of  the  involuntary  thoughts  that  occurred  to  him,  he  was

terrified  of  the  other  part.  I  may  add  that  after  a  short  time  the

treatment  resulted  in  his  being  able  to  sleep,  in  his  nervousness

disappearing and his being awarded a mark of distinction at the end of

his school-year.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        978

 

   In the same connection I will give the explanation of a vision that

was described to me by another hysterical patient (a woman of forty)

as having happened before she fell ill. One morning she opened her

eyes and saw her brother in the room, though, as she knew, he was in

fact  in  an  insane  asylum.  Her  small  son  was  sleeping  in  the  bed

beside  her.  To  save  the  child  from  having a fright  and falling  into

convulsions  when  he  saw  his uncle,  she  pulled  the sheet  over  his

face, whereupon the apparition vanished. This vision was a modified

version of a memory from the lady’s childhood; and, though it was

conscious, it was intimately related to all the unconscious material in

her mind. Her nurse had told her that her mother (who had died very

young, when my patient was only eighteen months old) had suffered

from epileptic or hysterical convulsions, which went back to a fright

caused by her brother (my patient’s uncle) appearing to her disguised

as a ghost with a sheet over his head. Thus the vision contained the

same elements as the memory: the brother’s appearance, the sheet,the fright and its results. But the elements had been arranged in a

different  context  and  transferred  on  to  other  figures.  The  obvious

motive  of  the  vision,  or  of  the  thoughts  which  it  replaced,  was  her

concern lest her little boy might follow in the footsteps of his uncle,

whom he greatly resembled physically.

   The two instances that I have quoted are neither of them entirely

devoid of connection with the state of sleep and for that reason are

perhaps not well chosen for what I want them to prove. I will therefore

refer  the  reader  to  my  analysis  of  a  woman  suffering  from

hallucinatory paranoia (Freud, 1896b ) as well as to the findings in my

still unpublished studies on the psychology of the psychoneuroses, for

evidence  that  in  such  instances  of  the  regressive  transformation  of

thoughts we must not overlook the influence of memories, mostly from

childhood,  which  have  been  suppressed  or  have  remained

unconscious. The thoughts which are connected with a memory of this

kind and which are forbidden expression by the censorship are, as it

were, attracted by the memory into regression as being the form of

representation in which the memory itself is couched. I may also recall

that one of the facts arrived at in the Studies on Hysteria was that

when  it  was  possible  to  bring  infantile  scenes  (whether  they  were

memories  or  phantasies)  into  consciousness,  they  were  seen  like

hallucinations and lost that characteristic only in the process of being

reported.  It  is  moreover  a  familiar  observation  that,  even  in  those

whose  memory  is  not  normally  of  a  visual  type,  the  earliest

recollections  of  childhood  retain  far  into  life  the  quality  of  sensory

vividness.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        979

 

   If we now bear in mind how great a part is played in the dream-

thoughts by infantile experiences or by phantasies based upon them,

how frequently portions of them re-emerge in the dream-content and

how often the dream-wishes themselves are derived from them, we

cannot dismiss the probability that in dreams too the transformation of

thoughts into visual images may be in part the result of the attractionwhich memories couched in visual form and eager for revival bring to

bear upon thoughts cut off from consciousness and struggling to find

expression. On this view a dream might be described as a substitute

for  an  infantile  scene  modified  by  being  transferred  on  to  a  recent

experience. The infantile scene is unable to bring about its own revival

and has to be content with returning as a dream.

      This  indication  of  the  way  in  which  infantile  scenes  (or  their

reproductions as phantasies) function in a sense as models for the

content of dreams, removes the necessity for one of the hypotheses

put forward by Scherner and his followers in regard to internal sources

of  stimulation.  Scherner  supposes  that,  when  dreams  exhibit

particularly  vivid  or  particularly  copious  visual  elements,  there  is

present a state of ‘visual stimulation’, that is, of internal excitation in

the  organ  of  vision.  We  need  not  dispute  this  hypothesis,  but  can

content ourselves with assuming that this state of excitation applies

merely  to  the psychical  perceptual  system  of  the  visual  organ;  we

may, however, further point out that the state of excitation has been

set up by a memory, that it is a revival of a visual excitation which was

originally an immediate one. I cannot produce any good example from

my  own  experience  of  an infantile  memory  producing  this  kind  of

result. My dreams are in general less rich in sensory elements than I

am led to suppose is the case in other people. But in the case of my

most vivid and beautiful dream of the last few years I was easily able

to trace back the hallucinatory clarity of the dream’s content to the

sensory qualities of recent or fairly recent impressions. On p. 907 ff. I

recorded  a  dream  in  which  the  deep  blue  colour  of  the  water,  the

brown  of  the  smoke  coming  from  the  ship’s  funnels,  and  the  dark

brown and red of the buildings left behind a profound impression on

me. This dream, if any, should be traceable, to a visual stimulus. What

was it that had brought my visual organ into this state of stimulation?

A recent impression, which attached itself to a number of earlier ones.

The colours which I saw were in the first instance those of a box of toy

bricks with which, on the day before the dream, my children had put

up a fine building and shown it off for my admiration. The big bricks

were of the same dark red and the small ones were of the same blue

and brown. This was associated with colour impressions from my last

travels in Italy: the beautiful blue of the Isonzo and the lagoons andthe brown of the Carso. The beauty of the colours in the dream was

only a repetition of something seen in my memory.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        980

 

 

   Let us bring together what we have found out about the peculiar

propensity of dreams to recast their ideational content into sensory

images. We have not explained this feature of the dream-work, we

have not traced it back to any known psychological laws; but we have

rather picked it out as something that suggests unknown implications

and we have characterized it with the word ‘regressive.’ We have put

forward the view that in all probability this regression, wherever it may

occur, is an effect of a resistance opposing the progress of a thought

into  consciousness  along  the  normal  path,  and  of  a  simultaneous

attraction exercised upon the thought by the presence of memories

possessing great sensory force.¹ In the case of dreams, regression

may perhaps be further facilitated by the cessation of the progressive

current - which streams in during the daytime from the sense organs;

in other forms of regression, the absence of this accessory factor must

be  made  up  for  by  a  greater  intensity  of  the  other  motives  for

regression. Nor must we forget to observe that in these pathological

cases of regression as well as in dreams the process of transference

of energy must differ from what it is in regressions occurring in normal

mental life, since in the former cases that process makes possible a

complete hallucinatory cathexis of the perceptual systems. What we

have  described,  in  our  analysis  of  the  dream-work,  as  ‘regard  for

representability’ might be brought into connection with the selective

attraction exercised by the visually recollected scenes touched upon

by the dream-thoughts.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] In any account of the theory of repression it would have to be laid

down that a thought become repressed as a result of the combined influence upon it of two
factors. It is pushed from the one side (by the censorship of the Cs.) and pulled from the other
(by the Ucs.), in the same kind of way in which people are conveyed to the top of the Great
Pyramid. [Added 1919:] Cf. my paper on repression (Freud, 1915d).
                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        981

 

 

   It is further to be remarked that regression plays a no less important

part in the theory of the formation of neurotic symptoms than it does in

that of dreams. Three kinds of regression are thus to be distinguished:

(a) topographical regression, in the sense of the schematic picture of

the Ψ-systems  which  we  have  explained  above;  (b) temporal

regression, in so far as what is in question is a harking back to older

psychical  structures;  and  (c) formal  regression,  where  primitive

methods of expression and representation take the place of the usual

ones. All these three kinds of regression are, however, one at bottom

and occur together as a rule; for what is older in time is more primitive

in form and in psychical topography lies nearer to the perceptual end.

 

   Nor can we leave the subject of regression in dreams without setting

down in words a notion by which we have already repeatedly been

struck and which will recur with fresh intensity when we have entered

more  deeply  into  the  study  of  the  psycho-neuroses:  namely  that

dreaming is on the whole an example of regression to the dreamer’s

earliest condition, a revival of his childhood, of the instinctual impulses

which dominated it and of the methods of expression which were then

available  to  him.  Behind  this  childhood  of  the  individual  we  are

promised  a  picture  of  a  phylogenetic  childhood  -  a  picture  of  the

development of the human race, of which the individual’s development

is  in  fact  an  abbreviated  recapitulation  influenced  by  the  chance

circumstances  of  life.  We  can  guess  how  much  to  the  point  is

Nietzsche’s assertion that in dreams ‘some primaeval relic of humanity

is at work which we can now scarcely reach any longer by a direct

path’; and we may expect that the analysis of dreams will lead us to a

knowledge of man’s archaic heritage, of what is psychically innate in

him.  Dreams  and  neuroses  seem  to  have  preserved  more  mental

antiquities  than  we  could  have  imagined  possible;  so  that  psycho-

analysis  may  claim  a  high  place  among  the  sciences  which  are

concerned with the reconstruction of the earliest and most obscure

periods of the beginnings of the human race. 

   It may well be that this first portion of our psychological study of

dreams  will  leave  us  with  a  sense  of  dissatisfaction.  But  we  can

console ourselves with the thought that we have been obliged to build

our way out into the dark. If we are not wholly in error, other lines of

approach are bound to lead us into much the same region and the

time may then come when we shall find ourselves more at home in it.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        982

 

                                          (C)

 

                                    WISH-FULFILMENT

 

   The dream of the burning child at the beginning of this chapter gives

us a welcome opportunity of considering the difficulties with which the

theory of wish-fulfilment is faced. It will no doubt have surprised all of

us to be told that dreams are nothing other than fulfilments of wishes,

and  not  only  on  account  of  the  contradiction  offered  by  anxiety-

dreams.  When  analysis  first  revealed  to  us  that  a  meaning  and  a

psychical value lay concealed behind dreams, we were no doubt quite

unprepared to find that that meaning was of such a uniform character.

According  to  Aristotle’s  accurate  but  bald  definition,  a  dream  is

thinking that persists (in so far as we are asleep) in the state of sleep.

Since,  then,  our  daytime  thinking  produces  psychical  acts  of  such

various  sorts  -  judgements,  inferences,  denials,  expectations,

intentions, and so on - why should it be obliged during the night to

restrict itself to the production of wishes alone? Are there not, on the

contrary,  numerous  dreams  which  show  us  psychical  acts  of  other

kinds - worries, for instance - transformed into dream-shape? And was

not the dream with which we began this chapter (a quite particularly

transparent one) precisely a dream of this sort? When the glare of

light  fell  on  the  eyes  of  the  sleeping  father,  he  drew  the  worrying

conclusion that a candle had fallen over and might have set the dead

body on fire. He turned this conclusion into a dream by clothing it in a

sensory situation and in the present tense. What part was played inthis  by  wish-fulfilment?  Can  we  fail  to  see  in  it  the  predominating

influence of a thought persisting from waking life or stimulated by a

new sense-impression? All this is quite true and compels us to enter

more closely into the part played by wish-fulfilment in dreams and into

the importance of waking thoughts which persist into sleep.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        983

 

 

   We have already been led by wish-fulfilment itself to divide dreams

into two groups. We have found some dreams which appeared openly

as  wish-fulfilments,  and  others  in  which  the  wish-fulfilment  was

unrecognizable and often disguised by every possible means. In the

latter we have perceived the dream censorship at work. We found the

undistorted wishful dreams principally in children; though short, frankly

wishful dreams seemed (and I lay emphasis upon this qualification) to

occur in adults as well.

      We  may  next  ask  where  the  wishes  that  come  true  in  dreams

originate. What contrasting possibilities or what alternatives have we

in mind in raising this question? It is the contrast, I think, between the

consciously perceived life of daytime and a psychical activity which

has remained unconscious and of which we can only become aware

at night. I can distinguish three possible origins for such a wish. (1) It

may have been aroused during the day and for external reasons may

not have been satisfied; in that case an acknowledged wish which has

not been dealt with is left over for the night. (2) It may have arisen

during the day but been repudiated; in that case what is left over is a

wish which has not been dealt with but has been suppressed. (3) It

may have no connection with daytime life and be one of those wishes

which only emerge from the suppressed part of the mind and become

active in us at night. If we turn again to our schematic picture of the

psychical apparatus, we shall localize wishes of the first kind in the

system Pcs.; we shall suppose that wishes of the second kind have

been driven out of the system Pcs. into the Ucs., where, if at all, they

continue to exist; and we shall conclude that wishful impulses of thethird kind are altogether incapable of passing beyond the system Ucs.

The question then arises whether wishes derived from these different

sources are of equal importance for dreams and have equal power to

instigate them.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        984

 

   If we cast our minds over the dreams that are at our disposal for

answering this question, we shall at once be reminded that we must

add  a  fourth  source  of  dream-wishes,  namely  the  current  wishful

impulses that arise during the night (e.g. those stimulated by thirst or

sexual needs). In the next place, we shall form the opinion that the

place  of  origin  of  a  dream-wish  probably  has  no  influence  on  its

capacity for instigating dreams. I may recall the little girl’s dream which

prolonged a trip on the lake that had been interrupted during the day

and the other children’s dreams which I have recorded. They were

explained as being due to unfulfilled, but unsuppressed, wishes from

the previous day. Instances of a wish that has been suppressed in the

daytime finding its way out in a dream are exceedingly numerous. I

will add a further very simple example of this class. The dreamer was

a lady who was rather fond of making fun of people and one of whose

friends, a woman younger than herself, had just become engaged. All

day long she had been asked by her acquaintances whether she knew

the young man and what she thought of him. She had replied with

nothing but praises, with which she had silenced her real judgement;

for  she  would  have  liked  to  tell  the  truth  -  that  he  was  a

‘Dutzendmensch’ [literally a ‘dozen man’, a very commonplace sort of

person - people like him are turned out by the dozen]. She dreamt that

night  that  she  was  asked  the  same  question,  and  replied  with  the

formula:  ‘In  the  case  of  repeat  orders  it  is  sufficient  to  quote  the

number.’  We  have  learnt,  lastly,  from  numerous  analyses  that

wherever a dream has undergone distortion the wish has arisen from

the unconscious and was one which could not be perceived during the

day. Thus it seems at a first glance as though all wishes are of equal

importance and equal power in dreams.   I cannot offer any proof here that the truth is nevertheless otherwise;

but I may say that I am strongly inclined to suppose that dream-wishes

are more strictly determined. It is true that children’s dreams prove

beyond a doubt that a wish that has not been dealt with during the day

can act as a dream-instigator. But it must not be forgotten that it is a

child’s wish, a wishful impulse of the strength proper to children. I think

it is highly doubtful whether in the case of an adult a wish that has not

been fulfilled during the day would be strong enough to produce a

dream.  It  seems  to  me,  on  the  contrary,  that,  with  the  progressive

control exercised upon our instinctual life by our thought-activity, we

are more and more inclined to renounce as unprofitable the formation

or retention of such intense wishes as children know. It is possible that

there are individual differences in this respect, and that some people

retain an infantile type of mental process longer than others, just as

there  are  similar  differences  in  regard  to  the  diminution  of  visual

imagery, which is so vivid in early years. But in general, I think, a wish

that has been left over unfulfilled from the previous day is insufficient

to  produce  a  dream  in  the  case  of  an  adult.  I  readily  admit  that  a

wishful  impulse  originating  in  the  conscious  will contribute  to  the

instigation of a dream, but it will probably not do more than that. The

dream would not materialize if the preconscious wish did not succeed

in finding reinforcement from elsewhere.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        985

 

   From the unconscious, in fact. My supposition is that a conscious

wish can only become a dream-instigator if it succeeds in awakening

an  unconscious  wish  with  the  same  tenor  and  in  obtaining

reinforcement  from  it.  From  indications  derived  from  the  psycho-

analysis of the neuroses, I consider that these unconscious wishes

are  always  on  the  alert,  ready  at  any  time  to  find  their  way  to

expression when an opportunity arises for allying themselves with an

impulse  from  the  conscious  and  for  transferring  their  own  great

intensity on to the latter’s lesser one.¹ It will then appear as though the

conscious  wish  alone  had  been  realized  in  the  dream;  only  somesmall peculiarity in the dream’s configuration will serve as a finger-

post to put us on the track of the powerful ally from the unconscious.

These wishes in our unconscious, ever on the alert and, so to say,

immortal, remind one of the legendary Titans, weighed down since

primaeval  ages  by  the  massive  bulk  of  the  mountains  which  were

once  hurled  upon  them  by  the  victorious  gods  and  which  are  still

shaken from time to time by the convulsion of their limbs. But these

wishes, held under repression, are themselves of infantile origin, as

we are taught by psychological research into the neuroses. I would

propose, therefore, to set aside the assertion made just now, that the

place of origin of dream-wishes is a matter of indifference and replace

it by another one to the following effect: a wish which is represented in

a dream must be an infantile one. In the case of adults it originates

from the Ucs., in the case of children, where there is as yet no division

or censorship between the Ucs. and the Pcs., or where that division is

only gradually being set up, it is an unfulfilled, unrepressed wish from

waking life. I am aware that this assertion cannot be proved to hold

universally;  but  it  can  be  proved  to  hold  frequently,  even  in

unsuspected  cases,  and  it  cannot  be contradicted  as  a  general

proposition.

 

   ¹ They share this character of indestructibility with all other mental acts which are truly

unconscious, i.e. which belong to the system Ucs. only. These are paths which have been laid
down once and for all, which never fall into disuse and which, whenever an unconscious
excitation re-cathects them, are always ready to conduct the excitatory process to discharge.
If I may use a simile, they are only capable of annihilation in the same sense as the ghosts in
the underworld of the Odyssey - ghosts which awoke to new life as soon as they tasted blood.
Processes which are dependent on the preconscious system are destructible in quite another
sense. The psychotherapy of the neuroses is based on this distinction.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        986

 

 

   In my view, therefore, wishful impulses left over from conscious

waking life must be relegated to a secondary position in respect to the

formation of dreams. I cannot allow that, as contributors to the content

of dreams, they play any other part than by the material of sensationswhich become currently active during sleep. (See pp. 707‑708.) I shall

follow  the  same  line  of  thought  in  now  turning  to  consider  those

psychical instigations to dreaming, left over from waking life, which are

other than wishes. When we decide to go to sleep, we may succeed in

temporarily bringing to an end the cathexes of energy attaching to our

waking thoughts. Anyone who can do this easily is a good sleeper; the

first Napoleon seems to have been a model of this class. But we do

not  always  succeed  in  doing  so,  nor  do  we  always  succeed

completely.  Unsolved  problems,  tormenting  worries,  overwhelming

impressions  -  all  these  carry  thought-activity  over  into  sleep  and

sustain  mental  processes  in  the  system  that  we  have  named  the

preconscious. If we wish to classify the thought-impulses which persist

in sleep, we may divide them into the following groups: (1) what has

not been carried to a conclusion during the day owing to some chance

hindrance; (2) what has not been dealt with owing to the insufficiency

of  our  intellectual  power  -  what  is  unsolved;  (3)  what  has  been

rejected and suppressed during the daytime. To these we must add

(4) a powerful group consisting of what has been set in action in our

Ucs. by the activity of the preconscious in the course of the day; and

finally (5) the group of daytime impressions which are indifferent and

have for that reason not been dealt with.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        987

 

   There is no need to underestimate the importance of the psychical

intensities  which  are  introduced  into  the  state  of  sleep  by  these

residues  of  daytime  life,  and  particularly  of  those  in  the  group  of

unsolved  problems.  It  is  certain  that  these  excitations  continue  to

struggle  for  expression  during  the  night;  and  we  may  assume  with

equal  certainty  that  the  state  of  sleep  makes  it  impossible  for  the

excitatory  process  to  be  pursued  in  the  habitual  manner  in  the

preconscious and brought to an end by becoming conscious. In so far

as our thought-processes are able to become conscious in the normal

way  at  night,  we  are  simply  not  asleep.  I  am  unable  to  say  what

modification in the system Pcs. is brought about by the state of sleep;¹but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  psychological  characteristics  of

sleep are to be looked for essentially in modifications in the cathexis of

this particular system - a system that is also in control of access to the

power of movement, which is paralysed during sleep. On the other

hand,  nothing  in  the  psychology  of  dreams  gives  me  reason  to

suppose that sleep produces any modifications other than secondary

ones in the state of things prevailing in the Ucs. No other course, then,

lies open to excitations occurring at night in the Pcs. than that followed

by  wishful  excitations  arising  from  the Ucs.;  the  preconscious

excitations  must  find  reinforcement  from  the Ucs.  and  must

accompany the unconscious excitations along their circuitous paths.

But what is the relation of the preconscious residues of the previous

day to dreams? There is no doubt that they find their way into dreams

in great quantity, and that they make use of the content of dreams in

order to penetrate into consciousness even during the night. Indeed

they occasionally dominate the content of a dream and force it to carry

on the activity of daytime. It is certain, too, that the day’s residues may

be  of  any  other  character  just  as  easily  as  wishes;  but  it  is  highly

instructive in this connection, and of positively decisive importance for

the theory of wish-fulfilment, to observe the condition to which they

must submit in order to be received into a dream.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1919:] I have tried to penetrate further into an understanding of the state

of things prevailing during sleep and of the determining conditions of hallucination in a paper
entitled ‘A Metapsychological Supplement to the Theory of Dreams’.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        988

 

   Let us take one of the dreams I have already recorded - for instance,

the one in which my friend Otto appeared with the signs of Graves’

disease. (See p. 746 ff.) I had been worried during the previous day by

Otto’s looks; and, like everything else concerned with him, this worry

affected me closely. And it pursued me, as I may assume, into my

sleep. I was probably anxious to discover what could be wrong with

him. This worry found expression during the night in the dream I have

described, the content of which was in the first place nonsensical andin the second place was in no respect the fulfilment of a wish. I then

began to investigate the origin of this inappropriate expression of the

worry I had felt during the day, and by means of analysis I found a

connection through the fact of my having identified my friend with a

certain Baron L. and myself with Professor R. There was only one

explanation  of  my  having  been  obliged  to  choose  this  particular

substitute for my daytime thought. I must have been prepared at all

times in my Ucs. to identify myself with Professor R., since by means

of  that  identification  one  of  the  immortal  wishes  of  childhood  -  the

megalomaniac wish - was fulfilled. Ugly thoughts hostile to my friend,

which were certain to be repudiated during the day, had seized the

opportunity of slipping through with the wish and getting themselves

represented in the dream; but my daytime worry had also found some

sort  of  expression  in  the  content  of  the  dream  by  means  of  a

substitute. The daytime thought, which was not in itself a wish but on

the contrary a worry, was obliged to find a connection in some way or

other  with  an  infantile  wish  which  was  now  unconscious  and

suppressed, and which would enable it - suitably decocted, it is true -

to ‘originate’ in consciousness. The more dominating was the worry,

the  more  far-fetched  a  link  could  be  established;  there  was  no

necessity  for  there  being  any  connection  whatever  between  the

content  of  the  wish  and  that  of  the  worry,  and  in  fact  no  such

connection existed in our example.

 

   It may perhaps be useful to continue our examination of the same

question  by  considering  how  a  dream  behaves  when  the  dream-

thoughts present it with material which is the complete reverse of a

wish-fulfilment  -  well-justified  worries,  painful  reflections,  distressing

realizations. The many possible outcome can be classed under the

two following groups. (A) The dream-work may succeed in replacing

all  the  distressing  ideas  by  contrary  ones  and  in  suppressing  the

unpleasurable  affects  attaching  to  them.  The  result  will  be  a

straightforward  dream  of  satisfaction,  a  palpable  ‘wish-fulfilment’,

about  which  there  seems  no  more  to  be  said.  (B)  The  distressing

ideas may make their way, more or less modified but none the less

quite recognizable, into the manifest content of the dream. This is the

case  which  raises  doubts  as  to  the  validity  of  the  wish  theory  ofdreams  and  needs  further  investigation.  Dreams  of  this  sort  with  a

distressing  content  may  either  be  experienced  with  indifference,  or

they may be accompanied by the whole of the distressing affect which

their ideational content seems to justify, or they may even lead to the

development of anxiety and to awakening.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        989

 

   Analysis is able to demonstrate that these unpleasurable dreams

are  wish-fulfilments  no  less  than  the  rest.  An  unconscious  and

repressed wish, whose fulfilment the dreamer’s ego could not fail to

experience  as  something  distressing,  has  seized  the  opportunity

offered to it by the persisting cathexis of the distressing residues of the

previous day; it has lent them its support and by that means rendered

them  capable  of  entering  a  dream.  But  whereas  in  Group  A  the

unconscious wish coincided with the conscious one, in Group B the

gulf  between  the  unconscious  and  the  conscious  (between  the

repressed and the ego) is revealed and the situation in the fairy tale of

the three wishes which were granted by the fairy to the husband and

wife is realized. (See below, p. 1009 f. n.)  The satisfaction at the

fulfilment of the repressed wish may turn out to be so great that it

counterbalances  the  distressing  feelings  attaching  to  the  day’s

residues; in that case the feeling-tone of the dream is indifferent, in

spite of its being on the one hand the fulfilment of a wish and on the

other the fulfilment of a fear. Or it may happen that the sleeping ego

takes a still larger share in the construction of the dream, that it reacts

to  the  satisfying  of  the  repressed  wish  with  violent  indignation  and

itself puts an end to the dream with an outburst of anxiety. Thus there

is  no  difficulty  in  seeing  that  unpleasurable  dreams  and  anxiety-

dreams are just as much wish-fulfilments in the sense of our theory as

are straightforward dreams of satisfaction.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        990

  

   Unpleasurable dreams may also be ‘punishment-dreams’. It must be

admitted  that  their  recognition  means  in  a  certain  sense  a  new

addition to the theory of dreams. What is fulfilled in them is equally an

unconscious wish, namely a wish that the dreamer may be punished

for a repressed and forbidden wishful impulse. To that extent dreams

of this kind fall in with the condition that has been laid down here that

the motive force for constructing a dream must be provided by a wish

belonging  to  the  unconscious.  A  closer  psychological  analysis,

however,  shows  how  they  differ  from  other  wishful  dreams.  In  the

cases  forming  Group  B  the  dream-constructing  wish  is  an

unconscious one and belongs to the repressed, while in punishment-

dreams, though it is equally an unconscious one, it must be reckoned

as belonging not to the repressed but to the ‘ego.’ Thus punishment-

dreams indicate the possibility that the ego may have a greater share

than was supposed in the construction of dreams. The mechanism of

dream-formation would in general be greatly clarified if instead of the

opposition between ‘conscious’ and ‘unconscious’ we were to speak of

that  between  the  ‘ego’  and  the  ‘repressed.’  This  cannot  be  done,

however,  without  taking  account  of  the  processes  underlying  the

psychoneuroses, and for that reason it has not been carried out in the

present  work.  I  will  only  add  that  punishment-dreams  are  not  in

general subject to the condition that the day’s residues shall be of a

distressing kind. On the contrary, they occur most easily where the

opposite  is  the  case  -  where  the  day’s  residues  are  thoughts  of  a

satisfying nature but the satisfaction which they express is a forbidden

one. The only trace of these thoughts that appears in the manifest

dream  is  their  diametric  opposite,  just  as  in  the  case  of  dreams

belonging  to  Group  A.  The  essential  characteristic  of  punishment-

dreams would thus be that in their case the dream-constructing wish is

not an unconscious wish derived from the repressed (from the system

Ucs.), but a punitive one reacting against it and belonging to the ego,

though at the same time an unconscious (that is to say, preconscious)

one.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1930:] This would be the appropriate point for a reference to the ‘super-

ego’, one of the later findings of psycho-analysis.
                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        991

 

   I will report a dream of my own in order to illustrate what I have just

said, and in particular the way in which the dream-work deals with a

residue of distressing anticipations from the previous day.

   ‘Indistinct beginning. I said to my wife that I had a piece of news for

her, something quite special. She was alarmed and refused to listen. I

assured her that on the contrary it was something that she would be

very glad to hear, and began to tell her that our son’s officer’s mess

had  sent  a  sum  of  money  (5000  Kronen?)  .  .  .  something  about

distinction . . . distribution. . . . Meanwhile I had gone with her into a

small room, like a storeroom, to look for something. Suddenly I saw

my son appear. He was not in uniform but in tight-fitting sports clothes

(like a seal?), with a little cap. He climbed up on to a basket that was

standing beside a cupboard, as though he wanted to put something on

the cupboard. I called out to him: no reply. It seemed to me that his

face or forehead was bandaged. He was adjusting something in his

mouth, pushing something into it. And his hair was flecked with grey. I

thought: "Could he be as exhausted as all that? And has he got false

teeth?”’ Before I could call out again I woke up, feeling no anxiety but

with my heart beating rapidly. My bedside clock showed that it was

two thirty.’

   Once again it is impossible for me to present a complete analysis. I

must restrict myself to bringing out a few salient points. Distressing

anticipations from the previous day were what gave rise to the dream:

we had once more been without news of our son at the front for over a

week. It is easy to see that the content of the dream expressed a

conviction that he had been wounded or killed. Energetic efforts were

clearly  being  made  at  the  beginning  of  the  dream  to  replace  the

distressing thoughts by their contrary. I had some highly agreeable

news  to  communicate  -  something  about  money  being  sent  .  .  .

distinction . . . distribution. (The sum of money was derived from an

agreeable occurrence in my medical practice; it was an attempt at a

complete diversion from the topic.) But these efforts failed. My wife

suspected  something  dreadful  and  refused  to  listen  to  me.  The

disguises  were  too  thin  and  references  to  what  it  was  sought  torepress pierced through them everywhere. If my son had been killed,

his fellow-officers would send back his belongings and I should have

to distribute what he left among his brothers and sisters and other

people. A ‘distinction’ is often awarded to an officer who has fallen in

battle. Thus the dream set about giving direct expression to what it

had first sought to deny, though the inclination towards wish-fulfilment

was  still  shown  at  work  in  the  distortions.  (The  change  of  locality

during the dream is no doubt to be understood as what Silberer has

described as ‘threshold symbolism’. We cannot tell, it is true, what it

was  that  provided  the  dream  with  the  motive  force  for  thus  giving

expression  to  my  distressing  thoughts.  My  son  did  not  appear  as

someone ‘falling’ but as someone ‘climbing.’ He had in fact been a

keen mountaineer. He was not in uniform but in sports clothes; this

meant that the place of the accident that I now feared had been taken

by  an earlier,  sporting  one;  for  he  had  had  a  fall  during  a  skiing

expedition and broken his thigh. The way in which he was dressed, on

the  other  hand,  which  made  him  look  like  a  seal,  at  once  recalled

someone  younger  -  our  funny  little  grandson;  while  the  grey  hair

reminded me of the latter’s father, our son-in-law, who had been hard

hit by the war. What could this mean? . . . but I have said enough of it.

- The locality in a store-closet and the cupboard from which he wanted

to  take  something  (‘on  which  he  wanted  to  put  something’  in  the

dream) - these allusions reminded me unmistakably of an accident of

my own which I had brought on myself when I was between two and

three years old. I had climbed up on to a stool in the store-closet to get

something nice that was lying on a cupboard or table. The stool had

tipped over and its corner had struck me behind my lower jaw; I might

easily, I reflected, have knocked out all my teeth. The recollection was

accompanied by an admonitory thought: ‘that serves you right’; and

this seemed as though it was a hostile impulse aimed at the gallant

soldier.  Deeper  analysis  at  last  enabled  me  to  discover  what  the

concealed  impulse  was  which  might  have  found  satisfaction  in  the

dreaded accident to my son: it was the envy which is felt for the young

by  those  who  have  grown  old,  but  which  they  believe  they  have

completely stifled. And there can be no question that it was precisely

the strength of the painful emotion which would have arisen if such a

misfortune had really happened that caused that emotion to seek outa  repressed  wish-fulfilment  of  this  kind  in  order  to  find  some

consolation.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        992

 

 

   I am now in a position to give a precise account of the part played in

dreams by the unconscious wish. I am ready to admit that there is a

whole  class  of  dreams  the instigation  to  which  arises  principally  or

even  exclusively  from  the  residues  of  daytime  life;  and  I  think  that

even  my  wish  that  I  might  at  long  last  become  a  Professor

Extraordinarius might have allowed me to sleep through the night in

peace if my worry over my friend’s health had not still persisted from

the previous day. But the worry alone could not have made a dream.

The motive force which the dream required had to be provided by a

wish; it was the business of the worry to get hold of a wish to act as

the motive force of the dream.

   The position may be explained by an analogy. A daytime thought

may  very  well  play  the  part  of entrepreneur  for  a  dream;  but  the

entrepreneur, who, as people say, has the idea and the initiative to

carry it out, can do nothing without capital; he needs a capitalist who

can afford the outlay, and the capitalist who provides the psychical

outlay for the dream is invariably and indisputably, whatever may be

the thoughts of the previous day, a wish from the unconscious.

   Sometimes the capitalist is himself the entrepreneur, and indeed in

the case of dreams this is the commoner event: an unconscious wish

is stirred up by daytime activity and proceeds to construct a dream.

So, too, the other possible variations in the economic situation that I

have taken as an analogy have their parallel in dream-processes. The

entrepreneur  may  himself  make  a  small  contribution  to  the  capital;

several entrepreneurs  may  apply  to  the  same  capitalist;  several

capitalists  may  combine  to  put  up  what  is  necessary  for  the

entrepreneur.  In  the  same  way,  we  come  across  dreams  that  are

supported by more than one dream-wish; and so too with other similar

variations, which could easily be run through, but which would be ofno further interest to us. We must reserve until later what remains to

be said of the dream-wish.

   The tertium comparationis in the analogy that I have just used - the

quantity  put  at  the  disposal  of  the entrepreneur  in  an  appropriate

amount  -  is  capable  of  being  applied  in  still  greater  detail  to  the

purpose of elucidating the structure of dreams. In most dreams it is

possible to detect a central point which is marked by peculiar sensory

intensity, as I have shown on p. 778. This central point is as a rule the

direct  representation  of  the  wish-fulfilment,  for,  if  we  undo  the

displacements  brought  about  by  the  dream-work,  we  find  that  the

psychical intensity of the elements in the dream-thoughts has been

replaced by the sensory intensity of the elements in the content of the

actual  dream.  The  elements  in  the neighbourhood  of  the  wish-

fulfilment often have nothing to do with its meaning, but turn out to be

derivatives of distressing thoughts that run contrary to the wish. But

owing  to  their  being  in  what  is  often  an  artificially  established

connection  with  the  central  element,  they  have  acquired  enough

intensity to become capable of being represented in the dream. Thus

the wish-fulfilment’s power of bringing about representation is diffused

over a certain sphere surrounding it, within which all the elements -

including  even  those  possessing  no  means  of  their  own  -  become

empowered to obtain representation. In the case of dreams that are

actuated by several wishes, it is easy to delimit the spheres of the

different  wish-fulfilments,  and  gaps  in  the  dream  may  often  be

understood as frontier zones between those spheres.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        993

 

 

   Though the preceding considerations have reduced the importance

of the part played by the day’s residues in dreams, it is worth while

devoting  a  little  more  attention  to  them.  It  must  be  that  they  are

essential ingredients in the formation of dreams, since experience has

revealed the surprising fact that in the content of every dream some

link with a recent daytime impression - often of the most insignificantsort - is to be detected. We have not hitherto been able to explain the

necessity for this addition to the mixture that constitutes a dream (see

p. 669). And it is only possible to do so if we bear firmly in mind the

part played by the unconscious wish and then seek for information

from the psychology of the neuroses. We learn from the latter that an

unconscious  idea  is  as  such  quite  incapable  of  entering  the

preconscious  and  that  it  can  only  exercise  any  effect  there  by

establishing a connection with an idea which already belongs to the

preconscious, by transferring its intensity on to it and by getting itself

‘covered’ by it. Here we have the fact of ‘transference’, which provides

an explanation of so many striking phenomena in the mental life of

neurotics. The preconscious idea, which thus acquires an undeserved

degree of intensity may either be left unaltered by the transference, or

it may have a modification forced upon it, derived from the content of

the idea which effects the transference. I hope I may be forgiven for

drawing analogies from everyday life, but I am tempted to say that the

position of a repressed idea resembles that of an American dentist in

this  country:  he  is  not  allowed  to  set  up  in  practice  unless  he  can

make  use  of  a  legally  qualified  medical  practitioner  to  serve  as  a

stalking-horse and to act as a ‘cover’ in the eyes of the law. And just

as it is not exactly the physicians with the largest practices who form

alliances of this kind with dentists, so in the same way preconscious or

conscious ideas which have already attracted a sufficient amount of

the attention that is operating in the preconscious will not be the ones

to be chosen to act as covers for a repressed idea. The unconscious

prefers to weave its connections round preconscious impressions and

ideas which are either indifferent and have thus had no attention paid

to them, or have been rejected and have thus had attention promptly

withdrawn  from  them.  It  is  a  familiar  article  in  the  doctrine  of

association, and one that is entirely confirmed by experience, that an

idea which is bound by a very intimate tie in one direction, tends, as it

were, to repel whole groups of new ties. I once attempted to base a

theory of hysterical paralyses on this proposition.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        994 

   If we assume that the same need for transference on the part of

repressed ideas which we have discovered in analysing the neuroses

is also at work in dreams, two of the riddles of the dream are solved at

a blow: the fact, namely, that every analysis of a dream shows some

recent impression woven into its texture and that this recent element is

often of the most trivial kind. I may add that (as we have already found

elsewhere) the reason why these recent and indifferent elements so

frequently  find  their  way  into  dreams  as  substitutes  for  the  most

ancient of all the dream-thoughts is that they have least to fear from

the censorship imposed by resistance. But while the fact that trivial

elements are preferred is explained by their freedom from censorship,

the fact that recent elements occur with such regularity points to the

existence  of  a  need  for  transference.  Both  groups  of  impressions

satisfy the demand of the repressed for material that is still clear of

associations  -  the  indifferent  ones  because  they  have  given  no

occasion for the formation of many ties, and the recent ones because

they have not yet had time to form them.

   It will be seen, then, that the day’s residues, among which we may

now class the indifferent impressions, not only borrow something from

the Ucs. when they succeed in taking a share in the formation of a

dream - namely the instinctual force which is at the disposal of the

repressed wish - but that they also offer the unconscious something

indispensable  -  namely  the  necessary  point  of  attachment  for  a

transference. If we wished to penetrate more deeply at this point into

the processes of the mind, we should have to throw more light upon

the  interplay  of  excitations  between  the  preconscious  and  the

unconscious a subject towards which the study of the psychoneuroses

draws us, but upon which, as it happens, dreams have no help to

offer.

   I have only one thing more to add about the day’s residues. There

can be no doubt that it is they that are the true disturbers of sleep and

not dreams, which, on the contrary are concerned to guard it. I shall

return to this point later.

 

   We have so far been studying dream-wishes: we have traced them

from  their  origin  in  the  region  of  the Ucs.  and  have  analysed  theirrelations  to  the  day’s  residues,  which  in  their  turn  may  either  be

wishes  or  psychical  impulses  of  some  other  kind  or  simply  recent

impressions. In this way we have allowed room for every claim that

may be raised by any of the multifarious waking thought-activities on

behalf of the importance of the part played by them in the process of

constructing dreams. It is not impossible, even, that our account may

have provided an explanation of the extreme cases in which a dream,

pursuing the activities of daytime, arrives at a happy solution of some

unsolved problem of waking life. All we need is an example of this

kind, so that we might analyse it and trace the source of the infantile

or repressed wishes whose help has been enlisted and has reinforced

the efforts of preconscious activity with such success. But all this has

not brought us a step nearer to solving the riddle of why it is that the

unconscious  has  nothing  else  to  offer  during  sleep  but  the  motive

force for the fulfilment of a wish. The answer to this question must

throw light upon the psychical nature of wishes, and I propose to give

the  answer  by  reference  to  our  schematic  picture  of  the  psychical

apparatus.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        995

 

   There can be no doubt that that apparatus has only reached its

present perfection after a long period of development. Let us attempt

to  carry  it  back  to  an  earlier  stage  of  its  functioning  capacity.

Hypotheses, whose justification must be looked for in other directions,

tell  us  that  at  first  the  apparatus’s  efforts  were  directed  towards

keeping itself so far as possible free from stimuli; consequently its first

structure followed the plan of a reflex apparatus, so that any sensory

excitation impinging on it could be promptly discharged along a motor

path. But the exigencies of life interfere with this simple function, and it

is  to  them,  too,  that  the  apparatus  owes  the  impetus  to  further

development. The exigencies of life confront it first in the form of the

major  somatic  needs.  The  excitations  produced  by  internal  needs

seek discharge in movement, which may be described as an ‘internal

change’  or  an  ‘expression  of  emotion.’  A  hungry  baby  screams  orkicks helplessly. But the situation remains unaltered, for the excitation

arising  from  an  internal  need  is  not  due  to  a  force  producing  a

momentary  impact  but  to  one  which  is  in  continuous  operation.  A

change can only come about if in some way or other (in the case of

the baby, through outside help) an ‘experience of satisfaction’ can be

achieved  which  puts  an  end  to  the  internal  stimulus.  An  essential

component of this experience of satisfaction is a particular perception

(that  of  nourishment,  in  our  example)  the  mnemic  image  of  which

remains  associated  thenceforward  with  the  memory  trace  of  the

excitation produced by the need. As a result of the link that has thus

been established, next time this need arises a psychical impulse will at

once emerge which will seek to re-cathect the mnemic image of the

perception and to re-evoke the perception itself, that is to say, to re-

establish the situation of the original satisfaction. An impulse of this

kind is what we call a wish; the reappearance of the perception is the

fulfilment of the wish; and the shortest path to the fulfilment of the wish

is a path leading direct from the excitation produced by the need to a

complete  cathexis  of  the  perception.  Nothing  prevents  us  from

assuming that there was a primitive state of the psychical apparatus in

which this path was actually traversed, that is, in which wishing ended

in  hallucinating.  Thus  the  aim  of  this  first  psychical  activity  was  to

produce a ‘perceptual identity’ - a repetition of the perception which

was linked with the satisfaction of the need.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        996

 

      The  bitter  experience  of  life  must  have  changed  this  primitive

thought-activity  into  a  more  expedient  secondary  one.  The

establishment  of  a  perceptual  identity  along  the  short  path  of

regression  within  the  apparatus  does  not  have  the  same  result

elsewhere in the mind as does the cathexis of the same perception

from  without.  Satisfaction  does  not  follow;  the  need  persists.  An

internal cathexis could only have the same value as an external one if

it  were  maintained  unceasingly,  as  in  fact  occurs  in  hallucinatory

psychoses  and  hunger  phantasies,  which  exhaust  their  wholepsychical  activity  in  clinging  to  the  object  of  their  wish.  In  order  to

arrive at a more efficient expenditure of psychical force, it is necessary

to bring the regression to a halt before it becomes complete, so that it

does not proceed beyond the mnemic image, and is able to seek out

other paths which lead eventually to the desired perceptual identity

being  established  from  the  direction  of  the  external  world.¹  This

inhibition  of  the  regression  and  the  subsequent  diversion  of  the

excitation  become  the  business  of  a  second  system,  which  is  in

control of voluntary movement - which for the first time, that is, makes

use of movement for purposes remembered in advance. But all the

complicated thought-activity which is spun out from the mnemic image

to the moment at which the perceptual identity is established by the

external  world  -  all  this  activity  of  thought  merely  constitutes  a

roundabout path to wish-fulfilment which has been made necessary by

experience.²  Thought  is  after  all  nothing  but  a  substitute  for  a

hallucinatory wish; and it is self-evident that dreams must be wish-

fulfilments, since nothing but a wish can set our mental apparatus at

work.  Dreams,  which  fulfil  their  wishes  along  the  short  path  of

regression, have merely preserved for us in that respect a sample of

the psychical apparatus’s primary method of working, a method which

was abandoned as being inefficient. What once dominated waking life,

while the mind was still young and incompetent, seems now to have

been banished into the night - just as the primitive weapons, the bows

and arrows, that have been abandoned by adult men, turn up once

more in the nursery. Dreaming is a piece of infantile mental life that

has been superseded. These methods of working on the part of the

psychical apparatus, which are normally suppressed in waking hours,

become  current  once  more  in  psychosis  and  then  reveal  their

incapacity for satisfying our needs in relation to the external world.³

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1919:] In other words, it becomes evident that there must be a means of

‘reality-testing’.

   ² The wish-fulfilling activity of dreams is justly extolled by Le Lorrain, who speaks of it as

‘sans fatigue sérieuse, sans être obligé de recourir à cette lutte opiniâtre et longue qui use et
corrode les jouissances poursuivies [incurring no serious fatigue and not being obliged to
embark upon the long and obstinate struggle that wears away and spoils enjoyments that
have to be pursued].’

   ³ [Footnote added 1914:] I have elsewhere carried this train of thought further in a paper on

the two principles of mental functioning (Freud 1911b) - the pleasure principle and the realityprinciple, as I have proposed calling them.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        997

 

   The unconscious wishful impulses clearly try to make themselves

effective in daytime as well, and the fact of transference, as well as

the psychoses, show us that they endeavour to force their way by way

of the preconscious system into consciousness and to obtain control

of the power of movement. Thus the censorship between the Ucs. and

the Pcs., the assumption of whose existence is positively forced upon

us  by  dreams,  deserves  to  be  recognized  and  respected  as  the

watchman of our mental health. Must we not regard it, however, as an

act of carelessness on the part of that watchman that it relaxes its

activities during the night, allows the suppressed impulses in the Ucs.

to find expression, and makes it possible for hallucinatory regression

to  occur  once  more?  I  think  not.  For  even  though  this  critical

watchman goes to rest - and we have proof that its slumbers are not

deep - it also shuts the door upon the power of movement. No matter

what impulses from the normally inhibited Ucs. may prance upon the

stage, we need feel no concern; they remain harmless, since they are

unable to set in motion the motor apparatus by which alone they might

modify the external world. The state of sleep guarantees the security

of  the  citadel  that  must  be  guarded.  The  position  is  less  harmless

when what brings about the displacement of forces is not the nightly

relaxation in the critical censorship’s output of force, but a pathological

reduction  in  that  force  or  a  pathological  intensification  of  the

unconscious excitations while the preconscious is still cathected and

the gateway to the power of movement stands open. When this is so,

the watchman is overpowered, the unconscious excitations overwhelm

the Pcs., and thence obtain control over our speech and actions; or

they forcibly bring about hallucinatory regression and direct the course

of the apparatus (which was not designed for their use) by virtue of the

attraction exercised by perceptions on the distribution of our psychical

energy. To this state of things we give the name of psychosis.

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        998

 

 

   We are now well on the way to proceeding further with the erection

of  the  psychological  scaffolding,  which  we  stopped  at  the  point  at

which we introduced the two systems Ucs. and Pcs. But there are

reasons for continuing a little with our consideration of wishes as the

sole psychical motive force for the construction of dreams. We have

accepted the idea that the reason why dreams are invariably wish-

fulfilments is that they are products of the system Ucs., whose activity

knows no other aim than the fulfilment of wishes and which has at its

command no other forces than wishful impulses. If we insist, for even

a  moment  longer,  upon  our  right  to  base  such  far-reaching

psychological speculations upon the interpretation of dreams, we are

in  duty  found  to  prove  that  those  speculations  have  enabled  us  to

insert  dreams  into  a  nexus  which  can  include  other  psychical

structures  as  well.  If  such  a  thing  as  a  system Ucs.  exists  (or

something analogous to it for the purposes of our discussion), dreams

cannot  be  its  only  manifestation;  every  dream  may  be  a  wish-

fulfilment,  but  apart  from  dreams  there  must  be  other  forms  of

abnormal wish-fulfilments. And it is a fact that the theory governing all

psychoneurotic  symptoms  culminates  in  a  single  proposition,  which

asserts that they too are to be regarded as fulfilments of unconscious

wishes.¹ Our explanation makes the dream only the first member of a

class  which  is  of  the  greatest  significance  to  psychiatrists  and  an

understanding of which implies the solution of the purely psychological

side of the problem of psychiatry.²

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] Or more correctly, one portion of the symptom corresponds to the

unconscious wish-fulfilment and another portion to the mental structure reacting against the
wish.

   ² [Footnote added 1914:] As Hughlings Jackson said: ‘Find out all about dreams and you

will have found out all about insanity.’
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        999

       The  other  members  of  this  class  of  wish-fulfilments  -  hysterical

symptoms,  for  instance  -  possess  one  essential  characteristic,

however, which I cannot discover in dreams. I have learnt from the

researches which I have mentioned so often in the course of this work

that in order to bring about the formation of a hysterical symptom both

currents  of  our  mind  must  converge.  A  symptom  is  not  merely  the

expression  of  a  realized  unconscious  wish;  a  wish  from  the

preconscious  which  is  fulfilled  by  the  same  symptom  must  also  be

present. So that the symptom will have of at least two determinants,

one arising from each of the systems involved in the conflict. As in the

case of dreams, there are no limits to the further determinants that

may  be  present  -  to  the  ‘overdetermination’  of  the  symptoms.  The

determinant which does not arise from the Ucs. is invariably, so far as

I know, a train of thought reacting against the unconscious wish - a

self-punishment, for instance. I can therefore make the quite general

assertion  that a  hysterical  symptom  develops  only  where  the

fulfilments  of  two  opposing  wishes,  arising  each  from  a  different

psychical  system,  are  able  to  converge  in  a  single  expression.

(Compare in this connection my most recent formulations on the origin

of hysterical symptoms in my paper on hysterical phantasies and their

relation to bisexuality.) Examples would serve very little purpose here,

since  nothing  but  an  exhaustive  elucidation  of  the  complications

involved could carry conviction. I will therefore leave my assertion to

stand for itself and only quote an example in order to make the point

clear, and not to carry conviction. In one of my women patients, then,

hysterical vomiting turned out to be on the one hand the fulfilment of

an unconscious phantasy dating from her puberty - of a wish, that is,

that  she  might  be  continuously  pregnant  and  have  innumerable

children, with a further wish, added later, that she might have them by

as many men as possible. A powerful defensive impulse had sprung

up against this unbridled wish. And, since the patient might lose her

figure and her good looks as a result of her vomiting, and so might

cease to be attractive to anyone, the symptom was acceptable to the

punitive train of thought as well; and since it was permitted by both

sides it could become a reality. This was the same method of treating

a wish-fulfilment as was adopted by the Parthian queen towards the

Roman  triumvir  Crassus.  Believing  that  he  had  embarked  on  hisexpedition out of love of gold, she ordered molten gold to be poured

down his throat when he was dead: ‘Now’, she said, ‘you have what

you wanted.’ But all that we so far know about dreams is that they

express the fulfilment of a wish from the unconscious; it seems as

though  the  dominant,  preconscious  system  acquiesces  in  this  after

insisting upon a certain number of distortions. Nor is it possible as a

general rule to find a train of thought opposed to the dream-wish and,

like  its  counterpart,  realized  in  the  dream.  Only  here  and  there  in

dream-analyses do we come upon signs of reactive creations, like, for

instance, my affectionate feelings for my friend R. in the dream of my

uncle (cf. p. 637 ff.). But we can find the missing ingredient from the

preconscious elsewhere. Whereas the wish from the Ucs. is able to

find expression in the dream after undergoing distortions of every kind,

the dominant system withdraws into a wish to sleep, realizes that wish

by bringing about the modifications which it is able to produce in the

cathexes  within  the  psychical  apparatus,  and  persists  in  that  wish

throughout the whole duration of sleep.¹

 

   ¹ I have borrowed this idea from the theory of sleep put forward by Liébeault (1889), to

whom is due the revival in modern times of research into hypnotism.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1000

 

      This  determined  wish  on  the  part  of  the  preconscious  to  sleep

exercises a generally facilitating effect on the formation of dreams. Let

me recall the dream dreamt by the man who was led to infer from the

glare of light coming out of the next room that his child’s body might

be  on  fire.  The  father  drew  this  inference  in  a  dream  instead  of

allowing himself to be woken up by the glare; and we have suggested

that one of the psychical forces responsible for this result was a wish

which prolonged by that one moment the life of the child whom he

pictured in the dream. Other wishes, originating from the repressed,

probably escape us, since we are unable to analyse the dream. But

we may assume that a further motive force in the production of the

dream was the father’s need to sleep; his sleep, like the child’ s life,

was prolonged by one moment by the dream. ‘Let the dream go on’ -such  was  his  motive  -  ‘or  I  shall  have  to  wake  up.’  In  every  other

dream, just as in this one, the wish to sleep lends its support to the

unconscious  wish.  On p.  624  f.  I  described  some  dreams  which

appeared openly as dreams of convenience. But in fact all dreams can

claim a right to the same description. The operation of the wish to

continue sleeping is most easily to be seen in arousal dreams, which

modify  external  sensory  stimuli  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  them

compatible with a continuance of sleep; they weave them into a dream

in order to deprive them of any possibility of acting as reminders of the

external world. That same wish must, however, play an equal part in

allowing the occurrence of all other dreams, though it may only be

from within that they threaten to shake the subject out of his sleep. In

some cases, when a dream carries things too far, the Ucs. says to

consciousness:  ‘Never  mind!  go  on  sleeping!  after  all  it’s  only  a

dream!’  But  this  describes  in  general  the  attitude  of  our  dominant

mental  activity  towards  dreams,  though  it  may  not  be  openly

expressed. I am driven to conclude that throughout our whole sleeping

state we know just as certainly that we are dreaming as we know that

we are sleeping. We must not pay too much attention to the counter-

argument that our consciousness is never brought to bear on the latter

piece of knowledge and that it is only brought to bear on the former on

particular occasions when the censorship feels that it has, as it were,

been taken off its guard.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1001

 

   On the other hand, there are some people who are quite clearly

aware during the night that they are asleep and dreaming and who

thus  seem  to  possess  the  faculty  of  consciously  directing  their

dreams. If, for instance, a dreamer of this kind is dissatisfied with the

turn taken by a dream, he can break it off without waking up and start

it again in another direction - just as a popular dramatist may under

pressure give his play a happier ending. Or another time, if his dream

has led him into a sexually exciting situation, he can think to himself: ‘I

won’t go on with this dream any further and exhaust myself with anemission; I’II hold it back for a real situation instead.’

   The Marquis d’Hervey de Saint-Denys, quoted by Vaschide (1911,

139), claimed to have acquired the power of accelerating the course of

his dreams just as he pleased, and of giving them any direction he

chose. It seems as though in his case the wish to sleep had given

place to another preconscious wish, namely to observe his dreams

and enjoy them. Sleep is just as compatible with a wish of this sort as

it is with a mental reservation to wake up if some particular condition is

fulfilled (e.g. in the case of a nursing mother or wet-nurse). Moreover,

it  is  a  familiar  fact  that  anyone  who  takes  an  interest  in  dreams

remembers a considerably greater number of them after waking.

      Ferenczi  (1911),  in  the  course  of  a  discussion  of  some  other

observations  upon  the  directing  of  dreams,  remarks:  ‘Dreams  work

over the thoughts which are occupying the mind at the moment from

every angle; they will drop a dream-image if it threatens the success

of a wish-fulfilment and will experiment with a fresh solution, till at last

they  succeed  in  constructing  a  wish-fulfilment  which  satisfies  both

agencies of the mind as a compromise.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1002

 

                                          (B)

 

      AROUSAL BY DREAMS - THE FUNCTION OF DREAMS - ANXIETY-DREAMS

 

   Now that we know that all through the night the preconscious is

concentrated upon the wish to sleep, we are in a position to carry our

understanding of the process of dreaming a stage further. But first let

us summarize what we have learnt so far.

   The situation is this. Either residues of the previous day have been

left over from the activity of waking life and it has not been possible to

withdraw the whole cathexis of energy from them; or the activity of

waking life during the course of the day has led to the stirring up of an

unconscious wish; or these two events have happened to coincide.

(We  have  already  discussed  the  various  possibilities  in  this

connection.)    The  unconscious  wish  links  itself  up  with  the  day’sresidues  and  effects  a  transference  on  to  them;  this  may  happen

either in the course of the day or not until a state of sleep has been

established. A wish now arises which has been transferred on to the

recent material; or a recent wish, having been suppressed, gains fresh

life by being reinforced from the unconscious. This wish seeks to force

its way along the normal path taken by thought processes, though the

Pcs.  (to  which,  indeed,  it  in  part  belongs)  to  consciousness.  But  it

comes up against the censorship, which is still functioning and to the

influence of which it now submits. At this point it takes on the distortion

for which the way has already been paved by the transference of the

wish on to recent material. So far it is on the way to becoming an

obsessive  idea  or  a  delusion  or  something  of  the  kind  -  that  is, a

thought which has been intensified by transference and distorted in its

expression by censorship. Its further advance is halted, however, by

the  sleeping  state  of  the  preconscious.  (The  probability  is  that  that

system has protected itself against the invasion by diminishing its own

excitations.) The dream-process consequently enters on a regressive

path, which lies open to it precisely owing to the peculiar nature of the

state of sleep, and it is led along that path by the attraction exercised

on it by groups of memories; some of these memories themselves

exist only in the form of visual cathexes and not as translations into

the terminology of the later systems. In the course of its regressive

path  the  dream-process  acquires  the  attribute  of  representability.  (I

shall  deal  later  with  the  question  of  compression.)  It  has  now

completed the second portion of its zigzag journey. The first portion

was  a  progressive  one,  leading  from  the  unconscious  scenes  or

phantasies  to  the  preconscious;  the  second  portion  led  from  the

frontier  of  the  censorship  back  again  to  perceptions.  But  when  the

content of the dream process has become perceptual, by that fact it

has, as it were, found a way of evading the obstacle put in its way by

the  censorship  and  the  state  of  sleep  in  the Pcs.  It  succeeds  in

drawing attention to itself and in being noticed by consciousness.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1003

    For consciousness, which we look upon in the light of a sense organ

for the apprehension of psychical qualities, is capable in waking life of

receiving  excitations  from  two  directions.  In  the  first  place,  it  can

receive  excitations  from  the  periphery  of  the  whole  apparatus,  the

perceptual system; and in addition to this, it can receive excitations of

pleasure and unpleasure, which prove to be almost the only psychical

quality  attaching  to  transpositions  of  energy  in  the  inside  of  the

apparatus. All other processes in the Ψ-systems, including the Pcs.,

are  lacking  in  any  psychical  quality  and  so  cannot  be  objects  of

consciousness, except in so far as they bring pleasure or unpleasure

to perception. We are thus driven to conclude that these releases of

pleasure  and  unpleasure  automatically  regulate  the  course  of

cathectic processes. But, in order to make more delicately adjusted

performances possible, it later became necessary to make the course

of ideas less dependent upon the presence or absence of unpleasure.

For this purpose the Pcs. system needed to have qualities of its own

which could attract consciousness; and it seems highly probable that it

obtained them by linking the preconscious processes with the mnemic

system  of  indications  of  speech,  a  system  which  was  not  without

quality.  By  means  of  the  qualities  of  that  system,  consciousness,

which had hitherto been a sense organ for perceptions alone. Now,

therefore, there are, as it were, two sensory surfaces, one directed

towards perception and the other towards the preconscious thought-

processes.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1004

 

   I must assume that the state of sleep makes the sensory surface of

consciousness  which  is  directed  towards  the Pcs.  far  more

insusceptible to excitation than the surface directed towards the Pcpt.

systems. Moreover, this abandonment of interest in thought-processes

during the night has a purpose: thinking is to come to a standstill, for

the Pcs.  requires  sleep.  Once,  however,  a  dream  has  become  a

perception, it is in a position to excite consciousness, by means of the

qualities  it  has  now  acquired.  This  sensory  excitation  proceeds  toperform what is its essential function: it directs a part of the available

cathectic  energy  in  the Pcs.  into  attention  to  what  is  causing  the

excitation.  It  must  therefore  be  admitted  that  every  dream  has  an

arousing effect, that it sets a part of the quiescent force of the Pcs. in

action.  The  dream  is  then  submitted  by  this  force  to  the  influence

which  we  have  described  as  secondary  revision  with  an  eye  to

consecutiveness and intelligibility. That is to say, the dream is treated

by  it  just  like  any  other  perceptual  content;  it  is  met  by  the  same

anticipatory ideas, in so far as its subject-matter allows. So far as this

third portion of the dream-process has any direction it is once again a

progressive one.

      To  avoid  misunderstandings,  a  word  about  the  chronological

relations of these dream-processes will not be out of place. A very

attractive conjecture has been put forward by Goblot, suggested, no

doubt, by the riddle of Maury’s guillotine dream. He seeks to show that

a dream occupies no more than the transition period between sleeping

and  waking.  The  process  of  awakening  takes  a  certain  amount  of

time, and during that time the dream occurs. We imagine that the final

dream-image was so powerful that it compelled us to wake; whereas

in  fact  it  was  only  so  powerful  because  at  that  moment  we  were

already  on  the  point  of  waking.  ‘Un  rêve  c’est  un  réveil  qui

commence.’¹

   It has already been pointed out by Dugas that Goblot would have to

disregard  many  facts  before  he  could  assert  his  thesis  generally.

Dreams occur from which we do not awaken for instance, some in

which we dream that we are dreaming. With our knowledge of the

dream-work, we could not possibly agree that it only covers the period

of awakening. It seems probable, on the contrary, that the first portion

of  the  dream-work  has  already  begun  during  the  day,  under  the

control  of  the  preconscious.  Its  second  portion  -  the  modification

imposed by the censorship, the attraction exercised by unconscious

scenes, and the forcing of its way to perception - no doubt proceeds

all through the night; and in this respect we may perhaps always be

right when we express a feeling of having been dreaming all night

long, though we cannot say what.

 

   ¹ [‘A dream is an awakening that is beginning.’] 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1005

 

   But it seems to me unnecessary to suppose that dream-processes

really  maintain,  up  to  the  moment  of  becoming  conscious,  the

chronological order in which I have described them: that the first thing

to  appear  is  the  transferred  dream-wish,  that  distortion  by  the

censorship follows, then the regressive change in direction, and so on.

I have been obliged to adopt this order in my description; but what

happens in reality is no doubt a simultaneous exploring of one path

and another, a swinging of the excitation now this way and now that,

until at last it accumulates in the direction that is most opportune and

one particular grouping becomes the permanent one. Certain personal

experiences of my own lead me to suspect that the dream-work often

requires more than a day and a night in order to achieve its result; and

if  this  is  so,  we  need  no  longer  feel  any  amazement  at  the

extraordinary ingenuity shown in the construction of the dream. In my

opinion even the demand for the dream to be made intelligible as a

perceptual  event  may  be  put  into  effect  before  the  dream  attracts

consciousness  to  itself.  From  then  onwards,  however,  the  pace  is

accelerated, for at that point a dream is treated in the same fashion as

anything else that is perceived. It is like a firework, which takes hours

to prepare but goes off in a moment.

   The dream-process has by now either acquired sufficient intensity

though the dream-work to attract consciousness to itself and arouse

the preconscious, irrespectively of the time and depth of sleep; or its

intensity is insufficient to achieve this and it must remain in a state of

readiness  until,  just  before  waking,  attention  becomes  more  mobile

and comes to meet it. The majority of dreams appear to operate with

comparatively low psychical intensities, for they mostly wait until the

moment  of  waking.  But  this  also  explains  the  fact  that,  if  we  are

suddenly woken from deep sleep, we usually perceive something that

we have dreamt. In such cases, just as when we wake of our own

accord, the first thing we see is the perceptual content that has been

constructed by the dream-work and immediately afterwards we see

the perceptual content that is offered to us from outside ourselves. 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1006

 

   Greater theoretical interest, however, attaches to the dreams which

have the power to rouse us in the middle of our sleep. Bearing in mind

the expediency which is everywhere else the rule, we may ask why a

dream, that is, an unconscious wish, is given the power to interfere

with sleep, that is, with the fulfilment of the preconscious wish. The

explanation no doubt lies in relations of energy of which we have no

knowledge. If we possessed such knowledge, we should probably find

that allowing the dream to take its course and expending a certain

amount  of  more  or  less  detached  attention  on  it  is  an  economy  of

energy compared with holding the unconscious as tightly under control

at  night  as  in  the  daytime.  Experience  shows  that  dreaming  is

compatible  with  sleeping,  even  if  it  interrupts  sleep  several  times

during the night. One wakes up for an instant and then falls asleep

again at once. It is like brushing away a fly in one’s sleep: a case of ad

hoc awakening. If one falls asleep again, the interruption has been

disposed of. As is shown by such familiar examples as the sleep of a

nursing mother or wet nurse, the fulfilment of the wish to sleep is quite

compatible with maintaining a certain expenditure of attention in some

particular direction.

      At  this  point  an  objection  arises,  which  is  based  on  a  better

knowledge  of  unconscious  processes.  I  myself  have  asserted  that

unconscious wishes are always active. But in spite of this they seem

not to be strong enough to make themselves perceptible during the

day. If, however, while a state of sleep prevails, an unconscious wish

has shown itself strong enough to construct a dream and arouse the

preconscious with it, why should this strength fail after the dream has

been brought to knowledge? Should not the dream continue to recur

perpetually, precisely as the vexatious fly keeps on coming back after

it has been driven away? What right have we to assert that dreams

get rid of the disturbance of sleep?

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1007

 

   It is perfectly true that unconscious wishes always remain active.

They  represent  paths  which  can  always  be  traversed,  whenever  a

quantity  of  excitation  makes  use  of  them.  Indeed  it  is  a  prominent

feature of unconscious processes that they are indestructible. In the

unconscious  nothing  can  be  brought  to  an  end,  nothing  is  past  or

forgotten. This is brought most vividly home to one in studying the

neuroses, and especially hysteria. The unconscious path of thoughts,

which leads to discharge in a hysterical attack, immediately becomes

traversable once more, when sufficient excitation has accumulated. A

humiliation that was experienced thirty years ago acts exactly like a

fresh  one  throughout  the  thirty  years,  as  soon  as  it  has  obtained

access  to  the  unconscious  sources  of  emotion.  As  soon  as  the

memory  of  it  is  touched,  it  springs  into  life  again  and  shows  itself

cathected with excitation which finds a motor discharge in an attack.

This is precisely the point at which psychotherapy has to intervene. Its

task is to make it possible for the unconscious processes to be dealt

with  finally  and  be  forgotten.  For  the  fading  of  memories  and  the

emotional weakness of impressions which are no longer recent, which

we are inclined to regard as self-evident and to explain as a primary

effect  of  time  upon  mental  memory-traces,  are  in  reality  secondary

modifications which are only brought about by laborious work. What

performs  this  work  is  the  preconscious,  and psychotherapy  can

pursue no other course than to bring the Ucs. under the domination of

the Pcs.

      Thus  there  are  two  possible  outcomes  for  any  particular

unconscious excitatory process. Either it may be left to itself, in which

case it eventually forces its way through at some point and on this

single occasion finds discharge for its excitation in movement; or it

may come under the influence of the preconscious, and its excitation,

instead of being discharged, may be bound by the preconscious. This

second alternative is the one which occurs in the process of dreaming.

The cathexis from the Pcs. which goes halfway to meet the dream

after it has become perceptual, having been directed on to it by the

excitation in consciousness, binds the dream’s unconscious excitationand makes it powerless to act as a disturbance. If it is true that the

dreamer wakes for an instant, yet he really has brushed away the fly

that was threatening to disturb his sleep. It begins to dawn on us that it

actually is more expedient and economical to allow the unconscious

wish to take its course, to leave the path to regression open to it so

that it can construct a dream, and then to bind the dream and dispose

of it with a small expenditure of preconscious work - rather than to

continue keeping a tight rein on the unconscious throughout the whole

period  of  sleep.  It  was  indeed  to  be  expected  that  dreaming,  even

though it may originally have been a process without a useful purpose,

would have procured itself some function in the interplay of mental

forces. And we can now see what that function is. Dreaming has taken

on  the  task  of  bringing  back  under  control  of  the  preconscious  the

excitation  in  the Ucs.  which  has  been  left  free;  in  so  doing,  it

discharges the Ucs. excitation, serves it as a safety valve and at the

same  time  preserves  the  sleep  of  the  preconscious  in  return  for  a

small expenditure of waking activity. Thus, like all the other psychical

structures  in  the  series  of  which  it  is  a  member,  it  constitutes  a

compromise; it is in the service of both of the two systems since it

fulfils the two wishes in so far as they are compatible with each other.

If  we  turn  back  to  the  ‘excretion  theory’  of  dreams  put  forward  by

Robert, which I explained on p. 586 ff., we shall see at a glance that in

its essence we must accept his account of the function of dreams,

though differing from him in his premises and in his view of the dream-

process itself.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] Is this the only function that can be assigned to dreams? I know of

no other. It is true that Maeder has attempted to show that dreams have other, ‘secondary’,
functions. He started out from the correct observation that some dreams contain attempts at
solving conflicts, attempts which are later carried out in reality and which thus behave as
though they were trial practices for waking actions. He therefore drew a parallel between
dreams  and  the  play  of  animals  and  children,  which  may  be  regarded  as  practice  in  the
operation of innate instincts and as preparation for serious activity later on, and put forward
the hypothesis that dreams have a ‘fonction ludique’ [‘play function’]. Shortly before Maeder,
Alfred Adler, too, had insisted that dreams possessed a function of ‘thinking ahead.’ (In an
analysis which I published in 1905, a dream, which could only be regarded as expressing an
intention, was repeated every night until it was carried out.)
   A little reflection will convince us, however, that this ‘secondary’ function of dreams has no
claim  to  be  considered  as  a  part  of  the  subject  of  dream-interpretation.  Thinking  ahead,
forming intentions, framing attempted solutions which may perhaps be realized later in waking
life,  all  these,  and  many  other  similar  things,  are  products  of  the  unconscious  andpreconscious activity of the mind; they may persist in the state of sleep as ‘the day’s residues’
and combine with an unconscious wish (cf. p. 982 ff.) in forming a dream. Thus the dream’s
function of ‘thinking ahead’ is rather a function of preconscious waking thought, the products
of which may be revealed to us by the analysis of dreams or of other phenomena. It has long
been the habit to regard dreams as identical with their manifest content; but we must now
beware equally of the mistake of confusing dreams with latent dream-thoughts.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1008

 

 

   The qualification ‘in so far as the two wishes are compatible with

each other’ implies a hint at the possible case in which the function of

dreaming may come to grief. The dream-process is allowed to begin

as  a  fulfilment  of  an  unconscious  wish;  but  if  this  attempted  wish-

fulfilment jars upon the preconscious so violently that it is unable to

continue  sleeping,  then  the  dream  has  made  a  breach  in  the

compromise and has failed to carry out the second half of its task. In

that case the dream is immediately broken off and replaced by a state

of complete waking. Here again it is not really the fault of the dream if

it has now to appear in the role of a disturber of sleep instead of in its

normal one of a guardian of sleep; and this fact need not prejudice us

against its having a useful purpose. This is not the only instance in the

organism of a contrivance which is normally useful becoming useless

and  disturbing  as  soon  as  the  conditions  that  give  rise  to  it  are

somewhat  modified;  and  the  disturbance  at  least  serves  the  new

purpose  of  drawing  attention  to  the  modification  and  of  setting  the

organism’s regulative machinery in motion against it. What I have in

mind is of course the case of anxiety-dreams, and in order that I may

not be thought to be evading this evidence against the theory of wish-

fulfilment whenever I come across it, I will at all events give some

hints of their explanation.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1009

 

   There is no longer anything contradictory to us in the notion that apsychical  process  which  develops  anxiety  can  nevertheless  be  the

fulfilment of a wish. We know that it can be explained by the fact that

the wish belongs to one system, the Ucs., while it has been repudiated

and suppressed by the other system, the Pcs.¹ Even where psychical

health  is  perfect,  the  subjugation  of  the Ucs.  by  the Pcs.  is  not

complete;  the  measure  of  suppression  indicates  the  degree  of  our

psychical  normality.  Neurotic  symptoms  show  that  the  two  systems

are in conflict with each other; they are the products of a compromise

which  brings  the  conflict  to  an  end  for  the  time  being.  On  the  one

hand, they allow the Ucs. an outlet for the discharge of its excitation,

and provide it with a kind of sally-port, while, on the other hand they

make it possible for the Pcs. to control the Ucs. to some extent. It is

instructive  to  consider,  for  instance,  the  significance  of  a  hysterical

phobia or an agoraphobia. Let us suppose that a neurotic patient is

unable to cross the street alone - a condition which we rightly regard

as a ‘symptom.’ If we remove this symptom by compelling him to carry

out the act of which he believes himself incapable, the consequence

will be an attack of anxiety; and indeed the occurrence of an anxiety-

attack in the street is often the precipitating cause of the onset of an

agoraphobia.  We  see,  therefore,  that  the  symptom  has  been

constructed  in  order  to  avoid  an  outbreak  of  anxiety;  the  phobia  is

erected like a frontier fortification against the anxiety.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1919:] ‘A second factor, which is much more important and far-reaching,

but which is equally overlooked by laymen is the following. No doubt a wish-fulfilment must
bring pleasure; but the question then arises "To whom?" To the person who has the wish, of
course.  But,  as  we  know,  a  dreamer’s  relation  to  his  wishes  is  a  quite  peculiar  one.  He
repudiates them and censors them - he has no liking for them, in short. So that their fulfilment
will  give  him  no  pleasure,  but  just  the  opposite;  and  experience  shows  that  this  opposite
appears in the form of anxiety, a fact which has still to be explained. Thus a dreamer in his
relation  to  his  dream-wishes  can  only  be  compared  to  an  amalgamation  of  two  separate
people who are linked by some important common element. Instead of enlarging on this, I will
remind you of a familiar fairy tale in which you will find the same situation repeated. A good
fairy promised a poor married couple to grant them the fulfilment of their first three wishes.
They were delighted, and made up their minds to choose their three wishes carefully. But a
smell of sausages being fried in the cottage next door tempted the woman to wish for a couple
of them. They were there in a flash; and this was the first wish-fulfilment. But the man was
furious,  and  in  his  rage  wished  that  the  sausages  were  hanging  on  his  wife’s  nose.  This
happened too; and the sausages were not to be dislodged from their new position. This was
the  second  wish-fulfilment;  but  the  wish  was  the  man’s,  and  its  fulfilment  was  most
disagreeable for his wife. You know the rest of the story. Since after all they were in fact one -
man and wife - the third wish was bound to be that the sausages should come away from thewoman’s nose. This fairy tale might be used in many other connections; but here it serves
only to illustrate the possibility that if two people are not at one with each other the fulfilment of
a wish of one of them may bring nothing but unpleasure to the other.’ (Introductory Lectures
on Psycho-Analysis, Lecture XIV.)
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1010

 

   Our discussion cannot be carried any further without examining the

part played by the affects in these processes; but we can only do so

imperfectly in the present connection. Let us assume, then, that the

suppression of the Ucs. is necessary above all because, if the course

of ideas in the Ucs. were left to itself, it would generate an affect which

was originally of a pleasurable nature, but became unpleasurable after

the process of ‘repression’ occurred. The purpose, and the result too,

of  suppression  is  to  prevent  this  release  of  unpleasure.  The

suppression extends over the ideational content of the Ucs., since the

release of unpleasure might start from that content. This presupposes

a quite specific assumption as to the nature of the generation of affect.

It  is  viewed  as  a  motor  or  secretory  function,  the  key  to  whose

innervation  lies  in  the  ideas  in  the Ucs.  Owing  to  the  domination

established  by  the Pcs.  these  ideas  are,  as  it  were,  throttled,  and

inhibited from sending out impulses which would generate affect. If,

therefore, the cathexis from the Pcs. ceases, the danger is that the

unconscious excitations may release affect of a kind which (as a result

of  the  repression  which  has  already  occurred)  can  only  be

experienced as unpleasure, as anxiety.

   This danger materializes if the dream-process is allowed to take its

course.  The  conditions  which  determine  its  realization  are  that

repressions  must  have  occurred  and  that  the  suppressed  wishful

impulses shall be able to grow sufficiently strong. These determinants

are  thus  quite  outside  the  psychological  framework  of  dream-

formation. If it were not for the fact that our topic is connected with the

subject  of  the  generation  of  anxiety  by  the  single  factor  of  the

liberation  of  the Ucs.  during  sleep,  I  should  be  able  to  omit  any

discussion of anxiety-dreams and avoid the necessity for entering in

these pages into all the obscurities surrounding them.

      The  theory  of  anxiety-dreams,  as  I  have  already  repeatedlydeclared,  forms  part  of  the  psychology  of  the  neuroses.  We  have

nothing more to do with it when once we have indicated its point of

contact with the topic of the dream-process. There is only one thing

more that I can do. Since I have asserted that neurotic anxiety arises

from sexual sources, I can submit some anxiety-dreams to analysis in

order to show the sexual material present in their dream-thoughts.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1011

 

      I  have  good  reasons  for  leaving  on  one  side  in  the  present

discussion  the  copious  examples  afforded  by  my  neurotic  patients,

and  for  preferring  to  quote  some  anxiety-dreams  dreamt  by  young

people.

   It is dozens of years since I myself had a true anxiety-dream, but I

remember one from my seventh or eighth year, which I submitted to

interpretation some thirty years later. It was a very vivid one, and in it I

saw my  beloved  mother,  with  a  peculiarly  peaceful,  sleeping

expression  on  her  features,  being  carried  into  the  room  by  two  (or

three) people with bird’s beaks and laid upon the bed. I awoke in tears

and  screaming,  and  interrupted  my  parents’  sleep.  The  strangely

draped and unnaturally tall figures with birds’ beaks were derived from

the  illustrations  to  Philippson’s  Bible.  I  fancy  they  must  have  been

gods  with  falcons’  heads  from  an  ancient  Egyptian  funerary  relief.

Besides this, the analysis brought to mind an ill-mannered boy, a son

of a concierge, who used to play with us on the grass in front of the

house when we were children, and who I am inclined to think was

called Philipp. It seems to me that it was from this boy that I first heard

the  vulgar  term  for  sexual  intercourse,  instead  of  which  educated

people always use a Latin word, ‘to copulate’, and which was clearly

enough  indicated  by  the  choice  of  the  falcons’  heads.  I  must  have

guessed the sexual significance of the word from the face of my young

instructor,  who  was  well  acquainted  with  the  facts  of  life.  The

expression on my mother’s features in the dream was copied from the

view I had had of any grandfather a few days before his death as he

lay snoring in a coma. The interpretation carried out in the dream bythe ‘secondary revision’ must therefore have been that my mother was

dying; the funerary relief fitted in with this. I awoke in anxiety, which

did  not  cease  till  I  had  woken  my  parents  up.  I  remember  that  I

suddenly grew calm when I saw my mother’s face, as though I had

needed to be reassured that she was not dead. But this ‘secondary’

interpretation  of  the  dream  had  already  been  made  under  the

influence  of  the  anxiety  which  had  developed.  I  was  not  anxious

because I had dreamt that my mother was dying; but I interpreted the

dream in that sense in my preconscious revision of it because I was

already under the influence of the anxiety. The anxiety can be traced

back,  when  repression  is  taken  into  account,  to  an  obscure  and

evidently sexual craving that had found appropriate expression in the

visual content of the dream.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1012

 

   A twenty-seven-year-old man, who had been seriously ill for a year,

reported  that  when  he  was  between  eleven  and  thirteen  he  had

repeatedly dreamt (to the accompaniment of severe anxiety) that a

man  with  a  hatchet  was  pursuing  him;  he  tried  to  run  away,  but

seemed to be paralysed and could not move from the spot. This is a

good example of a very common sort of anxiety-dream, which would

never  be  suspected  of  being  sexual.  In  analysis,  the  dreamer  first

came upon a story (dating from a time later than the dream) told him

by his uncle, of how he had been attacked in the street one night by a

suspicious-looking individual; the dreamer himself concluded from this

association that he may have heard of some similar episode at the

time of the dream. In connection with the hatchet, he remembered that

at about that time he had once injured his hand with a hatchet while

he  was  chopping  up  wood.  He  then  passed  immediately  to  his

relations with his younger brother. He used to ill-treat this brother and

knock him down; and he particularly remembered an occasion when

he had kicked him on the head with his boot and had drawn blood,

and how his mother had said: ‘I’m afraid he’ll be the death of him one

day.’ While he still seemed to be occupied with the subject of violence,a  recollection  from  his  ninth  year  suddenly  occurred  to  him.  His

parents had come home late and had gone to bed while he pretended

to be asleep; soon he had heard sounds of panting and other noises

which had seemed to him uncanny, and he had also been able to

make out their position in the bed. Further thoughts showed that he

had drawn an analogy between this relation between his parents and

his  own  relation  to  his  younger  brother.  He  had  subsumed  what

happened  between  his  parents  under  the  concept  of  violence  and

struggling; and he had found evidence in favour of this view in the fact

that he had often noticed blood in his mother’s bed.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1013

 

   It is, I may say, a matter of daily experience that sexual intercourse

between adults strikes any children who may observe it as something

uncanny  and  that  it  arouses  anxiety  in  them.  I  have  explained  this

anxiety by arguing that what we are dealing with is a sexual excitation

with which their understanding is unable to cope and which they also,

no doubt, repudiate because their parents are involved in it, and which

is  therefore  transformed  into  anxiety.  At  a  still  earlier  period  of  life

sexual excitations directed towards a parent of the opposite sex have

not  yet  met  with  repression  and,  as  we  have  seen,  are  freely

expressed. (See p. 735 ff.)

   I should have no hesitation in giving the same explanation of the

attacks  of  night  terrors  accompanied  by  hallucinations  (pavor

nocturnus) which are so frequent in children. In this case too it can

only  be  a  question  of  sexual  impulses  which  have  not  been

understood  and  which  have  been  repudiated.  Investigation  would

probably show a periodicity in the occurrence of the attacks, since an

increase in sexual libido can be brought about not only by accidental

exciting  impressions  but  also  by  successive  waves  of  spontaneous

developmental processes.

   I lack a sufficiency of material based upon observation to enable me

to confirm this explanation.¹

   Paediatricians, on the other hand, seem to lack the only line ofapproach which can make this whole class of phenomena intelligible,

whether from the somatic or from the psychical aspect. I cannot resist

quoting  an  amusing  instance  of  the  way  in  which  the  blinkers  of

medical mythology can cause an observer to miss an understanding

of such cases by a narrow margin. My instance is taken from a thesis

on pavor nocturnus by Debacker (1881, 66):

   A thirteen-year-old boy in delicate health began to be apprehensive

and dreamy. His sleep became disturbed and was interrupted almost

once  a  week  by  severe  attacks  of  anxiety  accompanied  by

hallucinations. He always retained a very clear recollection of these

dreams. He said that the Devil had shouted at him: ‘Now we’ve got

you,  now  we’ve  got  you!’  There  was  then  a  smell  of  pitch  and

brimstone and his skin was burnt by flames. He woke up from the

dream in terror, and at first could not cry out. When he had found his

voice  he  was  clearly  heard  to  say:  ‘No,  no,  not  me;  I’ve  not  done

anything!’ or ‘Please not! I won’t do it again!’ or sometimes: ‘Albert

never did that!’ Later, he refused to undress ‘because the flames only

caught him when he was undressed.’ While he was still having these

devil-dreams, which were a threat to his health, he was sent into the

country. There he recovered in the course of eighteen months, and

once, when he was fifteen, he confessed: ‘Je n’osais pas l’avouer,

mais  j’éprouvais  continuellement  des  picotements  et  des

surexcitations aux parties; à la fin, cela m’énervait tant que plusieurs

fois j’ai pensé me jeter par la fenêtre du dortoir.’³

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1919:] Since I wrote this a great quantity of such material has been

brought forward in psycho-analytic literature.

   ² I have italicized this word, but it is impossible to misunderstand it.

    ³ [‘I didn’t dare admit it; but I was continually having prickly feelings and overexcitement in

my parts; in the end it got on my nerves so much that I often thought of jumping out of the
dormitory window.’]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1014

 

   There is really very little difficulty in inferring: (1) that the boy had

masturbated when he was younger, that he had probably denied it,and that he had been threatened with severe punishment for his bad

habit (cf. his admission: ‘Je ne le ferais plus’, and his denial: ‘Albert

n’a jamais fait ça’); (2) that with the onset of puberty the temptation to

masturbate had revived with the tickling in his genitals; but (3) that a

struggle for repression had broken out in him, which had suppressed

his  libido  and  transformed  it  into  anxiety,  and  that  the  anxiety  had

taken  over  the  punishments  with  which  he  had  been  threatened

earlier.

   And now let us see the inferences drawn by our author (ibid., 69):

‘The following conclusions can be drawn from this observation:

    ‘(1) The influence of puberty upon a boy in delicate health can lead

to  a  condition  of  great  weakness  and  can  result  in  a  considerable

degree of cerebral anaemia.¹

        ‘(2)  This  cerebral  anaemia  produces  character  changes,

demonomanic hallucinations and very violent nocturnal (and perhaps

also diurnal) anxiety-states.

    ‘(3) The boy’s demonomania and self-reproaches go back to the

influences of his religious education, which affected him as a child.

    ‘(4) All the symptoms disappeared in the course of a somewhat

protracted visit to the country, as the result of physical exercise and

the regaining of strength with the passage of puberty.

    ‘(5) A predisposing influence upon the origin of the child’s brain

condition may perhaps be attributed to heredity and to a past syphilitic

infection in his father.’

      And  here  is  the  final  conclusion:  ‘Nous  avons  fait  entrer  cette

observation dans le cadre des délires apyrétiques d’inanition, car c’est

à l’ischémie cérébrale que nous rattachons cet état particulier.’²

 

   ¹ The italics are mine.

   ² [‘We have classified this case among the apyretic deliria of inanition, for we attribute this

particular state to cerebral ischaemia.’]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1015

 

                                          (E)

             THE PRIMARY AND SECONDARY PROCESSES - REPRESSION

 

      In  venturing  on  an  attempt  to  penetrate  more  deeply  into  the

psychology of dream-processes, I have set myself a hard task and

one to which my powers of exposition are scarcely equal. Elements in

this  complicated  whole  which  are  in  fact  simultaneous  can  only  be

represented successively in my description of them, while, in putting

forward each point, I must avoid appearing to anticipate the grounds

on which it is based: difficulties such as these it is beyond my strength

to master. In all this I am paying the penalty for the fact that in my

account  of  dream-psychology  I  have  been  unable  to  follow  the

historical  development  of  my  own  views.  Though  my  own  line  of

approach to the subject of dreams was determined by my previous

work on the psychology of the neuroses, I had not intended to make

use  of  the  latter  as  a  basis  of  reference  in  the  present  work.

Nevertheless  I  am  constantly  being  driven  to  do  so,  instead  of

proceeding,  as  I  should  have  wished,  in  the  contrary  direction  and

using  dreams  as  a  means  of  approach  to  the  psychology  of  the

neuroses. I am conscious of all the trouble in which my readers are

thus involved, but I can see no means of avoiding it.

 

   In my dissatisfaction at this state of things, I am glad to pause for a

little over another consideration which seems to put a higher value on

my efforts. I found myself faced by a topic on which, as has been

shown  in  my  first  chapter,  the  opinions  of  the  authorities  were

characterized  by  the  sharpest  contradictions.  My  treatment  of  the

problems  of  dreams  has  found  room  for  the  majority  of  these

contradictory  views.  I  have  only  found  it  necessary  to  give  a

categorical  denial  of  two  of  them  -  the  view  that  dreaming  is  a

meaningless process and the view that it is a somatic one. Apart from

this,  I  have  been  able  to  find  a  justification  for  all  these  mutually

contradictory opinions at one point or other of my complicated thesis

and to show that they had lighted upon some portion of the truth.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1016

    The view that dreams carry on the occupations and interests of

waking  life  has  been  entirely  confirmed  by  the  discovery  of  the

concealed dream-thoughts.  These  are  only  concerned  with  what

seems  important  to  us  and  interests  us  greatly.  Dreams  are  never

occupied  with  minor  details.  But  we  have  also  found  reason  for

accepting the contrary view, that dreams pick up indifferent refuse left

over from the previous day and that they cannot get control of any

major day time interest until it has been to some extent withdrawn

from  waking  activity.  We  have  found  that  this  holds  good  of  the

dream’s content, which gives expression to the dream-thoughts in a

form  modified  by  distortion.  For  reasons  connected  with  the

mechanism of association, as we have seen, the dream-process finds

it easier to get control of recent or indifferent ideational material which

has  not  yet  been  requisitioned  by  waking  thought-activity;  and  for

reasons  of  censorship  it  transfers  psychical  intensity  from  what  is

important but objectionable on to what is indifferent.

   The fact that dreams are hypermnesic and have access to material

from childhood has become one of the corner-stones of our teaching.

Our  theory  of  dreams  regards  wishes  originating  in  infancy  as  the

indispensable motive force for the formation of dreams.

      It  has  naturally  not  occurred  to  us  to  throw  any  doubt  on  the

significance, which has been experimentally demonstrated, of external

sensory stimuli during sleep; but we have shown that such material

stands in the same relation to the dream-wish as do the residues of

thought left over from day time activity. Nor have we seen any reason

to dispute the view that dreams interpret objective sensory stimuli just

as  illusions  do;  but  we  have  found  the  motive  which  provides  the

reason for that interpretation, a reason which has been left unspecified

by other writers. Interpretation is carried out in such a way that the

object  perceived  shall  not  interrupt  sleep  and  shall  be  usable  for

purposes of wish-fulfilment. As regards subjective states of excitation

in the sense organs during sleep, the occurrence of which seems to

have  been  proved  by  Trumbull  Ladd,  it  is  true  that  we  have  not

accepted them as a particular source of dreams; but we have been

able  to  explain  them  as  resulting  from  the  regressive  revival  of

memories that are in operation behind the dream.

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1017

 

   Internal organic sensations, which have commonly been taken as a

cardinal  point  in  explanations  of  dreaming,  have  retained  a  place,

though a humbler one, in our theory. Such sensations - sensations of

falling, for instance, or floating, or being inhibited - provide a material

which is accessible at any time and of which the dream-work makes

use, whenever it has need of it, for expressing the dream-thoughts.

   The view that the dream-process is a rapid or instantaneous one is

in our opinion correct as regards the perception by consciousness of

the  preconstructed  dream-content;  it  seems  probable  that  the

preceding portions of the dream-process run a slow and fluctuating

course. We have been able to contribute towards the solution of the

riddle of dreams which contain a great amount of material compressed

into  the  briefest  moment  of  time;  we  have  suggested  that  it  is  a

question  in  such  cases  of  getting  hold  of  ready-made  structures

already present in the mind.

      The  fact  that  dreams  are  distorted  and  mutilated  by  memory  is

accepted by us but in our opinion constitutes no obstacle; for it is no

more than the last and manifest portion of a distorting activity which

has been in operation from the very start of the dream’s formation.

   As regards the embittered and apparently irreconcilable dispute as

to whether the mind sleeps at night or is as much in command of all its

faculties as it is by day, we have found that both parties are right but

that neither is wholly right. We have found evidence in the dream-

thoughts  of  a  highly  complex  intellectual  function,  operating  with

almost the whole resources of the mental apparatus. Nevertheless it

cannot be disputed that these dream-thoughts originated during the

day, and it is imperative to assume that there is such a thing as a

sleeping state of the mind. Thus even the theory of partial sleep has

shown its value, though we have found that what characterizes the

state  of  sleep  is  not  the  disintegration  of  mental  bonds  but  the

concentration of the psychical system which is in command during the

day upon the wish to sleep. The factor of withdrawal from the external

world retains its significance in our scheme; it helps, though not as the

sole  determinant,  to  make  possible  the  regressive  character  ofrepresentation in dreams. The renunciation of voluntary direction of

the flow of ideas cannot be disputed; but this does not deprive mental

life of all purpose, for we have seen how, after voluntary purposive

ideas have been abandoned, involuntary ones assume command. We

have  not  merely  accepted  the  fact  of  the  looseness  of  associative

connections in dreams, but we have shown that it extends far further

than had been suspected; we have found, however, that these loose

connections  are  merely  obligatory  substitutes  for  others  which  are

valid and significant. It is quite true that we have described dreams as

absurd; but examples have taught us how sensible a dream can be

even when it appears to be absurd.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1018

 

   We have no difference of opinion over the functions that are to be

assigned to dreams. The view that dreams act as a safety valve to the

mind and that, in the words of Robert, all kinds of harmful things are

made harmless by being presented in a dream - not only does this

view  coincide  exactly  with  our  theory  of  the  double  wish-fulfilment

brought about by dreams, but the way in which it is phrased is more

intelligible to us than to Robert himself. The view that the mind has

free play in its functioning in dreams is represented in our theory by

the  fact  of  the  preconscious  activity  allowing  dreams  to  take  their

course.  Such  phrases  as  ‘the  return  of  the  mind  in  dreams  to  an

embryonic  point  of  view’  or  the  words  used  by  Havelock  Ellis  to

describe dreams - ‘an archaic world of vast emotions and imperfect

thoughts’ - strike us as happy anticipations of our own assertions that

primitive modes of activity which are suppressed during the day are

concerned  in  the  construction  of  dreams.  We  have  been  able  to

accept entirely as our own what Sully has written: ‘Our dreams are a

means of conserving these successive personalities. When asleep we

go back to the old ways of looking at things and of feeling about them,

to impulses and activities which long ago dominated us’. For us no

less than for Delage what has been ‘suppressed’ has become ‘the

motive force of dreams.’   We have fully appreciated the importance of the part ascribed by

Scherner  to  ‘dream-imagination’,  as  well  as  Scherner’s  own

interpretations,  but  we  have  been  obliged  to  transport  them,  as  it

were,  to  a  different  position  in  the  problem.  The  point  is  not  that

dreams create the imagination, but rather that the unconscious activity

of the imagination has a large share in the construction of the dream-

thoughts.  We  remain  in  Scherner’s  debt  for  having  indicated  the

source of the dream-thoughts; but nearly everything that he ascribes

to  the  dream-work  is  really  attributable  to  the  activity  of  the

unconscious during daytime, which is the instigating agent of dreams

no  less  than  of  neurotic  symptoms.  We  have  been  obliged  to

distinguish the ‘dream-work’ as something quite different and with a

much narrower connotation.

      Finally,  we  have  by  no  means  abandoned  the  relation  between

dreams and mental disorders, but have established it more firmly on

fresh ground.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1019

 

 

   We have thus been able to find a place in our structure for the most

various  and  contradictory  findings  of  earlier  writers,  thanks  to  the

novelty of our theory of dreams, which combines them, as it were, into

a higher unity. Some of those findings we have put to other uses, but

we have wholly rejected only a few. Nevertheless our edifice is still

uncompleted. Apart from the many perplexing questions in which we

have  become  involved  in  making  our  way  into  the  obscurities  of

psychology, we seem to be troubled by a fresh contradiction. On the

one hand we have supposed that the dream-thoughts arise through

entirely  normal  mental  activity;  but  on  the  other  hand  we  have

discovered a number of quite abnormal processes of thought among

the dream-thoughts, which extend into the dream-content, and which

we then repeat in the course of our dream-interpretation. Everything

that  we  have  described  as  the  ‘dream-work’    seems  to  depart  so

widely from what we recognize as rational thought-processes that themost severe strictures passed by earlier writers on the low level of

psychical functioning in dreams must appear fully justified.

   It may be that we shall only find enlightenment and assistance in this

difficulty by carrying our investigation still further. And I will begin by

picking out for closer examination one of the conjunctures which may

lead to the formation of a dream.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1020

 

   A dream, as we have discovered, takes the place of a number of

thoughts  which  are  derived  from  our  daily  life  and  which  form  a

completely  logical  sequence.  We  cannot  doubt,  then,  that  these

thoughts originate from our normal mental life. All the attributes which

we value highly in our trains of thought, and which characterize them

as complex achievements of a high order, are to be found once more

in dream-thoughts. There is no need to assume, however, that this

activity of thought is performed during sleep - a possibility which would

gravely  confuse  what  has  hitherto  been  our  settled  picture  of  the

psychical state of sleep. On the contrary, these thoughts may very

well have originated from the previous day, they may have proceeded

unobserved by our consciousness from their start, and may already

have been completed at the onset of sleep. The most that we can

conclude  from  this  is  that  it  proves  that the  most  complicated

achievements  of  thought  are  possible  without  the  assistance  of

consciousness - a fact which we could not fail to learn in any case

from every psycho-analysis of a patient suffering from hysteria or from

obsessional  ideas.  These  dream-thoughts  are  certainly  not  in

themselves  inadmissible  to  consciousness;  there  may  have  been  a

number of reasons for their not having become conscious to us during

the day. Becoming conscious is connected with the application of a

particular psychical function, that of attention - a function which, as it

seems, is only available in a specific quantity, and this may have been

diverted  from  the  train  of  thought  in  question  on  to  some  other

purpose. There is another way, too, in which trains of thought of this

kind  may  be  withheld  from  consciousness.  The  course  of  our