   In his attitude towards his father and mother Hans confirms in the

most concrete and uncompromising manner what I have said in my

Interpretation of Dreams and in my Three Essays with regard to the

sexual  relations  of  a  child  to  his  parents.  Hans  really  was  a  little

Oedipus who wanted to have his father ‘out of the way’, to get rid of

him, so that he might be alone with his beautiful mother and sleep with

her. This wish had originated during his summer holidays, when the

alternating  presence  and  absence  of  his  father  had  drawn  Hans’s

attention to the condition upon which depended the intimacy with his

mother which he longed for. At that time the form taken by the wish

had been merely that his father should ‘go away’; and at a later stage

it  became  possible  for  his  fear  of  being  bitten  by  a  white  horse  to

attach itself directly on to this form of the wish, owing to a chance

impression  which  he  received  at  the  moment  of  some  one  else’s

departure. But subsequently (probably not until they had moved back

to Vienna, where his father’s absences were no longer to be reckoned

on) the wish had taken the form that his father should be permanently

away  -  that  he  should  be  ‘dead’.  The  fear  which  sprang  from  this

death-wish against his father, and which may thus be said to have had

a normal motive, formed the chief obstacle to the analysis until it was

removed during the conversation in my consulting-room.¹

 

   ¹ It is quite certain that Hans’s two associations, ‘raspberry syrup’ and ‘a gun for shooting

people dead with’ must have had more than one set of determinants. They probably had just
as much to do with his hatred of his father as with his constipation complex. His father, who
himself guessed the latter connection, also suggested that ‘raspberry syrup’ might be related
to ‘blood’.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2097

 

   But Hans was not by any means a bad character; he was not even

one  of  those  children  who  at  his  age  still  give  free  play  to  the

propensity  towards  cruelty  and  violence  which  is  a  constituent  of

human nature. On the contrary, he had an unusually kind-hearted and

affectionate disposition; his father reported that the transformation of

aggressive tendencies into feelings of pity took place in him at a very

early age. Long before the phobia he had become uneasy when hesaw the horses in a merry-go-round being beaten; and he was never

unmoved if any one wept in his presence. At one stage in the analysis

a  piece  of  suppressed  sadism  made  its  appearance  in  a  particular

context:¹ but it was suppressed sadism, and we shall presently have

to discover from the content what it stood for and what it was meant to

replace. And Hans deeply loved the father against whom he cherished

these  death-wishes;  and  while  his  intellect  demurred  to  such  a

contradiction,²  he  could  not  help  demonstrating  the  fact  of  its

existence, by hitting his father and immediately afterwards kissing the

place he had hit. We ourselves, too, must guard against making a

difficulty  of  such  a  contradiction.  The  emotional  life  of  man  is  in

general made up of pairs of contraries such as these.³ Indeed, if it

were not so, repressions and neuroses would perhaps never come

about. In the adult these pairs of contrary emotions do not as a rule

become  simultaneously  conscious  except  at  the  climaxes  of

passionate love; at other times they usually go on suppressing each

other until one of them succeeds in keeping the other altogether out of

sight. But in children they can exist peaceably side by side for quite a

considerable time.

 

   ¹ His wanting to beat and tease horses.

   ² See the critical question he addressed to his father (p. 2033).

   ³              Das heisst, ich bin kein ausgeklügelt Buch.

                  Ich bin ein Mensch mit seinem Widerspruch.
                  C. F. Meyer, Huttens letzte Tage.
 
                  [In fact, I am no clever work of fiction;
                   I am a man, with all his contradiction.]
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2098

 

      The  most  important  influence  upon  the  course  of  Hans’s

psychosexual development was the birth of a baby sister when he was

three and a half years old. That event accentuated his relations to his

parents and gave him some insoluble problems to think about; and

later, as he watched the way in which the infant was looked after, the

memory-traces  of  his  own  earliest  experiences  of  pleasure  wererevived in him. This influence, too, is a typical one: in an unexpectedly

large number of life-histories, normal as well as pathological, we find

ourselves obliged to take as our starting-point an outburst of sexual

pleasure and sexual curiosity connected, like this one, with the birth of

the next child. Hans’s behaviour towards the new arrival was just what

I have described in The Interpretation of Dreams. In his fever a few

days later he betrayed how little he liked the addition to the family.

Affection  for  his  sister  might  come  later,¹  but  his  first  attitude  was

hostility. From that time forward fear that yet another baby might arrive

found  a  place  among  his  conscious  thoughts.  In  the  neurosis,  his

hostility, already suppressed, was represented by a special fear - a

fear of the bath. In the analysis he gave undisguised expression to his

death-wish against his sister, and was not content with allusions which

required  supplementing  by  his  father.  His  inner  conscience  did  not

consider this wish so wicked as the analogous one against his father;

but it is clear that in his unconscious he treated both persons in the

same way, because they both took his mummy away from him, and

interfered with his being alone with her.

   Moreover, this event and the feelings that were revived by it gave a

new  direction  to  his  wishes.  In  his  triumphant  final  phantasy  he

summed up all of his erotic wishes, both those derived from his auto-

erotic  phase  and  those  connected  with  his  object-love.  In  that

phantasy he was married to his beautiful mother and had innumerable

children whom he could look after in his own way.

 

   ¹ Cf. his plans of what he would do when his sister was old enough to speak (p. 2060).

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2099

 

                                            (II)

 

   One day while Hans was in the street he was seized with an attack

of anxiety. He could not yet say what it was he was afraid of; but at the

very  beginning  of  this  anxiety-state  he  betrayed  to  his  father  his

motive for being ill, the advantage he derived from it. He wanted to

stay with his mother and to coax with her; his recollection that he hadalso been separated from her at the time of the baby’s birth may also,

as  his  father  suggests,  have  contributed  to  his  longing.  It  soon

became  evident  that  his  anxiety  was  no  longer  reconvertible  into

longing; he was afraid even when his mother went with him. In the

meantime indications appeared of what it was to which his libido (now

changed into anxiety) had become attached. He gave expression to

the quite specific fear that a white horse would bite him.

   Disorders of this kind are called ‘phobias’, and we might classify

Hans’s case as an agoraphobia if it were not for the fact that it is a

characteristic of that complaint that the locomotion of which the patient

is otherwise incapable can always be easily performed when he is

accompanied by some specially selected person - in the last resort, by

the physician. Hans’s phobia did not fulfil this condition; it soon ceased

having any relation to the question of locomotion and became more

and more clearly concentrated upon horses. In the early days of his

illness, when the anxiety was at its highest pitch, he expressed a fear

that ‘the horse’ll come into the room’, and it was this that helped me so

much towards understanding his condition.

   In the classificatory system of the neuroses no definite position has

hitherto been assigned to ‘phobias’. It seems certain that they should

only  be  regarded  as  syndromes  which  may  form  part  of  various

neuroses  and  that  we  need  not  rank  them  as  an  independent

pathological process. For phobias of the kind to which little Hans’s

belongs,  and  which  are  in  fact  the  most  common,  the  name  of

‘anxiety-hysteria’ seems to me not inappropriate; I suggested the term

to Dr. W. Stekel when he was undertaking a description of neurotic

anxiety states,¹ and I hope it will come into general use. It finds its

justification  in  the  similarity  between  the  psychological  structure  of

these  phobias  and  that  of  hysteria  -  a  similarity  which  is  complete

except upon a single point. That point, however, is a decisive one and

well adapted for purposes of differentiation. For in anxiety-hysteria the

libido  which  has  been  liberated  from  the  pathogenic  material  by

repression is not converted (that is, diverted from the mental sphere

into a somatic innervation), but is set free In the clinical cases that we

meet with, this ‘anxiety-hysteria’ may be combined with ‘conversion-

hysteria’  in  any  proportion.  There  exist  cases  of  pure  conversion-

hysteria without any trace of anxiety, just as there are cases of simpleanxiety-hysteria,  which  exhibit  feelings  of  anxiety  and  phobias,  but

have no admixture of conversion. The case of little Hans is one of the

latter sort.

 

   ¹ Nervöse Angstzustände und ihre Behandlung, 1908.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2100

 

      Anxiety-hysterias  are  the  most  common  of  all  psychoneurotic

disorders. But, above all, they are those which make their appearance

earliest  in  life;  they  are par  excellence  the  neuroses  of  childhood.

When a mother uses such phrases as that her child’s ‘nerves’ are in a

bad state, we can be certain that in nine cases out of ten the child is

suffering  from  some  kind  of  anxiety  or  from  many  kinds  at  once.

Unfortunately the finer mechanism of these highly significant disorders

has not yet been sufficiently studied. It has not yet been established

whether  anxiety-hysteria  is  determined,  in  contradistinction  to

conversion-hysteria  and  other  neuroses,  solely  by  constitutional

factors or solely by accidental experiences, or by what combination of

the two.¹ It seems to me that of all neurotic disorders it is the least

dependent upon a special constitutional predisposition and that it is

consequently the most easily acquired at any time of life.

      One  essential  characteristic  of  anxiety-hysterias  is  very  easily

pointed out. An anxiety-hysteria tends to develop more and more into

a ‘phobia’. In the end the patient may have got rid of all his anxiety,

but only at the price of subjecting himself to all kinds of inhibitions and

restrictions. From the outset in anxiety-hysteria the mind is constantly

at work in the direction of once more psychically binding the anxiety

which has become liberated; but this work can neither bring about a

retransformation  of  the  anxiety  into  libido,  nor  can  it  establish  any

contact  with  the  complexes  which  were  the  source  of  the  libido.

Nothing is left for it but to cut off access to every possible occasion

that  might  lead  to  the  development  of  anxiety,  by  erecting  mental

barriers in the nature of precautions, inhibitions, or prohibitions; and it

is these defensive structures that appear to us in the form of phobias

and that constitute to our eyes the essence of the disease.   The treatment of anxiety-hysteria may be said hitherto to have been

a purely negative one. Experience has shown that it is impossible to

effect  the  cure  of  a  phobia  (and  even  in  certain  circumstances

dangerous  to  attempt  to  do  so)  by  violent  means,  that  is,  by  first

depriving  the  patient  of  his  defences  and  then  putting  him  in  a

situation  in  which  he  cannot  escape  the  liberation  of  his  anxiety.

Consequently, nothing can be done but to leave the patient to look for

protection  wherever  he  thinks  he  may  find  it;  and  he  is  merely

regarded with a not very helpful contempt for his ‘incomprehensible

cowardice’.

   Little Hans’s parents were determined from the very beginning of his

illness that he was neither to be laughed at nor bullied, but that access

must  be  obtained  to  his  repressed  wishes  by  means  of  psycho-

analysis.  The  extraordinary  pains  taken  by  Hans’s  father  were

rewarded by success, and his reports will give us an opportunity of

penetrating into the fabric of this type of phobia and of following the

course of its analysis.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1923:] The question which is raised here has not been pursued further.

But there is no reason to suppose that anxiety-hysteria is an exception to the rule that both
predisposition and experience must co-operate in the aetiology of a neurosis. Rank’s view of
the  effects  of  the  trauma  of  birth  seems  to  throw  special  light  upon  the  predisposition  to
anxiety-hysteria which is so strong in childhood.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2101

 

 

   I think it is not unlikely that the extensive and detailed character of

the  analysis  may  have  made  it  somewhat  obscure  to  the  reader.  I

shall therefore begin by giving a brief resume of it, in which I shall omit

all distracting side-issues and shall draw attention to the results as

they came to light one after the other.

   The first thing we learn is that the outbreak of the anxiety state was

by no means so sudden as appeared at first sight. A few days earlier

the  child  had  woken  from  an  anxiety-dream  to  the  effect  that  his

mother had gone away, and that now he had no mother to coax with.

This dream alone points to the presence of a repressive process ofominous  intensity.  We  cannot  explain  it,  as  we  can  so  many  other

anxiety-dreams,  by  supposing  that  the  child  had  in  his  dream  felt

anxiety arising from some somatic cause and had made use of the

anxiety for the purpose of fulfilling an unconscious wish which would

otherwise have been deeply repressed.¹ We must regard it rather as a

genuine  punishment  and  repression  dream,  and,  moreover,  as  a

dream which failed in its function, since the child woke from his sleep

in a state of anxiety. We can easily reconstruct what actually occurred

in the unconscious. The child dreamt of exchanging endearments with

his  mother  and  of  sleeping  with  her;  but  all  the  pleasure  was

transformed  into  anxiety,  and  all  the  ideational  content  into  its

opposite. Repression had defeated the purpose of the mechanism of

dreaming.

   But the beginnings of this psychological situation go back further

still. During the preceding summer Hans had had similar moods of

mingled  longing  and  apprehension,  in  which  he  had  said  similar

things; and at that time they had secured him the advantage of being

taken by his mother into her bed. We may assume that since then

Hans had been in a state of intensified sexual excitement, the object

of which was his mother. The intensity of this excitement was shown

by  his  two  attempts  at  seducing  his  mother  (the  second  of  which

occurred  just  before  the  outbreak  of  his  anxiety);  and  he  found  an

incidental channel of discharge for it by masturbating every evening

and in that way obtaining gratification. Whether the sudden change-

over of this excitement into anxiety took place spontaneously, or as a

result  of  his  mother’s  rejection  of  his  advances,  or  owing  to  the

accidental revival of earlier impressions by the ‘precipitating cause’ of

his  illness  (about  which  we  shall  hear  presently)  -  this  we  cannot

decide;  and,  indeed,  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference,  for  these  three

alternative possibilities cannot be regarded as mutually incompatible.

The fact remains that his sexual excitement suddenly changed into

anxiety.

 

   ¹ See my Interpretation of Dreams.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2102 

   We have already described the child’s behaviour at the beginning of

his  anxiety,  as  well  as  the  first  content  which  he  assigned  to  it,

namely, that a horse would bite him. It was at this point that the first

piece of therapy was interposed. His parents represented to him that

his  anxiety  was  the  result  of  masturbation,  and  encouraged  him  to

break himself of the habit. I took care that when they spoke to him

great stress was laid upon his affection for his mother, for that was

what  he  was  trying  to  replace  by  his  fear  of  horses.  This  first

intervention brought a slight improvement, but the ground was soon

lost  again  during  a  period  of  physical  illness.  Hans’s  condition

remained  unchanged.  Soon  afterwards  he  traced  back  his  fear  of

being bitten by a horse to an impression he had received at Gmunden.

A father had addressed his child on her departure with these words of

warning: ‘Don’t put your finger to the horse; if you do, it’ll bite you.’ The

words,  ‘don’t  put  your  finger  to’,  which  Hans  used  in  reporting  this

warning, resembled the form of words in which the warning against

masturbation had been framed. It seemed at first, therefore, as though

Hans’s parents were right in supposing that what he was frightened of

was his own masturbatory indulgence. But the whole nexus remained

loose, and it seemed to be merely by chance that horses had become

his bugbear.

   I had expressed a suspicion that Hans’s repressed wish might now

be  that  he  wanted  at  all  costs  to  see  his  mother’s  widdler.  As  his

behaviour to a new maid fitted in with this hypothesis, his father gave

him  his  first  piece  of  enlightenment,  namely,  that  women  have  no

widdlers. He reacted to this first effort at helping him by producing a

phantasy  that  he  had  seen  his  mother  showing  her  widdler.¹  This

phantasy and a remark made by him in conversation, to the effect that

his widdler was ‘fixed in, of course’, allow us our first glimpse into the

patient’s unconscious mental processes. The fact was that the threat

of castration made to him by his mother some fifteen months earlier

was now having a deferred effect upon him. For his phantasy that his

mother was doing the same as he had done (the familiar tu quoque

repartee of inculpated children) was intended to serve as a piece of

self-justification;  it  was  a  protective  or  defensive  phantasy.  At  the

same  time  we  must  remark  that  it  was  Hans’s  parents  who  hadextracted from the pathogenic material operating in him the particular

theme  of  his  interest  in  widdlers.  Hans  followed  their  lead  in  this

matter, but he had not yet taken any line of his own in the analysis.

And no therapeutic success was to be observed. The analysis had

passed far away from the subject of horses; and the information that

women have no widdlers was calculated, if anything, to increase his

concern for the preservation of his own.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] The context enables us to add: ‘and touching it’ (p. 2024). After

all, he himself could not show his widdler without touching it.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2103

 

      Therapeutic  success,  however,  is  not  our  primary  aim;  we

endeavour rather to enable the patient to obtain a conscious grasp of

his unconscious wishes. And this we can achieve by working upon the

basis  of  the  hints  he  throws  out,  and  so,  with  the  help  of  our

interpretative technique, presenting the unconscious complex to his

consciousness in our own words. There will be a certain degree of

similarity between that which he hears from us and that which he is

looking for, and which, in spite of all resistances, is trying to force its

way through to consciousness; and it is this similarity that will enable

him to discover the unconscious material. The physician is a step in

front of him in knowledge; and the patient follows along his own road,

until the two meet at the appointed goal. Beginners in psycho-analysis

are  apt  to  assimilate  these  two  events,  and  to  suppose  that  the

moment  at  which  one  of  the  patient’s  unconscious  complexes  has

become  known  to them  is  also  the  moment  at  which  the  patient

himself recognizes it. They are expecting too much when they think

that  they  will  cure  the  patient  by  informing  him  of  this  piece  of

knowledge; for he can do no more with the information than make use

of it to help himself in discovering the unconscious complex where it is

anchored in his unconscious. A first success of this sort had now been

achieved with Hans. Having partly mastered his castration complex,

he was now able to communicate his wishes in regard to his mother.

He did so, in what was still a distorted form, by means of the phantasyof the two giraffes, one of which was calling out in vain because Hans

had  taken  possession  of  the  other.  He  represented  the  ‘taking

possession of’ pictorially as ‘sitting down on’. His father recognized the

phantasy as a reproduction of a bedroom scene which used to take

place in the morning between the boy and his parents; and he quickly

stripped the underlying wish of the disguise which it still wore. The

boy’s  father  and  mother  were  the  two  giraffes.  The  reason  for  the

choice  of  a  giraffe-phantasy  for  the  purposes  of  disguise  was  fully

explained by a visit that the boy had paid to those same large beasts

at Schönbrunn a few days earlier, by the giraffe-drawing, belonging to

an earlier period, which had been preserved by his father, and also,

perhaps,  by  an  unconscious  comparison  based  upon  the  giraffe’s

long, stiff neck.¹ It may be remarked that the giraffe, as being a large

animal  and  interesting  on  account  of  its  widdler,  was  a  possible

competitor with the horse for the role of bugbear; moreover, the fact

that both his father and his mother appeared as giraffes offered a hint

which had not yet been followed up, as regards the interpretation of

the anxiety-horses.

 

   ¹ Hans’s admiration of his father’s neck later on would fit in with this.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2104

 

      Immediately  after  the  giraffe  story  Hans  produced  two  minor

phantasies:  one  of  his  forcing  his  way  into  a  forbidden  space  at

Schönbrunn, and the other of his smashing a railway-carriage window

on the Stadtbahn. In each case the punishable nature of the action

was emphasized, and in each his father appeared as an accomplice.

Unluckily his father failed to interpret either of these phantasies, so

that  Hans  himself  gained  nothing  from  telling  them.  In  an  analysis,

however, a thing which has not been understood inevitably reappears;

like an unlaid ghost, it cannot rest until the mystery has been solved

and the spell broken.

   There are no difficulties in the way of our understanding these two

criminal  phantasies.  They  belonged  to  Hans’s  complex  of  taking

possession of his mother. Some kind of vague notion was struggling inthe  child’s  mind  of  something  that  he  might  do  with  his  mother  by

means of which his taking possession of her would be consummated;

for  this  elusive  thought  he  found  certain  pictorial  representations,

which had in common the qualities of being violent and forbidden, and

the content of which strikes us as fitting in most remarkably well with

the hidden truth. We can only say that they were symbolic phantasies

of  intercourse,  and  it  was  no  irrelevant  detail  that  his  father  was

represented as sharing in his actions: ‘I should like’, he seems to have

been  saying,  ‘to  be  doing  something  with  my  mother,  something

forbidden; I do not know what it is, but I do know that you are doing it

too.’

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2105

 

   The giraffe phantasy strengthened a conviction which had already

begun to form in my mind when Hans expressed his fear that ‘the

horse’ll come into the room’; and I thought the right moment had now

arrived for informing him that he was afraid of his father because he

himself nourished jealous and hostile wishes against him - for it was

essential  to  postulate  this  much  with  regard  to  his  unconscious

impulses. In telling him this, I had partly interpreted his fear of horses

for him: the horse must be his father - whom he had good internal

reasons for fearing. Certain details of which Hans had shown he was

afraid, the black on horses’ mouths and the things in front of their eyes

(the moustaches and eyeglasses which are the privilege of a grown-

up man), seemed to me to have been directly transposed from his

father on to the horses.

   By enlightening Hans on this subject I had cleared away his most

powerful resistance against allowing his unconscious thoughts to be

made conscious; for his father was himself acting as his physician.

The worst of the attack was now over; there was a plentiful flow of

material;  the  little  patient  summoned  up  courage  to  describe  the

details of his phobia, and soon began to take an active share in the

conduct of the analysis.¹

    ¹ Even in analyses in which the physician and the patient are strangers, fear of the father

plays  one  of  the  most  important  parts  as  a  resistance  against  the  reproduction  of  the
unconscious pathogenic material. Resistances are sometimes in the nature of ‘motifs’. But
sometimes, as in the present instance, one piece of the unconscious material is capable from
its actual content of operating as an inhibition against the reproduction of another piece.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2106

 

   It was only then that we learnt what the objects and impressions

were of which Hans was afraid. He was not only afraid of horses biting

him  -  he  was  soon  silent  upon  that  point  -  but  also  of  carts,  of

furniture-vans, and of buses (their common quality being, as presently

became clear, that they were all heavily loaded), of horses that started

moving, of horses that looked big and heavy, and of horses that drove

quickly. The meaning of these specifications was explained by Hans

himself:  he  was  afraid  of  horses falling  down,  and  consequently

incorporated in his phobia everything that seemed likely to facilitate

their falling down.

   It not at all infrequently happens that it is only after doing a certain

amount  of  psycho-analytic  work  with  a  patient  that  an  analyst  can

succeed in learning the actual content of a phobia, the precise form of

words of an obsessional impulse, and so on. Repression has not only

descended  upon  the  unconscious  complexes,  but  it  is  continually

attacking their derivatives as well, and even prevents the patient from

becoming aware of the products of the disease itself. The analyst thus

finds himself in the position, curious for a doctor, of coming to the help

of a disease, and of procuring it its due of attention. But only those

who  entirely  misunderstand  the  nature  of  psycho-analysis  will  lay

stress upon this phase of the work and suppose that on its account

harm is likely to be done by analysis. The fact is that you must catch

your  thief  before  you  can  hang  him,  and  that  it  requires  some

expenditure  of  labour  to  get  securely  hold  of  the  pathological

structures - at the destruction of which the treatment is aimed.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2107 

   I have already remarked in the course of my running commentary on

the case history that it is most instructive to plunge in this way into the

details of a phobia, and thus arrive at a conviction of the secondary

nature of the relation between the anxiety and its objects. It is this that

accounts for phobias being at once so curiously diffuse and so strictly

conditioned. It is evident that the material for the particular disguises

which  Hans’s  fear  adopted  was  collected  from  the  impressions  to

which he was all day long exposed owing to the Head Customs House

being situated on the opposite side of the street. In this connection,

too, he showed signs of an impulse - though it was now inhibited by

his anxiety - to play with the loads on the carts, with the packages,

casks and boxes, like the street-boys.

      It  was  at  this  stage  of  the  analysis  that  he  recalled  the  event,

insignificant in itself, which immediately preceded the outbreak of the

illness and may no doubt be regarded as the precipitating cause of its

outbreak. He went for a walk with his mother, and saw a bus-horse fall

down and kick about with its feet. This made a great impression on

him. He was terrified, and thought the horse was dead; and from that

time on he thought that all horses would fall down. His father pointed

out to him that when he saw the horse fall down he must have thought

of him, his father, and have wished that he might fall down in the same

way and be dead. Hans did not dispute this interpretation; and a little

while later he played a game consisting of biting his father, and so

showed that he accepted the theory of his having identified his father

with the horse he was afraid of. From that time forward his behaviour

to  his  father  was  unconstrained  and  fearless,  and  in  fact  a  trifle

overbearing. Nevertheless his fear of horses persisted; nor was it yet

clear through what chain of associations the horse’s falling down had

stirred up his unconscious wishes.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2108

 

   Let me summarize the results that had so far been reached. Behind

the fear to which Hans first gave expression, the fear of a horse bitinghim, we had discovered a more deeply seated fear, the fear of horses

falling down; and both kinds of horses, the biting horse and the falling

horse,  had  been  shown  to  represent  his  father,  who  was  going  to

punish  him  for  the  evil  wishes  he  was  nourishing  against  him.

Meanwhile  the  analysis  had  moved  away  from  the  subject  of  his

mother.

   Quite unexpectedly, and certainly without any prompting from his

father, Hans now began to be occupied with the ‘lumf’ complex, and to

show disgust at things that reminded him of evacuating his bowels.

His father, who was reluctant to go with him along that line, pushed on

with the analysis through thick and thin in the direction in which he

wanted to go. He elicited from Hans the recollection of an event at

Gmunden, the impression of which lay concealed behind that of the

falling  bus-horse.  While  they  were  playing  at  horses,  Fritzl,  the

playmate of whom he was so fond, but at the same time, perhaps, his

rival with his many girl friends, had hit his foot against a stone and had

fallen  down,  and  his  foot  had  bled.  Seeing  the  bus-horse  fall  had

reminded him of this accident. It deserves to be noticed that Hans,

who  was  at  the  moment  concerned  with  other  things,  began  by

denying that Fritzl had fallen down (though this, was the event which

formed the connection between the two scenes) and only admitted it

at a later stage of the analysis. It is especially interesting, however, to

observe  the  way  in  which  the  transformation  of  Hans’s  libido  into

anxiety was projected on to the principal object of his phobia, on to

horses.  Horses  interested  him  the  most  of  all  the  large  animals;

playing at horses was his favourite game with the other children. I had

a suspicion - and this was confirmed by Hans’s father when I asked

him - that the first person who had served Hans as a horse must have

been his father; and it was this that had enabled him to regard Fritzl as

a substitute for his father when the accident happened at Gmunden.

When repression had set in and brought a revulsion of feeling along

with  it,  horses,  which  had  till  then  been  associated  with  so  much

pleasure, were necessarily turned into objects of fear.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2109 

   But, as we have already said, it was owing to the intervention of

Hans’s father that this last important discovery was made of the way in

which the precipitating cause of the illness had operated. Hans himself

was occupied with his lumf interests, and thither at last we must follow

him. We learn that formerly Hans had been in the habit of insisting

upon accompanying his mother to the W. C., and that he had revived

this custom with his friend Berta at a time when she was filling his

mother’s place, until the fact became known and he was forbidden to

do  so.  Pleasure  taken  in  looking  on  while  some  one  one  loves

performs the natural functions is once more a ‘confluence of instincts’,

of which we have already noticed an instance in Hans. In the end his

father went into the lumf symbolism, and recognized that there was an

analogy between a heavily loaded cart and a body loaded with faeces,

between the way in which a cart drives out through a gateway and the

way in which faeces leave the body, and so on.

   By this time, however, the position occupied by Hans in the analysis

had become very different from what it had been at an earlier stage.

Previously, his father had been able to tell him in advance what was

coming, while Hans had merely followed his lead and come trotting

after; but now it was Hans who was forging ahead, so rapidly and

steadily that his father found it difficult to keep up with him. Without

any warning, as it were, Hans produced a new phantasy: the plumber

unscrewed the bath in which Hans was, and then stuck him in the

stomach with his big borer. Henceforward the material brought up in

the analysis far outstripped our powers of understanding it. It was not

until later that it was possible to guess that this was a remoulding of a

phantasy of procreation, distorted by anxiety. The big bath of water, in

which  Hans  imagined  himself,  was  his  mother’s  womb;  the  ‘borer’,

which his father had from the first recognized as a penis, owed its

mention to its connection with ‘being born’. The interpretation that we

are obliged to give to the phantasy will of course sound very curious:

‘With your big penis you "bored" me’ (i.e. ‘gave birth to me’) ‘and put

me in my mother’s womb.’ For the moment, however, the phantasy

eluded interpretation, and merely served Hans as a starting point from

which to continue giving information.

                   Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2110

 

   Hans showed fear of being given a bath in the big bath; and this fear

was once more a composite one. One part of it escaped us as yet, but

the other part could at once be elucidated in connection with his baby

sister  having  her  bath.  Hans  confessed  to  having  wished  that  his

mother might drop the child while she was being given her bath, so

that she should die. His own anxiety while he was having his bath was

a fear of retribution for this evil wish and of being punished by the

same thing happening to him. Hans now left the subject of lumf and

passed on directly to that of his baby sister. We may well imagine

what this juxtaposition signified: nothing less, in fact, than that little

Hanna was a lumf herself - that all babies were lumfs and were born

like lumfs. We can now recognize that all furniture-vans and drays and

buses were only stork-box carts, and were only of interest to Hans as

being symbolic representations of pregnancy; and that when a heavy

or heavily loaded horse fell down he can have seen in it only one thing

- a childbirth, a delivery [‘ein Niederkommen’]. Thus the falling horse

was not only his dying father but also his mother in childbirth.

   And at this point Hans gave us a surprise, for which we were not in

the  very  least  prepared.  He  had  noticed  his  mother’s  pregnancy,

which had ended with the birth of his little sister when he was three

and  a  half  years  old,  and  had,  at  any  rate  after  the  confinement,

pieced the facts of the case together - without telling any one, it is

true, and perhaps without being able to tell any one. All that could be

seen at the time was that immediately after the delivery he had taken

up an extremely sceptical attitude towards everything that might be

supposed to point to the presence of the stork. But that - in complete

contradiction  to  his  official  speeches  -  he  knew  in  his  unconscious

where the baby came from and where it had been before, is proved

beyond  a  shadow  of  doubt  by  the  present  analysis;  indeed,  this  is

perhaps its most unassailable feature.

      The  most  cogent  evidence  of  this  is  furnished  by  the  phantasy

(which he persisted in with so much obstinacy, and embellished with

such  a  wealth  of  detail)  of  how  Hanna  had  been  with  them  at

Gmunden the summer before her birth, of how she had travelled therewith them, and of how she had been able to do far more then than she

had a year later, after she had been born. The effrontery with which

Hans  related  this  phantasy  and  the  countless  extravagant  lies  with

which he interwove it were anything but meaningless. All of this was

intended as a revenge upon his father, against whom he harboured a

grudge for having misled him with the stork fable. It was just as though

he had meant to say: ‘If you really thought I was as stupid as all that,

and  expected  me  to  believe  that  the  stork  brought  Hanna,  then  in

return I expect you to accept my inventions as the truth.’ This act of

revenge  on  the  part  of  our  young  enquirer  upon  his  father  was

succeeded by the clearly correlated phantasy of teasing and beating

horses. This phantasy, again, had two constituents. On the one hand,

it was based upon the teasing to which he had submitted his father

just before; and, on the other hand, it reproduced the obscure sadistic

desires  directed  towards  his  mother,  which  had  already  found

expression  (though  they  had  not  at  first  been  understood)  in  his

phantasies  of  doing  something  forbidden.  Hans  even  confessed

consciously to a desire to beat his mother.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2111

 

   There are not many more mysteries ahead of us now. An obscure

phantasy of missing a train seems to have been a forerunner of the

later notion of handing over Hans’s father to his grandmother at Lainz,

for  the  phantasy  dealt  with  a  visit  to  Lainz,  and  his  grandmother

appeared  in  it.  Another  phantasy,  in  which  a  boy  gave  the  guard

50,000 florins to let him ride on the truck, almost sounds like a plan of

buying his mother from his father, part of whose power, of course, lay

in his wealth. At about this time, too, he confessed, with a degree of

openness which he had never before reached, that he wished to get

rid of his father, and that the reason he wished it was that his father

interfered  with  his  own  intimacy  with  his  mother.  We  must  not  be

surprised  to  find  the  same  wishes  constantly  reappearing  in  the

course of an analysis. The monotony only attaches to the analyst’s

interpretations  of  these  wishes.  For  Hans  they  were  not  mererepetitions, but steps in a progressive development from timid hinting

to fully conscious, undistorted perspicuity.

      What  remains  are  just  such  confirmations  on  Hans’s  part  of

analytical  conclusions  which  our  interpretations  had  already

established.  In  an  entirely  unequivocal  symptomatic  act,  which  he

disguised  slightly  from  the  maid  but  not  at  all  from  his  father,  he

showed how he imagined a birth took place; but if we look into it more

closely  we  can  see  that  he  showed  something  else,  that  he  was

hinting at something which was not alluded to again in the analysis.

He pushed a small penknife which belonged to his mother in through a

round hole in the body of an india-rubber doll, and then let it drop out

again  by  tearing  apart  the  doll’s  legs.  The  enlightenment  which  he

received from his parents soon afterwards, to the effect that children

do in fact grow inside their mother’s body and are pushed out of it like

a  lumf,  came  too  late;  it  could  tell  him  nothing  new.  Another

symptomatic  act,  happening  as  though  by  accident,  involved  a

confession that he had wished his father dead; for, just at the moment

his father was talking of this death-wish, Hans let a horse that he was

playing with fall down - knocked it over in fact. Further, he confirmed in

so many words the hypothesis that heavily loaded carts represented

his mother’s pregnancy to him, and the horse’s falling down was like

having  a  baby.  The  most  delightful  piece  of  confirmation  in  this

connection - a proof that, in his view, children were ‘lumfs’ - was his

inventing the name of ‘Lodi’ for his favourite child. There was some

delay  in  reporting  this  fact,  for  it  then  appeared  that  he  had  been

playing with this sausage child of his for a long time past.¹

 

   ¹ I remember a set of drawings by T. T. Heine in a copy of Simplicissimus, in which that

brilliant  illustrator  depicted  the  fate  of  the  pork-butcher’s  child,  who  fell  into  the  sausage
machine,  and  then,  in  the  shape  of  a  small  sausage,  was  mourned  over  by  his  parents,
received the Church’s blessing, and flew up to Heaven. The artist’s idea seems a puzzling
one at first, but the Lodi episode in this analysis enables us to trace it back to its infantile root.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2112

 

   We have already considered Hans’s two concluding phantasies, with

which his recovery was rounded off. One of them, that of the plumbergiving him a new and, as his father guessed, a bigger widdler, was not

merely a repetition of the earlier phantasy concerning the plumber and

the bath. The new one was a triumphant, wishful phantasy, and with it

he  overcame  his  fear  of  castration.  His  other  phantasy,  which

confessed to the wish to be married to his mother and to have many

children by her, did not merely exhaust the content of the unconscious

complexes which had been stirred up by the sight of the falling horse

and which had generated his anxiety. It also corrected that portion of

those thoughts which was entirely unacceptable; for, instead of killing

his father, it made him innocuous by promoting him to a marriage with

Hans’s  grandmother.  With  this  phantasy  both  the  illness  and  the

analysis came to an appropriate end.

 

   While the analysis of a case is in progress it is impossible to obtain

any clear impression of the structure and development of the neurosis.

That is the business of a synthetic process which must be performed

subsequently.  In  attempting  to  carry  out  such  a  synthesis  of  little

Hans’s phobia we shall take as our basis the account of his mental

constitution, of his governing sexual wishes, and of his experiences up

to the time of his sister’s birth, which we have given in an earlier part

of this paper.

   The arrival of his sister brought into Hans’s life many new elements,

which from that time on gave him no rest. In the first place he was

obliged  to  submit  to  a  certain  degree  of  privation:  to  begin  with,  a

temporary  separation  from  his  mother,  and  later  a  permanent

diminution in the amount of care and attention which he had received

from  her  and  which  thenceforward  he  had  to  grow  accustomed  to

sharing with his sister. In the second place, he experienced a revival

of  the  pleasures  he  had  enjoyed  when  he  was  looked  after  as  an

infant; for they were called up by all that he saw his mother doing for

the baby. As a result of these two influences his erotic needs became

intensified, while at the same time they began to obtain insufficient

satisfaction.  He  made  up  for  the  loss  which  his  sister’s  arrival  had

entailed on him by imagining that he had children of his own; and so

long as he was at Gmunden - on his second visit there - and could

really  play  with  these  children,  he  found  a  sufficient  outlet  for  his

affections. But after his return to Vienna he was once more alone, andset all his hopes upon his mother. He had meanwhile suffered another

privation, having been exiled from his parents’ bedroom at the age of

four and a half. His intensified erotic excitability now found expression

in phantasies, by which in his loneliness he conjured up his playmates

of the past summer, and in regular auto-erotic satisfaction obtained by

a masturbatory stimulation of his genitals.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2113

 

   But in the third place his sister’s birth stimulated him to an effort of

thought  which,  on  the  one  hand,  it  was  impossible  to  bring  to  a

conclusion, and which, on the other hand, involved him in emotional

conflicts. He was faced with the great riddle of where babies come

from, which is perhaps the first problem to engage a child’s mental

powers, and of which the riddle of the Theban Sphinx is probably no

more than a distorted version. He rejected the proffered solution of the

stork having brought Hanna. For he had noticed that months before

the baby’s birth his mother’s body had grown big, that then she had

gone to bed, and had groaned while the birth was taking place, and

that when she got up she was thin again. He therefore inferred that

Hanna had been inside his mother’s body, and had then come out like

a  ‘lumf’.  He  was  able  to  imagine  the  act  of  giving  birth  as  a

pleasurable one by relating it to his own first feelings of pleasure in

passing  stool;  and  he  was  thus  able  to  find  a  double  motive  for

wishing to have children of his own: the pleasure of giving birth to

them  and  the  pleasure  (the  compensatory  pleasure,  as  it  were)  of

looking after them. There was nothing in all of this that could have led

him into doubts or conflicts.

   But there was something else, which could not fail to make him

uneasy. His father must have had something to do with little Hanna’s

birth,  for  he  had  declared  that  Hanna  and  Hans  himself  were  his

children. Yet it was certainly not his father who had brought them into

the world, but his mother. This father of his came between him and his

mother. When he was there Hans could not sleep with his mother, and

when his mother wanted to take Hans into bed with her, his fatherused  to  call  out.  Hans  had  learnt  from  experience  how  well-off  he

could be in his father’s absence, and it was only justifiable that he

should wish to get rid of him. And then Hans’s hostility had received a

fresh reinforcement. His father had told him the lie about the stork and

so made it impossible for him to ask for enlightenment upon these

things. He not only prevented his being in bed with his mother, but

also kept from him the knowledge he was thirsting for. He was putting

Hans at a disadvantage in both directions, and was obviously doing so

for his own benefit.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2114

 

   But this father, whom he could not help hating as a rival, was the

same  father  whom  he  had  always  loved  and  was  bound  to  go  on

loving, who had been his model, had been his first playmate, and had

looked after him from his earliest infancy: and this it was that gave rise

to the first conflict. Nor could this conflict find an immediate solution.

For  Hans’s  nature  had  so  developed  that  for  the  moment  his  love

could not but keep the upper hand and suppress his hate - though it

could not kill it, for his hate was perpetually kept alive by his love for

his mother.

   But his father not only knew where children came from, he actually

performed it - the thing that Hans could only obscurely divine. The

widdler must have something to do with it, for his own grew excited

whenever he thought of these things - and it must be a big widdler too,

bigger than Hans’s own. If he listened to these premonitory sensations

he could only suppose that it was a question of some act of violence

performed  upon  his  mother,  of  smashing  something,  of  making  an

opening into something, of forcing a way into an enclosed space -

such were the impulses that he felt stirring within him. But although

the sensations of his penis had put him on the road to postulating a

vagina, yet he could not solve the problem, for within his experience

no  such  thing  existed  as  his  widdler  required.  On  the  contrary,  his

conviction that his mother possessed a penis just as he did stood in

the way of any solution. His attempt at discovering what it was thathad to be done with his mother in order that she might have children

sank down into his unconscious; and his two active impulses - the

hostile one towards his father and the sadistic-tender one towards his

mother - could be put to no use, the first because of the love that

existed side by side with the hatred, and the second because of the

perplexity in which his infantile sexual theories left him.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2115

 

      This  is  how,  basing  my  conclusions  upon  the  findings  of  the

analysis, I am obliged to reconstruct the unconscious complexes and

wishes,  the  repression  and  reawakening  of  which  produced  little

Hans’s phobia. I am aware that in so doing I am attributing a great

deal to the mental capacity of a child between four and five years of

age; but I have let myself be guided by what we have recently learned,

and I do not consider myself bound by the prejudices of our ignorance.

It might perhaps have been possible to make use of Hans’s fear of the

‘making  a  row  with  the  legs’  for  filling  up  a  few  more  gaps  in  our

adjudication  upon  the  evidence.  Hans,  it  is  true,  declared  that  it

reminded  him  of  his  kicking  about  with  his  legs  when  he  was

compelled to leave off playing so as to do lumf; so that this element of

the neurosis becomes connected with the problem whether his mother

liked having children or was compelled to have them. But I have an

impression that this is not the whole explanation of the ‘making a row

with the legs’. Hans’s father was unable to confirm my suspicion that

there  was  some  recollection  stirring  in  the  child’s  mind  of  having

observed a scene of sexual intercourse between his parents in their

bedroom. So let us be content with what we have discovered.

   It is hard to say what the influence was which, in the situation we

have  just  sketched,  led  to  the  sudden  change  in  Hans  and  to  the

transformation of his libidinal longing into anxiety - to say from what

direction it was that repression set in. The question could probably

only be decided by making a comparison between this analysis and a

number of similar ones. Whether the scales were turned by the child’s

intellectual inability to solve the difficult problem of the begetting ofchildren and to cope with the aggressive impulses that were liberated

by his approaching its solution, or whether the effect was produced by

a somatic incapacity, a constitutional intolerance of the masturbatory

gratification in which he regularly indulged (whether, that is, the mere

persistence of sexual excitement at such a high pitch of intensity was

bound to bring about a revulsion) - this question must be left open until

fresh experience can come to our assistance.

   Chronological considerations make it impossible for us to attach any

great importance to the actual precipitating cause of the outbreak of

Hans’s  illness,  for  he  had  shown  signs  of  apprehensiveness  long

before he saw the bus-horse fall down in the street.

   Nevertheless, the neurosis took its start directly from this chance

event and preserved a trace of it in the circumstance of the horse

being exalted into the object of his anxiety. In itself the impression of

the  accident  which  he  happened  to  witness  carried  no  ‘traumatic

force’; it acquired its great effectiveness only from the fact that horses

had formerly been of importance to him as objects of his predilection

and interest, from the fact that he associated the event in his mind

with  an  earlier  event  at  Gmunden  which  had  more  claim  to  be

regarded as traumatic, namely, with Fritzl’s falling down while he was

playing at horses, and lastly from the fact that there was an easy path

of association from Fritzl to his father. Indeed, even these connections

would probably not have been sufficient if it had not been that, thanks

to the pliability and ambiguity of associative chains, the same event

showed  itself  capable  of  stirring  the  second  of  the  complexes  that

lurked in Hans’s unconscious, the complex of his pregnant mother’s

confinement. From that moment the way was clear for the return of the

repressed;  and  it  returned  in  such  a  manner  that the  pathogenic

material  was  remodelled  and  transposed  on  to  the  horse-complex,

while  the  accompanying  affects  were  uniformly  transformed  into

anxiety.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2116

 

   It deserves to be noticed that the ideational content of Hans’s phobiaas  it  then  stood  had  to  be  submitted  to  one  further  process  of

distortion and substitution before his consciousness took cognizance

of it. Hans’s first formulation of his anxiety was: ‘the horse will bite me’;

and this was derived from another episode at Gmunden, which was on

the one hand related to his hostile wishes towards his father and on

the  other  hand  was  reminiscent  of  the  warning  he  had  been  given

against masturbation. Some interfering influence, emanating from his

parents perhaps, had made itself felt. I am not certain whether the

reports upon Hans were at that time drawn up with sufficient care to

enable  us  to  decide  whether  he  expressed  his  anxiety  in  this  form

before  or  not  until after  his  mother  had  taken  him  to  task  on  the

subject of masturbating. I should be inclined to suspect that it was not

until afterwards, though this would contradict the account given in the

case history. At any rate, it is evident that at every point Hans’s hostile

complex against his father screened his lustful one about his mother,

just as it was the first to be disclosed and dealt with in the analysis.

   In other cases of this kind there would be a great deal more to be

said  upon  the  structure,  the  development,  and  the  diffusion  of  the

neurosis. But the history of little Hans’s attack was very short; almost

as  soon  as  it  had  begun,  its  place  was  taken  by  the  history  of  its

treatment. And although during the treatment the phobia appeared to

develop further and to extend over new objects and to lay down new

conditions, his father, since he was himself treating the case, naturally

had sufficient penetration to see that it was merely a question of the

emergence of material that was already in existence, and not of fresh

productions for which the treatment might be held responsible. In the

treatment of other cases it would not always be possible to count upon

so much penetration.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2117

 

   Before I can regard this synthesis as completed I must turn to yet

another aspect of the case, which will take us into the very heart of the

difficulties that lie in the way of our understanding of neurotic states.

We have seen how our little patient was overtaken by a great wave ofrepression and that it caught precisely those of his sexual components

that were dominant.¹ He gave up masturbation, and turned away in

disgust from everything that reminded him of excrement and of looking

on at other people performing their natural functions. But these were

not the components which were stirred up by the precipitating cause

of the illness (his seeing the horse fall down) or which provided the

material for the symptoms, that is, the content of the phobia.

   This allows us, therefore, to make a radical distinction. We shall

probably come to understand the case more deeply if we turn to those

other  components  which do  fulfil  the  two  conditions  that  have  just

been mentioned. These other components were tendencies in Hans

which had already been suppressed and which, so far as we can tell,

had never been able to find uninhibited expression: hostile and jealous

feelings towards his father, and sadistic impulses (premonitions, as it

were,  of  copulation)  towards  his  mother.  These  early  suppressions

may perhaps have gone to form the predisposition for his subsequent

illness. These aggressive propensities of Hans’s found no outlet, and

as soon as there came a time of privation and of intensified sexual

excitement, they tried to break their way out with reinforced strength. It

was then that the battle which we call his ‘phobia’ burst out. During the

course  of  it  a  part  of  the  repressed  ideas,  in  a  distorted  form  and

transposed  on  to  another  complex,  forced  their  way  into

consciousness as the content of the phobia. But it was a decidedly

paltry  success.  Victory  lay  with  the  forces  of  repression;  and they

made use of the opportunity to extend their domain over components

other than those that had rebelled. This last circumstance, however,

does not in the least alter the fact that the essence of Hans’s illness

was entirely dependent upon the nature of the instinctual components

that had to be repulsed. The content of his phobia was such as to

impose  a  very  great  measure  of  restriction  upon  his  freedom  of

movement,  and  that  was  its  purpose.  It  was  therefore  a  powerful

reaction  against  the  obscure  impulses  to  movement  which  were

especially directed against his mother. For Hans horses had always

typified pleasure in movement (‘I’m a young horse’, he had said as he

jumped  about);  but  since  this  pleasure  in  movement  included  the

impulse  to  copulate,  the  neurosis  imposed  a  restriction  on  it  and

exalted the horse into an emblem of terror. Thus it would seem asthough all that the repressed instincts got from the neurosis was the

honour  of  providing  pretexts  for  the  appearance  of  the  anxiety  in

consciousness.  But  however  clear  may  have  been  the  victory  in

Hans’s  phobia  of  the  forces  that  were  opposed  to  sexuality,

nevertheless, since such an illness is in its very nature a compromise,

this cannot have been all that the repressed instincts obtained. After

all,  Hans’s  phobia  of  horses  was  an  obstacle  to  his  going  into  the

street, and could serve as a means of allowing him to stay at home

with his beloved mother. In this way, therefore, his affection for his

mother triumphantly achieved its aim. In consequence of his phobia,

the lover clung to the object of his love - though, to be sure, steps had

been taken to make him innocuous. The true character of a neurotic

disorder is exhibited in this twofold result.

 

  ¹ Hans’s father even observed that simultaneously with this repression a certain amount of

sublimation set in. From the time of the beginning of his anxiety Hans began to show an
increased interest in music and to develop his inherited musical gift.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2118

 

   Alfred Adler, in a suggestive paper,¹ has recently developed the

view  that  anxiety  arises  from  the  suppression  of  what  he  calls  the

‘aggressive  instinct’,  and  by  a  very  sweeping  synthetic  process  he

ascribes to that instinct the chief part in human events, ‘in real life and

in  the  neuroses’.  As  we  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  in  our

present case of phobia the anxiety is to be explained as being due to

the  repression  of  Hans’s  aggressive  propensities  (the  hostile  ones

against his father and the sadistic ones against his mother), we seem

to have produced a most striking piece of confirmation of Adler’s view.

I am nevertheless unable to assent to it, and indeed I regard it as a

misleading  generalization.  I  cannot  bring  myself  to  assume  the

existence  of  a  special  aggressive  instinct  alongside  of  the  familiar

instincts of self-preservation and of sex, and on an equal footing with

them.² It appears to me that Adler has mistakenly promoted into a

special and self-subsisting instinct what is in reality a universal and

indispensable attribute of all instincts - their instinctual [triebhaft] and‘pressing’  character,  what  might  be  described  as  their  capacity  for

initiating movement. Nothing would then remain of the other instincts

but their relation to an aim, for their relation to the means of reaching

that aim would have been taken over from them by the ‘aggressive

instinct’. In spite of all the uncertainty and obscurity of our theory of

instincts I should prefer for the present to adhere to the usual view,

which leaves each instinct its own power of becoming aggressive; and

I  should  be  inclined  to  recognize  the  two  instincts  which  became

repressed in Hans as familiar components of the sexual libido.

 

   ¹ ‘Der Aggressionsbetrieb im Leben und in der Neurose’ (1908). This is the same paper

from which I have borrowed the term ‘confluence of instincts’. (See above, p. 2091)

   ² [Footnote added 1923:] The above passage was written at a time when Adler seemed still

to be taking his stand upon the ground of psycho-analysis, and before he had put forward the
masculine protest and disavowed repression. Since then I have myself been obliged to assert
the existence of an  ‘aggressive instinct’, but it is different from Adler’s. I prefer to call it the
‘destructive’ or ‘death instinct’. See Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920g) and The Ego and
the Id (1923b). Its opposition to the libidinal instincts finds an expression in the familiar polarity
of  love  and  hate.  My  disagreement  with  Adler’s  view,  which  results  in  a  universal
characteristic of instincts in general being reduced to be the property of a single one of them,
remains unaltered.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2119

 

                                            (III)

 

   I shall now proceed to what I hope will be a brief discussion of how

far little Hans’s phobia offers any contribution of general importance to

our views upon the life and upbringing of children. But before doing so

I must return to the objection which has so long been held over, and

according to which Hans was a neurotic, a ‘degenerate’ with a bad

heredity,  and  not  a  normal  child,  knowledge  about  whom  could  be

applied to other children. I have for some time been thinking with pain

of the way in which the adherents of ‘the normal person’ will fall upon

poor little Hans as soon as they are told that he can in fact be shown

to  have  had  a  hereditary  taint.  His  beautiful  mother  fell  ill  with  a

neurosis as a result of a conflict during her girlhood. I was able to be

of  assistance  to  her  at  the  time,  and  this  had  in  fact  been  thebeginning of my connection with Hans’s parents. It is only with the

greatest  diffidence  that  I  venture  to  bring  forward  one  or  two

considerations in his favour.

   In the first place Hans was not what one would understand, strictly

speaking, by a degenerate child, condemned by his heredity to be a

neurotic. On the contrary, he was well formed physically, and was a

cheerful,  amiable,  active-minded  young  fellow  who  might  give

pleasure  to  more  people  than  his  own  father.  There  can  be  no

question, of course, as to his sexual precocity; but on that point there

is very little material upon which a fair comparison can be based. I

gather, for instance, from a piece of collective research conducted in

America, that it is by no means such a rare thing to find object-choice

and feelings of love in boys at a similarly early age; and the same may

be learnt from studying the records of the childhood of men who have

later come to be recognized as ‘great’. I should therefore be inclined to

believe that sexual precocity is a correlate, which is seldom absent, of

intellectual precocity, and that it is therefore to be met with in gifted

children more often than might be expected.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2120

 

   Furthermore, let me say in Hans’s favour (and I frankly admit my

partisan attitude) that he is not the only child who has been overtaken

by a phobia at some time or other in his childhood. Troubles of that

kind  are  well  known  to  be  quite  extraordinarily  frequent,  even  in

children  the  strictness  of  whose  upbringing  has  left  nothing  to  be

desired. In later life these children either become neurotic or remain

healthy. Their phobias are shouted down in the nursery because they

are inaccessible to treatment and are decidedly inconvenient. In the

course  of  months  or  years  they  diminish,  and  the  child  seems  to

recover;  but  no  one  can  tell  what  psychological  changes  are

necessitated by such a recovery, or what alterations in character are

involved in it. When, however, an adult neurotic patient comes to us

for psycho-analytic treatment (and let us assume that his illness has

only become manifest after he has reached maturity), we find regularlythat his neurosis has as its point of departure an infantile anxiety such

as we have been discussing, and is in fact a continuation of it; so that,

as it were, a continuous and undisturbed thread of psychical activity,

taking  its  start  from  the  conflicts  of  his  childhood,  has  been  spun

through his life - irrespective of whether the first symptom of those

conflicts  has  persisted  or  has  retreated  under  the  pressure  of

circumstances.  I  think,  therefore,  that  Hans’s  illness  may  perhaps

have been no more serious than that of many other children who are

not branded as ‘degenerates’; but since he was brought up without

being  intimidated,  and  with  as  much  consideration  and  as  little

coercion  as  possible,  his  anxiety  dared  to  show  itself  more  boldly.

With him there was no place for such motives as a bad conscience or

a  fear  of  punishment,  which  with  other  children  must  no  doubt

contribute  to  making  the  anxiety  less.  It  seems  to  me  that  we

concentrate too much upon symptoms and concern ourselves too little

with their causes. In bringing up children we aim only at being left in

peace and having no difficulties, in short, at training up a model child,

and  we  pay  very  little  attention  to  whether  such  a  course  of

development  is  for  the  child’s  good  as  well.  I  can  therefore  quite

imagine that it may have been to Hans’s advantage to have produced

this phobia. For it directed his parents’ attention to the unavoidable

difficulties by which a child is confronted when in the course of his

cultural training he is called upon to overcome the innate instinctual

components  of  his  mind;  and  his  trouble  brought  his  father  to  his

assistance. It may be that Hans now enjoys an advantage over other

children, in that he no longer carries within him that seed in the shape

of repressed complexes which must always be of some significance

for a child’s later life, and which undoubtedly brings with it a certain

degree  of  deformity  of  character  if  not  a  predisposition  to  a

subsequent neurosis. I am inclined to think that this is so, but I do not

know if many others will share my opinion; nor do I know whether

experience will prove me right.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2121

    But I must now enquire what harm was done to Hans by dragging to

light in him complexes such as are not only repressed by children but

dreaded  by  their  parents.  Did  the  little  boy  proceed  to  take  some

serious action as regards what he wanted from his mother? or did his

evil  intentions  against  his  father  give  place  to  evil  deeds?  Such

misgivings  will  no  doubt  have  occurred  to  many  doctors,  who

misunderstand  the  nature  of  psycho-analysis  and  think  that  wicked

instincts are strengthened by being made conscious. Wise men like

these are being no more than consistent when they implore us for

heaven’s sake not to meddle with the evil things that lurk behind a

neurosis. In so doing they forget, it is true, that they are physicians,

and  their  words  bear  a  fatal  resemblance  to  Dogberry’s,  when  he

advised the Watch to avoid all contact with any thieves they might

happen to meet: ‘for such kind of men, the less you meddle or make

with them, why, the more is for your honesty.’¹

   On the contrary, the only results of the analysis were that Hans

recovered, that he ceased to be afraid of horses, and that he got on to

rather familiar terms with his father, as the latter reported with some

amusement.  But  whatever  his  father  may  have  lost  in  the  boy’s

respect he won back in his confidence: ‘I thought’, said Hans, ‘you

knew everything, as you knew that about the horse.’ For analysis does

not undo the effects of repression. The instincts which were formerly

suppressed remain suppressed; but the same effect is produced in a

different way. Analysis replaces the process of repression, which is an

automatic and excessive one, by a temperate and purposeful control

on the part of the highest agencies of the mind. In a word, analysis

replaces  repression  by  condemnation.  This  seems  to  bring  us  the

long-looked-for evidence that consciousness has a biological function,

and that with its entrance upon the scene an important advantage is

secured.²

 

   ¹ At this point I cannot keep back an astonished question. Where do my opponents obtain

their knowledge, which they produce with so much confidence, on the question whether the
repressed sexual instincts play a part, and if so what part, in the aetiology of the neuroses, if
they shut their patients’ mouths as soon as they begin to talk about their complexes or their
derivatives? For the only alternative source of knowledge remaining open to them are my own
writings and those of my adherents.

   ² [Footnote added 1923:] I am here using the word ‘consciousness’ in a sense which I later

avoided, namely, to describe our normal processes of thought - such, that is, as are capableof  consciousness.  We  know  that  thought  processes  of  this  kind  may  also  take  place
preconsciously;  and  it  is  wiser  to  regard  their  actual  ‘consciousness’  from  a  purely
phenomenological standpoint. By this I do not, of course, mean to contradict the expectation
that consciousness in this more limited sense of the word must also fulfil some biological
function.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2122

 

   If matters had lain entirely in my hands, I should have ventured to

give  the  child  the  one  remaining  piece  of  enlightenment  which  his

parents  withheld  from  him.  I  should  have  confirmed  his  instinctive

premonitions,  by  telling  him  of  the  existence  of  the  vagina  and  of

copulation;  thus  I  should  have  still  further  diminished  his  unsolved

residue, and put an end to his stream of questions. I am convinced

that  this  new  piece  of  enlightenment  would  have  made  him  lose

neither his love for his mother nor his own childish nature, and that he

would have understood that his preoccupation with these important,

these momentous things must rest for the present - until his wish to be

big had been fulfilled. But the educational experiment was not carried

so far.

   That no sharp line can be drawn between ‘neurotic’ and ‘normal’

people - whether children or adults - that our conception of ‘disease’ is

a  purely  practical  one  and  a  question  of  summation,  that

predisposition and the eventualities of life must combine before the

threshold of this summation is overstepped, and that consequently a

number of individuals are constantly passing from the class of healthy

people into that of neurotic patients, while a far smaller number also

make the journey in the opposite direction, - all of these are things

which have been said so often and have met with so much agreement

that I am certainly not alone in maintaining their truth. It is, to say the

least of it, extremely probable that a child’s upbringing can exercise a

powerful influence for good or for evil upon the predisposition which

we have just mentioned as one of the factors in the occurrence of

‘disease’; but what that upbringing is to aim at and at what point it is to

be  brought  to  bear  seem  at  present  to  be  very  doubtful  questions.

Hitherto education has only set itself the task of controlling, or, it would

often be more proper to say, of suppressing, the instincts. The resultshave  been  by  no  means  gratifying,  and  where  the  process  has

succeeded it has only been to the advantage of a small number of

favoured  individuals  who  have  not  been  required  to  suppress  their

instincts. Nor has any one enquired by what means and at what cost

the  suppression  of  the  inconvenient  instincts  has  been  achieved.

Supposing now that we substitute another task for this one, and aim

instead at making the individual capable of becoming a civilized and

useful member of society with the least possible sacrifice of his own

activity; in that case the information gained by psycho-analysis, upon

the  origin  of  pathogenic  complexes  and  upon  the  nucleus  of  every

nervous  affection,  can  claim  with  justice  that  it  deserves  to  be

regarded by educators as an invaluable guide in their conduct towards

children. What practical conclusions may follow from this, and how far

experience may justify the application of those conclusions within our

present social system, are matters which I leave to the examination

and decision of others.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2123

 

      I  cannot  take  leave  of  our  small  patient’s  phobia  without  giving

expression to a notion which has made its analysis, leading as it did to

a recovery, seem of especial value to me. Strictly speaking, I learnt

nothing new from this analysis, nothing that I had not already been

able to discover (though often less distinctly and more indirectly) from

other patients analysed at a more advanced age. But the neuroses of

these  other  patients  could  in  every  instance  be  traced  back  to  the

same infantile complexes that were revealed behind Hans’s phobia. I

am  therefore  tempted  to  claim  for  this  neurosis  of  childhood  the

significance of being a type and a model, and to suppose that the

multiplicity of the phenomena of repression exhibited by neuroses and

the abundance of their pathogenic material do not prevent their being

derived  from  a  very  limited  number  of  processes  concerned  with

identical ideational complexes.

                   Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2124

 

                                POSTSCRIPT (1922)

 

A few months ago - in the spring of 1922 - a young man introduced

himself to me and informed me that he was the ‘little Hans’ whose

infantile neurosis had been the subject of the paper which I published

in 1909. I was very glad to see him again, for about two years after the

end of his analysis I had lost sight of him and had heard nothing of

him for more than ten years. The publication of this first analysis of a

child had caused a great stir and even greater indignation, and a most

evil future had been foretold for the poor little boy, because he had

been ‘robbed of his innocence’ at such a tender age and had been

made the victim of a psycho-analysis.

   But none of these apprehensions had come true. Little Hans was

now a strapping youth of nineteen. He declared that he was perfectly

well,  and  suffered  from  no  troubles  or  inhibitions.  Not  only  had  he

come through his puberty without any damage, but his emotional life

had  successfully  undergone  one  of  the  severest  of  ordeals.  His

parents had been divorced and each of them had married again. In

consequence of this he lived by himself; but he was on good terms

with  both  of  his  parents,  and  only  regretted  that  as  a  result  of  the

breaking-up of the family he had been separated from the younger

sister he was so fond of.

      One  piece  of  information  given  me  by  little  Hans  struck  me  as

particularly remarkable; nor do I venture to give any explanation of it.

When he read his case history, he told me, the whole of it came to him

as  something  unknown;  he  did  not  recognize  himself;  he  could

remember nothing; and it was only when he came upon the journey to

Gmunden that there dawned on him a kind of glimmering recollection

that it might have been he himself that it happened to. So the analysis

had not preserved the events from amnesia, but had been overtaken

by amnesia itself. Any one who is familiar with psycho-analysis may

occasionally experience something similar in sleep. He will be woken

up by a dream, and will decide to analyse it then and there; he will

then  go  to  sleep  again  feeling  quite  satisfied  with  the  result  of  hisefforts; and next morning dream and analysis will alike be forgotten.

                                                                                       2125

 

          NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS

                                        (1909)

 


                                                                                      2126

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2127

 

          NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS

 

The matter contained in the following pages will be of two kinds. In the

first place I shall give some fragmentary extracts from the history of a

case  of  obsessional  neurosis.  This  case  judged  by  its  length,  the

injuriousness of its effects, and the patient’s own view of it, deserves

to be classed as a moderately severe one; the treatment, which lasted

for  about  a  year,  led  to  the  complete  restoration  of  the  patient’s

personality, and to the removal of his inhibitions. In the second place,

starting out from this case, and also taking other cases into account

which I have previously analysed, I shall make some disconnected

statements  of  an  aphoristic  character  upon  the  genesis  and  finer

psychological mechanism of obsessional processes, and I shall thus

hope  to  develop  my  first  observations  on  the  subject,  published  in

1896.¹

   A programme of this kind seems to me to require some justification.

For it might otherwise be thought that I regard this method of making a

communication  as  perfectly  correct  and  as  one  to  be  imitated;

whereas  in  reality  I  am  only  accommodating  myself  to  obstacles,

some external and others inherent in the subject, and I should gladly

have communicated more if it had been right or possible for me to do

so. I cannot give a complete history of the treatment, because that

would  involve  my  entering  in  detail  into  the  circumstances  of  my

patient’s life. The importunate interest of a capital city, focused withparticular  attention  upon  my  medical  activities,  forbids  my  giving  a

faithful picture of the case. On the other hand I have come more and

more  to  regard  the  distortions  usually  resorted  to  in  such

circumstances  as  useless  and  objectionable.  If  the  distortions  are

slight, they fail in their object of protecting the patient from indiscreet

curiosity; while if they go beyond this they require too great a sacrifice,

for they destroy the intelligibility of the material, which depends for its

coherence precisely upon the small details of real life. And from this

latter circumstance follows the paradoxical truth that it is far easier to

divulge the patient’s most intimate secrets than the most innocent and

trivial facts about him; for, whereas the former would not throw any

light on his identity, the latter, by which he is generally recognized,

would make it obvious to every one.

 

   ¹ ‘Further Remarks on the Neuro-Psychoses of Defence’, 1896b (Section II. ‘The Nature

and Mechanism of Obsessional Neurosis’).
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2128

 

   Such is my excuse for having curtailed so drastically the history of

this case and its treatment. And I can offer still more cogent reasons

for having confined myself to the statement only of some disconnected

results of the psycho-analytic investigation of obsessional neuroses. I

must confess that I have not yet succeeded in completely penetrating

the complicated texture of a severe case of obsessional neurosis, and

that, if I were to reproduce the analysis, it would be impossible for me

to make the structure, such as by the help of analysis we know or

suspect it to be, visible to others through the mass of therapeutic work

superimposed upon it. What add so greatly to the difficulty of doing

this are the resistances of the patients and the forms in which they are

expressed.  But  even  apart  from  this  it  must  be  admitted  that  an

obsessional  neurosis  is  in  itself  not  an  easy  thing  to  understand  -

much  less  so  than  a  case  of  hysteria.  Actually,  indeed,  we  should

have expected to find the contrary. The language of an obsessional

neurosis - the means by which it expresses its secret thoughts - is, as

it were, only a dialect of the language of hysteria; but it is a dialect inwhich we ought to be able to find our way about more easily, since it is

more  nearly  related  to  the  forms  of  expression  adopted  by  our

conscious thought than is the language of hysteria. Above all, it does

not involve the leap from a mental process to a somatic innervation -

hysterical conversion - which can never be fully comprehensible to us.

   Perhaps it is only because we are less familiar with obsessional

neuroses  that  we  do  not  find  these  expectations  confirmed  by  the

facts. Persons suffering from a severe degree of obsessional neurosis

present  themselves  far  less  frequently  for  analytic  treatment  than

hysterical patients. They dissimulate their condition in daily life, too, as

long as they possibly can, and often call in a physician only when their

complaint has reached such an advanced stage as, had they been

suffering, for instance, from tuberculosis of the lungs, would have led

to  their  being  refused  admission  to  a  sanatorium.  I  make  this

comparison,  moreover,  because,  as  with  the  chronic  infectious

disease which I have just mentioned, we can point to a number of

brilliant therapeutic successes in severe no less than in light cases of

obsessional  neurosis,  where  these  have  been  taken  in  hand  at  an

early stage.

   In these circumstances there is no alternative but to report the facts

in the imperfect and incomplete fashion in which they are known and

in  which  it  is  legitimate  to  communicate  them.  The  crumbs  of

knowledge offered in these pages, though they have been laboriously

enough collected, may not in themselves prove very satisfying; but

they may serve as a starting-point for the work of other investigators,

and  common  endeavour  may  bring  the  success  which  is  perhaps

beyond the reach of individual effort.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2129

 

                                            I

 

                  EXTRACTS FROM THE CASE HISTORY

 

A youngish man of university education introduced himself to me withthe statement that he had suffered from obsessions ever since his

childhood, but with particular intensity for the last four years. The chief

features of his disorder were fears that something might happen to

two people of whom he was very fond - his father and a lady whom he

admired. Besides this he was aware of compulsive impulses - such as

an impulse, for instance, to cut his throat with a razor; and further he

produced prohibitions, sometimes in connection with quite unimportant

things.  He  had  wasted  years,  he  told  me,  in  fighting  against  these

ideas of his, and in this way had lost much ground in the course of his

life. He had tried various treatments, but none had been of any use to

him except a course of hydrotherapy at a sanatorium near ---; and

this, he thought, had probably only been because he had made an

acquaintance there which had led to regular sexual intercourse. Here

he had no opportunities of the sort, and he seldom had intercourse

and only at irregular intervals. He felt disgust at prostitutes. Altogether,

he said, his sexual life had been stunted; masturbation had played

only a small part in it, in his sixteenth or seventeenth year. His potency

was normal; he had first had intercourse at the age of twenty-six.

   He gave me the impression of being a clear-headed and shrewd

person. When I asked him what it was that made him lay such stress

upon telling me about his sexual life, he replied that that was what he

knew about my theories. Actually, however, he had read none of my

writings, except that a short time before he had been turning over the

pages of one of my books¹ and had come across the explanation of

some curious verbal associations which had so much reminded him of

some of his own ‘efforts of thought’ in connection with his ideas that

he had decided to put himself in my hands.

 

   ¹ The Psychopathology of Everyday Life.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2130

 

                      (A)  THE BEGINNING OF THE TREATMENT

 

   The next day I made him pledge himself to submit to the one and

only condition of the treatment - namely, to say everything that cameinto his head, even if it was unpleasant to him, or seemed unimportant

or irrelevant  or senseless.  I  then  gave  him  leave  to  start  his

communications with any subject he pleased, and he began thus:¹

   He had a friend, he told me, of whom he had an extraordinarily high

opinion.  He  used  always  to  go  to  him  when  he  was  tormented  by

some criminal impulse, and ask him whether he despised him as a

criminal. His friend used then to give him moral support by assuring

him that he was a man of irreproachable conduct, and had probably

been in the habit, from his youth onwards, of taking a dark view of his

own life. At an earlier date, he went on, another person had exercised

a similar influence over him. This was a nineteen-year-old student (he

himself had been fourteen or fifteen at the time) who had taken a liking

to him, and had raised his self-esteem to an extraordinary degree, so

that  he  appeared  to  himself  to  be  a  genius.  This  student  had

subsequently  become  his  tutor,  and  had  suddenly  altered  his

behaviour  and  begun  treating  him  as  though  he  were  an  idiot.  At

length he had noticed that the student was interested in one of his

sisters, and had realized that he had only taken him up in order to gain

admission into the house. This had been the first great blow of his life.

   He then proceeded without any apparent transition:-

 

   ¹ What follows is based upon notes made on the evening of the day of treatment, and

adheres as closely as possible to my recollection of the patient’s words. - I feel obliged to offer
a warning against the practice of noting down what the patient says during the actual time of
treatment. The consequent withdrawal of the physician’s attention does the patient more harm
than  can  be  made  up  for  by  any  increase  in  accuracy  that  may  be  achieved  in  the
reproduction of his case history.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2131

 

                              (B)  INFANTILE SEXUALITY

 

   ‘My sexual life began very early. I can remember a scene during my

fourth  or  fifth  year.  (From  my  sixth  year  onwards  I  can  remember

everything.) This scene came into my head quite distinctly, years later.

We had a very pretty young governess called Fräulein Peter.¹ One

evening she was lying on the sofa lightly dressed, and reading. I waslying beside her, and begged her to let me creep under her skirt. She

told me I might, so long as I said nothing to any one about it. She had

very  little  on,  and  I  fingered  her  genitals  and  the  lower  part  of  her

body,  which  struck  me  as  very  queer.  After  this  I  was  left  with  a

burning and tormenting curiosity to see the female body. I can still

remember  the  intense  excitement  with  which  I  waited  at  the  Baths

(which I was still allowed to go to with the governess and my sisters)

for the governess to undress and get into the water. I can remember

more things from my sixth year onwards. At that time we had another

governess,  who  was  also  young  and  good-looking.  She  had

abscesses on her buttocks which she was in the habit of pressing out

at  night.  I  used  to  wait  eagerly  for  that  moment,  to  appease  my

curiosity. It was just the same at the Baths - though Fräulein Lina was

more reserved than her predecessor.’ (In reply to a question which I

threw in, ‘As a rule,’ the patient told me, ‘I did not sleep in her room,

but mostly with my parents.’) ‘I remember a scene which must have

taken place when I was seven years old.² We were sitting together

one evening - the governess, the cook, another servant-girl, myself

and  my  brother,  who  was  eighteen  months  younger  than  me.  The

young women were talking, and I suddenly became aware of Fräulein

Lina saying: "It could be done with the little one; but Paul" (that was I)

"is  too  clumsy,  he  would  be  sure  to  miss  it."  I  did  not  understand

clearly what was meant, but I felt the slight and began to cry. Lina

comforted me, and told me how a girl, who had done something of the

kind with a little boy she was in charge of, had been put in prison for

several months. I do not believe she actually did anything wrong with

me, but I took a great many liberties with her. When I got into her bed I

used to uncover her and touch her, and she made no objections. She

was not very intelligent, and clearly had very strong sexual cravings.

At twenty-three she had already had a child. She afterwards married

its father, so that to-day she is a Frau Hofrat. Even now I often see her

in the street.

 

   ¹ Dr. Alfred Adler, who was formerly an analyst, once drew attention in a privately delivered

paper to the peculiar importance which attaches to the very first communications made by
patients.  Here  is  an  instance  of  this.  The  patient’s  opening  words  laid  stress  upon  the
influence  exercised  over  him  by  men,  that  is  to  say,  upon  the  part  played  in  his  life  by
homosexual object-choice; but immediately afterwards they touched upon a second motif,which was to become of great importance later on, namely, the conflict between man and
woman and the opposition of their interests. Even the fact that he remembered his first pretty
governess by her surname, which happened to be a man’s first name, must be taken into
account  in  this  connection.  In  middle-class  circles  in  Vienna  it  is  more  usual  to  call  a
governess by her first name, and it is by that name that she is more commonly remembered.

      ²  The  patient  subsequently  admitted  that  this  scene  probably

occurred one or two years later.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2132

 

   ‘When I was six years old I already suffered from erections, and I

know that once I went to my mother to complain about them. I know

too that in doing so I had some misgivings to get over, for I had a

feeling that there was some connection between this subject and my

ideas and inquisitiveness, and at that time I used to have a morbid

idea that my parents knew my thoughts; I explained this to myself by

supposing  that  I  had  spoken  them  out  loud,  without  having  heard

myself do it. I look on this as the beginning of my illness. There were

certain people, girls, who pleased me very much, and I had a very

strong wish to see them naked. But in wishing this I had an uncanny

feeling, as though something must happen if I thought such things,

and as though I must do all sorts of things to prevent it.’

   (In reply to a question he gave an example of these fears: ‘For

instance, that my father might die.’) ‘Thoughts about my father’s death

occupied my mind from a very early age and for a long period of time,

and greatly depressed me.’

   At this point I learnt with astonishment that the patient’s father, with

whom his obsessional fears were, after all, occupied now, had died

several years previously.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2133

 

 

   The events in his sixth or seventh year which the patient described

in the first hour of his treatment were not merely, as he supposed, thebeginning of his illness, but were already the illness itself. It was a

complete  obsessional  neurosis,  wanting  in  no  essential  element,  at

once  the  nucleus  and  the  prototype  of  the  later  disorder,  -  an

elementary  organism,  as  it  were,  the  study  of  which  could  alone

enable  us  to  obtain  a  grasp  of  the  complicated  organization  of  his

subsequent  illness.  The  child,  as  we  have  seen,  was  under  the

domination of a component of the sexual instinct, the desire to look, as

a result of which there was a constant recurrence in him of a very

intense wish connected with persons of the female sex who pleased

him - the wish, that is, to see them naked. This wish corresponds to

the  later  obsessional  or  compulsive  idea;  and  if  the  quality  of

compulsion was not yet present in the wish, this was because the ego

had not yet placed itself in complete opposition to it and did not yet

regard it as something foreign to itself. Nevertheless, opposition to this

wish  from  some  source  or  other  was  already  in  activity,  for  its

occurrence  was  regularly  accompanied  by  a  distressing  affect.¹  A

conflict was evidently in progress in the mind of this young libertine.

Side by side with the obsessive wish, and intimately associated with it,

was an obsessive fear: every time he had a wish of this kind he could

not  help  fearing  that  something  dreadful  would  happen.  This

something  dreadful  was  already  clothed  in  a  characteristic

indeterminateness  which  was  thenceforward  to  be  an  invariable

feature of every manifestation of the neurosis. But in a child it is not

hard to discover what it is that is veiled behind an indeterminateness

of this kind. If the patient can once be induced to give a particular

instance  in  place  of  the  vague  generalities  which  characterize  an

obsessional neurosis, it may be confidently assumed that the instance

is the original and actual thing which has tried to hide itself behind the

generalization. Our present patient’s obsessive fear, therefore, when

restored to its original meaning, would run as follows: ‘If I have this

wish  to  see  a  woman  naked,  my  father  will  be  bound  to  die.’  The

distressing affect was distinctly coloured with a tinge of uncanniness

and superstition, and was already beginning to give rise to impulses to

do something to ward off the impending evil. These impulses were

subsequently  to  develop  into  the protective  measures  which  the

patient adopted.

    ¹ Yet  attempts  have  been  made  to  explain  obsessions  without  taking  the  affects  into

account!
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2134

 

   We find, accordingly: an erotic instinct and a revolt against it; a wish

which has not yet become compulsive and, struggling against it, a fear

which  is  already  compulsive;  a  distressing  affect  and  an  impulsion

towards  the  performance  of  defensive  acts.  The  inventory  of  the

neurosis  has  reached  its  full  muster.  Indeed,  something  more  is

present,  namely,  a  kind  of delusion  or delirium  with  the  strange

content that his parents knew his thoughts because he spoke them

out loud without his hearing himself do it. We shall not go far astray if

we suppose that in making this attempt at an explanation the child had

some  inkling  of  those  remarkable  mental  processes  which  we

describe as unconscious and which we cannot dispense with if we are

to  throw  any  scientific  light  upon  this  obscure  subject.  ‘I  speak  my

thoughts out loud, without hearing them’ sounds like a projection into

the external world of our own hypothesis that he had thoughts without

knowing  anything  about  them;  it  sounds  like  an  endopsychic

perception of what has been repressed.

   For the situation is clear. This elementary neurosis of childhood

already  involved  a  problem  and  an  apparent  absurdity,  like  any

complicated neurosis of maturity. What can have been the meaning of

the child’s idea that if he had this lascivious wish his father would be

bound  to  die?  Was  it  sheer  nonsense?  Or  are  there  means  of

understanding  the  words  and  of  perceiving  them  as  a  necessary

consequence of earlier events and premises?

   If we apply knowledge gained elsewhere to this case of childhood

neurosis, we shall not be able to avoid a suspicion that in this instance

as in others (that is to say, before the child had reached his sixth year)

there had been conflicts and repressions, which had themselves been

overtaken by amnesia, but had left behind them as a residuum the

particular content of this obsessive fear. Later on we shall learn how

far it is possible for us to rediscover those forgotten experiences or to

reconstruct  them  with  some  degree  of  certainty.  In  the  meantimestress may be laid on the fact, which is probably more than a mere

coincidence, that the patient’s infantile amnesia ended precisely with

his sixth year.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2135

 

   To find a chronic obsessional neurosis beginning like this in early

childhood, with lascivious wishes of this sort connected with uncanny

apprehensions  and  an  inclination  to  the  performance  of  defensive

acts, is no new thing to me. I have come across it in a number of other

cases. It is absolutely typical, although probably not the only possible

type. Before proceeding to the events of the second session, I should

like to add one more word on the subject of the patient’s early sexual

experiences. It will hardly be disputed that they may be described as

having  been  considerable  both  in  themselves  and  in  their

consequences.  But  it  has  been  the  same  with  the  other  cases  of

obsessional  neurosis  that  I  have  had  the  opportunity  of  analysing.

Such  cases,  unlike  those  of  hysteria,  invariably  possess  the

characteristic  of  premature  sexual  activity.  Obsessional  neuroses

make it much more obvious than hysterias that the factors which go to

form a psychoneurosis are to be found in the patient’s infantile sexual

life  and  not  in  his  present  one.  The  current  sexual  life  of  an

obsessional  neurotic  may  often  appear  perfectly  normal  to  a

superficial observer; indeed, it frequently offers to the eye far fewer

pathogenic elements and abnormalities than in the instance we are

now considering.

 

                          (C)  THE GREAT OBSESSIVE FEAR

 

      ‘I  think  I  will  begin  to-day  with  the  experience  which  was  the

immediate occasion of my coming to you. It was in August, during the

manoeuvres in ---. I had been suffering before, and tormenting myself

with all kinds of obsessional thoughts, but they had quickly passed off

during the manoeuvres. I was keen to show the regular officers that

people like me had not only learnt a good deal but could stand a good

deal too. One day we started from --- on a short march. During a halt Ilost my pince-nez, and, although I could easily have found them, I did

not  want  to  delay  our  start,  so  I  gave  them  up.  But  I  wired  to  my

opticians in Vienna to send me another pair by the next post. During

that same halt I sat between two officers, one of whom, a captain with

a Czech name, was to be of no small importance to me. I had a kind

of dread of him, for he was obviously fond of cruelty. I do not say he

was a bad man, but at the officers’ mess he had repeatedly defended

the introduction of corporal punishment, so that I had been obliged to

disagree  with  him  very  sharply.  Well,  during  this  halt  we  got  into

conversation,  and  the  captain  told  me  he  had  read  of  a  specially

horrible punishment used in the East . . .’

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2136

 

   Here the patient broke off, got up from the sofa, and begged me to

spare him the recital of the details. I assured him that I myself had no

taste whatever for cruelty, and certainly had no desire to torment him,

but that naturally I could not grant him something which was beyond

my power. He might just as well ask me to give him the moon. The

overcoming  of  resistances  was  a  law  of  the  treatment,  and  on  no

consideration could it be dispensed with. (I had explained the idea of

‘resistance’ to him at the beginning of the hour, when he told me there

was much in himself which he would have to overcome if he was to

relate this experience of his.) I went on to say that I would do all I

could, nevertheless, to guess the full meaning of any hints he gave

me. Was he perhaps thinking of impalement? - ‘No, not that; . . . the

criminal was tied up . . .’ - he expressed himself so indistinctly that I

could  not  immediately  guess  in  what  position  -  ‘a  pot  was  turned

upside down on his buttocks . . . some rats were put into it . . . and

they . . .’ - he had again got up, and was showing every sign of horror

and resistance - ‘. . . bored their way in  . . .’ - Into his anus, I helped

him out.

   At all the more important moments while he was telling his story his

face  took  on  a  very  strange,  composite  expression.  I  could  only

interpret it as one of horror at pleasure of his own of which he himselfwas  unaware.  He  proceeded  with  the  greatest  difficulty:  ‘At  that

moment the idea flashed through my mind that this was happening to

a person who was very dear to me.’¹ In answer to a direct question he

said that it was not he himself who was carrying out the punishment,

but that it was being carried out as it were impersonally. After a little

prompting I learnt that the person to whom this ‘idea’ of his related

was the lady whom he admired.

 

   ¹ He said ‘idea’ - the stronger and more significant term ‘wish’, or rather ‘fear’, having

evidently  been  censored.  Unfortunately  I  am  not  able  to  reproduce  the  peculiar
indeterminateness of all his remarks.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2137

 

   He broke off his story in order to assure me that these thoughts

were  entirely  foreign  and  repugnant  to  him,  and  to  tell  me  that

everything which had followed in their train had passed through his

mind with the most extraordinary rapidity. Simultaneously with the idea

there  always  appeared  a  ‘sanction’,  that  is  to  say,  the  defensive

measure  which  he  was  obliged  to  adopt  in  order  to  prevent  the

phantasy from being fulfilled. When the captain had spoken of this

ghastly punishment, he went on, and these ideas had come into his

head,  by  employing  his  usual  formulas  (a  ‘but’  accompanied  by  a

gesture of repudiation, and the phrase ‘whatever are you thinking of?’)

he had just succeeded in warding off both of them.

   This ‘both’ took me aback, and it has no doubt also mystified the

reader.  For  so  far  we  have  heard  only  of  one  idea  -  of  the  rat

punishment being carried out upon the lady. He was now obliged to

admit that a second idea had occurred to him simultaneously, namely,

the idea of the punishment being applied to his father. As his father

had died many years previously, this obsessive fear was much more

nonsensical even than the first, and accordingly it had attempted to

escape being confessed to for a little while longer.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis                                                                                      2138

 

   That evening, he continued, the same captain had handed him a

packet that had arrived by the post and had said: ‘Lieutenant A.¹ has

paid the charges for you. You must pay him back.’ The packet had

contained  the  pince-nez  that  he  had  wired  for.  At  that  instant,

however, a ‘sanction’ had taken shape in his mind, namely, that he

was  not  to  pay  back  the  money  or  it  would  happen  -  (that  is,  the

phantasy about the rats would come true as regards his father and the

lady). And immediately, in accordance with a type of procedure with

which  he  was  familiar,  to  combat  this  sanction  there  had  arisen  a

command in the shape of a vow: ‘You must pay back the 3.80 Kronen

to Lieutenant A.’ He had said these words to himself almost half aloud.

   Two days later the manoeuvres had come to an end. He had spent

the whole of the intervening time in efforts at repaying Lieutenant A.

the small amount in question; but a succession of difficulties of an

apparently external nature had arisen to prevent it. First he had tried

to effect the payment though another officer who had been going to

the  post  office.  But  he  had  been  much  relieved  when  this  officer

brought him back the money, saying that he had not met Lieutenant A.

there, for this method of fulfilling his vow had not satisfied him, as it

did not correspond with the wording, which ran: ‘You must pay back

the money to Lieutenant A.’ Finally, he had met Lieutenant A., the

person he was looking for; but that officer had refused to accept the

money,  declaring  that  he  had  not  paid  anything  for  him,  and  had

nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  post,  which  was  the  business  of

Lieutenant B. This had thrown my patient into great perplexity, for it

meant that he was unable to keep his vow, since it had been based

upon  false  premises.  He  had  excogitated  a  very  curious  means  of

getting out of his difficulty, namely, that he should go to the post office

with both the men, A. and B., that A. should give the young lady there

the 3.80 kronen, that the young lady should give them to B., and that

then he himself should pay back the 3.80 kronen to A. according to

the wording of his vow.

 

   ¹ The names are of little consequence here.

                 Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2139

 

   It would not surprise me to hear that at this point the reader had

ceased to be able to follow. For even the detailed account which the

patient  gave  me  of  the  external  events  of  these  days  and  of  his

reactions  to  them  was  full  of  self-contradictions  and  sounded

hopelessly confused. It was only when he told the story for the third

time that I could get him to realize its obscurities and could lay bare

the errors of memory and the displacements in which he had become

involved. I shall spare myself the trouble of reproducing these details,

the essentials of which we shall easily be able to pick up later on, and

I  will  only  add  that  at  the  end  of  this  second  session  the  patient

behaved  as  though  he  were  dazed  and  bewildered.  He  repeatedly

addressed me as ‘Captain’, probably because at the beginning of the

hour I had told him that I myself was not fond of cruelty like Captain

N., and that I had no intention of tormenting him unnecessarily.

   The only other piece of information that I obtained from him during

this hour was that from the very first, on all the previous occasions on

which he had had a fear that something would happen to people he

loved  no  less  than  on  the  present  one,  he  had  referred  the

punishments not only to our present life but also to eternity - to the

next world. Up to his fourteenth or fifteenth year he had been devoutly

religious, but from that time on he had gradually developed into the

free-thinker  that  he  was  to-day.  He  reconciled  the  contradiction

between his beliefs and his obsessions by saying to himself: ‘What do

you  know  about  the  next  world?  Nothing can  be  known  about  it.

You’re not risking anything - so do it.’ This form of argument seemed

unobjectionable to a man who was in other respects particularly clear-

headed, and in this way he exploited the uncertainty of reason in the

face of these questions to the benefit of the religious attitude which he

had outgrown.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2140

 

    At the third session he completed his very characteristic story of his

efforts at fulfilling his obsessional vow. That evening the last gathering

of officers had taken place before the end of the manoeuvres. It had

fallen to him to reply to the toast of ‘The Gentlemen of the Reserve’.

He had spoken well, but as if he were in a dream, for at the back of his

mind he was being incessantly tormented by his vow. He had spent a

terrible night. Arguments and counter-arguments had struggled with

one  another.  The  chief  argument,  of  course,  had  been  that  the

premise upon which his vow had been based - that Lieutenant A. had

paid the money for him - had proved to be false. However, he had

consoled  himself  with  the  thought  that  the  business  was  not  yet

finished, as A. would be riding with him next morning part of the way

to the railway station at P--, so that he would still have time to ask him

the necessary favour. As a matter of fact he had not done this, and

had allowed A. to go off without him; but he had given instructions to

his  orderly  to  let  A.  know  that  he  intended  to  pay  him  a  visit  that

afternoon. He himself had reached the station at half-past nine in the

morning. He had deposited his luggage there and had seen to various

things he had to do in the small town, with the intention of afterwards

paying his visit to A. The village in which A. was stationed was about

an hour’s drive from the town of P--. The railway journey to the place

where the post office was would take three hours. He had calculated,

therefore, that the execution of his complicated plan would just leave

him time to catch the evening train from P--- to Vienna. The ideas that

were struggling within him had been, on the one hand, that he was

simply being cowardly and was obviously only trying to save himself

the unpleasantness of asking A. to make the sacrifice in question and

of cutting a foolish figure before him, and that that was why he was

disregarding his vow; and, on the other hand, that it would, on the

contrary, be cowardly of him to fulfil his vow, since he only wanted to

do  so  in  order  to  be  left  in  peace  by  his  obsessions.  When  in  the

course of his deliberations, the patient added, he found the arguments

so evenly balanced as these, it was his custom to allow his actions to

be decided by chance events as though by the hand of God. When,

therefore, a porter at the station had addressed him with the words,

‘Ten o’clock train, sir? ‘ he had answered ‘Yes’, and in fact had gone

off by the ten o’clock train. In this way he had produced fait accompliand  felt  greatly  relieved.  He  had  proceeded  to  book  a  seat  for

luncheon in the restaurant car. At the first station they had stopped at

it had suddenly struck him that he still had time to get out, wait for the

next  down  train,  travel  back  in  it  to  P--,  drive  to  the  place  where

Lieutenant A. was quartered, from there make the three hours’ train

journey with him to the post office, and so forth. It had only been the

consideration  that  he  had  booked  his  seat  for  luncheon  with  the

steward of the restaurant car that had prevented his carrying out this

design. He had not abandoned it, however; he had only put off getting

out until a later stop. In this way he had struggled through from station

to  station,  till  he  had  reached  one  at  which  it  had  seemed  to  him

impossible to get out because he had relatives living there. He had

then determined to travel through to Vienna, to look up his friend there

and lay the whole matter before him, and then, after his friend had

made  his  decision,  to  catch  the  night  train  back  to  P--.  When  I

expressed a doubt whether this would have been feasible, he assured

me that he would have had half an hour to spare between the arrival

of the one train and the departure of the other. When he had arrived in

Vienna, however, he had failed to find his friend at the restaurant at

which  he  had  counted  on  meeting  him,  and  had  not  reached  his

friend’s house till eleven o’clock at night. He told him the whole story

that very night. His friend had held up his hands in amazement to think

that  he  could  still  be  in  doubt  whether  he  was  suffering  from  an

obsession, and had calmed him down for the night, so that he had

slept  excellently.  Next  morning  they  had  gone  together  to  the  post

office,  to  dispatch  the  3.80 kronen  to  the  post  office  at  which  the

packet containing the pince-nez had arrived.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2141

 

   It was this last statement which provided me with a starting-point

from  which  I  could  begin  straightening  out  the  various  distortions

involved in his story. After his friend had brought him to his senses he

had  dispatched  the  small  sum  of  money  in  question  neither  to

Lieutenant A. nor to Lieutenant B., but direct to the post office. Hemust therefore have known that he owed the amount of the charges

due upon the packet to no one but the official at the post office, and he

must have known this before he started on his journey. It turned out

that in fact he had known it before the captain made his request and

before he himself made his vow; for he now remembered that a few

hours before  meeting  the  cruel  captain  he  had  had  occasion  to

introduce himself to another captain, who had told him how matters

actually stood. This officer, on hearing his name, had told him that he

had been at the post office a short time before, and that the young

lady  there  had  asked  him  whether  he  knew  a  Lieutenant  L.  (the

patient,  that  is),  for  whom  a  packet  had  arrived,  to  be  paid  for  on

delivery. The officer had replied that he did not, but the young lady

had been of opinion that she could trust the unknown lieutenant and

had said that in the meantime she would pay the charges herself. It

had been in this way that the patient had come into possession of the

pince-nez  he  had  ordered.  The  cruel  captain  had  made  a  mistake

when, as he handed him over the packet, he had asked him to pay

back the 3.80 kronen to A., and the patient must have known it was a

mistake.  In  spite  of  this  he  had  made  a  vow  founded  upon  this

mistake, a vow that was bound to be a torment to him. In so doing he

had  suppressed  to  himself,  just  as  in  telling  the  story  he  had

suppressed to me, the episode of the other captain and the existence

of the trusting young lady at the post office. I must admit that when

this  correction  has  been  made  his  behaviour  becomes  even  more

senseless and unintelligible than before.

   After he had left his friend and returned to his family his doubts had

overtaken him afresh. His friend’s arguments, he saw, had been no

different  from  his  own,  and  he  was  under  no  delusion  that  his

temporary  relief  was  attributable  to  anything  more  than  his  friend’s

personal influence. His determination to consult a doctor was woven

into  his  delirium  in  the  following  ingenious  manner.  He  thought  he

would get a doctor to give him a certificate to the effect that it was

necessary  for  him,  in  order  to  recover  his  health,  to  perform  some

such action as he had planned in connection with Lieutenant A.; and

the  lieutenant  would  no  doubt  let  himself  be  persuaded  by  the

certificate into accepting the 3.80 crowns from him. The chance that

one of my books happened to fall into his hands just at that momentdirected  his  choice  to  me.  There  was  no  question  of  getting  a

certificate  from  me,  however;  all  that  he  asked  of  me  was,  very

reasonably, to be freed of his obsessions. Many months later, when

his  resistance  was  at  its  height,  he  once  more  felt  a  temptation  to

travel to P-- after all, to look up Lieutenant A. and to go through the

farce of returning him the money.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2142

 

              (D)  INITIATION INTO THE NATURE OF THE TREATMENT

 

   The reader must not expect to hear at once what light I have to

throw upon the patient’s strange and senseless obsessions about the

rats. The true technique of psycho-analysis requires the physician to

suppress  his  curiosity  and  leaves  the  patient  complete  freedom  in

choosing the order in which topics shall succeed each other during the

treatment.  At  the  fourth  session,  accordingly,  I  received  the  patient

with the question: ‘And how do you intend to proceed to-day?’

      ‘I  have  decided  to  tell  you  something  which  I  consider  most

important and which has tormented me from the very first.’ He then

told me at great length the story of the last illness of his father, who

had died of emphysema nine years previously. One evening, thinking

that the condition was one which would come to a crisis, he had asked

the doctor when the danger could be regarded as over. ‘The evening

of the day after to-morrow’, had been the reply. It had never entered

his head that his father might not survive that limit. At half-past eleven

at night he had lain down for an hour’s rest. He had woken up at one

o’clock, and had been told by a medical friend that his father had died.

He had reproached himself with not having been present at his death;

and the reproach had been intensified when the nurse told him that his

father had spoken his name once during the last days, and had said to

her as she came up to the bed: ‘Is that Paul?’ He had thought he

noticed  that  his  mother  and  sisters  had  been  inclined  to  reproach

themselves in a similar way; but they had never spoken about it. At

first, however, the reproach had not tormented him. For a long time he

had  not  realized  the  fact  of  his  father’s  death.  It  had  constantlyhappened that, when he heard a good joke, he would say to himself: ‘I

must tell Father that.’ His imagination, too, had been occupied with his

father, so that often, when there was a knock at the door, he would

think: ‘Here comes Father’, and when he walked into a room he would

expect to find his father in it. And although he had never forgotten that

his father was dead, the prospect of seeing a ghostly apparition of this

kind  had  had  no  terrors  for  him;  on  the  contrary,  he  had  greatly

desired  it.  It  had  not  been  until  eighteen  months  later  that  the

recollection of his neglect had recurred to him and begun to torment

him terribly, so that he had come to treat himself as a criminal. The

occasion of this happening had been the death of an aunt by marriage

and of a visit of condolence that he had paid at her house. From that

time  forward  he  had  extended  the  structure  of  his  obsessional

thoughts so as to include the next world. The immediate consequence

of this development had been that he became seriously incapacitated

from working.¹ He told me that the only thing that had kept him going

at that time had been the consolation given him by his friend, who had

always  brushed  his  self-reproaches  aside  on  the  ground  that  they

were  grossly  exaggerated.  Hearing  this,  I  took  the  opportunity  of

giving him a first glance at the underlying principles of psycho-analytic

therapy. When there is a mésalliance, I began, between an affect and

its  ideational  content  (in  this  instance,  between  the  intensity  of  the

self-reproach and the occasion for it ), a layman will say that the affect

is  too  great  for  the  occasion  -  that  it  is  exaggerated  and  that

consequently  the  inference  following  from  the  self-reproach  (the

inference that the patient is a criminal) is false. On the contrary, the

physician says: ‘No. The affect is justified. The sense of guilt is not in

itself open to further criticism. But it belongs to some other content,

which is unknown (unconscious), and which requires to be looked for.

The  known  ideational  content  has  only  got  into  its  actual  position

owing to a false connection. We are not used to feeling strong affects

without  their  having  any  ideational  content,  and  therefore,  if  the

content is missing, we seize as a substitute upon some other content

which is in some way or other suitable, much as our police, when they

cannot  catch  the  right  murderer,  arrest  a  wrong  one  instead.

Moreover, this fact of there being a false connection is the only way of

accounting for the powerlessness of logical processes to combat thetormenting idea.’ I concluded by admitting that this new way of looking

at the matter gave immediate rise to some hard problems; for how

could he admit that his self-reproach of being a criminal towards his

father was justified, when he must know that as a matter of fact he

had never committed any crime against him?

 

   ¹ A more detailed description of the episode, which the patient gave me later on, made it

possible to understand the effect that it produced on him. His uncle, lamenting the loss of his
wife, had exclaimed: ‘Other men allow themselves every possible indulgence, but I lived for
this woman alone!’ The patient had assumed that his uncle was alluding to his father and was
casting doubts upon his conjugal fidelity; and although his uncle had denied this construction
of his words most positively, it was no longer possible to counteract their effect.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2143

 

 

   At the next session the patient showed great interest in what I had

said, but ventured, so he told me, to bring for ward a few doubts. -

How, he asked, could the information that the self-reproach, the sense

of guilt, was justified have a therapeutic effect? - I explained that it

was not the information that had this effect, but the discovery of the

unknown  content  to  which  the  self-reproach  was  really  attached.  -

Yes, he said, that was the precise point to which his question had

been  directed.  -  I  then  made  some  short  observations  upon the

psychological  differences  between  the  conscious  and  the

unconscious, and upon the fact that everything conscious was subject

to  a  process  of  wearing-away,  while  what  was  unconscious  was

relatively unchangeable; and I illustrated my remarks by pointing to

the antiques standing about in my room. They were, in fact, I said,

only  objects  found  in  a  tomb,  and  their  burial  had  been  their

preservation: the destruction of Pompeii was only beginning now that

it had been dug up. - Was there any guarantee, he next enquired, of

what one’s attitude would be towards what was discovered? One man,

he thought, would no doubt behave in such a way as to get the better

of his self-reproach, but another would not. - No, I said, it followed

from  the  nature  of  the  circumstances  that  in  every  case  the  affect

would be overcome - for the most part during the progress of the workitself.  Every  effort  was  made  to  preserve  Pompeii,  whereas  people

were anxious to be rid of tormenting ideas like his. - He had said to

himself,  he  went  on,  that  a  self-reproach  could  only  arise  from  a

breach of a person’s own inner moral principles and not from that of

any  external  ones.  -  I  agreed,  and  said  that  the  man  who  merely

breaks an external law often regards himself as a hero. - Such an

occurrence,  he  continued,  was  thus  only  possible  where  a

disintegration  of  the  personality  was  already  present.  Was  there  a

possibility  of  his  effecting  a  reintegration  of  his  personality?  If  this

could be done, he thought he would be able to make a success of his

life, perhaps more of one than most people. - I replied that I was in

complete agreement with this notion of a splitting of his personality.

He had only to assimilate this new contrast, between a moral self and

an evil one, with the contrast I had already mentioned, between the

conscious and the unconscious. The moral self was the conscious, the

evil  self  was  the  unconscious.¹  -  He  then  said  that,  though  he

considered himself a moral person, he could quite definitely remember

having done things in his childhood which came from his other self. - I

remarked  that  here  he  had  incidentally  hit  upon  one  of  the  chief

characteristics of the unconscious, namely, its relation to the infantile.

The unconscious, I explained, was the infantile; it was that part of the

self which had become separated off from it in infancy, which had not

shared  the  later  stages  of  its  development,  and  which  had  in

consequence  become repressed.  It  was  the  derivatives  of  this

repressed  unconscious  that  were  responsible  for  the  involuntary

thoughts  which  constituted  his  illness.  He  might  now,  I  added,

discover  yet  another  characteristic  of  the  unconscious;  it  was  a

discovery which I should be glad to let him make for himself. - He

found nothing more to say in this immediate connection, but instead

he expressed a doubt whether it was possible to undo modifications of

such long standing. What, in particular, could be done against his idea

about the next world, for it could not be refuted by logic? - I told him I

did  not  dispute  the  gravity  of  his  case  nor  the  significance  of  his

pathological constructions; but at the same time his youth was very

much in his favour as well as the intactness of his personality. In this

connection I said a word or two upon the good opinion I had formed of

him, and this gave him visible pleasure. 

   ¹ All of this is of course only true in the roughest way, but it serves as a first introduction to

the subject.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2144

 

 

   At the next session he began by saying that he must tell me an

event in his childhood. From the age of seven, as he had already told

me, he had had a fear that his parents guessed his thoughts, and this

fear  had  in  fact  persisted  all  through  his  life.  When  he  was  twelve

years old he had been in love with a little girl, the sister of a friend of

his.  (In  answer  to  a  question  he  said  that  his  love  had  not  been

sensual; he had not wanted to see her naked for she was too small.)

But she had not shown him as much affection as he had desired. And

thereupon the idea had come to him that she would be kind to him if

some misfortune were to befall him; and as an instance of such a

misfortune his father’s death had forced itself upon his mind. He had

at once rejected the idea with energy. And even now he could not

admit the possibility that what had arisen in this way could have been

a ‘wish’; it had clearly been no more than a ‘train of thought’¹ - By way

of  objection  I  asked  him  why,  if  it  had  not  been  a  wish,  he  had

repudiated it. - Merely, he replied, on account of the content of the

idea, the notion that his father might die. - I remarked that he was

treating the phrase as though it were one that involved lèse-majesté; it

was well known, of course, that it was equally punishable to say ‘The

Emperor is an ass’ or to disguise the forbidden words by saying ‘If any

one says, etc., . . . then he will have me to reckon with.’ I added that I

could easily insert the idea which he had so energetically repudiated

into  a  context  which  would  exclude  the  possibility  of  any  such

repudiation: for instance, ‘If my father dies, I shall kill myself upon his

grave.’ - He was shaken, but did not abandon his objection. I therefore

broke off the argument with the remark that I felt sure this had not

been  the  first  occurrence  of  his  idea  of  his  father’s  dying;  it  had

evidently originated at an earlier date, and some day we should have

to  trace  back  its  history.  -  He  then  proceeded  to  tell  me  that  aprecisely similar thought had flashed through his mind a second time,

six months before his father’s death. At that time² he had already been

in love with his lady, but financial obstacles made it impossible to think

of an alliance with her. The idea had then occurred to him that his

father’s death might make him rich enough to marry her. In defending

himself against this idea he had gone to the length of wishing that his

father  might  leave  him  nothing  at  all,  so  that  he  might  have  no

compensation for his terrible loss. The same idea, though in a much

milder form, had come to him for a third time, on the day before his

father’s death. He had then thought: ‘Now I may be going to lose what

I love most’; and then had come the contradiction: ‘No, there is some

one  else  whose  loss  would  be  even  more  painful  to  you.’³  These

thoughts surprised him very much, for he was quite certain that his

father’s death could never have been an object of his desire but only

of his fear. - After his forcible enunciation of these words I thought it

advisable to bring a fresh piece of theory to his notice. According to

psycho-analytic theory, I told him, every fear corresponded to a former

wish which was now repressed; we were therefore obliged to believe

the exact contrary of what he had asserted. This would also fit in with

another theoretical requirement, namely, that the unconscious must

be the precise contrary of the conscious. - He was much agitated at

this and very incredulous. He wondered how he could possibly have

had such a wish, considering that he loved his father more than any

one else in the world; there could be no doubt that he would have

renounced all his own prospects of happiness if by so doing he could

have saved his father’s life. - I answered that it was precisely such

intense  love  as  his  that  was  the  necessary  precondition  of  the

repressed hatred. In the case of people to whom he felt indifferent he

would  certainly  have  no  difficulty  in  maintaining  side  by  side

inclinations to a moderate liking and to an equally moderate dislike:

supposing, for instance, that he were an official, he might think that his

chief was agreeable as a superior, but at the same time pettifogging

as a lawyer and inhuman as a judge. (Shakespeare makes Brutus

speak in a similar way of Julius Caesar: ‘As Caesar loved me, I weep

for him; as he was fortunate, I rejoice at it; as he was valiant, I honour

him; but, as he was ambitious, I slew him.’ But these words already

strike  us  as  rather  strange,  and  for  the  very  reason  that  we  hadimagined  Brutus’s  feeling  for  Caesar  as  something  deeper.)  In  the

case of some one who was closer to him, of his wife for instance, he

would wish his feelings to be unmixed, and consequently, as was only

human,  he  would  overlook  her  faults,  since  they  might  make  him

dislike her - he would ignore them as though he were blind to them.

So it was precisely the intensity of his love that would not allow his

hatred - though to give it such a name was to caricature the feeling -

to remain conscious. To be sure, the hatred must have a source, and

to discover that source was certainly a problem; his own statements

pointed to the time when he was afraid that his parents guessed his

thoughts. On the other hand, too, it might be asked why this intense

love of his had not succeeded in extinguishing his hatred, as usually

happened where there were two opposing impulses. We could only

presume  that  the  hatred  must  flow  from  some  source,  must  be

connected with some particular cause, which made it indestructible.

On the one hand, then, some connection of this sort must be keeping

his hatred for his father alive, while on the other hand, his intense love

prevented it from becoming conscious. Therefore nothing remained for

it but to exist in the unconscious, though it was able from time to time

to flash out for a moment into consciousness.

 

   ¹ Obsessional neurotics are not the only people who are satisfied with euphemisms of this

kind.

   ² That is, ten years ago.

   ³ There is here an unmistakable indication of an opposition between the two objects of his

love, his father and the ‘lady’.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2145

 

   He admitted that all of this sounded quite plausible, but he was

naturally not in the very least convinced by it.¹ He would venture to

ask,  he  said,  how  it  was  that  an  idea  of  this  kind  could  have

remissions, how it could appear for a moment when he was twelve

years old, and again when he was twenty, and then once more two

years later, this time for good. He could not believe that his hostility

had been extinguished in the intervals, and yet during them there hadbeen no sign of self-reproaches. - To this I replied that whenever any

one  asked  a  question  like  that,  he  was  already  prepared  with  an

answer; he needed only to be encouraged to go on talking. - He then

proceeded, somewhat disconnectedly as it seemed, to say that he had

been his father’s best friend, and that his father had been his. Except

on a few subjects, upon which fathers and sons usually hold aloof

from one another - (What could he mean by that?) -, there had been a

greater intimacy between them than there now was between him and

his best friend. As regards the lady for whose sake he had sacrificed

his father in that idea of his, it was true that he had loved her very

much, but he had never felt really sensual wishes towards her, such

as he had constantly had in his childhood. Altogether, in his childhood

his sensual impulses had been much stronger than during his puberty.

- At this I told him I thought he had now produced the answer we were

waiting  for,  and  had  at  the  same  time  discovered  the  third  great

characteristic of the unconscious. The source from which his hostility

to his father derived its indestructibility was evidently something in the

nature of sensual desires, and in that connection he must have felt his

father as in some way or other an interference. A conflict of this kind, I

added, between sensuality and childish love was entirely typical. The

remissions he had spoken of had occurred because the premature

explosion  of  his  sensual  feelings  had  had  as  its  immediate

consequence a considerable diminution of their violence. It was not

until  he  was  once  more  seized  with  intense  erotic  desires  that  his

hostility reappeared again owing to the revival of the old situation. I

then got him to agree that I had not led him on to the subject either of

childhood or of sex, but that he had raised them both of his own free

will.  -  He  then  went  on  to  ask  why  he  had  not  simply  come  to  a

decision, at the time he was in love with the lady, that his father’s

interference with that love could not for a moment weigh against his

love of his father. - I replied that it was scarcely possible to destroy a

person in absentia. Such a decision would only have been possible if

the wish that he took objection to had made its first appearance on

that occasion; whereas, as a matter of fact, it was a long-repressed

wish,  towards  which  he  could  not  behave  otherwise  than  he  had

formerly done, and which was consequently immune from destruction.

This wish (to get rid of his father as being an interference) must haveoriginated at a time when circumstances had been very different - at a

time, perhaps, when he had not loved his father more than the person

whom he desired sensually, or when he was incapable of making a

clear  decision.  It  must  have  been  in  his  very  early  childhood,

therefore, before he had reached the age of six, and before the date at

which  his  memory  became  continuous;  and  things  must  have

remained  in  the  same  state  ever  since.  -  With  this  piece  of

construction our discussion was broken off for the time being.

 

   ¹ It is never the aim of discussions like this to create conviction. They are only intended to

bring the repressed complexes into consciousness, to set the conflict going in the field of
conscious  mental  activity,  and  to  facilitate  the  emergence  of  fresh  material  from  the
unconscious. A sense of conviction is only attained after the patient has himself worked over
the  reclaimed  material,  and  so  long  as  he  is  not  fully  convinced  the  material  must  be
considered as unexhausted.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2146

 

 

   At the next session, which was the seventh, he took up the same

subject once more. He could not believe, he said, that he had ever

entertained such a wish against his father. He remembered a story of

Sudermann’s, he went on, that had made a deep impression upon

him. In this story there was a woman who, as she sat by her sister’s

sick-bed, felt a wish that her sister should die so that she herself might

marry  her  husband.  The  woman  thereupon  committed  suicide,

thinking she was not fit to live after being guilty of such baseness. He

could  understand  this,  he  said,  and  it  would  be  only  right  if  his

thoughts  were  the  death  of  him,  for  he  deserved  nothing  less.¹  -  I

remarked that it was well known to us that patients derived a certain

satisfaction from their sufferings, so that in reality they all resisted their

own recovery to some extent. He must never lose sight of the fact that

a treatment like ours proceeded to the accompaniment of a constant

resistance; I should be repeatedly reminding him of this fact.

   He then went on to say that he would like to speak of a criminal act,

whose author he did not recognize as himself, though he quite clearly

recollected committing it. He quoted a saying of Nietzsche’s:² ‘"I didthis," says my Memory. "I cannot have done this," says my Pride and

remains inexorable. In the end - Memory yields.’ ‘Well,’ he continued,

‘my memory has not  yielded  on  this  point.’  -  ‘That  is  because  you

derive  pleasure  from  your  self-reproaches  as  a  means  of  self-

punishment.’ - ‘My younger brother - I am really very fond of him now,

and he is causing me a great deal of worry just at present, for he

wants to make what I consider a preposterous match; I have thought

before now of going and killing the person concerned so as to prevent

his marrying her -well, my younger brother and I used to fight a lot

when we were children. We were very fond of each other at the same

time, and were inseparable; but I was plainly filled with jealousy, as he

was the stronger and better-looking of the two and consequently the

favourite.’ - ‘Yes. You have already given me a description of a scene

of  jealousy  in  connection  with  Fräulein  Lina.’  -  ‘Very  well  then,  on

some such occasion (it was certainly before I was eight years old, for I

was not going to school yet, which I began to do when I was eight) -

on some such occasion, this is what I did. We both had toy guns of the

usual make. I loaded mine with the ram rod and told him that if he

looked up the barrel he would see something. Then, while he was

looking in, I pulled the trigger. He was hit on the forehead and not hurt;

but I had meant to hurt him very much indeed. Afterwards I was quite

beside  myself,  and  threw  myself  on  the  ground  and  asked  myself

however I could have done such a thing. But I did do it.’ - I took the

opportunity of urging my case. If he had preserved the recollection of

an action so foreign to him as this, he could not, I maintained, deny

the  possibility  of  something  similar,  which  he  had  now  forgotten

entirely, having happened at a still earlier age in relation to his father. -

He then told me he was aware of having felt other vindictive impulses,

this time towards the lady he admired so much, of whose character he

painted a glowing picture. It might be true, he said, that she could not

love easily; but she was reserving her whole self for the one man to

whom she would some day belong. She did not love him. When he

had become certain of that, a conscious phantasy had taken shape in

his mind of how he should grow very rich and marry some one else,

and  should  then  take  her  to  call  on  the  lady  in  order  to  hurt  her

feelings. But at that point the phantasy had broken down, for he had

been obliged to own to himself that the other woman, his wife, wascompletely indifferent to him; then his thoughts had become confused,

till finally it had been clearly borne in upon him that this other woman

would have to die. In this phantasy, just as in his attempt upon his

brother,  he  recognized  the  quality  of cowardice  which  was  so

particularly horrible to him.³ - In the further course of our conversation

I pointed out to him that he ought logically to consider himself as in no

way responsible for any of these traits in his character; for all of these

reprehensible  impulses  originated  from  his  infancy,  and  were  only

derivatives of his infantile character surviving in his unconscious; and

he  must  know  that  moral  responsibility  could  not  be  applied  to

children. It was only by a process of development, I added, that a

man,  with  his  moral  responsibility,  grew  up  out  of  the  sum  of  his

                              4
infantile predispositions. He expressed a doubt, however, whether all

his evil impulses had originated from that source. But I promised to

prove it to him in the course of the treatment.

   He went on to adduce the fact of his illness having become so

enormously intensified since his father’s death; and I said I agreed

with him in so far as I regarded his sorrow at his father’s death as the

chief source of the intensity of his illness. His sorrow had found, as it

were, a pathological expression in his illness. Whereas, I told him, a

normal  period  of  mourning  would  last  from  one  to  two  years,  a

pathological one like this would last indefinitely.

 

   This is as much of the present case history as I am able to report in

a  detailed  and  consecutive  manner.  It  coincides  roughly  with  the

expository  portion  of  the  treatment;  this  lasted  in  all  for  more  than

eleven months.

 

   ¹ This sense of guilt involves the most glaring contradiction of his opening denial that he

had ever entertained such an evil wish against his father. This is a common type of reaction to
repressed material which has become conscious: the ‘No’ with which the fact is first denied is
immediately followed by a confirmation of it, though, to begin with, only an indirect one.

   ² Jenseits von Gut und Böse, iv. 68.

   ³ This quality of his will find an explanation later on.

  4
     I  only  produced  these  arguments  so  as  once  more  to  demonstrate  to  myself  their

inefficacy. I cannot understand how other psychotherapists can assert that they successfully
combat neuroses with such weapons as these.
                 Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2147

 

            (E)  SOME OBSESSIONAL IDEAS AND THEIR EXPLANATION

 

   Obsessional ideas, as is well known, have an appearance of being

either without motive or without meaning, just a dreams have. The first

problem is how to give them a sense and a status in the subject’s

mental life, so as to make them comprehensible and even obvious.

The  problem  of  translating  them  may  seem  insoluble;  but  we  must

never let ourselves be misled by that illusion. The wildest and most

eccentric obsessional ideas can be cleared up if they are investigated

deeply enough. The solution is effected by bringing the obsessional

ideas into temporal relationship with the patient’s experiences, that is

to say, by enquiring when a particular obsessional idea made its first

appearance  and  in  what  external  circumstances  it  is  apt  to  recur.

When, as so often happens, an obsessional idea has not succeeded

in  establishing  itself  permanently,  the  task  of  clearing  it  up  is

correspondingly  simplified.  We  can  easily  convince  ourselves  that,

when once the interconnections between an obsessional idea and the

patient’s experiences have been discovered, there will be no difficulty

in  obtaining  access  to  whatever  else  may  be  puzzling  or  worth

knowing  in  the  pathological  structure  we  are  dealing  with  -  its

meaning,  the  mechanism  of  its  origin,  and  its  derivation  from  the

preponderant motive forces of the patient’s mind.

   As a particularly clear example I will begin with one of the suicidal

impulses which appeared so frequently in our patient. This instance

almost  analysed  itself  in  the  telling.  He  had  once,  he  told  me,  lost

some weeks of study owing to his lady’s absence: she had gone away

to nurse her grandmother, who was seriously ill. Just as he was in the

middle of a very hard piece of work the idea had occurred to him: ‘If

you received a command to take your examination this term at the first

possible opportunity, you might manage to obey it. But if you were

commanded to cut your throat with a razor, what then?’ He had at

once become aware that this command had already been given, and

was hurrying to the cupboard to fetch his razor when he thought: ‘No,

it’s not so simple as that. You must¹ go and kill the old woman.’ Upon

that, he had fallen to the ground, beside himself with horror.   In this instance the connection between the compulsive idea and the

patient’s life is contained in the opening words of his story. His lady

was absent, while he was working very hard for an examination so as

to bring the possibility of an alliance with her nearer. While he was

working he was overcome by a longing for his absent lady, and he

thought of the cause of her absence. And now there came over him

something which, if he had been a normal man, would probably have

been some kind of feeling of annoyance with her grandmother: ‘Why

must the old woman get ill just at the very moment when I’m longing

for her so frightfully?’ We must suppose that something similar but far

more intense passed through our patient’s mind - an unconscious fit of

rage which could combine with his longing and find expression in the

exclamation:  ‘Oh,  I  should  like  to  go  and  kill  that  old  woman  for

robbing  me  of  my  love!’  Thereupon  followed  the  command:  ‘Kill

yourself, as a punishment for these savage and murderous passions!’

The  whole  process  then  passed  into  the  obsessional  patient’s

consciousness  accompanied  by  the  most  violent  affect  and in  a

reverse order - the punitive command coming first, and the mention of

the guilty outburst afterwards. I cannot think that this attempt at an

explanation  will  seem  forced  or  that  it  involves  many  hypothetical

elements.

 

   ¹ The sense requires that the word ‘first’ should be interpolated here.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2148

 

   Another impulse, which might be described as indirectly suicidal and

which  was  of  longer  duration,  was  not  so  easily  explicable.  For  its

relation  to  the  patient’s  experiences  succeeded  in  concealing  itself

behind  one  of  those  purely  external  associations  which  are  so

obnoxious to our consciousness. One day while he was away on his

summer holidays the idea suddenly occurred to him that he was too

fat [German ‘dick’]  and  that  he  must make himself slimmer.  So  he

began  getting  up  from  table  before  the  pudding  came  round  and

tearing along the road without a hat in the blazing heat of an August

sun. Then he would dash up a mountain at the double, till, drippingwith perspiration, he was forced to come to a stop. On one occasion

his  suicidal  intentions  actually  emerged  without  any  disguise  from

behind this mania for slimming: as he was standing on the edge of a

steep precipice he suddenly received a command to jump over, which

would  have  been  certain  death.  Our  patient  could  think  of  no

explanation of this senseless obsessional behaviour until it suddenly

occurred to him that at that time his lady had also been stopping at the

same resort; but she had been in the company of an English cousin,

who was very attentive to her and of whom the patient had been very

jealous. This cousin’s name was Richard, and, according to the usual

practice in England, he was known as Dick. Our patient, then, had

wanted  to  kill  this  Dick;  he  had  been  far  more  jealous  of  him  and

enraged with him than he could admit to himself, and that was why he

had  imposed  on  himself  this  course  of  slimming  by  way  of  a

punishment. This obsessional impulse may seem very different from

the directly suicidal command which was discussed above, but they

have nevertheless one important feature in common. For they both

arose  as  reactions  to  a  tremendous  feeling  of  rage,  which  was

inaccessible to the patient’s consciousness and was directed against

some one who had cropped up as an interference with the course of

his love.¹

 

   ¹ Names and words are not nearly so frequently or so recklessly employed in obsessional

neuroses as in hysteria for the purpose of establishing a connection between unconscious
thoughts (whether they are impulses or phantasies) and symptoms. I happen, however, to
recollect another instance in which the very same name, Richard, was similarly used by a
patient whom I analysed a long time since. After a quarrel with his brother he began brooding
over the best means of getting rid of his fortune, and declaring that he did not want to have
anything more to do with money, and so on. His brother was called Richard, and ‘richard’ is
the French for ‘a rich man’.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2149

 

   Some other of the patient’s obsessions, however, though they too

were  centred  upon  his  lady,  exhibited  a  different  mechanism  and

owed their origin to a different instinct. Besides his slimming mania he

produced a whole series of other obsessional activities at the periodduring which the lady was stopping at his summer resort; and, in part

at least, these directly related to her. One day, when he was out with

her in a boat and there was a stiff breeze blowing, he was obliged to

make her put on his cap, because a command had been formulated in

his  mind  that nothing  must  happen  to  her.¹  This  was  a  kind  of

obsession for protecting, and it bore other fruit besides this. Another

time,  as  they  were  sitting  together  during  a  thunderstorm,  he  was

obsessed, he could not tell why, with the necessity for counting up to

forty  or  fifty  between  each  flash  of  lightning  and  its  accompanying

thunder-clap. On the day of her departure he knocked his foot against

a stone lying in the road, and was obliged to put it out of the way by

the side of the road, because the idea struck him that her carriage

would be driving along the same road in a few hours’ time and might

come to grief against this stone. But a few minutes later it occurred to

him that this was absurd, and he was obliged to go back and replace

the stone in its original position in the middle of the road. After her

departure he became a prey to an obsession for understanding, which

made  him  a  curse  to  all  his  companions.  He  forced  himself  to

understand the precise meaning of every syllable that was addressed

to  him,  as  though  he  might  otherwise  be  missing  some  priceless

treasure. Accordingly he kept asking: ‘What was it you said just then?‘

And after it had been repeated to him he could not help thinking it had

sounded different the first time, so he remained dissatisfied.

 

   ¹ The words ‘for which he might be to blame’ must be added to complete the sense.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2150

 

      All  of  these  products  of  his  illness  depended  upon  a  certain

circumstance which at that time dominated his relations to his lady.

When he had been taking leave of her in Vienna before the summer

holidays,  she  had  said  something  which  he  had  construed  into  a

desire on her part to disown him before the rest of the company; and

this had made him very unhappy. During her stay at the holiday resort

there had been an opportunity for discussing the question, and the

lady had been able to prove to him that these words of hers which hehad misunderstood had on the contrary been intended to save him

from looking ridiculous. This made him very happy again. The clearest

allusion  to  this  incident  was  contained  in  the  obsession  for

understanding.  It  was  constructed  as  though  he  were  saying  to

himself: ‘After such an experience you must never misunderstand any

one again, if you want to spare yourself unnecessary distress.’ This

resolution was not merely a generalization from a single occasion, but

it was also displaced - perhaps on account of the lady’s absence -

from a single highly valued individual on to all the remaining inferior

ones.  And  the  obsession  cannot  have  arisen  solely  from  his

satisfaction  at  the  explanation  she  had  given  him;  it  must  have

expressed  something  else  besides,  for  it  ended  in  an  unsatisfying

doubt as to whether what he had heard had been correctly repeated.

   The other compulsive commands that have been mentioned put us

upon the track of this other element. His obsession for protecting can

only  have  been  a  reaction  -  as  an  expression  of  remorse  and

penitence - to a contrary, that is a hostile, impulse which he must have

felt  towards  his  lady  before  they  had  their éclaircissement.  His

obsession  for  counting  during  the  thunderstorm  can  be  interpreted,

with the help of some material which he produced, as having been a

defensive  measure  against  fears  that  some  one  was  in  danger  of

death. The analysis of the obsessions which we first considered has

already  warned  us  to  regard  our  patient’s  hostile  impulses  as

particularly violent and as being in the nature of senseless rage; and

now we find that even after their reconciliation his rage against the

lady continued to play a part in the formation of his obsessions. His

doubting  mania  as  to  whether  he  had  heard  correctly  was  an

expression of the doubt still lurking in his mind, whether he had really

understood  his  lady  correctly  this  time  and  whether  he  had  been

justified in taking her words as a proof of her affection for him. The

doubt implied in his obsession for understanding was a doubt of her

love. A battle between love and hate was raging in the lover’s breast,

and the object of both these feelings was one and the same person.

The battle was represented in a plastic form by his compulsive and

symbolic act of removing the stone from the road along which she was

to drive, and then of undoing this deed of love by replacing the stone

where it had lain, so that her carriage might come to grief against itand she herself be hurt. We shall not be forming a correct judgement

of this second part of the compulsive act if we take it at its face value

as having merely been a critical repudiation of a pathological action.

The fact that it was accompanied by a sense of compulsion betrays it

as having itself been a part of the pathological action, though a part

which was determined by a motive contrary to that which produced the

first part.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2151

 

   Compulsive acts like this, in two successive stages, of which the

second neutralizes the first, are a typical occurrence in obsessional

neuroses. The patient’s consciousness naturally misunderstands them

and puts forward a set of secondary motives to account for them -

rationalizes  them,  in  short.  (Cf.  Jones,  1908.)  But  their  true

significance lies in their being a representation of a conflict between

two opposing impulses of approximately equal strength: and hitherto I

have invariably found that this opposition has been one between love

and  hate.  Compulsive  acts  of  this  sort  are  theoretically  of  special

interest,  for  they  show  us  a  new  type  of  method  of  constructing

symptoms. What regularly occurs in hysteria is that a compromise is

arrived  at  which  enables  both  the  opposing  tendencies  to  find

expression  simultaneously  -  which  kills  two  birds  with  one  stone;¹

whereas here each of the two opposing tendencies finds satisfaction

singly,  first  one  and  then  the  other,  though  naturally  an  attempt  is

made to establish some sort of logical connection (often in defiance of

all logic) between the antagonists.²

 

   ¹ Cf. ‘Hysterical Phantasies and their Relation to Bisexuality’ (Freud, 1908a).

   ² Another obsessional patient once told me the following story. He was walking one day in

the  park  at  Schönbrunn  when  he  kicked  his  foot  against  a  branch  that  was  lying  on  the
ground. He picked it up and flung it into the hedge that bordered the path. On his way home
he was suddenly seized with uneasiness that the branch in its new position might perhaps be
projecting a little from the hedge and might cause an injury to some one passing by the same
place after him. He was obliged to jump off his tram, hurry back to the park, find the place
again, and put the branch back in its former position - although any one else but the patient
would have seen that, on the contrary, it was bound to be more dangerous to passers-by in itsoriginal position than where he had put it in the hedge. The second and hostile act, which he
carried out under compulsion, had clothed itself to his conscious view with the motives that
really belonged to the first and philanthropic one.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2152

 

   The conflict between love and hatred showed itself in our patient by

other signs as well. At the time of the revival of his piety he made up

prayers for himself, which took up more and more time and eventually

lasted for an hour and a half. The reason for this was that he found,

like an inverted Balaam, that something always inserted itself into his

pious phrases and turned them into their opposite. E.g., if he said,

‘May God protect him’, an evil spirit would hurriedly insinuate a ‘not’.¹

On one such occasion the idea occurred to him of cursing instead, for

in that case, he thought, the contrary words would be sure to creep in.

His original intention, which had been repressed by his praying, was

forcing its way through in this last idea of his. In the end he found his

way out of his embarrassment by giving up the prayers and replacing

them by a short formula concocted out of the initial letters or syllables

of various prayers. He then recited this formula so quickly that nothing

could slip into it.

   He once brought me a dream which represented the same conflict in

relation to his transference on to the physician. He dreamt that my

mother was dead; he was anxious to offer me his condolences, but

was afraid that in doing so he might break into an impertinent laugh,

as  he  had  repeatedly  done  on  similar  occasions  in  the  past.  He

preferred, therefore, to leave a card on me with ‘p. c.’ written on it; but

as he was writing them the letters turned into ‘p. f.’²

 

   ¹ Compare the similar mechanism in the familiar case of sacrilegious thoughts entering the

minds of devout persons.

   ² [The customary abbreviations for ‘pour condoler’ and ‘pour féliciter’ respectively.] This

dream provides the explanation of the compulsive laughter which so often occurs on mournful
occasions and which is regarded as such an unaccountable phenomenon.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2153 

   The mutual antagonism between his feelings for his lady was too

marked to have escaped his conscious perception entirely, although

we may conclude from the obsessions in which it was manifested that

he did not rightly appreciate the depth of his negative impulses. The

lady had refused his first proposal, ten years earlier. Since then he

had  to  his  own  knowledge  passed  through  alternating  periods,  in

which he either believed that he loved her intensely, or felt indifferent

to her. Whenever in the course of the treatment he was faced by the

necessity  of  taking  some  step  which  would  bring  him  nearer  the

successful end of his courtship, his resistance usually began by taking

the form of a conviction that after all he did not very much care for her

- though this resistance, it is true, used soon to break down. Once

when  she  was  lying  seriously  ill  in  bed  and  he  was  most  deeply

concerned about her, there crossed his mind as he looked at her a

wish that she might lie like that for ever. He explained this idea by an

ingenious piece of sophistry: maintaining that he had only wished her

to be permanently ill so that he might be relieved of his intolerable fear

that she would have a repeated succession of attacks!¹ Now and then

he used to occupy his imagination with day-dreams, which he himself

recognized as ‘phantasies of revenge’ and felt ashamed of. Believing,

for instance, that the lady set great store by the social standing of a

suitor, he made up a phantasy in which she was married to a man of

that  kind,  who  was  in  some  government  office.  He  himself  then

entered the same department, and rose much more rapidly than her

husband,  who  eventually  became  his  subordinate.  One  day,  his

phantasy proceeded, this man committed some act of dishonesty. The

lady threw herself at his feet and implored him to save her husband.

He promised to do so, and informed her that it had only been for love

of her that he had entered the service, because he had foreseen that

such a moment would occur; and now that her husband was saved,

his own mission was fulfilled and he would resign his post.

   He produced other phantasies in which he did the lady some great

service without her knowing that it was he who was doing it. In these

he only recognized his affection, without sufficiently appreciating the

origin and aim of his magnanimity, which was designed to repress his

thirst for revenge, after the manner of Dumas’ Count of Monte-Cristo.Moreover  he  admitted  that  occasionally  he  was  overcome  by  quite

distinct impulses to do some mischief to the lady he admired. These

impulses  were  mostly  in  abeyance  when  she  was  there,  and  only

appeared in her absence.

 

   ¹ It cannot be doubted that another contributory motive to this compulsive idea was a wish

to know that she was powerless against his designs.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2154

 

                  (F)  THE PRECIPITATING CAUSE OF THE ILLNESS

 

   One day the patient mentioned quite casually an event which I could

not fail to recognize as the precipitating cause of his illness, or at least

as the immediate occasion of the attack which had begun some six

years previously and had persisted to that day. He himself had no

notion that he had brought forward anything of importance; he could

not remember that he had ever attached any importance to the event;

and moreover he had never forgotten it. Such an attitude on his part

calls for some theoretical consideration.

   In hysteria it is the rule that the precipitating causes of the illness are

overtaken by amnesia no less than the infantile experiences by whose

help  the  precipitating  causes  are  able  to  transform  their  affective

energy into symptoms. And where the amnesia cannot be complete, it

nevertheless  subjects  the  recent  traumatic  precipitating  cause  to  a

process  of  erosion  and  robs  it  at  least  of  its  most  important

components. In this amnesia we see the evidence of the repression

which has taken place. The case is different in obsessional neuroses.

The  infantile  preconditions  of  the  neurosis  may  be  overtaken  by

amnesia, though this is often an incomplete one; but the immediate

occasions of the illness are, on the contrary, retained in the memory.

Repression  makes  use  of  another,  and  in  reality  a  simpler,

mechanism. The trauma, instead of being forgotten, is deprived of its

affective cathexis; so that what remains in consciousness is nothing

but its ideational content, which is perfectly colourless and is judged to

be unimportant. The distinction between what occurs in hysteria and inan obsessional neurosis lies in the psychological processes which we

can reconstruct behind the phenomena; the result is almost always

the same, for the colourless mnemic content is rarely reproduced and

plays no part in the patient’s mental activity. In order to differentiate

between the two kinds of repression we have on the surface nothing

to rely upon but the patient’s assurance that he has a feeling in the

one case of having always known the thing and in the other of having

long ago forgotten it.¹

 

   ¹ It must therefore be admitted that in an obsessional neurosis there are two kinds of

knowledge, and it is just as reasonable to hold that the patient ‘knows’ his traumas as that he
does not ‘know’ them. For he knows them in that he has not forgotten them, and he does not
know them in that he is unaware of their significance. It is often the same in ordinary life. The
waiters who used to serve Schopenhauer at his regular restaurant ‘knew’ him in a certain
sense, at a time when, apart from that, he was not known either in Frankfurt or outside it; but
they did not ‘know’ him in the sense in which we speak to-day of ‘knowing’ Schopenhauer.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2155

 

      For  this  reason  it  not  uncommonly  happens  that  obsessional

neurotics, who are troubled with self-reproaches but have connected

their affects with the wrong causes, will also tell the physician the true

causes, without any suspicion that their self-reproaches have simply

become  detached  from  them.  In  relating  such  an  incident  they  will

sometimes add with astonishment or even with an air of pride: ‘But I

think nothing of that.’ This happened in the first case of obsessional

neurosis which gave me an insight many years ago into the nature of

the malady. The patient, who was a government official, was troubled

by innumerable scruples. He was the man whose compulsive act in

connection with the branch in the park at Schönbrunn I have already

described. I was struck by the fact that the florin notes with which he

paid his consultation fees were invariably clean and smooth. (This was

before we had a silver coinage in Austria.) I once remarked to him that

one could always tell a government official by the brand-new florins

that he drew from the State treasury, and he then informed me that his

florins were by no means new, but that he had them ironed out at

home. It was a matter of conscience with him, he explained, not tohand  any  one  dirty  paper  florins;  for  they  harboured  all  sorts  of

dangerous bacteria and might do some harm to the recipient. At that

time  I  already  had  a  vague  suspicion  of  the  connection  between

neuroses and sexual life, so on another occasion I ventured to ask the

patient how he stood in regard to that matter. ‘Oh, that’s quite all right,’

he answered airily, ‘I’m not at all badly off in that respect. I play the

part of a dear old uncle in a number of respectable families, and now

and then I make use of my position to invite some young girl to go out

with me for a day’s excursion in the country. Then I arrange that we

shall miss the train home and be obliged to spend the night out of

town. I always engage two rooms - I do things most handsomely; but

when the girl has gone to bed I go in to her and masturbate her with

my fingers.’ - ‘But aren’t you afraid of doing her some harm, fiddling

about  in  her  genitals  with  your  dirty  hand?’  -  At  this  he  flared  up:

‘Harm? Why, what harm should it do her? It hasn’t done a single one

of them any harm yet, and they’ve all of them enjoyed it. Some of

them are married now, and it hasn’t done them any harm at all.’ - He

took my remonstrance in very bad part, and never appeared again.

But I could only account for the contrast between his fastidiousness

with the paper florins and his unscrupulousness in abusing the girls

entrusted  to  him  by  supposing  that  the  self-reproachful  affect  had

become displaced. The aim of this displacement was obvious enough:

if  his  self-reproaches  had  been  allowed  to  remain  where  they

belonged he would have had to abandon a form of sexual gratification

to  which  he  was  probably  impelled  by  some  powerful  infantile

determinants.  The  displacement  therefore  ensured  his  deriving  a

considerable advantage from his illness.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2156

 

      But  I  must  now  return  to  a  more  detailed  examination  of  the

precipitating  cause  of  our  present  patient’s  illness.  His  mother  was

brought up in a wealthy family with which she was distantly connected.

This family carried on a large industrial concern. His father, at the time

of his marriage, had been taken into the business, and had thus by hismarriage made himself a fairly comfortable position. The patient had

learnt  from  some  chaff  exchanged  between  his  parents  (whose

marriage  was  an  extremely  happy  one)  that  his  father,  some  time

before making his mother’s acquaintance, had made advances to a

pretty  but  penniless  girl  of  humble  birth.  So  much  by  way  of

introduction. After his father’s death the patient’s mother told him one

day that she had been discussing his future with her rich relations, and

that one of her cousins had declared himself ready to let him marry

one of his daughters when his education was completed; a business

connection  with  the  firm  would  offer  him  a  brilliant  opening  in  his

profession. This family plan stirred up in him a conflict as to whether

he should remain faithful to the lady he loved in spite of her poverty, or

whether he should follow in his father’s footsteps and marry the lovely,

rich, and well-connected girl who had been assigned to him. And he

resolved this conflict, which was in fact one between his love and the

persisting influence of his father’s wishes, by falling ill; or, to put it

more correctly, by falling ill he avoided the task of resolving it in real

life.¹

 

   ¹ It is worth emphasizing that his flight into illness was made possible by his identifying

himself with his father. The identification enabled his affects to regress on to the residue of his
childhood.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2157

 

   The proof that this view was correct lies in the fact that the chief

result  of  his  illness  was  an  obstinate  incapacity  for  work,  which

allowed him to postpone the completion of his education for years. But

the results of such an illness are never unintentional; what appears to

be the consequence of the illness is in reality the cause or motive of

falling ill.

   As was to be expected, the patient did not, to begin with, accept my

elucidation of the matter. He could not imagine, he said, that the plan

of  marriage  could  have  had  any  such  effects:  it  had  not  made  the

slightest impression on him at the time. But in the further course of

treatment  he  was  forcibly  brought  to  believe  in  the  truth  of  mysuspicion,  and  in  a  most  singular  manner.  With  the  help  of  a

transference phantasy, he experienced, as though it were new and

belonged to the present, the very episode from the past which he had

forgotten, or which had only passed though his mind unconsciously.

There  came  an  obscure  and  difficult  period  in  the  treatment;

eventually it turned out that he had once met a young girl on the stairs

in  my  house  and  had  on  the  spot  promoted  her  into  being  my

daughter. She had pleased him, and he pictured to himself that the

only reason I was so kind and incredibly patient with him was that I

wanted to have him for a son-in-law. At the same time he raised the

wealth  and  position  of  my  family  to  a  level  which  agreed  with  the

model he had in mind. But his undying love for his lady fought against

the  temptation.  After  we  had  gone  though  a  series  of  the  severest

resistances and bitterest vituperations on his part, he could no longer

remain  blind  to  the  overwhelming  effect  of  the  perfect  analogy

between the transference phantasy and the actual state of affairs in

the past. I will repeat one of the dreams which he had at this period,

so as to give an example of his manner of treating the subject. He

dreamt that he saw my daughter in front of him; she had two patches

of dung instead of eyes. No one who understands the language of

dreams will find much difficulty in translating this one: it declared that

he  was  marrying  my  daughter  not  for  her  ‘beaux  yeux’ but for her

money.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2158

 

        (G)  THE FATHER COMPLEX AND THE SOLUTION OF THE RAT IDEA

 

   From the precipitating cause of the patient’s illness in his adult years

there  was  a  thread  leading  back  to  his  childhood.  He  had  found

himself in a situation similar to that in which, as he knew or suspected,

his father had been before his marriage; and he had thus been able to

identify himself with his father. But his dead father was involved in his

recent attack in yet another way. The conflict at the root of his illness

was in essentials a struggle between the persisting influence of his

father’s  wishes  and  his  own  amatory  predilections.  If  we  take  intoconsideration what the patient reported in the course of the first hours

of his treatment, we shall not be able to avoid a suspicion that this

struggle was a very ancient one and had arisen as far back as in his

childhood.

      By  all  accounts  our  patient’s  father  was  a  most  excellent  may.

Before his marriage he had been a non-commissioned officer, and, as

relics  of  that  period  of  his  life,  he  had  retained  a  straightforward

soldierly manner and a penchant for using downright language. Apart

from  those  virtues  which  are  celebrated  upon  every  tombstone,  he

was distinguished by a hearty sense of humour and a kindly tolerance

towards  his  fellow-men.  That  he  could  be  hasty  and  violent  was

certainly  not  inconsistent  with  his  other  qualities,  but  was  rather  a

necessary complement to them; but it occasionally brought down the

most severe castigations upon the children, while they were young

and  naughty.  When  they  grew  up,  however,  he  differed  from  other

fathers in not attempting to exalt himself into a sacrosanct authority,

but  in  sharing  with  them  a  knowledge  of  the  little  failures  and

misfortunes  of  his  life  with  good-natured  candour.  His  son  was

certainly  not  exaggerating  when  he  declared  that  they  had  lived

together like the best of friends, except upon a single point (p. 2145).

And it must no doubt have been in connection with that very point that

thoughts about his father’s death had occupied his mind when he was

a small boy with unusual and undue intensity (p. 2133), and that those

thoughts  made  their  appearance  in  the  wording  of  the  obsessional

ideas  of  his  childhood;  and  it  can  only  have  been  in  that  same

connection that he was able to wish for his father’s death, in order that

a certain little girl’s sympathy might be aroused and that she might

behave more kindly towards him (p. 2144).

   There can be no question that there was something in the sphere of

sexuality that stood between the father and son, and that the father

had  come  into  some  sort  of  opposition  to  the  son’s  prematurely

developed erotic life. Several years after his father’s death, the first

time he experienced the pleasurable sensations of copulation, an idea

sprang into his mind: ‘This is glorious! One might murder one’s father

for  this!’  This  was  at  once  an  echo  and  an  elucidation  of  the

obsessional  ideas  of  his  childhood.  Moreover,  his  father,  shortly

before his death, had directly opposed what later became our patient’sdominating passion. He had noticed that his son was always in the

lady’s company, and had advised him to keep away from her, saying

that it was imprudent of him and that he would only make a fool of

himself.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2159

 

   To this unimpeachable body of evidence we shall be able to add

fresh material, if we turn to the history of the masturbatory side of our

patient’s sexual activities. There is a conflict between the opinions of

doctors  and  patients  on  this  subject  which  has  not  hitherto  been

properly appreciated. The patients are unanimous in their belief that

masturbation, by which they mean masturbation during puberty, is the

root and origin of all their troubles. The doctors are, upon the whole,

unable to decide what line to take; but, influenced by the knowledge

that not only neurotics but most normal people pass through a period

of masturbation during their puberty, the majority of them are inclined

to  dismiss  the  patients’  assertions  as  gross  exaggerations.  In  my

opinion the patients are once again nearer to a correct view than the

doctors;  for  the  patients  have  some  glimmering  notion  of  the  truth,

while the doctors are in danger of overlooking an essential point. The

thesis propounded by the patients certainly does not correspond to the

facts in the sense in which they themselves construe it, namely, that

masturbation  during  puberty  (which  may  almost  be  described  as  a

typical occurrence) is responsible for all neurotic disturbances. Their

thesis requires interpretation. The masturbation of puberty is in fact no

more than a revival of the masturbation of infancy, a subject which has

hitherto  invariably  been  neglected.  Infantile  masturbation  reaches  a

kind of climax, as a rule, between the ages of three and four or five;

and  it  is  the  clearest  expression  of  a  child’s  sexual  constitution,  in

which the aetiology of subsequent neuroses must be sought. In this

disguised way, therefore, the patients are putting the blame for their

illnesses upon their infantile sexuality; and they are perfectly right in

doing so. On the other hand, the problem of masturbation becomes

insoluble if we attempt to treat it as a clinical unit, and forget that it canrepresent the discharge of every variety of sexual component and of

every sort of phantasy to which such components can give rise. The

injurious  effects  of  masturbation  are  only  in  a  very  small  degree

autonomous - that is to say, determined by its own nature. They are in

substance merely part and parcel of the pathogenic significance of the

subject’s sexual life as a whole. The fact that so many people can

tolerate masturbation - that is, a certain amount of it - without injury

merely  shows  that  their  sexual  constitution  and  the  course  of

development of their sexual life have been such as to allow them to

exercise  the  sexual  function  within  the  limits  of  what  is  culturally

permissible; whereas other people, because their sexual constitution

has been less favourable or their development has been disturbed, fall

ill  as  a  result  of  their  sexuality  -  they  cannot,  that  is,  achieve  the

necessary  suppression  or  sublimation  of  their  sexual  components

without having recourse to inhibitions or substitutes.¹

 

   ¹ See Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality, 1905d.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2160

 

   Our present patient’s behaviour in the matter of masturbation was

most remarkable. He did not practise it during puberty and therefore,

according to one set of views, he might have expected to be exempt

from neurosis. On the other hand, an impulsion towards masturbatory

activities  came  over  him  in  his  twenty-first  year, shortly  after  his

father’s death. He felt very much ashamed of himself each time he

gave way to this kind of gratification, and soon foreswore the habit.

From  that  time  onwards  it  reappeared  only  upon  rare  and

extraordinary  occasions.  It  was  provoked,  he  told  me,  when  he

experienced especially fine moments, or when he read especially fine

passages.  It  occurred  once,  for  instance,  on  a  lovely  summer’s

afternoon when, in the middle of Vienna, he heard a postilion blowing

his horn in the most wonderful way - until a policeman stopped him,

because blowing horns is not allowed in the centre of the town. And

another time it happened when he read in Dichtung und Warheit how

the young Goethe had freed himself in a burst of tenderness from theeffects of a curse which a jealous mistress had pronounced upon the

next woman who should kiss his lips after her; he had long, almost

superstitiously, suffered the curse to hold him back, but now he broke

his bonds and kissed his love joyfully again and again.

      It  seemed  to  the  patient  not  a  little  strange  that  he  should  be

impelled  to  masturbate  precisely  upon  such  beautiful  and  uplifting

occasions as these. But I could not help pointing out that these two

occasions had something in common - a prohibition, and the defiance

of a command.

      We  must  also  consider  in  the  same  connection  his  curious

behaviour  at  a  time  when  he  was  working  for  an  examination  and

toying with his favourite phantasy that his father was still alive and

might at any moment reappear. He used to arrange that his working

hours should be as late as possible in the night. Between twelve and

one o’clock at night he would interrupt his work, and open the front

door of the flat as though his father were standing outside it; then,

coming back into the hall, he would take out his penis and look at it in

the  looking-glass.  This  crazy  conduct  becomes  intelligible  if  we

suppose that he was acting as though he expected a visit from his

father at the hour when ghosts are abroad. He had on the whole been

idle at his work during his father’s lifetime, and this had often been a

cause of annoyance to his father. And now that he was returning as a

ghost, he was to be delighted at finding his son hard at work. But it

was impossible that his father should be delighted at the other part of

his behaviour; in this therefore he must be defying him. Thus, in a

single unintelligible obsessional act, he gave expression to the two

sides of his relation with his father, just as he did subsequently with

regard to his lady by means of his obsessional act with the stone.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2161

 

   Starting from these indications and from other data of a similar kind,

I ventured to put forward a construction to the effect that when he was

a child of under six he had been guilty of some sexual misdemeanour

connected with masturbation and had been soundly castigated for itby his father. This punishment, according to my hypothesis, had, it

was true, put an end to his masturbating, but on the other hand it had

left  behind  it  an  ineradicable  grudge  against  his  father  and  had

established him for all time in his role of an interferer with the patient’s

sexual  enjoyment.¹  To  my  great  astonishment  the  patient  then

informed  me  that  his  mother  had  repeatedly  described  to  him  an

occurrence of this kind which dated from his earliest childhood and

had  evidently  escaped  being  forgotten  by  her  on  account  of  its

remarkable consequences. He himself, however, had no recollection

of it whatever. The tale was as follows. When he was very small - it

became possible to establish the date more exactly owing to its having

coincided  with  the  fatal  illness  of  an  elder  sister  -  he  had  done

something naughty, for which his father had given him a beating. The

little boy had flown into a terrible rage and had hurled abuse at his

father even while he was under his blows. But as he knew no bad

language, he had called him all the names of common objects that he

could think of, and had screamed: ‘You lamp! You towel! You plate!’

and so on. His father, shaken by such an outburst of elemental fury,

had stopped beating him, and had declared: ‘The child will be either a

great man or a great criminal!’² The patient believed that the scene

made  a  permanent  impression  upon  himself  as  well  as  upon  his

father.  His  father,  he  said,  never  beat  him  again;  and  he  also

attributed to this experience a part of the change which came over his

own character. From that time forward he was a coward - out of fear of

the violence of his own rage. His whole life long, moreover, he was

terribly afraid of blows, and used to creep away and hide, filled with

terror and indignation, when one of his brothers or sisters was beaten.

 

   ¹ Compare my suspicions to a similar effect in one of the first sessions (p. 2145).

    ² These  alternatives  did  not  exhaust  the  possibilities.  His  father  had  overlooked  the

commonest outcome of such premature passions - a neurosis.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2162

 

      The  patient  subsequently  questioned  his  mother  again.  She

confirmed  the  story,  adding  that  at  the  time  he  had  been  betweenthree and four years old and that he had been given the punishment

because  he  had bitten  some  one.  She  could  remember  no  further

details, except for a very uncertain idea that the person the little boy

had  hurt  might  have  been  his  nurse.  In  her  account  there  was  no

suggestion of his misdeed having been of a sexual nature.¹

 

   ¹ In psycho-analyses we frequently come across occurrences of this kind, dating back to

the earliest years of the patient’s childhood, in which his infantile sexual activity appears to
reach  its  climax  and  often  comes  to  a  catastrophic  end  owing  to  some  misfortune  or
punishment. Such occurrences are apt to appear in a shadowy way in dreams. Often they will
become so clear that the analyst thinks he has a firm hold of them, and will nevertheless
evade any final elucidation; and unless he proceeds with the greatest skill and caution he may
be compelled to leave it undecided whether the scene in question actually took place or not. It
will help to put us upon the right track in interpreting it, if we recognize that more than one
version  of  the  scene  (each  often  differing  greatly  from  the  other)  may  be  detected  in  the
patient’s unconscious phantasies. If we do not wish to go astray in our judgement of their
historical reality, we must above all bear in mind that people’s ‘childhood memories’ are only
consolidated  at  a  later  period,  usually  at  the  age  of  puberty;  and  that  this  involves  a
complicated process of remodelling, analogous in every way to the process by which a nation
constructs legends about its early history. It at once becomes evident that in his phantasies
about his infancy the individual as he grows up endeavours to efface the recollection of his
auto-erotic activities; and this he does by exalting their memory-traces to the level of object-
love, just as a real historian will view the past in the light of the present. This explains why
these phantasies abound in seductions and assaults, where the facts will have been confined
to auto-erotic activities and the caresses or punishments that stimulated them. Furthermore, it
becomes clear that in constructing phantasies about his childhood the individual sexualizes
his  memories;  that  is,  he  brings  commonplace  experiences  into  relation  with  his  sexual
activity, and extends his sexual interest to them - though in doing this he is probably following
upon the traces of a really existing connection. No one who remembers my ‘Analysis of a
Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy’ will need to be told that it is not my intention in these remarks
to detract from the importance which I have hitherto attached to infantile sexuality by reducing
it to nothing more than sexual interest at the age of puberty. I merely wish to give some
technical advice that may help to clear up a class of phantasy which is calculated to falsify the
picture of infantile sexual activity.
   It is seldom that we are in the fortunate position of being able, as in the present instance, to
establish the facts upon which these tales of the individual’s prehistoric past are based, by
recourse to the unimpeachable testimony of a grown-up person. Even so, the statement made
by our patient’s mother leaves the way open to various possibilities. That she did not proclaim
the sexual character of the offence for which the child was punished may have been due to
the activity of her own censorship; for with all parents it is precisely this sexual element in their
children’s past that their own censorship is most anxious to eliminate. But it is just as possible
that the child was reproved by his nurse or by his mother herself for some commonplace
piece of naughtiness of a non-sexual nature, and that his reaction was so violent that he was
castigated by his father. In phantasies of this kind nurses and servants are regularly replaced
by the superior figure of the mother. A deeper interpretation of the patient’s dreams in relation
to this episode revealed the clearest traces of the presence in his mind of an imaginative
production of a positively epic character. In this his sexual desires for his mother and sister
and his sister’s premature death were linked up with the young hero’s chastisement at hisfather’s  hand.  It  was  impossible  to  unravel  this  tissue  of  phantasy  thread  by  thread;  the
therapeutic success of the treatment was precisely what stood in the way of this. The patient
recovered, and his ordinary life began to assert its claims: there were many tasks before him,
which he had already neglected far too long, and which were incompatible with a continuation
of the treatment. I am not to be blamed, therefore, for this gap in the analysis. The scientific
results of psycho-analysis are at present only a by-product of its therapeutic aims, and for that
reason it is often just in those cases where treatment fails that most discoveries are made.
   The content of the sexual life of infancy consists in auto-erotic activity on the part of the
dominant sexual components, in traces of object-love, and in the formation of that complex
which deserves to be called the nuclear complex of the neuroses. It is the complex which
comprises  the  child’s  earliest  impulses,  alike  tender  and  hostile,  towards  its  parents  and
brothers and sisters, after its curiosity has been awakened - usually by the arrival of a new
baby brother or sister. The uniformity of the content of the sexual life of children, together with
the unvarying character of the modifying tendencies which are later brought to bear upon it,
will easily account for the constant sameness which as a rule characterizes the phantasies
that are constructed around the period of childhood, irrespective of how greatly or how little
real experiences have contributed towards them. It is entirely characteristic of the nuclear
complex of infancy that the child’s father should be assigned the part of a sexual opponent
and of an interferer with auto-erotic sexual activities; and real events are usually to a large
extent responsible for bringing this about.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2163

 

   A discussion of this childhood scene will be found in the footnote,

and here I will only remark that its emergence shook the patient for the

first time in his refusal to believe that at some prehistoric period in his

childhood  he  had  been  seized  with  fury  (which  had  subsequently

become  latent)  against  the  father  whom  he  loved  so  much.  I  must

confess that I had expected it to have a greater effect, for the incident

had been described to him so often - even by his father himself - that

there could be no doubt of its objective reality. But, with that capacity

for  being  illogical  which  never  fails  to  bewilder  one  in  such  highly

intelligent people as obsessional neurotics, he kept urging against the

evidential  value  of  the  story  the  fact  that  he  himself  could  not

remember the scene. And so it was only along the painful road of

transference that he was able to reach a conviction that his relation to

his  father  really  necessitated  the  postulation  of  this  unconscious

complement. Things soon reached a point at which, in his dreams, his

waking  phantasies,  and  his  associations,  he  began  heaping  the

grossest  and  filthiest  abuse  upon  me  and  my  family,  though  in  his

deliberate actions he never treated me with anything but the greatestrespect. His demeanour as he repeated these insults to me was that

of a man in despair. ‘How can a gentleman like you, sir,’ he used to

ask,  ‘let  yourself  be  abused  in  this  way  by  a  low,  good-for-nothing

fellow like me? You ought to turn me out: that’s all I deserve.’ While he

talked like this, he would get up from the sofa and roam about the

room, - a habit which he explained at first as being due to delicacy of

feeling:  he  could  not  bring  himself,  he  said,  to  utter  such  horrible

things while he was lying there so comfortably. But soon he himself

found a more cogent explanation, namely, that he was avoiding my

proximity for fear of my giving him a beating. If he stayed on the sofa

he behaved like some one in desperate terror trying to save himself

from castigations of terrific violence; he would bury his head in his

hands, cover his face with his arm, jump up suddenly and rush away,

his features distorted with pain, and so on. He recalled that his father

had had a passionate temper, and sometimes in his violence had not

known where to stop. Thus, little by little, in this school of suffering, the

patient won the sense of conviction which he had lacked - though to

any disinterested mind the truth would have been almost self-evident.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2164

 

   And now the path was clear to the solution of his rat idea. The

treatment  had  reached  its  turning-point,  and  a  quantity  of  material

information which had hitherto been withheld became available, and

so  made  possible  a  reconstruction  of  the  whole  concatenation  of

events.

   In my description I shall, as I have already said, content myself with

the  briefest  possible  summary  of  the  circumstances.  Obviously  the

first problem to be solved was why the two speeches of the Czech

captain - his rat story, and his request to the patient that he should pay

back the money to Lieutenant A. - should have had such an agitating

effect on him and should have provoked such violently pathological

reactions. The presumption was that it was a question of ‘complexive

sensitiveness’,  and  that  the  speeches  had  jarred  upon  certain

hyperaesthetic spots in his unconscious. And so it proved to be. Asalways happened with the patient in connection with military matters,

he had been in a state of unconscious identification with his father,

who had seen many years’ service and had been full of stories of his

soldiering days. Now it happened by chance - for chance may play a

part in the formation of a symptom, just as the wording may help in the

making of a joke - that one of his father’s little adventures had an

important element in common with the captain’s request. His father, in

his capacity as non-commissioned officer, had control over a small

sum of money and had on one occasion lost it at cards. (Thus he had

been a ‘Spielratte’.¹) He would have found himself in a serious position

if one of his comrades had not advanced him the amount. After he had

left the army and become well-off, he had tried to find this friend in

need so as to pay him back the money, but had not managed to trace

him. The patient was uncertain whether he had ever succeeded in

returning the money. The recollection of this sin of his father’s youth

was painful to him, for, in spite of appearances, his unconscious was

filled with hostile strictures upon his father’s character. The captain’s

words,  ‘You  must  pay  back  the  3.80 kronen  to  Lieutenant  A.’,  had

sounded to his ears like an allusion to this unpaid debt of his father’s.

 

   ¹ [Literally, ‘play-rat’. Colloquial German for ‘gambler’.]

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2165

 

   But the information that the young lady at the post office at Z-- had

herself paid the charges due upon the packet, with a complimentary

remark about himself,¹ had intensified his identification with his father

in quite another direction. At this stage in the analysis he brought out

some new information, to the effect that the landlord of the inn at the

little place where the post office was had had a pretty daughter. She

had been decidedly encouraging to the smart young officer, so that he

had thought of returning there after the manoeuvres were over and of

trying his luck with her. Now, however, she had a rival in the shape of

the  young  lady  at  the  post  office.  Like  his  father  in  the  tale  of  his

marriage, he could afford now to hesitate upon which of the two he

should bestow his favours when he had finished his military service.We can see at once that his singular indecision whether he should

travel to Vienna or go back to the place where the post office was, and

the  constant  temptation  he  felt  to  turn  back  while  he  was  on  the

journey (p. 2140), were not so senseless as they seemed to us at first.

To his conscious mind, the attraction exercised upon him by Z--, the

place where the post office was, was explained by the necessity of

seeing Lieutenant A. and fulfilling the vow with his assistance. But in

reality what was attracting him was the young lady at the post office,

and the lieutenant was merely a good substitute for her, since he had

lived at the same place and had himself been in charge of the military

postal  service.  And  when  subsequently  he  heard  that  it  was  not

Lieutenant A. but another officer B., who had been on duty at the post

office that day, he drew him into his combination as well; and he was

then able to reproduce in his deliria in connection with the two officers

the  hesitation  he  felt  between  the  two  girls  who  were  so  kindly

disposed towards him.²

 

     ¹ It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  he  had  learnt  this before  the  captain,  owing  to  a

misapprehension, requested him to pay back the money to Lieutenant A. This circumstance
was the vital point of the story, and by suppressing it the patient reduced himself to a state of
the most hopeless muddle and for some time prevented me from getting any idea of the
meaning of it all.

   ² (Footnote added 1923:) My patient did his very best to throw confusion over the little

episode of the repayment of the charges for his pince-nez, so that perhaps my own account of
it may also have failed to clear it up entirely. I therefore reproduce here a little map (Fig. 5), by
means of which Mr. and Mrs. Strachey have endeavoured to make the situation at the end of
the  manoeuvres  plainer.  My  translators  have  justly  observed  that  the  patient’s  behaviour
remains unintelligible so long as a further circumstance is not expressly stated, namely, that
Lieutenant A. had formerly lived at the place Z-- where the post office was situated and had
been in charge of the military post office there, but that during the last few days he had
handed over this billet to Lieutenant B. and had been transferred to another village. The ‘cruel’
captain had been in ignorance of this transfer, and this was the explanation of his mistake in
supposing that the charges had to be paid back to Lieutenant A.

  
                                          Fig. 5.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2166

 

   In elucidating the effects produced by the captain’s rat story we must

follow the course of the analysis more closely. The patient began by

producing an enormous mass of associative material, which at first,

however, threw no light upon the circumstances in which the formation

of his obsession had taken place. The idea of the punishment carried

out  by  means  of  rats  had  acted  as  a  stimulus  to  a  number  of  his

instincts and had called up a whole quantity of recollections; so that, in

the short interval between the captain’s story and his request to him to

pay back the money, rats had acquired a series of symbolic meanings,

to which, during the period which followed, fresh ones were continually

being added. I must confess that I can only give a very incomplete

account of the whole business. What the rat punishment stirred up

more than anything else was his anal erotism, which had played an

important part in his childhood and had been kept in activity for many

years by a constant irritation due to worms. In this way rats came to

have the meaning of ‘money’.¹ The patient gave an indication of this

connection by reacting to the word ‘Ratten’ [‘rats’] with the association

‘Raten’ [‘instalments’]. In his obsessional deliria he had coined himself

a regular rat currency. When, for instance, in reply to a question, I told

him the amount of my fee for an hour’s treatment, he said to himself(as I learned six months later): ‘So many florins, so many rats’. Little

by little he translated into this language the whole complex of money

interests which centred round his father’s legacy to him, that is to say,

all his ideas connected with that subject were, by way of the verbal

bridge  ‘Raten  -  Ratten’,  carried  over  into  his  obsessional  life  and

brought  under  the  dominion  of  his  unconscious.  Moreover,  the

captain’s request to him to pay back the charges due upon the packet

served to strengthen the money significance of rats, by way of another

verbal bridge ‘Spielratte’, which led back to his father’s gambling debt.

 

   ¹ See my paper on ‘Character and Anal Erotism’ (1908b).

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2167

 

   But the patient was also familiar with the fact that rats are carriers of

dangerous  infectious  diseases;  he  could  therefore  employ  them  as

symbols  of  his  dread  (justifiable  enough  in  the  army)  of syphilitic

infection. This dread concealed all sorts of doubts as to the kind of life

his father had led during his term of military service. Again, in another

sense, the penis itself is a carrier of syphilitic infection; and in this way

he could consider the rat as a male organ of sex. It had a further title

to be so regarded; for a penis (especially a child’s penis) can easily be

compared to a worm,  and  the  captain’s  story  had  been  about  rats

burrowing in some one’s anus, just as the large round-worms had in

his  when  he  was  a  child.  Thus  the  penis  significance  of  rats  was

based, once more, upon anal erotism. And apart from this, the rat is a

dirty  animal,  feeding  upon  excrement  and  living  in  sewers.¹  It  is

perhaps unnecessary to point out how great an extension of the rat

delirium became possible owing to this new meaning. For instance,

‘So  many  rats,  so  many  florins’  could  serve  as  an  excellent

characterization of a certain female profession which he particularly

detested. On the other hand, it is certainly not a matter of indifference

that the substitution of a penis for a rat in the captain’s story resulted

in  a  situation  of  intercourse per  anum,  which  could  not  fail  to  be

especially  revolting  to  him  when  brought  into  connection  with  his

father and the woman he loved. And when we consider that the samesituation was reproduced in the compulsive threat which had formed in

his mind after the captain had made his request, we shall be forcibly

reminded  of  certain  curses  in  use  among  the  Southern  Slavs.²

Moreover, all of this material, and more besides, was woven into the

fabric of the rat discussions behind the screen-association ‘heiraten’

[‘to marrry’].

 

   ¹ If the reader feels tempted to shake his head at the possibility of such leaps of imagination

in the neurotic mind, I may remind him that artists have sometimes indulged in similar freaks
of fancy. Such, for instance, are Le Poitevin’s Diableries érotiques.

   ² The exact terms of these curses will be found in the periodical Anthropophyteia, edited by

F. S. Krauss.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2168

 

   The story of the rat punishment, as was shown by the patient’s own

account of the matter and by his facial expression as he repeated the

story to me, had fanned into a flame all his prematurely suppressed

impulses of cruelty, egoistic and sexual alike. Yet, in spite of all this

wealth  of  material,  no  light  was  thrown  upon  the  meaning  of  his

obsessional  idea  until  one  day  the  Rat-Wife  in  Ibsen’s Little  Eyolf

came  up  in  the  analysis,  and  it  became  impossible  to  escape  the

inference  that  in  many  of  the  shapes  assumed  by  his  obsessional

deliria  rats  had  another  meaning  still  -  namely,  that  of children.¹

Enquiry into the origin of this new meaning at once brought me up

against some of the earliest and most important roots. Once when the

patient was visiting his father’s grave he had seen a big beast, which

he had taken to be a rat, gliding along over the grave.² He assumed

that it had actually come out of his father’s grave, and had just been

having a meal off his corpse. The notion of a rat is inseparably bound

up with the fact that it has sharp teeth with which it gnaws and bites.³

But rats cannot be sharp-toothed, greedy and dirty with impunity: they

are cruelly persecuted and mercilessly put to death by man, as the

patient had often observed with horror. He had often pitied the poor

creatures.  But  he  himself  had  been  just  such  a  nasty,  dirty  little

wretch, who was apt to bite people when he was in a rage, and hadbeen fearfully punished for doing so (p. 2162). He could truly be said

to find ‘a living likeness of himself’ in the rat. It was almost as though

Fate,  when  the  captain  told  him  his  story,  had  been  putting  him

through an association test: she had called out a ‘complex stimulus-

word’, and he had reacted to it with his obsessional idea.

 

   ¹ Ibsen’s Rat-Wife must certainly be derived from the legendary Pied Piper of Hamelin, who

first enticed away the rats into the water, and then, by the same means, lured the children out
of the town, never to return. So too, Little Eyolf threw himself into the water under the spell of
the Rat-Wife. In legends generally the rat appears not so much as a disgusting creature but
as  something  uncanny  -  as  a  chthonic  animal,  one  might  almost  say;  and  it  is  used  to
represent the souls of the dead.

   ² It was no doubt a weasel, of which there are great numbers in the Zentralfriedhof [the

principal cemetery] in Vienna.

   ³ Compare the words of Mephistopheles:

 
                Doch dieser Schwelle Zauber zu zerspalten
                Bedarf ich eines Rattenzahns.
                .     .    .     .     .     .     .     .
                Noch einen Biss, so ist’s geschehn!
 
                [But to break through the magic of this threshold
                I need a rat’s tooth. (He conjures up a rat.)
                .     .    .     .     .     .     .     .
                Another bite, and it is done!]

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2169

 

   According, then, to his earliest and most momentous experiences,

rats  were  children.  And  at  this  point  he  brought  out  a  piece  of

information which he had kept away from its context long enough, but

which now fully explained the interest he was bound to feel in children.

The lady, whose admirer he had been for so many years, but whom

he had nevertheless not been able to make up his mind to marry, was

condemned to childlessness by reason of a gynaecological operation

which had involved the removal of both ovaries. This indeed - for he

was extraordinarily fond of children - had been the chief reason for his

hesitation.

      It  was  only  then  that  it  became  possible  to  understand  theinexplicable process by which his obsessional idea had been formed.

With the assistance of our knowledge of infantile sexual theories and

of symbolism (as learnt from the interpretation of dreams) the whole

thing could be translated and given a meaning. When, at the afternoon

halt (during which he had lost his pince-nez), the captain had told him

about the rat punishment, the patient had only been struck at first by

the combined cruelty and lasciviousness of the situation depicted. But

immediately afterwards a connection had been set up with the scene

from  his  childhood  in  which  he  himself  had  bitten  some  one.  The

captain - a man who could defend such punishments - had become a

substitute for his father, and had thus drawn down upon himself a part

of the reviving animosity which had burst out, on the original occasion,

against his cruel father. The idea which came into his consciousness

for a moment, to the effect that something of the sort might happen to

some one he was fond of, is probably to be translated into a wish such

as ‘You ought to have the same thing done to you!’ aimed at the teller

of the story, but through him at his father. A day and a half later,¹

when the captain had handed him the packet upon which the charges

were  due  and  had  requested  him  to  pay  back  the  3.80 kronen  to

Lieutenant A., he had already been aware that his ‘cruel superior’ was

making a mistake, and that the only person he owed anything to was

the  young  lady  at  the  post  office.  It  might  easily,  therefore,  have

occurred  to  him  to  think  of  some  derisive  reply,  such  as,  ‘Will  I,

though?’ or ‘Pay your grandmother!’ or ‘Yes! You bet I’II pay him back

the  money!’  -  answers  which  would  have  been  subject  to  no

compulsive force. But instead, out of the stirrings of his father-complex

and out of his memory of the scene from his childhood, there formed

in his mind some such answer as: ‘Yes! I’II pay back the money to A.

when my father and the lady have children!’ or ‘As sure as my father

and the lady can have children, I’ll pay him back the money!’ In short,

a  derisive  affirmation  attached  to  an  absurd  condition  which  could

never be fulfilled.²

 

   ¹ Not that evening, as he first told me. It was quite impossible that the pince-nez he had

ordered  could  have  arrived  the  same  day.  The  patient  shortened  the  interval  of  time
retrospectively, because it was the period during which the decisive mental connections had
been set up, and during which the repressed episode had taken place - the episode of his
interview with the officer who told him of the friendly conduct of the young lady at the postoffice.

   ² Thus absurdity signifies derision in the language of obsessional thought, just as it does in

dreams. See my Interpretation of Dreams.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2170

 

   But now the crime had been committed; he had insulted the two

persons who were dearest to him - his father and his lady. The deed

had  called  for  punishment,  and  the  penalty  had  consisted  in  his

binding himself by a vow which it was impossible for him to fulfil and

which entailed literal obedience to his superior’s ill-founded request.

The vow ran as follows: ‘Now you must really pay back the money to

A.’ In his convulsive obedience he had repressed his better knowledge

that the captain’s request had been based upon erroneous premises:

‘Yes, you must pay back the money to A., as your father’s surrogate

has required. Your father cannot be mistaken.’ So too the king cannot

be mistaken; if he addresses one of his subjects by a title which is not

his, the subject bears that title ever afterwards.

      Only  vague  intelligence  of  these  events  reached  the  patient’s

consciousness.  But  his  revolt  against  the  captain’s  order  and  the

sudden  transformation  of  that  revolt  into  its  opposite  were  both

represented there. First had come the idea that he was not to pay

back the money, or it (that is, the rat punishment) would happen; and

then  had  come  the  transformation  of  this  idea  into  a  vow  to  the

opposite effect, as a punishment for his revolt.

   Let us, further, picture to ourselves the general conditions under

which the formation of the patient’s great obsessional idea occurred.

His libido had been increased by a long period of abstinence coupled

with the friendly welcome which a young officer can always reckon

upon receiving when he goes among women. Moreover, at the time

when he had started for the manoeuvres, there had been a certain

coolness between himself and his lady. This intensification of his libido

had  inclined  him  to  a  renewal  of  his  ancient  struggle  against  his

father’s  authority,  and  he  had  dared  to  think  of  having  sexual

intercourse with other women. His loyalty to his father’s memory had

grown weaker, his doubts as to his lady’s merits had increased; and inthat frame of mind he let himself be dragged into insulting the two of

them, and had then punished himself for it. In doing so he had copied

an  old  model.  And  when  at  the  end  of  the  manoeuvres  he  had

hesitated so long whether he should travel to Vienna or whether he

should stop and fulfil his vow, he had represented in a single picture

the  two  conflicts  by  which  he  had  from  the  very  first  been  torn  -

whether or no he should remain obedient to his father and whether or

no he should remain faithful to his beloved.¹

 

    ¹ It  is  perhaps  not  uninteresting  to  observe  that  once  again  obedience  to  his  father

coincided with abandoning the lady. If he had stopped and paid back the money to A., he
would have made atonement to his father, and at the same time he would have deserted his
lady in favour of some one else more attractive. In this conflict the lady had been victorious -
with the assistance, to be sure, of the patient’s own normal good sense.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2171

 

   I may add a word upon the interpretation of the ‘sanction’ which, it

will  be  remembered,  was  to  the  effect  that  ‘otherwise  the  rat

punishment will be carried out on both of them’. It was based upon the

influence  of  two  infantile  sexual  theories,  which  I  have  discussed

elsewhere.¹ The first of these theories is that babies come out of the

anus; and the second, which follows logically from the first, is that men

can have babies just as well as women. According to the technical

rules for interpreting dreams, the notion of coming out of the rectum

can be represented by the opposite notion of creeping into the rectum

(as in the rat punishment), and vice versa.

 

   We should not be justified in expecting such severe obsessional

ideas as were present in this case to be cleared up in any simpler

manner or by any other means. When we reached the solution that

has been described above, the patient’s rat delirium disappeared.

 

   ¹ ‘On the Sexual Theories of Children’ (1908c).

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis                                                                                      2172

 

                                            II

 

                                    THEORETICAL

 

    (A)  SOME GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF OBSESSIONAL STRUCTURES ¹

 

In  the  year  1896  I  defined  obsessional  ideas  as  ‘transformed  self-

reproaches which have re-emerged from repression and which always

relate  to  some  sexual  act  that  was  performed  with  pleasure  in

childhood’. This definition now seems to me to be open to criticism

upon  formal  grounds,  though  its  component  elements  are

unobjectionable. It was aiming too much at unification, and took as its

model the practice of obsessional neurotics themselves, when, with

their  characteristic  liking  for  indeterminateness,  they  heap  together

under  the  name  of  ‘obsessional  ideas’  the  most  heterogeneous

psychical  structures.²  In  point  of  fact,  it  would  be  more  correct  to

speak of ‘obsessive thinking’, and to make it clear that obsessional

structures can correspond to every sort of psychical act. They can be

classed  as  wishes,  temptations,  impulses,  reflections,  doubts,

commands,  or  prohibitions.  Patients  endeavour  in  general  to  tone

down such distinctions and to regard what remains of these psychical

acts after they have been deprived of their affective index simply as

‘obsessional ideas’. Our present patient gave an example of this type

of behaviour in one of his first sessions, when he attempted to reduce

a wish to the level of a mere ‘train of thought’ (p. 2144).

 

   ¹ Several  of  the  points  dealt  with  in  this  and  the  following  section  have  already  been

mentioned in the literature on the subject of obsessional neuroses, as may be gathered from
Löwenfeld’s exhaustive study, Die psychischen Zwangserscheinungen,  1904,  which  is  the
standard work upon this form of disease.

   ² This fault in my definition is to some extent corrected in the paper itself. The following

passage will be found: ‘The re-activated memories, however, and the self-reproaches formed
from  them  never  re-emerge  into  consciousness  unchanged:  what  become  conscious  as
obsessional  ideas  and  affects,  and  take  the  place  of  the  pathogenic  memories  so  far  as
conscious  life  is  concerned,  are  structures  in  the  nature  of  a  compromise  between  the
repressed ideas and the repressing ones.’ In the definition, that is to say, especial stress is to
be laid on the word ‘transformed’.
                 Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2173

 

   It must be confessed, moreover, that even the phenomenology of

obsessional  thinking  has  not  yet  had  sufficient  attention  paid  to  it.

During the secondary defensive struggle, which the patient carries on

against  the  ‘obsessional  ideas’  that  have  forced  their  way  into  his

consciousness,  psychical  structures  make  their  appearance  which

deserve to be given a special name. (Such, for example, were the

sequences of thoughts that occupied our patient’s mind on his journey

back  from  the  manoeuvres.)  They  are  not  purely  reasonable

considerations arising in opposition to the obsessional thoughts, but,

as it were, hybrids between the two species of thinking; they accept

certain of the premises of the obsession they are combating, and thus,

while using the weapons of reason, are established upon a basis of

pathological thought. I think such structures as these deserve to be

given the name of ‘deliria’. To make the distinction clear, I will give an

instance,  which  should  be  inserted  into  its  proper  context  in  the

patient’s case history. I have already described the crazy conduct to

which  he  gave  way  at  one  time  when  he  was  preparing  for  an

examination - how, after working till far into the night, he used to go

and  open  the  front  door  to  his  father’s  ghost,  and  then  look  at  his

genitals in the looking-glass (p. 2160). He tried to bring himself to his

senses by asking himself what his father would say to it all if he were

really still alive. But the argument had no effect so long as it was put

forward in this rational shape. The spectre was not laid until he had

transformed the same idea into a ‘delirious’ threat to the effect that if

he ever went through this nonsense again some evil would befall his

father in the next world.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2174

 

      The  distinction  between  a  primary  and  a  secondary  defensive

struggle is no doubt well founded, but we find its value unexpectedly

diminished  when  we  discover  that the  patients  themselves  do  notknow  the  wording  of  their  own  obsessional  ideas.  This  may  sound

paradoxical, but it is perfectly good sense. During the progress of a

psycho-analysis it is not only the patient who plucks up courage, but

his disease as well; it grows bold enough to speak more plainly than

before. To drop the metaphor, what happens is that the patient, who

his hitherto turned his eyes away in terror from his own pathological

productions, begins to attend to them and obtains a clearer and more

detailed view of them.¹

   There are, besides this, two special ways in which a more precise

knowledge of obsessional structures can be gained. In the first place,

experience shows that an obsessional command (or whatever it may

be), which in waking life is known only in a truncated and distorted

form,  like  a  mutilated  telegraph  message,  may  have  its  actual  text

brought to light in a dream. Such texts appear in dreams in the shape

of speeches, and are thus an exception to the rule that speeches in

dreams  are  derived  from  speeches  in  real  life.²  Secondly,  in  the

course of the analytic examination of a case history, one becomes

convinced that if a number of obsessions succeed one another they

are often - even though their wording is not identical - ultimately one

and the same. The obsession may have been successfully shaken off

on its first appearance, but it comes back a second time in a distorted

form and without being recognized, and may then perhaps be able to

hold  its  own  in  the  defensive  struggle  more  effectively,  precisely

because of its distortion. But the original form is the correct one, and

often displays its meaning quite openly. When we have at great pains

elucidated an unintelligible obsessional idea, it often happens that the

patient informs us that just such a notion, wish, or temptation as the

one  we  have  constructed  did  in  fact  make  its  appearance  on  one

occasion before the obsessional idea had arisen, but that it did not

persist. It would unfortunately involve us in too lengthy a digression if

we  were  to  give  instances  of  this  from  the  history  of  our  present

patient.

 

   ¹ Some patients carry the diversion of their attention to such lengths that they are totally

unable to give the content of an obsessional idea or to describe an obsessional act though
they have performed it over and over again.

   ² See The Interpretation of Dreams, 1900a, Chapter VI, Section F.

                 Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2175

 

      What  is  officially  described  as  an  ‘obsessional  idea’  exhibits,

therefore,  in  its  distortion  from  its  original  wording,  traces  of  the

primary defensive struggle. Its distortion enables it to persist, since

conscious  thought  is  thus  compelled  to  misapprehend  it,  just  as

though it were a dream; for dreams also are a product of compromise

and distortion, and are also misapprehended by waking thought.

   This misapprehension on the part of consciousness can be seen at

work not only in reference to the obsessional ideas themselves, but

also in reference to the products of the secondary defensive struggle,

such, for instance, as the protective formulas. I can produce two good

examples of this. Our patient used to employ as a defensive formula a

rapidly  pronounced  ‘aber’  [‘but’]  accompanied  by  a  gesture  of

repudiation. He told me on one occasion that this formula had become

altered recently; he now no longer said ‘áber’ but ‘abér’. When he was

asked to give the reason for this new departure, he declared that the

mute ‘e’ of the second syllable gave him no sense of security against

the  intrusion,  which  he  so  much  dreaded,  of  some  foreign  and

contradictory element, and that he had therefore decided to accent the

‘e’. This explanation (an excellent sample of the obsessional neurotic

style) was, however, clearly inadequate; the most that it could claim to

be  was  a  rationalization.  The  truth  was  that  ‘abér’  was  an

approximation  towards  the  similar-sounding  ‘abwehr’  [’defence’],  a

term which he had learnt in the course of our theoretical discussions

of psycho-analysis. He had thus put the treatment to an illegitimate

and ‘delirious’ use in order to strengthen a defensive formula. Another

time  he  told  me  about  his  principal  magic  word,  which  was  an

apotropaic against every evil; he had put it together out of the initial

letters  of  the  most  powerfully  beneficent  of  his  prayers  and  had

clapped on an ‘amen’ at the end of it. I cannot reproduce the word

itself, for reasons which will become apparent immediately. For, when

he told it me, I could not help noticing that the word was in fact an

anagram of the name of his lady. Her name contained an ‘s’, and this

he had put last, that is, immediately before the ‘amen’ at the end. We

may say, therefore, that by this process he had brought his ‘Samen’[‘semen’] into contact with the woman he loved; in imagination, that is

to say, he had masturbated with her. He himself, however, had never

noticed this very obvious connection; his defensive forces had allowed

themselves to be fooled by the repressed ones. This is also a good

example of the rule that in time the thing which is meant to be warded

off invariably finds its way into the very means which is being used for

warding it off.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2176

 

   I have already asserted that obsessional thoughts have undergone a

distortion  similar  to  that  undergone  by  dream-thoughts  before  they

become  the  manifest  content  of  a  dream.  The  technique  of  this

distortion  may  therefore  be  of  interest  to  us,  and  there  should  be

nothing  to  prevent  our  exhibiting  its  various  modes  by  means  of  a

series of obsessions which have been translated and made clear. But

here again the conditions governing the publication of this case make

it impossible for me to give more than a few specimens. Not all of the

patient’s  obsessions  were  so  complicated  in  their  structure  and  so

difficult to solve as the great rat idea. In some of the others a very

simple  technique  was  employed  -  namely,  that  of  distortion  by

omission  or  ellipsis.  This  technique  is  pre-eminently  applicable  to

jokes, but in our present case, too, it did useful work as a means of

protecting things from being understood.

   For instance, one of the patient’s oldest and favourite obsessions

(which corresponded to an admonition or warning) ran as follows: ‘If I

marry  the  lady,  some  misfortune  will  befall  my  father  (in  the  next

world).’ If we insert the intermediate steps, which had been skipped

but were known to us from the analysis, we get the following train of

thought:  ‘If  my  father  were  alive,  he  would  be  as  furious  over  my

design of marrying the lady as he was in the scene in my childhood;

so that I should fly into a rage with him once more and wish him every

possible evil; and thanks to the omnipotence of my wishes¹ these evils

would be bound to come upon him.’

   Here is another instance in which a solution can be reached by fillingout an ellipsis. It is once more in the nature of a warning or an ascetic

prohibition. The patient had a charming little niece of whom he was

very fond. One day this idea came into his head: ‘If you indulge in

intercourse, something will happen to Ella’ (i.e. she will die). When the

omissions have been made good, we have: ‘Every time you copulate,

even with a stranger, you will not be able to avoid the reflection that in

your married life sexual intercourse can never bring you a child (on

account of the lady’s sterility). This will grieve you so much that you

will become envious of your sister on account of little Ella, and you will

grudge her the child. These envious impulses will inevitably lead to the

child’s death.’²

 

   ¹ This omnipotence is discussed further on.

   ² An example from another of my works, Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious, will

recall to the reader the manner in which this elliptical technique is employed in making jokes:
‘There is a witty and pugnacious journalist in Vienna, whose biting invective has repeatedly
led to his being physically maltreated by the subjects of his attacks. On one occasion, when a
fresh misdeed on the part of one of his habitual opponents was being discussed, somebody
exclaimed: "If X hears of this, he’ll get his ears boxed again." . . . The apparent absurdity of
this remark disappears if between the two clauses we insert the words: "he’ll write such a
scathing article upon the man, that, etc."' - This elliptical joke, we may note, is similar in its
content, as well as in its form, to the first example quoted in the text.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2177

 

      The  technique  of  distortion  by  ellipsis  seems  to  be  typical  of

obsessional  neuroses;  I  have  come  across  it  in  the  obsessional

thoughts  of  other  patients  as  well.  One  example,  a  particularly

transparent  one,  is  of  especial  interest  on  account  of  a  certain

structural similarity with the rat idea. It was a case of doubting, and

occurred in a lady who suffers principally from obsessional acts. This

lady was going for a walk with her husband in Nuremberg, and made

him take her into a shop, where she purchased various objects for her

child  and  amongst  them  a  comb.  Her  husband,  finding  that  the

shopping  was  too  long  a  business  for  his  taste,  said  that  he  had

noticed  some  coins  in  an  antique  shop  on  the  way  which  he  was

anxious to secure, adding that after he had made his purchase he

would come and fetch her in the shop in which they at present were.But he stayed away, as she thought, far too long. When he came back

she accordingly asked him where he had been. ‘Why,’ he replied, ‘at

the antique shop I told you about.’ At the same instant she was seized

by a tormenting doubt whether she had not as a matter of fact always

possessed the comb which she had just bought for her child. She was

naturally  quite  unable  to  discover  the  simple  mental  link  that  was

involved.  There  is  nothing  for  it  but  to  regard  the  doubt  as  having

become  displaced,  and  to  reconstruct  the  complete  chain  of

unconscious thoughts as follows: ‘If it is true that you were only at the

antique shop, if I am really to believe that, then I may just as well

believe that this comb that I bought a moment ago has been in my

possession for years.’ Here, therefore, the lady was drawing a derisive

and ironical parallel, just as when our patient thought: ‘Oh yes, as sure

as those two’ (his father and the lady) ‘will have children, I shall pay

back the money to A.’ In the lady’s case the doubt was dependent

upon  her  unconscious  jealousy,  which  led  her  to  suppose  that  her

husband  had  spent  the  interval  of  his  absence  in  paying  a  visit  of

gallantry.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2178

 

      I  shall  not  in  the  present  paper  attempt  any  discussion  of  the

psychological significance of obsessional thinking. Such a discussion

would be of extraordinary value in its results, and would do more to

clarify  our  ideas  upon  the  nature  of  the  conscious  and  the

unconscious  than  any  study  of  hysteria  or  the  phenomena  of

hypnosis. It would be a most desirable thing if the philosophers and

psychologists  who  develop  brilliant  theoretical  views  on  the

unconscious upon a basis of hearsay knowledge or from their own

conventional  definitions  would  first  submit  to  the  convincing

impressions  which  may  be  gained  from  a  first-hand  study  of  the

phenomena of obsessional thinking. We might almost go to the length

of requiring it of them, if the task were not so far more laborious than

the methods of work to which they are accustomed. I will only add

here that in obsessional neuroses the unconscious mental processesoccasionally  break  through  into  consciousness  in  their  pure  and

undistorted  form,  that  such  incursions  may  take  place  at  every

possible stage of the unconscious process of thought, and that at the

moment of the incursion the obsessional ideas can, for the most part,

be recognized as formations of very long standing. This accounts for

the striking circumstance that, when the analyst tries, with the patient’s

help, to discover the date of the first occurrence of an obsessional

idea, the patient is obliged to place it further and further back as the

analysis proceeds, and is constantly finding fresh ‘first’ occasions for

the appearance of the obsession.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2179

 

  (B)  SOME PSYCHOLOGICAL PECULIARITIES OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS:
          THEIR ATTITUDE TOWARD REALITY, SUPERSTITION AND DEATH

 

   In this section I intend to deal with a few mental characteristics of

obsessional neurotics which, though they do not seem important in

themselves,  nevertheless  lie  upon  the  road  to  a  comprehension  of

more  important  things.  They  were  strongly  marked  in  our  present

patient;  but  I  know  that  they  are  not  attributable  to  his  individual

character, but to his disorder, and that they are to be met with quite

typically in other obsessional patients.

 

   Our patient was to a high degree superstitious, and this although he

was a highly educated and enlightened man of considerable acumen,

and  although  he  was  able  at  times  to  assure  me  that  he  did  not

believe a word of all this rubbish. Thus he was at once superstitious

and not superstitious; and there was a clear distinction between his

attitude  and  the  superstition  of  uneducated  people  who  feel

themselves at one with their belief. He seemed to understand that his

superstition was dependent upon his obsessional thinking, although at

times he gave way to it completely. The meaning of this inconsistent

and vacillating behaviour can be most easily, grasped if it is regarded

in the light of a hypothesis which I shall now proceed to mention. I did

not hesitate to assume that the truth was not that the patient still hadan open mind upon this subject, but that he had two separate and

contradictory  convictions  upon  it.  His  oscillation  between  these  two

views quite obviously depended upon his momentary attitude towards

his obsessional disorder. As soon as he had got the better of one of

these  obsessions,  he  used  to  smile  in  a  superior  way  at  his  own

credulity, and no events then occurred that were calculated to shake

his  firmness;  but  the  moment  he  came  under  the  sway  of  another

obsession which had not been cleared up - or, what amounts to the

same  thing,  of  a  resistance  -  the  strangest  coincidences  would

happen, to support him in his credulous belief.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2180

 

   His superstition was nevertheless that of an educated man, and he

avoided  such  vulgar  prejudices  as  being  afraid  of  Friday  or  of  the

number thirteen, and so on. But he believed in premonitions and in

prophetic dreams; he would constantly meet the very person of whom,

for some inexplicable reason, he had just been thinking; or he would

receive a letter from some one who had suddenly come into his mind

after being forgotten for many years. At the same time he was honest

enough - or rather, he was loyal enough to his official conviction - not

to  have  forgotten  instances  in  which  he  strangest  forebodings  had

come to nothing. On one occasion, for instance, when he went away

for  his  summer  holidays,  he  had  felt  morally  certain  that  he  would

never return to Vienna alive. He also admitted that the great majority

of his premonitions related to things which had no special personal

importance to him, and that, when he met an acquaintance of whom,

until a few moments previously, he had not thought for a very long

time, nothing further took place between himself and the miraculous

apparition.  And  he  naturally  could  not  deny  that  all  the  important

events of his life had occurred without his having had any premonition

of  them,  and  that,  for  instance,  his  father’s  death  had  taken  him

entirely by surprise. But arguments such as these had no effect upon

the discrepancy in his convictions. They merely served to prove the

obsessional  nature  of  his  superstitions,  and  that  could  already  beinferred from the way in which they came and went with the increase

and decrease of his resistance.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2181

 

   I was not in a position, of course, to give a rational explanation of all

the miraculous stories of his remoter past. But as regards the similar

things that happened during the time of his treatment, I was able to

prove to him that he himself invariably had a hand in the manufacture

of these miracles, and I was able to point out to him the methods that

he employed. He worked by means of peripheral vision and reading,

forgetting,  and,  above  all,  errors  of  memory.  In  the  end  he  used

himself  to  help  me  in  discovering  the  little  sleight-of-hand  tricks  by

which these wonders were performed. I may mention one interesting

infantile root of his belief that forebodings and premonitions came true.

It was brought to light by his recollection that very often, when a date

was being fixed for something, his mother used to say: ‘I shan’t be

able to on such-and-such a day. I shall have to stop in bed then.’ And

in fact when the day in question arrived she had invariably stayed in

bed!

      There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  patient  felt  a  need  for  finding

experiences of this kind to act as props for his superstition, and that it

was  for  that  reason  that  he  occupied  himself  so  much  with  the

inexplicable  coincidences  of  everyday  life  with  which  we  are  all

familiar, and helped out their shortcomings with unconscious activity of

his own. I have come across a similar need in many other obsessional

patients and have suspected its presence in many more besides. It

seems  to  me  easily  explicable  in  view  of  the  psychological

characteristics of the obsessional neurosis. In this disorder, as I have

already explained (p. 2155), repression is effected not by means of

amnesia but by a severance of causal connections brought about by a

withdrawal of affect. These repressed connections appear to persist in

some kind of shadowy form (which I have elsewhere compared to an

endopsychic perception),¹ and they are thus transferred, by a process

of projection, into the external world, where they bear witness to whathas been effaced from consciousness.

 

   ¹ The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901b), Chapter XII, Section C (b).

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2182

 

 

   Another mental need, which is also shared by obsessional neurotics

and which is in some respects related to the one just mentioned, is the

need  for uncertainty  in  their  life,  or  for doubt.  An  enquiry  into  this

characteristic leads deep into the investigation of instinct. The creation

of  uncertainty  is  one  of  the  methods  employed  by  the  neurosis  for

drawing the patient away from reality and isolating him from the world

- which is among the objects of every psychoneurotic disorder. Again,

it is only too obvious what efforts are made by the patients themselves

in order to be able to avoid certainty and remain in doubt. Some of

them, indeed, give a vivid expression to this tendency in a dislike of

clocks and watches (for these at least make the time of day certain),

and in the unconscious artifices which they employ in order to render

these doubt removing instruments innocuous. Our present patient had

developed  a  peculiar  talent  for  avoiding  a  knowledge  of  any  facts

which would have helped him in deciding his conflict. Thus he was in

ignorance upon those matters relating to his lady which were the most

relevant to the question of his marriage: he was ostensibly unable to

say who had operated upon her and whether the operation had been

unilateral or bilateral. He had to be forced into remembering what he

had forgotten and into finding out what he had overlooked.

   The predilection felt by obsessional neurotics for uncertainty and

doubt  leads  them  to  turn  their  thoughts  by  preference  to  those

subjects upon which all mankind are uncertain and upon which our

knowledge and judgements must necessarily remain open to doubt.

The chief subjects of this kind are paternity, length of life, life after

death, and memory - in the last of which we are all in the habit of

believing,  without  having  the  slightest  guarantee  of  its

trustworthiness.¹

    ¹ As Lichtenberg says, ‘An astronomer knows whether the moon is inhabited or not with

about as much certainty as he knows who was his father, but not with so much certainty as he
knows who was his mother’. A great advance was made in civilization when men decided to
put their inferences upon a level with the testimony of their senses and to make the step from
matriarchy to patriarchy. The prehistoric figures which show a smaller person sitting upon the
head of a larger one are representations of patrilineal descent; Athena had no mother, but
sprang from the head of Zeus. A witness who testifies to something before a court of law is
still called ‘Zeuge’ [literally, ‘begetter’] in German, after the part played by the male in the act
of procreation; so too in hieroglyphics the word for a ‘witness’ is written with a representation
of the male organ.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2183

 

 

   In obsessional neuroses the uncertainty of memory is used to the

fullest extent as a help in the formation of symptoms; and we shall

learn  directly  the  part  played  in  the  actual  content  of  the  patients’

thoughts by the questions of length of life and life after death. But as

an appropriate transition I will first consider one particular superstitious

trait in our patient to which I have already alluded (p. 2176) and which

will no doubt have puzzled more than one of my readers.

   I refer to the omnipotence which he ascribed to his thoughts and

feelings, and to his wishes, whether good or evil. It is, I must admit,

decidedly tempting to declare that this idea was a delusion and that it

oversteps the limits of obsessional neurosis. I have, however, come

across  the  same  conviction  in  another  obsessional  patient;  and  he

was long ago restored to health and is leading a normal life. Indeed,

all  obsessional  neurotics  behave  as  though  they  shared  this

conviction.  It  will  be  our  business  to  throw  some  light  upon  these

patients’ over-estimation of their powers. Assuming, without more ado,

that  this  belief  is  a  frank  acknowledgement  of  a  relic  of  the  old

megalomania of infancy, we will proceed to ask our patient for the

grounds  of  his  conviction.  In  reply,  he  adduces  two  experiences.

When he returned for a second visit to the hydropathic establishment

at which his disorder had been relieved for the first and only time, he

asked  to  be  given  his  old  room,  for  its  position  had  facilitated  his

relations  with  one  of  the  nurses.  He  was  told  that  the  room  was

already taken and that it was occupied by an old professor. This pieceof  news  considerably  diminished  his  prospects  of  successful

treatment, and he reacted to it with the unamiable thought: ‘I wish he

may be struck dead for it!’ A fortnight later he was woken up from his

sleep by the disturbing idea of a corpse; and in the morning he heard

that  the  professor  had  really  had  a  stroke,  and  that  he  had  been

carried up into his room at about the time he himself had woken up.

The  second  experience  related  to  an  unmarried  woman,  no  longer

young, though with a great desire to be loved, who had paid him a

great deal of attention and had once asked him point blank whether he

could not love her. He had given her an evasive answer. A few days

afterwards he heard that she had thrown herself out of a window. He

then began to reproach himself, and said to himself that it would have

been in his power to save her life by giving her his love. I n this way he

became convinced of the omnipotence of his love and of his hatred.

Without denying the omnipotence of love we may point out that both

these instances were concerned with death, and we may adopt the

obvious explanation that, like other obsessional neurotics, our patient

was compelled to overestimate the effects of his hostile feelings upon

the  external  world,  because  a  large  part  of  their  internal,  mental

effects  escaped  his  conscious  knowledge.  His  love  -  or  rather  his

hatred - was in truth overpowering; it was precisely they that created

the obsessional thoughts, of which he could not understand the origin

and against which he strove in vain to defend himself.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1923:] The omnipotence of thoughts, or, more accurately speaking, of

wishes, has since been recognized as an essential element in the mental life of primitive
people. See Totem and Taboo (1912-13).
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2184

 

 

   Our patient had a quite peculiar attitude towards the question of

death. He showed the deepest sympathy whenever any one died, and

religiously attended the funeral; so that among his brothers and sisters

he earned the nickname of ‘carrion crow’. In his imagination, too, he

was constantly making away with people so as to show his heartfeltsympathy for their bereaved relatives. The death of an elder sister,

which  took  place  when  he  was  between  three  and  four  years  old,

played a great part in his phantasies, and was brought into intimate

connection with his childish misdemeanours during the same period.

We know, moreover, at what an early age thoughts about his father’s

death had occupied his mind, and we may regard his illness itself as a

reaction to that event, for which he had felt an obsessional wish fifteen

years earlier. The strange extension of his obsessional fears to the

‘next world’ was nothing else than a compensation for these death-

wishes which he had felt against his father. It was introduced eighteen

months after his father had died, at a time when there had been a

revival of his sorrow at the loss, and it was designed - in defiance of

reality,  and  in  deference  to  the  wish  which  had  previously  been

showing itself in phantasies of every kind - were intended to undo the

fact of his father’s death. We have had occasion in several places (pp.

2173,  and 2176)  to  translate  the  phrase  ‘in  the  next  world’  by  the

words ‘if my father were still alive’.

   But the behaviour of other obsessional neurotics does not differ

greatly from that of our present patient, even though it has not been

their fate to come face to face with the phenomenon of death at such

an  early  age.  Their  thoughts  are  unceasingly  occupied  with  other

people’s  length  of  life  and  possibility  of  death;  their  superstitious

propensities  have  had  no  other  content  to  begin  with,  and  have

perhaps no other source whatever. But these neurotics need the help

of the possibility of death chiefly in order that it may act as a solution

of conflicts they have left unsolved. Their essential characteristic is

that they are incapable of coming to a decision, especially in matters

of love; they endeavour to postpone every decision, and, in their doubt

which person they shall decide for or what measures they shall take

against a person, they are obliged to choose as their model the old

German courts of justice, in which the suits were usually brought to an

end, before judgement had been given, by the death of the parties to

the dispute. Thus in every conflict which enters their lives they are on

the look out for the death of some one who is of importance to them,

usually of some one they love - such as one of their parents, or a rival,

or one of the objects of their love between which their inclinations are

wavering.  But  at  this  point  our  discussion  of  the  death-complex  inobsessional neuroses touches upon the problem of the instinctual life

of obsessional neurotics. And to this problem we must now turn.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2185

 

            (C)  THE INSTINCTUAL LIFE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS,
                  AND THE ORIGINS OF COMPULSION AND DOUBT

 

   If we wish to obtain a grasp of the psychical forces whose interplay

built up this neurosis, we must turn back to what we have learnt from

the patient on the subject of the precipitating causes of his falling ill as

a grown-up man and as a child. He fell ill when he was in his twenties

on being faced with a temptation to marry another woman instead of

the one whom he had loved so long; and he avoided a decision of this

conflict  by  postponing  all  the  necessary  preliminary  actions.  The

means for doing this was given him by his neurosis. His hesitation

between  the  lady  he  loved  and  the  other  girl  can  be  reduced  to  a

conflict between his father’s influence and his love for his lady, or, in

other words, to a conflicting choice between his father and his sexual

object, such as had already subsisted (judging from his recollections

and obsessional ideas) in his remote childhood. All through his life,

moreover, he was unmistakably victim to a conflict between love and

hatred, in regard both to his lady and to his father. His phantasies of

revenge  and  such  obsessional  phenomena  as  his  obsession  for

understanding and his exploit with the stone in the road bore witness

to  his  divided  feelings;  and  they  were  to  a  certain  degree

comprehensible and normal, for the lady by her original refusal and

subsequently by her coolness had given him some excuse for hostility.

But his relations with his father were dominated by a similar division of

feeling,  as  we  have  seen  from  our  translation  of  his  obsessional

thoughts;  and  his  father,  too,  must  have  given  him  an  excuse  for

hostility in his childhood, as indeed we have been able to establish

almost beyond question. His attitude towards the lady - a compound of

tenderness and hostility - came to a great extent within the scope of

his  conscious  knowledge;  at  most  he  deceived  himself  over  the

degree and violence of his negative feelings. But his hostility towardshis  father,  on  the  contrary,  though  he  had  once  been  acutely

conscious of it, had long since vanished from his ken, and it was only

in the teeth of the most violent resistance that it could be brought back

into his consciousness. We may regard the repression of his infantile

hatred of his father as the event which brought his whole subsequent

career under the dominion of the neurosis.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2186

 

      The  conflicts  of  feeling  in  our  patient  which  we  have  here

enumerated separately were not independent of each other, but were

bound together in pairs. His hatred of his lady was inevitably coupled

with his attachment to his father, and inversely his hatred of his father

with his attachment to his lady. But the two conflicts of feeling which

result  from  this  simplification  -  namely,  the  opposition  between  his

relation to his father and to his lady, and the contradiction between his

love and his hatred within each of these relations - had no connection

whatever with each other, either in their content or in their origin. The

first  of  these  two  conflicts  corresponds  to  the  normal  vacillation

between male and female which characterizes every one’s choice of a

love-object. It is first brought to the child’s notice by the time-honoured

question:  ‘Which  do  you  love  most,  Daddy  or  Mummy?’  and  it

accompanies him through his whole life, whatever may be the relative

intensity  of  his  feelings  to  the  two  sexes  or  whatever  may  be  the

sexual  aim  upon  which  he  finally  becomes  fixed.  But  normally  this

opposition soon loses the character of a hard-and-fast contradiction,

of an inexorable ‘either-or’. Room is found for satisfying the unequal

demands of both sides, although even in a normal person the higher

estimation of one sex is always thrown into relief by a depreciation of

the other.

   The other conflict, that between love and hatred, strikes us more

strangely. We know that incipient love is often perceived as hatred,

and that love, if it is denied satisfaction, may easily be partly converted

into hatred, and poets tell us that in the more tempestuous stages of

love the two opposed feelings may subsist side by side for a while asthough in rivalry with each other. But the chronic co-existence of love

and hatred, both directed towards the same person and both of the

highest degree of intensity, cannot fail to astonish us. We should have

expected that the passionate love would long ago have conquered the

hatred or been devoured by it. And in fact such a protracted survival of

two  opposites  is  only  possible  under  quite  peculiar  psychological

conditions  and  with  the  co-operation  of  the  state  of  affairs  in  the

unconscious. The love has not succeeded in extinguishing the hatred

but  only  in  driving  it  down  into  the  unconscious;  and  in  the

unconscious the hatred, safe from the danger of being destroyed by

the operations of consciousness, is able to persist and even to grow.

In such circumstances the conscious love attains as a rule, by way of

reaction, an especially high degree of intensity, so as to be strong

enough  for  the  perpetual  task  of  keeping  its  opponent  under

repression.  The  necessary  condition  for  the  occurrence  of  such  a

strange state of affairs in a person’s erotic life appears to be that at a

very early age, somewhere in the prehistoric period of his infancy, the

two opposites should have been split apart and one of them, usually

the hatred, have been repressed.¹

 

   ¹ Compare the discussion on this point during one of the first sessions. - (Added 1923:)

Bleuler subsequently introduced the appropriate term ‘ambivalence’ to describe this emotional
constellation.  See  also  a  further  development  of  this  line  of  thought  in  my  paper  ‘The
Predisposition to Obsessional Neurosis’ (1913I).
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2187

 

   If we consider a number of analyses of obsessional neurotics we

shall  find  it  impossible  to  escape  the  impression  that  a  relation

between love and hatred such as we have found in our present patient

is  among  the  most  frequent,  the  most  marked,  and  probably,

therefore, the most important characteristics of obsessional neurosis.

But however tempting it may be to bring the problem of the ‘choice of

neurosis’  into  connection  with  instinctual  life,  there  are  reasons

enough for avoiding such a course. For we must remember that in

every neurosis we come upon the same suppressed instincts behindthe symptoms. After all, hatred, kept suppressed in the unconscious

by  love,  plays  a  great  part  in  the  pathogenesis  of  hysteria  and

paranoia. We know too little of the nature of love to be able to arrive at

any definite conclusion here; and, in particular, the relation between

the negative factor¹ in love and the sadistic components of the libido

remains completely obscure. What follows is therefore to be regarded

as no more than a provisional explanation. We may suppose, then,

that in the cases of unconscious hatred with which we are concerned

the  sadistic  components  of  love  have,  from  constitutional  causes,

been  exceptionally  strongly  developed,  and  have  consequently

undergone a premature and all too thorough suppression, and that the

neurotic phenomena we have observed arise on the one hand from

conscious feelings of affection which have become exaggerated as a

reaction,  and  on  the  other  hand  from  sadism  persisting  in  the

unconscious in the form of hatred.

 

   ¹ Alcibiades says of Socrates in the Symposium: ‘Many a time have I wished that he were

dead, and yet I know that I should be much more sorry than glad if he were to die: so that I am
at my wits’ end,’
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2188

 

   But in whatever way this remarkable relation of love and hatred is to

be explained, its occurrence is established beyond any possibility of

doubt  by  the  observations  made  in  the  present  case;  and  it  is

gratifying to find how easily we can now follow the puzzling processes

of an obsessional neurosis by bringing them into relation with this one

factor. If an intense love is opposed by an almost equally powerful

hatred,  and  is  at  the  same  time  inseparably  bound  up  with  it,  the

immediate consequence is certain to be a partial paralysis of the will

and an incapacity for coming to a decision upon any of those actions

for which love ought to provide the motive power. But this indecision

will not confine itself for long to a single group of actions. For, in the

first place, what actions of a lover are not brought into relation with his

one principal motive? And secondly a man’s attitude in sexual things

has the force of a model to which the rest of his reactions tend toconform. And thirdly, it is an inherent characteristic in the psychology

of  an  obsessional  neurotic  to  make  the  fullest  possible  use  of  the

mechanism  of displacement.  So  the  paralysis  of  his  powers  of

decision gradually extends itself over the entire field of the patient’s

behaviour.

   And here we have the domination of compulsion and doubt such as

we meet with in the mental life of obsessional neurotics.

   The doubt corresponds to the patient’s internal perception of his own

indecision, which, in consequence of the inhibition of his love by his

hatred, takes possession of him in the face of every intended action.

The doubt is in reality a doubt of his own love - which ought to be the

most certain thing in his whole mind; and it becomes diffused over

everything else, and is especially apt to become displaced on to what

is most insignificant and small.¹  A man who doubts his own love may,

or rather must, doubt every lesser thing.²

 

   ¹ Compare the use of ‘representation by something very small’ as a technique in making

jokes. Cf. Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious.

   ² So in the love-verses addressed by Hamlet to Ophelia:

 
                                                Doubt thou the stars are fire;
                                                    Doubt that the sun doth move;
                                                Doubt truth to be a liar;
                                                    But never doubt I love.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2189

 

   It is this same doubt that leads the patient to uncertainty about his

protective measures, and to his continual repetition of them in order to

banish that uncertainty; and it is this doubt, too, that eventually brings

it  about  that  the  patient’s  protective  acts  themselves  become  as

impossible to carry out as his original inhibited decision in connection

with  his  love.  At  the  beginning  of  my  investigations  I  was  led  to

assume  another  and  more  general  origin  for  the  uncertainty  of

obsessional neurotics and one which seemed to be nearer the normal.

If, for instance, while I am writing a letter some one interrupts me with

questions, I afterwards feel a quite justifiable uncertainty as to what Imay not have written under the influence of the disturbance, and, to

make sure, I am obliged to read the letter over after I have finished it.

In the same way I might suppose that the uncertainty of obsessional

neurotics, when they are praying, for instance, is due to unconscious

phantasies constantly mingling with their prayers and disturbing them.

This hypothesis is correct, but it may be easily reconciled with what I

have just said. It is true that the patient’s uncertainty whether he has

carried through a protective measure is due to the disturbing effect of

unconscious  phantasies;  but  the  content  of  these  phantasies  is

precisely the contrary impulse - which it was the very aim of the prayer

to  ward  off.  This  became  clearly  evident  in  our  patient  on  one

occasion, for the disturbing element did not remain unconscious but

made  its  appearance  openly.  The  words  he  wanted  to  use  in  his

prayer were, ‘May God protect her’, but a hostile ‘not’ suddenly darted

out of his unconscious and inserted itself into the sentence; and he

understood that this was an attempt at a curse (p. 2152). If the ‘not’

had  remained  mute,  he  would  have  found  himself  in  a  state  of

uncertainty and would have kept on prolonging his prayers indefinitely.

But since it became articulate he eventually gave up praying. Before

doing so, however, he, like other obsessional patients, tried every kind

of method for preventing the opposite feeling from insinuating itself.

He shortened his prayers, for instance, or said them more rapidly. And

similarly other patients will endeavour to ‘isolate’ all such protective

acts from other things. But none of these technical procedures are of

any avail in the long run. If the impulse of love achieves any success

by displacing itself on to some trivial act, the impulse of hostility will

very soon follow it on to its new ground and once more proceed to

undo all that it has done.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2190

 

   And when the obsessional patient lays his finger on the weak spot in

the  security  of  our  mental  life  -  on  the  untrustworthiness  of  our

memory  -  the  discovery  enables  him  to  extend  his  doubt  over

everything, even over actions which have already been performed andwhich have so far had no connection with the love-hatred complex,

and over the entire past. I may recall the instance of the woman who

had  just  bought  a  comb  for  her  little  daughter  in  a  shop,  and,

becoming suspicious of her husband, began to doubt whether she had

not as a matter of fact been in possession of the comb for a long time.

Was not this woman saying point-blank: ‘If I can doubt your love’ (and

this was only a projection of her doubt of her own love for him), ‘then I

can doubt this too, then I can doubt everything’ - thus revealing to us

the hidden meaning of neurotic doubt?

   The compulsion on the other hand is an attempt at a compensation

for  the  doubt  and  at  a  correction  of  the  intolerable  conditions  of

inhibition to which the doubt bears witness. If the patient, by the help

of  displacement,  succeeds  at  last  in  bringing  one  of  his  inhibited

intentions to a decision, then the intention must be carried out. It is

true that this intention is not his original one, but the energy dammed

up in the latter cannot let slip the opportunity of finding an outlet for its

discharge in the substitutive act. Thus this energy makes itself felt now

in commands and now in prohibitions, according as the affectionate

impulse or the hostile one snatches control of the pathway leading to

discharge.  If  it  happens  that  a  compulsive  command  cannot  be

obeyed,  the  tension  becomes  intolerable  and  is  perceived  by  the

patient in the form of extreme anxiety.(But the pathway leading to a

substitutive  act,  even  where  the  displacement  has  been  on  to

something very small, is so hotly contested, that such an act can as a

rule be carried out only in the shape of a protective measure intimately

associated with the very impulse which it is designed to ward off.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2191

 

      Furthermore,  by  a  sort  of regression,  preparatory  acts  become

substituted for the final decision, thinking replaces acting, and, instead

of the substitutive act, some thought preliminary to it asserts itself with

all the force of compulsion. According as this regression from acting to

thinking is more or less marked, a case of obsessional neurosis will

exhibit the characteristics of obsessive thinking (that is, of obsessionalideas) or of obsessive acting in the narrower sense of the word. True

obsessional  acts  such  as  these,  however,  are  only  made  possible

because  they  constitute  a  kind  of  reconciliation,  in  the  shape  of  a

compromise, between the two antagonistic impulses. For obsessional

acts tend to approximate more and more - and the longer the disorder

lasts the more evident does this become - to infantile sexual acts of a

masturbatory character. Thus in this form of the neurosis acts of love

are carried out in spite of everything, but only by the aid of a new kind

of regression; for such acts no longer relate to another person, the

object of love and hatred, but are auto-erotic acts such as occur in

infancy.

   The first kind of regression, that from acting to thinking, is facilitated

by another factor concerned in the production of the neurosis. The

histories  of  obsessional  patients  almost  invariably  reveal  an  early

development  and  premature  repression  of  the  sexual  instinct  of

looking and knowing; and, as we know, a part of the infantile sexual

activity of our present patient was governed by that instinct.¹

      We  have  already  mentioned  the  important  part  played  by  the

sadistic  instinctual  components  in  the  genesis  of  obsessional

neuroses. Where the epistemophilic instinct is a preponderant feature

in the constitution of an obsessional patient, brooding becomes the

principal  symptom  of  the  neurosis.  The  thought-process  itself

becomes  sexualized,  for  the  sexual  pleasure  which  is  normally

attached to the content of thought becomes shifted on to the act of

thinking  itself,  and  the  satisfaction  derived  from  reaching  the

conclusion of a line of thought is experienced as a sexual satisfaction.

In  the  various  forms  of  obsessional  neurosis  in  which  the

epistemophilic instinct plays a part, its relation to thought-processes

makes it particularly well adapted to attract the energy which is vainly

endeavouring to make its way forward into action, and divert it into the

sphere  of  thought,  where  there  is  a  possibility  of  its  obtaining

pleasurable satisfaction of another sort. In this way, with the help of

the  epistemophilic  instinct,  the  substitutive  act  may  in  its  turn  be

replaced by preparatory acts of thought. But procrastination in action

is soon replaced by lingering over thoughts, and eventually the whole

process, together with all its peculiarities, is transferred into the new

sphere, just as in America an entire house will sometimes be shiftedfrom one site to another.

 

   ¹ The very high average of intellectual capacity among obsessional patients is probably also

connected with this fact.
 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2192

 

   I may now venture, upon the basis of the preceding discussion, to

determine the psychological characteristic, so long sought after, which

lends to the products of an obsessional neurosis their ‘obsessive’ or

compulsive  quality.  A  thought-process  is  obsessive  or  compulsive

when, in consequence of an inhibition (due to a conflict of opposing

impulses) at the motor end of the psychical system, it is undertaken

with  an  expenditure  of  energy  which  (as  regards  both  quality  and

quantity) is normally reserved for actions alone; or, in other words, an

obsessive  or  compulsive  thought  is  one  whose  function  it  is  to

represent  an  act  regressively.  No  one,  I  think,  will  question  my

assumption  that  processes  of  thought  are  ordinarily  conducted  (on

grounds of economy) with smaller displacements of energy, probably

at a higher level, than are acts intended to bring about discharge or to

modify the external world.

   The obsessive thought which has forced its way into consciousness

with  such  excessive  violence  has  next  to  be  secured  against  the

efforts made by conscious thought to resolve it. As we already know,

this  protection  is  afforded  by  the distortion  which  the  obsessive

thought has undergone before becoming conscious. But this is not the

only means employed. In addition, each separate obsessional idea is

almost invariably removed from the situation in which it originated and

in  which,  in  spite  of  its  distortion,  it  would  be  most  easily

comprehensible. With this end in view, in the first place an interval of

time is inserted between the pathogenic situation and the obsession

that arises from it, so as to lead astray any conscious investigation of

its  causal  connections,  and  in  the  second  place  the  content  of  the

obsession is taken out of its particular setting by being generalized.

Our  patient’s  ‘obsession  for  understanding’  is  an  example  of  this

(p. 2150). But perhaps a better one is afforded by another patient.This was a woman who prohibited herself from wearing any sort of

personal  adornment,  though  the  exciting  cause  of  the  prohibition

related only to one particular piece of jewellery: she had envied her

mother  the  possession  of  it  and  had  had  hopes  that  one  day  she

would inherit it. Finally, if we care to distinguish verbal distortion from

distortion  of  content,  there  is  yet  another  means  by  which  the

obsession  is  protected  against  conscious  attempts  at  solution.  And

that is the choice of an indefinite or ambiguous wording. After being

misunderstood, the wording may find its way into the patient’s ‘deliria’,

and  whatever  further  processes  of  development  or  substitution  his

obsession undergoes will then be based upon the misunderstanding

and  not  upon  the  proper  sense  of  the  text.  Observation  will  show,

however, that the deliria constantly tend to form new connections with

that  part  of  the  matter  and  wording  of  the  obsession  which  is  not

present in consciousness.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2193

 

      I  should  like  to  go  back  once  more  to  the  instinctual  life  of

obsessional neurotics and add one more remark upon it. It turned out

that our patient, besides all his other characteristics, was a renifleur.

By his own account, when he was a child he had recognized every

one by their smell, like a dog; and even when he was grown up he

was more susceptible to sensations of smell than most people.¹ I have

met with the same characteristic in other neurotics, both in hysterical

and  in  obsessional  patients,  and  I  have  come  to  recognize  that  a

tendency to taking pleasure in smell, which has become extinct since

childhood, may play a part in the genesis of neurosis.² And here I

should like to raise the general question whether the atrophy of the

sense of smell (which was an inevitable result of man’s assumption of

an  erect  posture)  and  the  consequent  organic  repression  of  his

pleasure in smell may not have had a considerable share in the origin

of his susceptibility to nervous disease. This would afford us some

explanation of why, with the advance of civilization, it is precisely the

sexual  life  that  must  fall  a  victim  to  repression.  For  we  have  longknown the intimate connection in the animal organization between the

sexual instinct and the function of the olfactory organ.

 

   ¹ I may add that in his childhood he had been subject to strong coprophilic propensities. In

this connection his anal erotism has already been noticed (p. 2166).

   ² For instance, in certain forms of fetishism.

 


                Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis

                                                                                      2194

 

 

   In bringing this paper to a close I may express a hope that, though

my  communication  is  incomplete  in  every  sense,  it  may  at  least

stimulate  other  workers  to  throw  more  light  upon  the  obsessional

neurosis  by  a  deeper  investigation  of  the  subject.  What  is

characteristic of this neurosis - what differentiates it from hysteria - is

not,  in  my  opinion,  to  be  found  in  instinctual  life  but  in  the

psychological field. I cannot take leave of my patient without putting on

paper my impression that he had, as it were, disintegrated into three

personalities: into one unconscious personality, that is to say, and into

two  preconscious  ones  between  which  his  consciousness  could

oscillate. His unconscious comprised those of his impulses which had

been suppressed at an early age and which might be described as

passionate  and  evil  impulses.  In  his  normal  state  he  was  kind,

cheerful, and sensible - an enlightened and superior kind of person -

while  in  his  third  psychological  organization  he  paid  homage  to

superstition and asceticism. Thus he was able to have two different

creeds and two different outlooks upon life. This second preconscious

personality  comprised  chiefly  the  reaction-formations  against  his

repressed  wishes,  and  it  was  easy  to  foresee  that  it  would  have

swallowed up the normal personality if the illness had lasted much

longer. I have at present an opportunity of studying a lady suffering

severely  from  obsessional  acts.  She  has  become  similarly

disintegrated  into  an  easy-going  and  lively  personality  and  into  an

exceedingly  gloomy  and  ascetic  one.  She  puts  forward  the  first  of

them as her official ego, while in fact she is dominated by the second.

Both  of  these  psychical  organizations  have  access  to  herconsciousness, but behind her ascetic personality may be discerned

the  unconscious  part  of  her  being  -  quite  unknown  to  her  and

composed of ancient and long-repressed wishful impulses.¹

 

   ¹ (Footnote added 1923:) The patient’s mental health was restored to him by the analysis

which I have reported upon in these pages. Like so many other young men of value and
promise, he perished in the Great War.

                                                                                       2195

 

                  FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

                                        (1910)

 


                                                                                      2196

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2197

 

                  FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

                Delivered on the Occasion of the Celebration

              of the Twentieth Anniversary of the Foundation

 

                                            of

 

                    CLARK UNIVERSITY, WORCESTER

                                MASSACHUSETTS

 

                                  September 1909

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2198

 

                                          To

 

                    DR. G. STANLEY HALL, PH.D., LL.D.

 

                          President of Clark University

 

                  Professor of Psychology and Pedagogics

                       This Work is Gratefully Dedicated

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2199

 

                                  FIRST LECTURE

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - It is with novel and bewildering feelings that I

find  myself  in  the  New  World,  lecturing  before  an  audience  of

expectant enquirers. No doubt I owe this honour only to the fact that

my  name  is  linked  with  the  topic  of  psycho-analysis;  and  it  is  of

psycho-analysis,  therefore,  that  I  intend  to  speak  to  you.  I  shall

attempt to give you, as succinctly as possible, a survey of the history

and subsequent development of this new method of examination and

treatment.

 

   If it is a merit to have brought psycho-analysis into being that merit is

not mine.¹ I had no share in its earliest beginnings. I was a student

and  working  for  my  final  examinations  at  the  time  when  another

Viennese physician, Dr. Josef Breuer,² first (in 1880-2) made use of

this procedure on a girl who was suffering from hysteria. Let us turn

our attention straightaway to the history of this case and its treatment,

which you will find set out in detail in the Studies on Hysteria³ which

were published later by Breuer and myself.

   But I should like to make one preliminary remark. It is not without

satisfaction that I have learnt that the majority of my audience are not

members of the medical profession. You have no need to be afraid

that any special medical knowledge will be required for following what

I have to say. It is true that we shall go along with the doctors on the

first stage of our journey, but we shall soon part company with them

and, with Dr. Breuer, shall pursue a quite individual path.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1923:] See, however, in this connection my remarks in ‘A History of the

Psycho-Analytic Movement’ (1914d), where I assumed the entire responsibility for psycho-
analysis.

   ² Dr. Josef Breuer, born in 1842, a Corresponding Member of the Kaiserliche Akademie der

Wissenschaften, is well known for his work on respiration and on the physiology of the senseof equilibrium.

   ³ Some of my contributions to this book have been translated into English by Dr. A. A. Brill

of New York: Selected Papers on Hysteria (New York, 1909).
 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2200

 

   Dr. Breuer’s patient was a girl of twenty-one, of high intellectual gifts.

Her  illness  lasted  for  over  two  years,  and  in  the  course  of  it  she

developed a series of physical and psychological disturbances which

decidedly deserved to be taken seriously. She suffered from a rigid

paralysis, accompanied by loss of sensation, of both extremities on

the right side of her body; and the same trouble from time to time

affected her on her left side. Her eye movements were disturbed and

her  power  of  vision  was  subject  to  numerous  restrictions.  She  had

difficulties over the posture of her head; she had a severe nervous

cough.  She  had  an  aversion  to  taking  nourishment,  and  on  one

occasion  she  was  for  several  weeks  unable  to  drink  in  spite  of  a

tormenting thirst. Her powers of speech were reduced, even to the

point of her being unable to speak or understand her native language.

Finally, she was subject to conditions of ‘absence’,¹ of confusion, of

delirium, and of alteration of her whole personality, to which we shall

have presently to turn our attention.

      When  you  hear  such  an  enumeration  of  symptoms,  you  will  be

inclined to think it safe to assume, even though you are not doctors,

that what we have before us is a severe illness, probably affecting the

brain, that it offers small prospect of recovery and will probably lead to

the patient’s early decease. You must be prepared to learn from the

doctors, however, that, in a number of cases which display severe

symptoms such as these, it is justifiable to take a different and a far

more favourable view. If a picture of this kind is presented by a young

patient of the female sex, whose vital internal organs (heart, kidneys,

etc.) are shown on objective examination to be normal, but who has

been subjected to violent emotional shocks - if, moreover, her various

symptoms  differ  in  certain  matters  of  detail  from  what  would  have

been expected - then doctors are not inclined to take the case too

seriously.  They  decide  that  what  they  have  before  them  is  not  anorganic disease of the brain, but the enigmatic condition which, from

the time of ancient Greek medicine, has been known as ‘hysteria’ and

which has the power of producing illusory pictures of a whole number

of serious diseases. They consider that there is then no risk to life but

that a return to health - even a complete one - is probable. It is not

always  quite  easy  to  distinguish  a  hysteria  like  this  from  a  severe

organic  illness.  There  is  no  need  for  us  to  know,  however,  how  a

differential diagnosis of that kind is made; it will suffice to have an

assurance that the case of Breuer’s patient was precisely of a kind in

which  no  competent  physician  could  fail  to  make  a  diagnosis  of

hysteria.  And  here  we  may  quote  from  the  report  of  the  patient’s

illness the further fact that it made its appearance at a time when she

was nursing her father, of whom she was devotedly fond, through the

grave illness which led to his death, and that, as a result of her own

illness, she was obliged to give up nursing him.

 

   ¹ [The French term.]

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2201

 

   So far it has been an advantage to us to accompany the doctors; but

the moment of parting is at hand. For you must not suppose that a

patient’s prospects of medical assistance are improved in essentials

by the fact that a diagnosis of hysteria has been substituted for one of

severe  organic  disease  of  the  brain.  Medical  skill  is  in  most  cases

powerless against severe diseases of the brain; but neither can the

doctor do anything against hysterical disorders. He must leave it to

kindly Nature to decide when and how his optimistic prognosis shall

be fulfilled.¹

   Thus the recognition of the illness as hysteria makes little difference

to the patient; but to the doctor quite the reverse. It is noticeable that

his  attitude  towards  hysterical  patients  is  quite  other  than  towards

sufferers  from  organic  diseases.  He  does  not  have  the  same

sympathy for the former as for the latter: for the hysteric’s ailment is in

fact  far  less  serious  and  yet  it  seems  to  claim  to  be  regarded  as

equally so. And there is a further factor at work. Through his studies,the doctor has learnt many things that remain a sealed book to the

layman: he has been able to form ideas on the causes of illness and

on the changes it brings about - e.g. in the brain of a person suffering

from apoplexy or from a malignant growth - ideas which must to some

degree meet the case, since they allow him to understand the details

of  the  illness.  But  all  his  knowledge  -  his  training  in  anatomy,  in

physiology  and  in  pathology  -  leaves  him  in  the  lurch  when  he  is

confronted  by  the  details  of  hysterical  phenomena.  He  cannot

understand hysteria, and in the face of it he is himself a layman. This

is not a pleasant situation for anyone who as a rule sets so much store

by his knowledge. So it comes about that hysterical patients forfeit his

sympathy. He regards them as people who are transgressing the laws

of his science - like heretics in the eyes of the orthodox. He attributes

every kind of wickedness to them, accuses them of exaggeration, of

deliberate  deceit,  of  malingering.  And  he  punishes  them  by

withdrawing his interest from them.

 

   ¹ I am aware that this is no longer the case; but in my lecture I am putting myself and my

hearers back into the period before 1880. If things are different now, that is to a great extent
the result of the activities whose history I am now sketching.
 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2202

 

   Dr. Breuer’s attitude towards his patient deserved no such reproach.

He gave her both sympathy and interest, even though, to begin with,

he did not know how to help her. It seems likely that she herself made

his task easier by the admirable qualities of intellect and character to

which  he  has  testified  in  her  case  history.  Soon,  moreover,  his

benevolent  scrutiny  showed  him  the  means  of  bringing  her  a  first

instalment of help.

   It was observed that, while the patient was in her states of ‘absence

(altered personality accompanied by confusion), she was in the habit

of  muttering  a  few  words  to  herself  which  seemed  as  though  they

arose from some train of thought that was occupying her mind. The

doctor, after getting a report of these words, used to put her into a kind

of hypnosis and then repeat them to her so as to induce her to usethem as a starting point. The patient complied with the plan, and in

this way reproduced in his presence the mental creations which had

been  occupying  her  mind  during  the  ‘absences’  and  which  had

betrayed  their  existence  by  the  fragmentary  words  which  she  had

uttered. They were profoundly melancholy phantasies - ‘day dreams’

we should call them - sometimes characterized by poetic beauty, and

their starting-point was as a rule the position of a girl at her father’s

sick-bed. When she had related a number of these phantasies, she

was as if set free, and she was brought back to normal mental life.

The improvement in her condition, which would last for several hours,

would be succeeded next day by a further attack of ‘absence’; and this

in turn would be removed in the same way by getting her to put into

words her freshly constructed phantasies. It was impossible to escape

the  conclusion  that  the  alteration  in  her  mental  state  which  was

expressed in the ‘absences’ was a result of the stimulus proceeding

from  these  highly  emotional  phantasies.  The  patient  herself,  who,

strange to say, could at this time only speak and understand English,

christened this novel kind of treatment the ‘talking cure’¹ or used to

refer to it jokingly as ‘chimney sweeping’.¹

 

   ¹ [In English in the original.]

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2203

 

      It  soon  emerged,  as  though  by  chance,  that  this  process  of

sweeping  the  mind  clean  could  accomplish  more  than  the  merely

temporary relief of her ever-recurring mental confusion. It was actually

possible to bring about the disappearance of the painful symptoms of

her illness, if she could be brought to remember under hypnosis, with

an accompanying expression of affect, on what occasion and in what

connection the symptom had first appeared. ‘It was in the summer

during a period of extreme heat, and the patient was suffering very

badly from thirst; for, without being able to account for it in any way,

she suddenly found it impossible to drink. She would take up the glass

of water that she longed for, but as soon as it touched her lips she

would push it away like someone suffering from hydrophobia. As shedid this, she was obviously in an absence for a couple of seconds.

She  lived  only  on  fruit,  such  as  melons,  etc.,  so  as  to  lessen  her

tormenting thirst. This had lasted for some six weeks, when one day

during  hypnosis  she  grumbled  about  her  English  "lady-companion",

whom she did not care for, and went on to describe, with every sign of

disgust, how she had once gone into this lady’s room and how her

little dog - horrid creature! - had drunk out of a glass there. The patient

had said nothing, as she had wanted to be polite. After giving further

energetic expression to the anger she had held back, she asked for

something  to  drink,  drank  a  large  quantity  of  water  without  any

difficulty, and awoke from her hypnosis with the glass at her lips; and

thereupon the disturbance vanished, never to return.’¹

   With your permission, I should like to pause a moment over this

event. Never before had anyone removed a hysterical symptom by

such  a  method  or  had  thus  gained  so  deep  an  insight  into  its

causation.  It  could  not  fail  to  prove  a  momentous  discovery  if  the

expectation were confirmed that others of the patient’s symptoms -

perhaps the majority of them - had arisen and could be removed in

this same manner. Breuer spared no pains in convincing himself that

this was so, and he proceeded to a systematic investigation of the

pathogenesis of the other and more serious symptoms of the patient’s

illness. And it really was so. Almost all the symptoms had arisen in this

way as residues - ‘precipitates’ they might be called - of emotional

experiences. To these experiences, therefore, we later gave the name

of  ‘psychical  traumas’,  while  the  particular  nature  of  the  symptoms

was explained by their relation to the traumatic scenes which were

their cause. They were, to use a technical term, ‘determined’ by the

scenes of whose recollection they represented residues, and it was no

longer  necessary  to  describe  them  as  capricious  or  enigmatic

products of the neurosis. One unexpected point, however, must be

noticed.  What  left  the  symptom  behind  was  not  always  a single

experience. On the contrary, the result was usually brought about by

the convergence of several traumas, and often by the repetition of a

great number of similar ones. Thus it was necessary to reproduce the

whole chain of pathogenic memories in chronological order, or rather

in reversed order, the latest ones first and the earliest ones last; and it

was quite impossible to jump over the later traumas in order to getback more quickly to the first, which was often the most potent one.

 

   ¹ Studies on Hysteria.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2204

 

   No doubt you will now ask me for some further instances of the

causation  of  hysterical  symptoms  besides  the  one  I  have  already

given you of a fear of water produced by disgust at a dog drinking out

of a glass. But if I am to keep to my programme I shall have to restrict

myself to very few examples. In regard to the patient’s disturbances of

vision, for instance, Breuer describes how they were traced back to

occasions such as one on which, ‘when she was sitting by her father’s

bedside with tears in her eyes, he suddenly asked her what time it

was. She could not see clearly; she made a great effort, and brought

her watch near to her eyes. The face of the watch now seemed very

big  -  thus  accounting  for  her  macropsia  and  convergent  squint.  Or

again, she tried hard to suppress her tears so that the sick man should

not  see  them.’¹  Moreover,  all  of  the  pathogenic  impressions  came

from the period during which she was helping to nurse her sick father.

‘She once woke up during the night in great anxiety about the patient,

who was in a high fever; and she was under the strain of expecting the

arrival of a surgeon from Vienna who was to operate. Her mother had

gone away for a short time and Anna was sitting at the bedside with

her right arm over the back of her chair. She fell into a waking dream

and saw a black snake coming towards the sick man from the wall to

bite him. (It is most likely that there were in fact snakes in the field

behind the house and that these had previously given the girl a fright;

they would thus have provided the material for her hallucination.) She

tried to keep the snake off, but it was as though she was paralysed.

Her right arm, over the back of the chair, had gone to sleep, and had

become anaesthetic and paretic; and when she looked at it the fingers

turned  into  little  snakes  with  death’s  heads  (the  nails).  (It  seems

probable that she had tried to use her paralysed right hand to drive off

the snake and that its anaesthesia and paralysis has consequently

become  associated  with  the  hallucination  of  the  snake.)  When  thesnake vanished, in her terror she tried to pray. But language failed

her: she could find no tongue in which to speak, till at last she thought

of some children’s verses in English and then found herself able to

think and pray in that language.’¹ When the patient had recollected

this scene in hypnosis, the rigid paralysis of her left arm, which had

persisted  since  the  beginning  of  her  illness,  disappeared,  and  the

treatment was brought to an end.

 

   ¹ Studies on Hysteria.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2205

 

   When, some years later, I began to employ Breuer’s method of

examination and treatment on patients of my own, my experiences

agreed entirely with his. A lady, aged about forty, suffered from a tic

consisting  of  a  peculiar  ‘clacking’  sound  which  she  produced

whenever she was excited, or sometimes for no visible reason. It had

its origin in two experiences, whose common element lay in the fact

that  at  the  moment  of  their  occurrence  she  had  formed  a

determination  not  to  make  any  noise,  and  in  the  fact  that  on  both

these occasions a kind of counter-will led her to break the silence with

this same sound. On the first of these occasions one of her children

had been ill, and, when she had at last with great difficulty succeeded

in getting it off to sleep, she had said to herself that she must keep

absolutely still so as not to wake it. On the other occasion, while she

was driving with her two children in a thunderstorm, the horses had

bolted and she had carefully tried to avoid making any noise for fear of

frightening them even more.¹ I give you this one example out of a

number of others which are reported in the Studies on Hysteria.²

 

   ¹ Studies on Hysteria.

   ² Extracts from that volume, together with some later writings of mine on hysteria, are now

to be had in an English translation prepared by Dr. A. A. Brill of New York.
 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis                                                                                      2206

 

 

   Ladies and Gentlemen, if I may be allowed to generalize - which is

unavoidable  in  so  condensed  an  account  as  this  -  I  should  like  to

formulate  what  we  have  learned  so  far  as  follows: our  hysterical

patients suffer from reminiscences. Their symptoms are residues and

mnemic  symbols  of  particular  (traumatic)  experiences.  We  may

perhaps obtain a deeper understanding of this kind of symbolism if we

compare  them  with  other  mnemic  symbols  in  other  fields.  The

monuments and memorials with which large cities are adorned are

also  mnemic  symbols.  If  you  take  a  walk  through  the  streets  of

London, you will find, in front of one of the great railway termini, a

richly  carved  Gothic  column  -  Charing  Cross.  One  of  the  old

Plantagenet kings of the thirteenth century ordered the body of his

beloved Queen Eleanor to be carried to Westminster; and at every

stage at which the coffin rested he erected a Gothic cross. Charing

Cross  is  the  last  of  the  monuments  that  commemorate  the  funeral

cortège.¹  At  another  point  in  the  same  town,  not  far  from  London

Bridge, you will find a towering, and more modern, column, which is

simply known as ‘The Monument’. It was designed as a memorial of

the Great Fire, which broke out in that neighbourhood in 1666 and

destroyed a large part of the city. These monuments, then, resemble

hysterical symptoms in being mnemic symbols; up to that point the

comparison seems justifiable. But what should we think of a Londoner

who paused to-day in deep melancholy before the memorial of Queer

Eleanor’s funeral instead of going about his business in the hurry that

modern working conditions demand or instead of feeling joy over the

youthful queen of his own heart? Or again what should we think of a

Londoner who shed tears before the Monument that commemorates

the reduction of his beloved metropolis to ashes although it has long

since risen again in far greater brilliance? Yet every single hysteric

and neurotic behaves like these two unpractical Londoners. Not only

do they remember painful experiences of the remote past, but they still

cling to them emotionally; they cannot get free of the past and for its

sake they neglect what is real and immediate. This fixation of mental

life to pathogenic traumas is one of the most significant and practicallyimportant characteristics of neurosis.

   I am quite ready to allow the justice of an objection that you are

probably raising at this moment on the basis of the case history of

Breuer’s patient. It is quite true that all her traumas dated from the

period when she was nursing her sick father and that her symptoms

can only be regarded as mnemic signs of his illness and death. Thus

they  correspond  to  a  display  of  mourning,  and  there  is  certainly

nothing pathological in being fixated to the memory of a dead person

so short a time after his decease; on the contrary, it would be a normal

emotional  process.  I  grant  you  that  in  the  case  of  Breuer’s  patient

there  is  nothing  striking  in  her  fixation  to  her  trauma.  But  in  other

cases  -  such  as  that  of  the tic  that  I  treated  myself,  where  the

determinants dated back more than fifteen and ten years - the feature

of an abnormal attachment to the past is very clear; and it seems likely

that Breuer’s patient would have developed a similar feature if she had

not  received  cathartic  treatment  so  soon  after  experiencing  the

traumas and developing the symptoms.

 

   ¹ Or rather, it is a modern copy of one of these monuments. As Dr. Ernest Jones tells me,

the name ‘Charing’ is believed to be derived from the words ‘chère reine’.
 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2207

 

 

      So  far  we  have  only  been  discussing  the  relations  between  a

patient’s hysterical symptoms and the events of her life. There are,

however, two further factors in Breuer’s observation which enable up

to  form  some  notion  of  how  the  processes  of  falling  ill  and  of

recovering occur.

   In the first place, it must be emphasized that Breuer’s patient, in

almost  all  her  pathogenic  situations,  was  obliged  to suppress  a

powerful emotion instead of allowing its discharge in the appropriate

signs  of  emotion,  words  or  actions.  In  the  episode  of  her  lady-

companion’s  dog,  she  suppressed  any  manifestation  of  her  very

intense disgust, out of consideration for the woman’s feelings; while

she watched at her father’s bedside she was constantly on the alert toprevent  the  sick  man  from  observing  her  anxiety  and  her  painful

depression. When subsequently she reproduced these scenes in her

doctor’s  presence  the  affect  which  had  been  inhibited  at  the  time

emerged with peculiar violence, as though it had been saved up for a

long time. Indeed, the symptom which was left over from one of these

scenes would reach its highest pitch of intensity at the time when its

determining cause was being approached, only to vanish when that

cause had been fully ventilated. On the other hand, it was found that

no result was produced by the recollection of a scene in the doctor’s

presence if for some reason the recollection took place without any

generation  of  affect.  Thus  it  was  what  happened  to  these  affects,

which might be regarded as displaceable magnitudes, that was the

decisive factor both for the onset of illness and for recovery. One was

driven  to  assume  that  the  illness  occurred  because  the  affects

generated in the pathogenic situations had their normal outlet blocked,

and  that  the  essence  of  the  illness  lay  in  the  fact  that  these

‘strangulated’ affects were then put to an abnormal use. In part they

remained as a permanent burden upon the patient’s mental life and a

source  of  constant  excitation  for  it;  and  in  part  they  underwent  a

transformation  into  unusual  somatic  innervations  and  inhibitions,

which manifested themselves as the physical symptoms of the case.

For  this  latter  process  we  coined  the  term  ‘hysterical  conversion’.

Quite  apart  from  this,  a  certain  portion  of  our  mental  excitation  is

normally directed along the paths of somatic innervation and produces

what  we  know  as  an  ‘expression  of  the  emotions’.  Hysterical

conversion exaggerates this portion of the discharge of an emotionally

cathected mental process; it represents a far more intense expression

of the emotions, which has entered upon a new path. When the bed of

a stream is divided into two channels, then, if the current in one of

them  is  brought  up  against  an  obstacle,  the  other  will  at  once  be

overfilled.  As  you  see,  we  are  on  the  point  of  arriving  at  a  purely

psychological theory of hysteria, with affective processes in the front

rank.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2208 

   A second observation of Breuer’s, again, compels us to attach great

importance,  among  the  characteristics  of  the  pathological  chain  of

events,  to  states  of  consciousness.  Breuer’s  patient  exhibited,

alongside  of  her  normal  state,  a  number  of  mental  peculiarities:

conditions of ‘absence’, confusion, and alterations of character. In her

normal  state  she  knew  nothing  of  the  pathogenic  scenes  or  their

connection with her symptoms; she had forgotten the scenes, or at all

events  had  severed  the  pathogenic  link.  When  she  was  put  under

hypnosis, it was possible, at the expense of a considerable amount of

labour, to recall the scenes to her memory; and, through this work of

recollecting, the symptoms were removed. The explanation of this fact

would be a most awkward business, were it not that the way is pointed

by experiences and experiments in hypnotism. The study of hypnotic

phenomena  has  accustomed  us  to  what  was  at  first  a  bewildering

realization that in one and the same individual there can be several

mental groupings, which can remain more or less independent of one

another,  which  can  ‘know  nothing’  of  one  another  and  which  can

alternate with one another in their hold upon consciousness. Cases of

this  kind,  too,  occasionally  appear  spontaneously,  and  are  then

described as examples of ‘double conscience’.¹ If, where a splitting of

the  personality  such  as  this  has  occurred,  consciousness  remains

attached regularly to one of the two states, we call it the conscious

mental state and the other, which is detached from it, the unconscious

one. In the familiar condition known as ‘post-hypnotic suggestion’, a

command given under hypnosis is slavishly carried out subsequently

in the normal state. This phenomenon affords an admirable example

of the influences which the unconscious state can exercise over the

conscious one; moreover, it provides a pattern upon which we can

account for the phenomena of hysteria. Breuer adopted a hypothesis

that hysterical symptoms arise in peculiar mental conditions to which

he  gave  the  name  of  ‘hypnoid’.  On  this  view,  excitations  occurring

during these hypnoid states can easily become pathogenic because

such states do not provide opportunities for the normal discharge of

the process of excitation. There consequently arises from the process

of excitation an unusual product - the symptom. This finds its way, like

a foreign body, into the normal state, which in turn is in ignorance ofthe hypnoid pathogenic situation. Wherever there is a symptom there

is  also  an  amnesia,  a  gap  in  the  memory,  and  filling  up  this  gap

implies the removal of the conditions which led to the production of the

symptom.

 

   ¹ [The French term for ‘dual consciousness’.]
 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2209

 

   This last part of my account will not, I fear, strike you as particularly

clear. But you should bear in mind that we are dealing with novel and

difficult considerations, and it may well be that it is not possible to

make them much clearer - which shows that we still have a long way

to go in our knowledge of the subject. Moreover, Breuer’s theory of

‘hypnoid states’ turned out to be impeding and unnecessary, and it

has  been  dropped  by  psycho-analysis  to-day.  Later  on,  you  will  at

least  have  a  hint  of  the  influences  and  processes  that  were  to  be

discovered behind the screen of hypnoid states erected by Breuer.

You  will  have  rightly  formed  the  opinion,  too,  that  Breuer’s

investigation  has  only  succeeded  in  offering  you  a  very  incomplete

theory and an unsatisfying explanation of the phenomena observed.

But complete theories do not fall ready-made from the sky and you

would have even better grounds for suspicion if anyone presented you

with  a  flawless  and  complete  theory  at  the  very  beginning  of  his

observations. Such a theory could only be a child of his speculation

and could not be the fruit of an unprejudiced examination of the facts.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2210

 

                                SECOND LECTURE

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - At about the same time at which Breuer was

carrying  on  the  ‘talking  cure’  with  his  patient,  the  great  Charcot  in

Paris  had  begun  the  researches  into  hysterical  patients  at  theSalpêtrière which were to lead to a new understanding of the disease.

There was no possibility of his findings being known in Vienna at that

time.  But  when,  some  ten  years  later,  Breuer  and  I  published  our

‘Preliminary Communication’ on the psychical mechanism of hysterical

phenomena,  we  were  completely  under  the  spell  of  Charcot’s

researches. We regarded the pathogenic experiences of our patients

as  psychical  traumas,  and  equated  them  with  the  somatic  traumas

whose  influence  on  hysterical  paralyses  had  been  established  by

Charcot; and Breuer’s hypothesis of hypnoid states was itself nothing

but  a  reflection  of  the  fact  that  Charcot  had  reproduced  those

traumatic paralyses artificially under hypnosis.

   The great French observer, whose pupil I became in 1885-6, was

not himself inclined to adopt a psychological outlook. It was his pupil,

Pierre Janet, who first attempted a deeper approach to the peculiar

psychical processes present in hysteria, and we followed his example

when  we  took  the  splitting  of  the  mind  and  dissociation  of  the

personality as the centre of our position. You will find in Janet a theory

of hysteria which takes into account the prevailing views in France on

the  part  played  by  heredity  and  degeneracy.  According  to  him,

hysteria is a form of degenerate modification of the nervous system,

which shows itself in an innate weakness in the power of psychical

synthesis. Hysterical patients, he believes, are inherently incapable of

holding together the multiplicity of mental processes into a unity, and

hence arises the tendency to mental dissociation. If I may be allowed

to draw a homely but clear analogy, Janet’s hysterical patient reminds

one  of  a  feeble  woman  who  has  gone  out  shopping  and  is  now

returning  home  laden  with  a  multitude  of  parcels  and  boxes.  She

cannot contain the whole heap of them with her two arms and ten

fingers. So first of all one object slips from her grasp; and when she

stoops to pick it up, another one escapes her in its place, and so on.

This  supposed  mental  weakness  of  hysterical  patients  is  not

confirmed  when  we  find  that,  alongside  these  phenomena  of

diminished capacity, examples are also to be observed of a partial

increase in efficiency: as though by way of compensation. At the time

when  Breuer’s  patient  had  forgotten  her  mother  tongue  and  every

other language but English, her grasp of English reached such heights

that, if she was handed a German book, she was able straight away toread out a correct and fluent translation of it.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2211

 

 

      When,  later  on,  I  set  about  continuing  on  my  own  account  the

investigations  that  had  been  begun  by  Breuer,  I  soon  arrived  at

another  view  of  the  origin  of  hysterical  dissociation  (the  splitting  of

consciousness). A divergence of this kind, which was to be decisive

for everything that followed, was inevitable, since I did not start out,

like Janet, from laboratory experiments, but with therapeutic aims in

mind.

   I was driven forward above all by practical necessity. The cathartic

procedure, as carried out by Breuer, presupposed putting the patient

into a state of deep hypnosis; for it was only in a state of hypnosis that

he  attained  a  knowledge  of  the  pathogenic  connections  which

escaped him in his normal state. But I soon came to dislike hypnosis,

for it was a temperamental and, one might almost say, a mystical ally.

When I found that, in spite of all my efforts, I could not succeed in

bringing more than a fraction of my patients into a hypnotic state, I

determined to give up hypnosis and to make the cathartic procedure

independent of it. Since I was not able at will to alter the mental state

of the majority of my patients, I set about working with them in their

normal state. At first, I must confess, this seemed a senseless and

hopeless undertaking. I was set the task of learning from the patient

something that I did not know and that he did not know himself. How

could one hope to elicit it? But there came to my help a recollection of

a most remarkable and instructive experiment which I had witnessed

when I was with Bernheim at Nancy. Bernheim showed us that people

whom he had put into a state of hypnotic somnambulism, and who

had had all kinds of experiences while they were in that state, only

appeared  to  have  lost  the  memory  of  what  they  had  experienced

during  somnambulism;  it  was  possible  to  revive  these  memories  in

their normal state. It is true that, when he questioned them about their

somnambulistic  experiences,  they  began  by  maintaining  that  theyknew nothing about them; but if he refused to give way, and insisted,

and  assured  them  that  they did  know  about  them,  the  forgotten

experiences always reappeared.

   So I did the same thing with my patients. When I reached a point

with them at which they maintained that they knew nothing more, I

assured them that they did know it all the same, and that they had

only to say it; and I ventured to declare that the right memory would

occur  to  them  at  the  moment  at  which  I  laid  my  hand  on  their

forehead.  In  that  way  I  succeeded,  without  using  hypnosis,  in

obtaining from the patients whatever was required for establishing the

connection between the pathogenic scenes they had forgotten and the

symptoms  left  over  from  those  scenes.  But  it  was  a  laborious

procedure, and in the long run an exhausting one; and it was unsuited

to serve as a permanent technique.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2212

 

 

   I did not abandon it, however, before the observations I made during

my use of it afforded me decisive evidence. I found confirmation of the

fact  that  the  forgotten  memories  were  not  lost.  They  were  in  the

patient’s possession and were ready to emerge in association to what

was still known by him; but there was some force that prevented them

from becoming conscious and compelled them to remain unconscious.

The existence of this force could be assumed with certainty, since one

became aware of an effort corresponding to it if, in opposition to it, one

tried  to  introduce  the  unconscious  memories  into  the  patient’s

consciousness.  The  force  which  was  maintaining  the  pathological

condition became apparent in the form of resistance on the part of the

patient.

   It was on this idea of resistance, then, that I based my view of the

course of psychical events in hysteria. In order to effect a recovery, it

had proved necessary to remove these resistances. Starting out from

the  mechanism  of  cure,  it  now  became  possible  to  construct  quite

definite ideas of the origin of the illness. The same forces which, in theform  of  resistance,  were  now  offering  opposition  to  the  forgotten

material’s being made conscious, must formerly have brought about

the forgetting and must have pushed the pathogenic experiences in

question out of consciousness. I gave the name of ‘repression’ to this

hypothetical  process,  and  I  considered  that  it  was  proved  by  the

undeniable existence of resistance.

   The further question could then be raised as to what these forces

were and what the determinants were of the repression in which we

now recognized the pathogenic mechanism of hysteria. A comparative

study  of  the  pathogenic  situations  which  we  had  come  to  know

through  the  cathartic  procedure  made  it  possible  to  answer  this

question.  All  these  experiences  had  involved  the  emergence  of  a

wishful  impulse  which  was  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  subject’s  other

wishes and which proved incompatible with the ethical and aesthetic

standards of his personality. There had been a short conflict, and the

end of this internal struggle was that the idea which had appeared

before consciousness as the vehicle of this irreconcilable wish fell a

victim  to  repression,  was  pushed  out  of  consciousness  with  all  its

attached memories, and was forgotten. Thus the incompatibility of the

wish  in  question  with  the  patient’s  ego  was  the  motive  for  the

repression;  the  subject’s  ethical  and  other  standards  were  the

repressing forces. An acceptance of the incompatible wishful impulse

or a prolongation of the conflict would have produced a high degree of

unpleasure;  this  unpleasure  was  avoided  by  means  of  repression,

which was thus revealed as one of the devices serving to protect the

mental personality.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2213

 

   To take the place of a number of instances, I will relate a single one

of my cases, in which the determinants and advantages of repression

are  sufficiently  evident.  For  my  present  purpose  I  shall  have  once

again to abridge the case history and omit some important underlying

material. The patient was a girl, who had lost her beloved father after

she had taken a share in nursing him - a situation analogous to that ofBreuer’s  patient.  Soon  afterwards  her  elder  sister  married,  and  her

new  brother-in-law  aroused  in  her  a  peculiar  feeling  of  sympathy

which was easily masked under a disguise of family affection. Not long

afterwards her sister fell ill and died, in the absence of the patient and

her mother. They were summoned in all haste without being given any

definite  information  of  the  tragic  event.  When  the  girl  reached  the

bedside of her dead sister, there came to her for a brief moment an

idea that might be expressed in these words: ‘Now he is free and can

marry  me.’  We  may  assume  with  certainty  that  this  idea,  which

betrayed to her consciousness the intense love for her brother-in-law

of  which  she  had  not  herself  been  conscious,  was  surrendered  to

repression a moment later, owing to the revolt of her feelings. The girl

fell ill with severe hysterical symptoms; and while she was under my

treatment it turned out that she had completely forgotten the scene by

her sister’s bedside and the odious egoistic impulse that had emerged

in her. She remembered it during the treatment and reproduced the

pathogenic moment with signs of the most violent emotion, and, as a

result of the treatment, she became healthy once more.

   Perhaps I may give you a more vivid picture of repression and of its

necessary relation to resistance, by a rough analogy derived from our

actual situation at the present moment. Let us suppose that in this

lecture-room and among this audience, whose exemplary quiet and

attentiveness  I  cannot  sufficiently  commend,  there  is  nevertheless

someone  who  is  causing  a  disturbance  and  whose  ill-mannered

laughter,  chattering  and  shuffling  with  his  feet  are  distracting  my

attention from my task. I have to announce that I cannot proceed with

my lecture; and thereupon three or four of you who are strong men

stand up and, after a short struggle, put the interrupter outside the

door. So now he is ‘repressed’, and I can continue my lecture. But in

order that the interruption shall not be repeated, in case the individual

who has been expelled should try to enter the room once more, the

gentlemen  who  have  put  my  will  into  effect  place  their  chairs  up

against the door and thus establish a ‘resistance’ after the repression

has  been  accomplished.  If  you  will  now  translate  the  two  localities

concerned  into  psychical  terms  as  the  ‘conscious’  and  the

‘unconscious’, you will have before you a fairly good picture of the

process of repression. 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2214

 

 

   You will now see in what it is that the difference lies between our

view  and  Janet’s.  We  do  not  derive  the  psychical  splitting  from  an

innate incapacity for synthesis on the part of the mental apparatus; we

explain it dynamically, from the conflict of opposing mental forces and

recognize it as the outcome of an active struggling on the part of the

two psychical groupings against each other. But our view gives rise to

a large number of fresh problems. Situations of mental conflict are, of

course, exceedingly common; efforts by the ego to ward off painful

memories are quite regularly to be observed without their producing

the  result  of  a  mental  split.  The  reflection  cannot  be  escaped  that

further  determinants  must  be  present  if  the  conflict  is  to  lead  to

dissociation.  I  will  also  readily  grant  you  that  the  hypothesis  of

repression  leaves  us  not  at  the  end  but  at  the  beginning  of  a

psychological theory. We can only go forward step by step however,

and complete knowledge must await the results of further and deeper

researches.

   Nor is it advisable to attempt to explain the case of Breuer’s patient

from the point of view of repression. That case history is not suited to

this  purpose,  because  its  findings  were  reached  with  the  help  of

hypnotic  influence.  It  is  only  if  you  exclude  hypnosis  that  you  can

observe resistances and repressions and form an adequate idea of

the  truly  pathogenic  course  of  events.  Hypnosis  conceals  the

resistance and renders a certain area of the mind accessible; but, as

against this, it builds up the resistance at the frontiers of this area into

a wall that makes everything beyond it inaccessible.

 

   Our most valuable lesson from Breuer’s observation was what it

proved  concerning  the  relation  between  symptoms  and  pathogenic

experiences  or  psychical  traumas,  and  we  must  not  omit  now  to

consider  these  discoveries  from  the  standpoint  of  the  theory  of

repression. At first sight it really seems impossible to trace a path fromrepression  to  the  formation  of  symptoms.  Instead  of  giving  a

complicated theoretical account, I will return here to the analogy which

I employed earlier for my explanation of repression. If you come to

think  of  it,  the  removal  of  the  interrupter  and  the  posting  of  the

guardians at the door may not mean the end of the story. It may very

well be that the individual who has been expelled, and who has now

become embittered and reckless, will cause us further trouble. It is

true that he is no longer among us; we are free from his presence,

from his insulting laughter and his sotto voce comments. But in some

respects, nevertheless, the repression has been unsuccessful; for now

he is making an intolerable exhibition of himself outside the room, and

his shouting and banging on the door with his fists interfere with my

lecture  even  more  than  his  bad  behaviour  did  before.  In  these

circumstances  we  could  not  fail  to  be  delighted  if  our  respected

president, Dr. Stanley Hall, should be willing to assume the role of

mediator  and  peacemaker.  He  would  have  a  talk  with  the  unruly

person  outside  and  would  then  come  to  us  with  a  request  that  he

should be re-admitted after all: he himself would guarantee that the

man would now behave better. On Dr. Hall’s authority we decide to lift

the repression, and peace and quiet are restored. This presents what

is really no bad picture of the physician’s task in the psycho-analytic

treatment of the neuroses.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2215

 

      To  put  the  matter  more  directly.  The  investigation  of  hysterical

patients and of other neurotics leads us to the conclusion that their

repression of the idea to which the intolerable wish is attached has

been a failure. It is true that they have driven it out of consciousness

and out of memory and have apparently saved themselves a large

amount of unpleasure. But the repressed wishful impulse continues to

exist in the unconscious. It is on the look-out for an opportunity of

being activated, and when that happens it succeeds in sending into

consciousness  a  disguised  and  unrecognizable substitute  for  what

had  been  repressed,  and  to  this  there  soon  become  attached  thesame feelings of unpleasure which it was hoped had been saved by

the repression. This substitute for the repressed idea - the symptom -

is proof against further attacks from the defensive ego; and in place of

the short conflict an ailment now appears which is not brought to an

end by the passage of time. Alongside the indication of distortion in

the symptom, we can trace in it the remains of some kind of indirect

resemblance  to  the  idea  that  was  originally  repressed.  The  paths

along which the substitution was effected can be traced in the course

of the patient’s psycho-analytic treatment; and in order to bring about

recovery, the symptom must be led back along the same paths and

once more turned into the repressed idea. If what was repressed is

brought back again into conscious mental activity - a process which

presupposes  the  overcoming  of  considerable  resistances  -  the

resulting psychical conflict, which the patient had tried to avoid, can,

under  the  physician’s  guidance,  reach  a  better  outcome  than  was

offered  by  repression.  There  are  a  number  of  such  opportune

solutions, which may bring the conflict and the neurosis to a happy

end, and which may in certain instances be combined. The patient’s

personality may be convinced that it has been wrong in rejecting the

pathogenic wish and may be led into accepting it wholly or in part; or

the  wish  itself  may  be  directed  to  a  higher  and  consequently

unobjectionable  aim  (this  is  what  we  call  its  ‘sublimation’);  or  the

rejection of the wish may be recognized as a justifiable one, but the

automatic and therefore inefficient mechanism of repression may be

replaced  by  a  condemning  judgement  with  the  help  of  the  highest

human mental functions - conscious control of the wish is attained.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2216

 

 

   You must forgive me if I have not succeeded in giving you a more

clearly  intelligible  account  of  these  basic  positions  adopted  by  the

method of treatment that is now described as ‘psycho-analysis’. The

difficulties have not lain only in the novelty of the subject. The nature

of the incompatible wishes which, in spite of repression, succeed inmaking  their  existence  in  the  unconscious  perceptible,  and  the

subjective and constitutional determinants which must be present in

anyone before a failure of repression can occur and a substitute or

symptom be formed - on all this I shall have more light to throw in

some of my later observations.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2217

 

                                  THIRD LECTURE

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - It is not always easy to tell the truth especially

when one has to be concise; and I am thus to-day obliged to correct a

wrong statement that I made in my last lecture. I said to you that,

having  dispensed  with  hypnosis,  I  insisted  on  my  patients

nevertheless telling me what occurred to them in connection with the

subject  under  discussion,  and  assured  them  that  they  really  knew

everything that they had ostensibly forgotten and that the idea that

occurred to them would infallibly contain what we were in search of;

and I went on to say to you that I found that the first idea occurring to

my patients did in fact produce the right thing and turned out to be the

forgotten continuation of the memory. This, however, is not in general

the case, and I only put the matter so simply for the sake of brevity.

Actually it was only for the first few times that the right thing which had

been forgotten turned up as a result of simple insistence on my part.

When the procedure we carried further, ideas kept on emerging that

could not be the right ones, since they were not appropriate and were

rejected as being wrong by the patients themselves. Insistence was of

no further help at this point, and I found myself once more regretting

my abandonment of hypnosis.

      While  I  was  thus  at  a  loss,  I  clung  to  a  prejudice  the  scientific

justification for which was proved years later by my friend C. G. Jung

and his pupils in Zurich. I am bound to say that it is sometimes most

useful to have prejudices. I cherished a high opinion of the strictness

with which mental processes are determined, and I found it impossible

to believe that an idea produced by a patient while his attention wason the stretch could be an arbitrary one and unrelated to the idea we

were in search of. The fact that the two ideas were not identical could

be satisfactorily explained from the postulated psychological state of

affairs.  In  the  patient  under  treatment  two  forces  were  in  operation

against each other: on the one hand, his conscious endeavour to bring

into consciousness the forgotten idea in his unconscious, and on the

other hand, the resistance we already know about, which was striving

to prevent what was repressed or its derivatives from thus becoming

conscious. If this resistance amounted to little or nothing, what had

been  forgotten  became  conscious  without  distortion.  It  was

accordingly  plausible  to  suppose  that  the  greater  the  resistance

against what we were in search of becoming conscious, the greater

would be its distortion. The idea which occurred to the patient in place

of what we were in search of had thus itself originated like a symptom:

it was a new, artificial and ephemeral substitute for what had been

repressed,  and  was  dissimilar  to  it  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of

distortion it had undergone under the influence of the resistance. But,

owing to its nature as a symptom, it must nevertheless have a certain

similarity to what we were in search of; and if the resistance were not

too great, we ought to be able to guess the latter from the former. The

idea occurring to the patient must be in the nature of an allusion to the

repressed element, like a representation of it in indirect speech.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2218

 

 

   We know cases in the field of normal mental life in which situations

analogous to the one we have just assumed produce similar results.

One  such  case  is  that  of  jokes.  The  problems  of  psycho-analytic

technique have compelled me to investigate the technique of making

jokes.  I  will  give  you  one  example  of  this  -  incidentally,  a  joke  in

English.

   This is the anecdote.¹ Two not particularly scrupulous business men

had  succeeded,  by  dint  of  a  series  of  highly  risky  enterprises,  in

amassing a large fortune, and they were now making efforts to pushtheir way into good society. One method, which struck them as a likely

one, was to have their portraits painted by the most celebrated and

highly-paid  artist  in  the  city,  whose  pictures  had  an  immense

reputation. The precious canvases were shown for the first time at a

large  evening  party,  and  the  two  hosts  themselves  led  the  most

influential  connoisseur  and  art  critic  up  to  the  wall  on  which  the

portraits were hanging side by side. He studied the works for a long

time, and then, shaking his head, as though there was something he

had  missed,  pointed  to  the  gap  between  the  pictures  and  asked

quietly: ‘But where’s the Saviour?’² I see you are all much amused at

this  joke.  Let  us  now  proceed  to  examine  it.  Clearly  what  the

connoisseur meant to say was: ‘You are a couple of rogues, like the

two thieves between whom the Saviour was crucified.’ But he did not

say  this.  Instead  he  made  a  remark  which  seems  at  first  sight

strangely  inappropriate  and  irrelevant,  but  which  we  recognize  a

moment later as an allusion to the insult that he had in mind and as a

perfect  substitute  for  it.  We  cannot  expect  to  find  in  jokes all  the

characteristics that we have attributed to the ideas occurring to our

patients, but we must stress the identity of the motive for the joke and

for the idea. Why did the critic not tell the rogues straight out what he

wanted  to  say?  Because  he  had  excellent  counter-motives  working

against his desire to say it to their faces. There are risks attendant

upon  insulting  people  who  are  one’s  hosts  and  who  have  at  their

command the fists of a large domestic staff. One might easily meet

with the fate which I suggested in my last lecture as an analogy for

repression. That was the reason why the critic did not express the

insult  he  had  in  mind  directly  but  in  the  form  of  an  ‘allusion

accompanied  by  omission’;  and  the  same  state  of  things  is

responsible  for  our  patients’  producing  a  more  or  less  distorted

substitute instead of the forgotten idea we are in search of.

 

   ¹ Cf. Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious, 1905c.

   ² [In English in the original.]

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2219

  

   It is highly convenient, Ladies and Gentlemen, to follow the Zurich

school (Bleuler, Jung, etc.) in describing a group of interdependent

ideational  elements  cathected  with  affect  as  a  ‘complex’.  We  see,

then,  that  if  in  our  search  for  a  repressed  complex  in  one  of  our

patients we start out from the last thing he remembers, we shall have

every prospect of discovering the complex, provided that the patient

puts  a  sufficient  number  of  his  free  associations  at  our  disposal.

Accordingly, we allow the patient to say whatever he likes, and hold

fast to the postulate that nothing can occur to him which is not in an

indirect fashion dependent on the complex we are in search of. If this

method  of  discovering  what  is  repressed  strikes  you  as  unduly

circumstantial, I can at least assure you that it is the only practicable

one.

   When we come to putting this procedure into effect, we are subject

to yet another interference. For the patient will often pause and come

to a stop, and assert that he can think of nothing to say, and that

nothing whatever occurs to his mind. If this were so and if the patient

were  right,  then  our  procedure  would  once  again  have  proved

ineffective. But closer observation shows that such a stoppage of the

flow of ideas never in fact occurs. It appears to happen only because

the  patient  holds  back  or  gets  rid  of  the  idea  that  he  has  become

aware  of,  under  the  influence  of  the  resistances  which  disguise

themselves as various critical judgements about the value of the idea

that has occurred to him. We can protect ourselves against this by

warning him beforehand of this behaviour and requiring him to take no

notice of such criticisms. He must, we tell him, entirely renounce any

critical selection of this kind and say whatever comes into his head,

even  if  he  considers  it  incorrect  or  irrelevant  or  nonsensical,  and

above all if he finds it disagreeable to let himself think about what has

occurred  to  him.  So  long  as  this  ordinance  is  carried  out  we  are

certain of obtaining the material which will put us on the track of the

repressed complexes.

   This associative material, which the patient contemptuously rejects

when he is under the influence of the resistance instead of under the

doctor’s, serves the psycho-analyst, as it were, as ore from which,

with  the  help  of  some  simple  interpretative  devices,  he  extracts  itscontent  of  precious  metal.  If  you  are  anxious  to  gain  a  rapid  and

provisional knowledge of a patient’s repressed complexes, without as

yet  entering  into  their  arrangement  and  interconnection,  you  will

employ as a method of examination the ‘association experiment’ as it

has been developed by Jung (1906) and his pupils. This procedure

offers the psycho-analyst what qualitative analysis offers the chemist.

In the treatment of neurotic patients it can be dispensed with; but it is

indispensable for the objective demonstration of complexes and in the

examination of the psychoses, which has been embarked on with so

much success by the Zurich school.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2220

 

 

   Working over the ideas that occur to patients when they submit to

the main rule of psycho-analysis is not our only technical method of

discovering  the  unconscious.  The  same  purpose  is  served  by  two

other  procedures:  the  interpretation  of  patients’  dreams  and  the

exploitation of their faulty and haphazard actions.

   I must admit, Ladies and Gentlemen, that I hesitated for a long time

whether, instead of giving you this condensed general survey of the

whole field of psycho-analysis, it might not be better to present you

with a detailed account of dream-interpretation.¹ I was held back by a

purely subjective and seemingly secondary motive. It seemed to me

almost  indecent  in  a  country  which  is  devoted  to  practical  aims  to

make  my  appearance  as  a  ‘dream-interpreter’,  before  you  could

possibly know the importance that can attach to that antiquated and

derided art. The interpretation of dreams is in fact the royal road to a

knowledge of the unconscious; it is the securest foundation of psycho-

analysis  and  the  field  in  which  every  worker  must  acquire  his

convictions and seek his training. If I am asked how one can become

a  psycho-analyst,  I  reply:  ‘By  studying  one’s  own  dreams.’  Every

opponent of psycho-analysis hitherto has, with a nice discrimination,

either evaded any consideration of The Interpretation of Dreams, or

has sought to skirt over it with the most superficial objections. If, onthe contrary, you can accept the solutions of the problems of dream-

life, the novelties with which psycho-analysis confronts your minds will

offer you no further difficulties.

   You should bear in mind that the dreams which we produce at night

have, on the one hand, the greatest external similarity and internal

kinship  with  the  creations  of  insanity,  and  are,  on  the  other  hand,

compatible  with  complete  health  in  waking  life.  There  is  nothing

paradoxical in the assertion that no one who regards these ‘normal’

illusions, delusions and character-changes with astonishment instead

of  comprehension  has  the  slightest  prospect  of  understanding  the

abnormal structures of pathological mental states otherwise than as a

layman.  You  may  comfortably  count  almost  all  psychiatrists  among

such laymen.

 

   ¹ The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a).

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2221

 

   I invite you now to follow me on a brief excursion through the region

of dream-problems. When we are awake we are in the habit of treating

dreams  with  the  same  contempt  with  which  patients  regard  the

associations that are demanded of them by the psycho-analyst. We

dismiss  them,  too,  by  forgetting  them  as  a  rule,  quickly  and

completely. Our low opinion of them is based on the strange character

even of those dreams that are not confused and meaningless, and on

the  obvious  absurdity  and  nonsensicalness  of  other  dreams.  Our

dismissal  of  them  is  related  to  the  uninhibited  shamelessness  and

immorality of the tendencies openly exhibited in some dreams. It is

well known that the ancient world did not share this low opinion of

dreams.  Nor  are  the  lower  strata  of  our  own  society  to-day  in  any

doubt about the value of dreams; like the peoples of antiquity, they

expect them to reveal the future. I confess that I feel no necessity for

making  any  mystical  assumptions  in  order  to  fill  the  gaps  in  our

present knowledge, and accordingly I have never been able to find

anything to confirm the prophetic nature of dreams. There are plenty

of other things - sufficiently wonderful too - to be said about them.      In  the  first  place,  not  all  dreams  are  alien  to  the  dreamer,

incomprehensible  and  confused.  If  you  inspect  the  dreams  of  very

young  children,  from  eighteen  months  upwards,  you  will  find  them

perfectly simple and easy to explain. Small children always dream of

the fulfilment of wishes that were aroused in them the day before but

not satisfied. You will need no interpretative art in order to find this

simple  solution;  all  you  need  do  is  to  enquire  into  the  child’s

experiences on the previous day (the ‘dream-day’). Certainly the most

satisfactory  solution  of  the  riddle  of  dreams  would  be  to  find  that

adults’ dreams too were like those of children - fulfilments of wishful

impulses that had come to them on the dream-day. And such in fact is

the case. The difficulties in the way of this solution can be overcome

step by step if dreams are analysed more closely.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2222

 

   The first and most serious objection is that the content of adults’

dreams is as a rule unintelligible and could not look more unlike the

fulfilment of a wish. And here is the answer. Such dreams have been

subjected to distortion; the psychical process underlying them might

originally have been expressed in words quite differently. You must

distinguish the manifest content of the dream, as you vaguely recollect

it in the morning and laboriously (and, as it seems, arbitrarily) clothe it

in  words,  and  the latent dream-thoughts,  which  you  must  suppose

were present in the unconscious. This distortion in dreams is the same

process  that  you  have  already  come  to  know  in  investigating  the

formation  of  hysterical  symptoms.  It  indicates,  too,  that  the  same

interplay of mental forces is at work in the formation of dreams as in

that of symptoms. The manifest content of the dream is the distorted

substitute for the unconscious dream-thoughts and this distortion is

the work of the ego’s forces of defence - of resistances. In waking life

these  resistances  altogether  prevent  the  repressed  wishes  of  the

unconscious  from  entering  consciousness;  and  during  the  lowered

state of sleep they are at least strong enough to oblige them to adopt

a veil of disguise. Thereafter, the dreamer can no more understandthe  meaning  of  his  dreams  than  the  hysteric  can  understand  the

connection and significance of his symptoms.

      You  can  convince  yourself  that  there  are  such  things  as  latent

dream-thoughts and that the relation between them and the manifest

content of the dream is really as I have described it, if you carry out an

analysis  of  dreams,  the  technique  of  which  is  the  same  as  that  of

psycho-analysis.  You  entirely  disregard  the  apparent  connections

between the elements in the manifest dream and collect the ideas that

occur to you in connection with each separate element of the dream

by free association according to the psycho-analytic rule of procedure.

From this material you arrive at the latent dream-thoughts, just as you

arrived at the patient’s hidden complexes from his associations to his

symptoms  and  memories.  The  latent  dream-thoughts  which  have

been  reached  in  this  way  will  at  once  show  you  how  completely

justified  we  have  been  in  tracing  back  adults’  dreams  to  children’s

dreams. The true meaning of the dream, which has now taken the

place of its manifest content, is always clearly intelligible; it has its

starting-point in experiences of the previous day, and proves to be a

fulfilment of unsatisfied wishes. The manifest dream, which you know

from  your  memory  when  you  wake  up,  can  therefore  only  be

described as a disguised fulfilment of repressed wishes.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2223

 

   You can also obtain a view, by a kind of synthetic work, of the

process  which  has  brought  about  the  distortion  of  the  unconscious

dream-thoughts into the manifest content of the dream. We call this

process the ‘dream-work’. It deserves our closest theoretical interest,

since we are able to study in it, as nowhere else, what unsuspected

psychical processes can occur in the unconscious, or rather, to put it

more  accurately, between  two  separate  psychical  systems  like  the

conscious  and  unconscious.  Among  these  freshly  discovered

psychical  processes  those  of condensation  and displacement  are

especially noticeable. The dream-work is a special case of the effects

produced by two different mental groupings on each other - that is, ofthe  consequences  of  mental  splitting;  and  it  seems  identical  in  all

essentials  with  the  process  of  distortion  which  transforms  the

repressed  complexes  into  symptoms  where  there  is  unsuccessful

repression.

   You will also learn with astonishment from the analysis of dreams

(and most convincingly from that of your own) what an unsuspectedly

great  part  is  played  in  human  development  by  impressions  and

experiences of early childhood. In dream-life the child that is in man

pursues its existence, as it were, and retains all its characteristics and

wishful impulses, even such as have become unserviceable in later

life. There will be brought home to you with irresistible force the many

developments, repressions, sublimations and reaction-formations, by

means of which a child with a quite other innate endowment grows

into what we call a normal man, the bearer, and in part the victim, of

the civilization that has been so painfully acquired.

   I should like you to notice, too, that the analysis of dreams has

shown us that the unconscious makes use of a particular symbolism,

especially for representing sexual complexes. This symbolism varies

partly from individual to individual; but partly it is laid down in a typical

form and seems to coincide with the symbolism which, as we suspect,

underlies our myths and fairy tales. It seems not impossible that these

creations of the popular mind might find an explanation through the

help of dreams.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2224

 

      Lastly,  I  must  warn  you  not  to  let  yourselves  be  put  out  by  the

objection that the occurrence of anxiety-dreams contradicts our view

of dreams as the fulfilments of wishes. Apart from the fact that these

anxiety-dreams,  like  the  rest,  require  interpretation  before  any

judgement can be formed on them, it must be stated quite generally

that the anxiety does not depend on the content of the dream in such

a  simple  manner  as  one  might  imagine  without  having  more

knowledge and taking more account of the determinants of neurotic

anxiety.  Anxiety  is  one  of  the  ego’s  reactions  in  repudiation  ofrepressed wishes that have become powerful; and its occurrence in

dreams  as  well  is  very  easily  explicable  when  the  formation  of  the

dream has been carried out with too much of an eye to the fulfilment

of these repressed wishes.

   As you see, research into dreams would be justified for its own sake

merely by the information it gives us on matters that can with difficulty

be discovered in other ways. But we were in fact led to the subject in

connection with the psycho-analytic treatment of neurotics. You will

easily understand from what I have already said how it is that dream-

interpretation, if it is not made too difficult by the patient’s resistances,

leads to a knowledge of his hidden and repressed wishes and of the

complexes nourished by them; and I can now pass on to the third

group  of  mental  phenomena  whose  study  has  become  one  of  the

technical instruments of psycho-analysis.

   The phenomena in question are the small faulty actions performed

by both normal and neurotic people, to which as a rule no importance

is attached: forgetting things that might be known and sometimes in

fact are  known  (e.g.  the  occasional  difficulty  in  recalling  proper

names), slips of the tongue in talking, by which we ourselves are so

often affected, analogous slips of the pen and misreadings, bungling

the  performance  of  actions,  losing  objects  or  breaking  them.  All  of

these are things for which as a rule no psychological determinants are

sought  and  which  are  allowed  to  pass  without  criticism  as

consequences of distraction or inattention or similar causes. Besides

these  there  are  the  actions  and  gestures  which  people  carry  out

without  noticing  them  at  all,  to  say  nothing  of  attributing  any

psychological  importance  to  them:  playing  about  and  fiddling  with

things,  humming  tunes,  fingering  parts  of  one’s  own  body  or  one’s

clothing  and  so  on.¹  These  small  things,  faulty  actions  and

symptomatic or haphazard actions alike, are not so insignificant as

people, by a sort of conspiracy of silence, are ready to suppose. They

always have a meaning, which can usually be interpreted with ease

and certainty from the situation in which they occur. And it turns out

that once again they give expression to impulses and intentions which

have to be kept back and hidden from one’s own consciousness, or

that  they  are  actually  derived  from  the  same  repressed  wishful

impulses and complexes which we have already come to know as thecreators of symptoms and the constructors of dreams. They therefore

deserve to be rated as symptoms, and if they are examined they may

lead, just as dreams do, to the uncovering of the hidden part of the

mind. A man’s most intimate secrets are as a rule betrayed by their

help. If they occur particularly easily and frequently even in healthy

people in whom the repression of unconscious impulses has on the

whole  been  quite  successful,  they  have  their  triviality  and

inconspicuousness to thank for it. But they can claim a high theoretical

value,  since  they  prove  that  repression  and  the  formation  of

substitutes occur even under healthy conditions.

 

   ¹ Cf. The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901b).

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2225

 

   As you already see, psycho-analysts are marked by a particularly

strict  belief  in  the  determination  of  mental  life.  For  them  there  is

nothing trivial, nothing arbitrary or haphazard. They expect in every

case to find sufficient motives where, as a rule, no such expectation is

raised. Indeed, they are prepared to find several motives for one and

the same mental occurrence, whereas what seems to be our innate

craving  for  causality  declares  itself  satisfied  with  a single psychical

cause.

 

   If you will now bring together the means we possess for uncovering

what is concealed, forgotten and repressed in the mind (the study of

the ideas occurring to patients under free association, of their dreams

and of their faulty and symptomatic actions), and if you will add to

these the exploitation of certain other phenomena which occur during

psycho-analytic treatment and on which I shall have a few remarks to

make later under the heading of ‘transference’ - if you bear all these in

mind,  you  will  agree  with  me  in  concluding  that  our  technique  is

already  efficient  enough  to  fulfil  its  task,  to  bring  the  pathogenic

psychical material into consciousness and so to get rid of the ailments

that  have  been  brought  about  by  the  formation  of  substitutive

symptoms. And if, in the course of our therapeutic endeavours, weextend and deepen our knowledge of the human mind both in health

and  sickness,  that  can,  of  course,  only  be  regarded  as  a  peculiar

attraction in our work.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2226

 

   You may have formed an impression that the technique through

whose armoury I have just conducted you is particularly difficult. In my

opinion that technique is entirely in conformity with the material with

which it has to deal. But this much at least is clear: it is not a self-

evident one and it must be learnt just as the techniques of histology or

surgery must be learnt. You will perhaps be surprised to hear that in

Europe  we  have  heard  a  large  number  of  judgements  on  psycho-

analysis from people who know nothing of this technique and do not

employ it; and who go on to demand with apparent scorn that we shall

prove  to  them  the  correctness  of  our  findings.  Among  these

adversaries there are no doubt some to whom a scientific mode of

thought is not as a rule alien, who, for instance, would not reject the

results  of  a  microscopic  examination  because  it  could  not  be

confirmed on the anatomical preparation with the naked eye, but who

would first form a judgement on the matter themselves with the help of

a microscope. But, where psycho-analysis is concerned, the prospects

of recognition are in truth less favourable. Psycho-analysis is seeking

to bring to conscious recognition the things in mental life which are

repressed; and everyone who forms a judgement on it is himself a

human being, who possesses similar repressions and may perhaps be

maintaining them with difficulty. They are therefore bound to call up

the same resistance in him as in our patients; and that resistance finds

it  easy  to  disguise  itself  is  an  intellectual  rejection  and  to  bring  up

arguments like those which we ward off in our patients by means of

the fundamental rule of psycho-analysis. We often become aware in

our  opponents,  just  as  we  do  in  our  patients,  that  their  power  of

judgement  is  very  noticeably  influenced  affectively  in  the  sense  of

being  diminished.  The  arrogance  of  consciousness  (in  rejecting

dreams with such contempt, for instance) is one of the most powerfulof the devices with which we are provided as a universal protection

against the incursion of unconscious complexes. That is why it is so

hard to convince people of the reality of the unconscious and to teach

them  to  recognize  something  new  which  is  in  contradiction  to  their

conscious knowledge.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2227

 

                                FOURTH LECTURE

 

LADIES  AND  GENTLEMEN,  -  You  will  want  to  know  now  what  we  have

found  out  about  the  pathogenic  complexes  and  repressed  wishful

impulses of neurotics with the help of the technical methods I have

described.

   First and foremost we have found out one thing. Psycho-analytic

research traces back the symptoms of patients’ illnesses with really

surprising regularity to impressions from their erotic life. It shows us

that  the  pathogenic  wishful  impulses  are  in  the  nature  of  erotic

instinctual components; and it forces us to suppose that among the

influences leading to the illness the predominant significance must be

assigned  to  erotic  disturbances,  and  that  this  is  the  case  in  both

sexes.

   I am aware that this assertion of mine will not be willingly believed.

Even workers who are ready to follow my psychological studies are

inclined to think that I over-estimate the part played by sexual factors;

they meet me with the question why other mental excitations should

not lead to the phenomena I have described of repression and the

formation of substitutes. I can only answer that I do not know why they

should not, and that I should have no objection to their doing so; but

experience shows that they do not carry this weight, that at most they

support the operation of the sexual factors but cannot replace them.

Far from this position having been postulated by me theoretically, at

the time of the joint publication of the Studies with Dr. Breuer in 1895 I

had  not  yet  adopted  it;  and  I  was  only  converted  to  it  when  my

experiences became more numerous and penetrated into the subjectmore  deeply.  There  are  among  my  present  audience  a  few  of  my

closest  friends  and  followers,  who  have  travelled  with  me  here  to

Worcester. Enquire from them, and you will hear that they all began by

completely  disbelieving  my  assertion  that  sexual  aetiology  was  of

decisive  importance,  until  their  own  analytic  experiences  compelled

them to accept it.

   A conviction of the correctness of this thesis was not precisely made

easier by the behaviour of patients. Instead of willingly presenting us

with information about their sexual life, they try to conceal it by every

means in their power. People are in general not candid over sexual

matters. They do not show their sexuality freely, but to conceal it they

wear  a  heavy  overcoat  woven  of  a  tissue  of  lies,  as  though  the

weather were bad in the world of sexuality. Nor are they mistaken. It is

a fact that sun and wind are not favourable to sexual activity in this

civilized  world  of  ours;  none  of  us  can  reveal  his  erotism  freely  to

others. But when your patients discover that they can feel quite easy

about it while they are under your treatment, they discard this veil of

lies, and only then are you in a position to form a judgement on this

debatable question. Unluckily even doctors are not preferred above

other human creatures in their personal relation to questions of sexual

life,  and  many  of  them  are  under  the  spell  of  the  combination  of

prudery  and  prurience  which  governs  the  attitude  of  most  ‘civilized

people’ in matters of sexuality.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2228

 

 

   Let me now proceed with my account of our findings. In another set

of cases psycho-analytic investigation traces the symptoms back, it is

true, not to sexual experiences but to commonplace traumatic ones.

But  this  distinction  loses  its  significance  owing  to  another

circumstance.  For  the  work  of  analysis  required  for  the  thorough

explanation and complete recovery of a case never comes to a stop at

events  that  occurred  at  the  time  of  the  onset  of  the  illness,  but

invariably goes back to the patient’s puberty and early childhood; andit is only there that it comes upon the impressions and events which

determined  the  later  onset  of  the  illness.  It  is  only  experiences  in

childhood that explain susceptibility to later traumas and it is only by

uncovering these almost invariably forgotten memory-traces and by

making them conscious that we acquire the power to get rid of the

symptoms.  And  here  we  reach  the  same  conclusion  as  in  our

investigation of dreams: the imperishable, repressed wishful impulses

of childhood have alone provided the power for the construction of

symptoms, and without them the reaction to later traumas would have

taken  a  normal  course.  But  these  powerful  wishful  impulses  of

childhood may without exception be described as sexual.

   And now at last I am quite certain that I have surprised you. ‘Is there

such a thing, then, as infantile sexuality?’ you will ask ‘Is not childhood

on the contrary the period of life that is marked by the absence of the

sexual instinct?’ No, Gentlemen, it is certainly not the case that the

sexual instinct enters into children at the age of puberty in the way in

which, in the Gospel, the devil entered into the swine. A child has its

sexual instincts and activities from the first; it comes into the world

with  them;  and,  after  an  important  course  of  development  passing

through  many  stages,  they  lead  to  what  is  known  as  the  normal

sexuality  of  the  adult.  There  is  even  no  difficulty  in  observing  the

manifestations of these sexual activities in children; on the contrary, it

calls for some skill to overlook them or explain them away.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2229

 

   By a lucky chance I am in a position to call a witness in favour of my

assertions  from  your  very  midst.  I  have  here  in  my  hand  a  paper

written by a Dr. Sanford Bell, which was published in The American

Journal  of  Psychology  in  1902.  The  author  is  a  Fellow  of  Clark

University, of the very institution in whose lecture-room we are now

assembled. In this work, which is entitled ‘A Preliminary Study of the

Emotion of Love between the Sexes’, and which appeared three years

before my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality, the author says

exactly what I have just told you: ‘The emotion of sex-love . . . doesnot  make  its  appearance  for  the  first  time  at  the  period  of

adolescence, as has been thought.’ He carried out his work in what

we in Europe would call ‘the American manner’, collecting no fewer

than 2,500 positive observations in the course of fifteen years, among

them 800 of his own. Concerning the signs by which these instances

of falling in love are revealed he writes as follows: ‘The unprejudiced

mind  in  observing  these  manifestations  in  hundreds  of  couples  of

children cannot escape referring them to sex origin. The most exacting

mind  is  satisfied  when  to  these  observations  are  added  the

confessions of those who have, as children, experienced the emotion

to a marked degree of intensity and whose memories of childhood are

relatively  distinct.’  But  those  of  you  who  do  not  wish  to  believe  in

infantile sexuality will be most of all surprised to hear that not a few of

these children who have fallen in love so early are of the tender age of

three, four and five.

   It would not astonish me if you were to attach more credence to

these observations made by one of your closest neighbours than to

mine. I myself have recently been fortunate enough to obtain a fairly

complete picture of the somatic instinctual manifestations and mental

products at an early stage of a child’s erotic life from the analysis of a

five-year-old boy, suffering from anxiety - an analysis carried out with

a correct technique by his own father.¹ And I may remind you that only

a few hours ago, in this same room, my friend Dr. C. G. Jung reported

an  observation  to  you  made  on  a  still  younger  girl  who,  with  a

precipitating cause similar to my patient’s (the birth of a younger child

in the family), made it possible to infer with certainty the presence of

almost the same sensual impulses, wishes and complexes. I do not

despair, therefore, of your becoming reconciled to what seems at first

sight the strange idea of infantile sexuality. And I should like to quote

to  you  the  praiseworthy  example  of  the  Zurich  psychiatrist,  Dr.  E.

Bleuler, who declared publicly not many years ago that he was ‘unable

to  comprehend  my  theories  of  sexuality’,  and  who  has  since  then

confirmed the existence of infantile sexuality to its full extent from his

own observations. (Cf. Bleuler, 1908.)

   It is only too easy to explain why most people (whether medical

observers or others) will hear nothing of the sexual life of children.

They  have  forgotten  their  own  infantile  sexual  activity  under  thepressure of their education to a civilized life, and they do not wish to

be reminded of what has been repressed. They would arrive at other

convictions if they were to begin their enquiry with a self-analysis, a

revision and interpretation of their childhood memories.

 

   ¹ ‘The Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy’.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2230

 

 

      Put  away  your  doubts,  then,  and  join  me  in  a  consideration  of

infantile sexuality from the earliest age.¹ A child’s sexual instinct turns

out to be put together out of a number of factors; it is capable of being

divided up into numerous components which originate from various

sources. Above all, it is still independent of the reproductive function,

into  the  service  of  which  it  will  later  be  brought.  It  serves  for  the

acquisition  of  different  kinds  of  pleasurable  feeling,  which,  basing

ourselves on analogies and connections, we bring together under the

idea of sexual pleasure. The chief source of infantile sexual pleasure

is  the  appropriate  excitation  of  certain  parts  of  the  body  that  are

especially susceptible to stimulus: apart from the genitals, these are

the  oral,  anal  and  urethral  orifices,  as  well  as  the  skin  and  other

sensory  surfaces.  Since  at  this  first  phase  of  infantile  sexual  life

satisfaction is obtained from the subject’s own body and extraneous

objects are disregarded, we term this phase (from a word coined by

Havelock Ellis) that of auto-erotism. We call the parts of the body that

are important in the acquisition of sexual pleasure ‘erotogenic zones’.

Thumb-sucking (or sensual sucking) in the youngest infants is a good

example of this auto-erotic satisfaction from an erotogenic zone. The

first  scientific  observer  of  this  phenomenon,  a  paediatrician  in

Budapest  named  Lindner  (1879),  already  interpreted  it  correctly  as

sexual satisfaction and described exhaustively its transition to other

and higher forms of sexual activity. Another sexual satisfaction at this

period  of  life  is  the  masturbatory  excitation  of  the  genitals,  which

retains so much importance in later life and by many people is never

completely  conquered.  Alongside  these  and  other  auto-eroticactivities,  we  find  in  children  at  a  very  early  age  manifestations  of

those instinctual components of sexual pleasure (or, as we like to say,

of libido) which presuppose the taking of an extraneous person as an

object. These instincts occur in pairs of opposites, active and passive.

I may mention as the most important representatives of this group the

desire  to  cause  pain  (sadism)  with  its  passive  counterpart

(masochism) and the active and passive desire for looking, from the

former of which curiosity branches off later on and from the latter the

impulsion to artistic and theatrical display. Others of a child’s sexual

activities  already  imply  the  making  of  an  ‘object-choice’,  where  an

extraneous person becomes the main feature, a person who owes his

importance in the first instance to considerations arising from the self-

preservative instinct. But at this early period of childhood difference in

sex plays no decisive part as yet. Thus you can attribute some degree

of homosexuality to every child without doing him an injustice. This

widespread  and  copious  but  dissociated  sexual  life  of  children,  in

which each separate instinct pursues its own acquisition of pleasure

independently of all the rest, is now brought together and organized in

two main directions, so that by the end of puberty the individual’s final

sexual character is as a rule completely formed. On the one hand, the

separate  instincts  become  subordinated  to  the  dominance  of  the

genital  zone,  so  that  the  whole  sexual  life  enters  the  service  of

reproduction, and the satisfaction of the separate instincts retains its

importance  only  as  preparing  for  and  encouraging  the  sexual  act

proper. On the other hand, object-choice pushes auto-erotism into the

background, so that in the subject’s erotic life all the components of

the sexual instinct now seek satisfaction in relation to the person who

is  loved.  Not  all  of  the  original  sexual  components,  however,  are

admitted  to  take  part  in  this  final  establishment  of  sexuality.  Even

before  puberty  extremely  energetic  repressions  of  certain  instincts

have  been  effected  under  the  influence  of  education,  and  mental

forces such as shame, disgust and morality have been set up, which,

like watchmen, maintain these repressions. So that when at puberty

the high tide of sexual demands is reached, it is met by these mental

reactive  or  resistant  structures  like  dams,  which  direct  its  flow  into

what  are  called  normal  channels  and  make  it  impossible  for  it  to

reactivate  the  instincts  that  have  undergone  repression.  It  is  inparticular the coprophilic impulses of childhood - that is to say, the

desires  attaching  to  the  excreta  -  which  are  submitted  the  most

rigorously to repression, and the same is true, furthermore, of fixation

to the figures to which the child’s original object-choice was attached.

 

   ¹ Cf. Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d).

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2231

 

 

   There is a dictum in general pathology, Gentlemen, which asserts

that  every  developmental  process  carries  with  it  the  seed  of  a

pathological disposition, in so far as that process may be inhibited,

delayed, or may run its course incompletely. The same thing is true of

the highly complicated development of the sexual function. It does not

occur smoothly in every individual; and, if not, it leaves behind it either

abnormalities  or  a  predisposition  to  fall  ill  later,  along  the  path  of

involution (i.e. regression). It may happen that not all the component

instincts  submit  to  the  dominance  of  the  genital  zone.  An  instinct

which remains in this way independent leads to what we describe as a

perversion, and may substitute its own sexual aim for the normal one.

It very often happens, as I have already said, that auto-erotism is not

completely conquered, and evidence of this is given by a great variety

of subsequent disturbances. The originally equal value attached to the

two  sexes  as  sexual  objects  may  persist,  and  this  will  lead  to  a

tendency  in  adult  life  to  homosexual  activity,  which  can  in  certain

circumstances  be  intensified  into  exclusive  homosexuality.  These

classes of disturbance represent direct inhibitions in the development

of the sexual function; they comprise the perversions and, what is by

no means rare, general infantilism in sexual life.

      The  predisposition  to neurosis  is  traceable  to  impaired  sexual

development in a different way. Neuroses are related to perversions

as negative to positive. The same instinctual components as in the

perversions  can  be  observed  in  the  neuroses  as  vehicles  of

complexes and constructors of symptoms, but in the latter case they

operate from the unconscious. Thus they have undergone repression,but have been able, in defiance of it, to persist in the unconscious.

Psycho-analysis  makes  it  clear  that  an  excessively  strong

manifestation of these instincts at a very early age leads to a kind of

partial fixation, which then constitutes a weak point in the structure of

the sexual function. If in maturity the performance of the normal sexual

function comes up against obstacles, the repression that took place

during the course of development will be broken through at the precise

points at which the infantile fixations occurred.

   But here you will perhaps protest that all this is not sexuality. I have

been using the word in a far wider sense than that in which you have

been accustomed to understand it. So much I am quite ready to grant

you. But the question arises whether it is not rather you who have

been using the word in far too narrow a sense by restricting it to the

sphere  of  reproduction.  It  means  that  you  are  sacrificing  an

understanding  of  the  perversions  and  the  connection  between  the

perversions, the neuroses and normal sexual life; and you are making

it  impossible  for  you  to  recognize  in  its  true  significance  the  easily

observable beginnings of the somatic and mental erotic life of children.

But however you may choose to decide the verbal usage, you should

bear firmly in mind that psycho-analysts understand sexuality in the

full sense to which one is led by a consideration of infantile sexuality.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2232

 

 

   Let us return to the sexual development of children. We have some

arrears to make up owing to our having paid more attention to the

somatic than to the mental phenomena of sexual life. The child’s first

choice of an object, which derives from its need for help, claims our

further interest. Its choice is directed in the first instance to all those

who look after it, but these soon give place to its parents. Children’s

relations to their parents, as we learn alike from direct observations of

children  and  from  later  analytic  examination  of  adults,  are  by  no

means  free  from  elements  of  accompanying  sexual  excitation.  The

child takes both of its parents, and more particularly one of them, asthe  object  of  its  erotic  wishes.  In  so  doing,  it  usually  follows  some

indication  from  its  parents,  whose  affection  bears  the  clearest

characteristics of a sexual activity, even though of one that is inhibited

in its aims. As a rule a father prefers his daughter and a mother her

son;  the  child  reacts  to  this  by  wishing,  if  he  is  a  son,  to  take  his

father’s place, and, if she is a daughter, her mother’s. The feelings

which are aroused in these relations between parents and children

and in the resulting ones between brothers and sisters are not only of

a positive or affectionate kind but also of a negative or hostile one.

The complex which is thus formed is doomed to early repression; but

it  continues  to  exercise  a  great  and  lasting  influence  from  the

unconscious. It is to be suspected that, together with its extensions, it

constitutes the nuclear complex of every neurosis, and we may expect

to find it no less actively at work in other regions of mental life. The

myth of King Oedipus, who killed his father and took his mother to

wife, reveals, with little modification, the infantile wish, which is later

opposed and repudiated by the barrier against incest. Shakespeare’s

Hamlet is equally rooted in the soil of the incest-complex, but under a

better disguise.

   During the time when the child is dominated by the still unrepressed

nuclear complex, an important part of his intellectual activity is brought

into the service of his sexual interests. He begins to enquire where

babies come from, and, on the basis of the evidence presented to him,

guesses  more  of  the  true  facts  than  the  grown-ups  imagine.  His

interest in these researches is usually set going by the very real threat

offered to him by the arrival of a new baby, which to begin with he

regards merely as a competitor. Under the influence of the component

instincts that are active in himself, he arrives at a number of ‘infantile

sexual  theories’  -  such  as  attributing  a  male  genital  organ  to  both

sexes alike, or supposing that babies are conceived by eating and

born through the end of the bowel, or regarding sexual intercourse as

a hostile act, a kind of violent subjugation. But as a result precisely of

the incompleteness of his sexual constitution, and of the gap in his

knowledge due to the hidden nature of the female sexual channel, the

young investigator is obliged to abandon his work as a failure. The fact

of this childish research itself, as well as the different infantile sexual

theories that it brings to light, remain of importance in determining theformation of the child’s character and the content of any later neurotic

illness.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2233

 

      It  is  inevitable  and  perfectly  normal  that  a  child  should  take  his

parents as the first objects of his love. But his libido should not remain

fixated to these first objects; later on, it should merely take them as a

model,  and  should  make  a  gradual  transition  from  them  on  to

extraneous  people  when  the  time  for  the  final  choice  of  an  object

arrives. The detachment of the child from his parents is thus a task

that cannot be evaded if the young individual’s social fitness is not to

be  endangered.  During  the  time  at  which  repression  is  making  its

selection  among  the  component  instincts,  and  later,  when  there

should be a slackening of the parents’ influence, which is essentially

responsible for the expenditure of energy on these repressions, the

task  of  education  meets  with  great  problems,  which  at  the  present

time  are  certainly  not  always  dealt  with  in  an  understanding  and

unobjectionable manner.

 

      You  must  not  suppose,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  that  these

discussions  on  sexual  life  and  the  psychosexual  development  of

children have led us too far from psycho-analysis and the problem of

curing nervous disorders. You can, if you like, regard psycho-analytic

treatment as no more than a prolongation of education for the purpose

of overcoming the residues of childhood.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2234

 

                                  FIFTH LECTURE

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - With the discovery of infantile sexuality and

the tracing back of neurotic symptoms to erotic instinctual components

we have arrived at some unexpected formulas concerning the natureand purposes of neurotic illnesses. We see that human beings fall ill

when,  as  a  result  of  external  obstacles  or  of  an  internal  lack  of

adaptation, the satisfaction of their erotic needs in reality frustrated.

We see that they then take flight into illness in order that by its help

they  may  find  a  satisfaction  to  take  the  place  of  what  has  been

frustrated. We recognize that the pathological symptoms constitute a

portion of the subject’s sexual activity or even the whole of his sexual

life, and we find that the withdrawal from reality is the main purpose of

the illness but also the main damage caused by it. We suspect that

our patients’ resistance to recovery is no simple one, but compounded

of  several  motives.  Not  only  does  the  patient’s  ego  rebel  against

giving up the repressions by means of which it has risen above its

original disposition, but the sexual instincts are unwilling to renounce

their substitutive satisfaction so long as it is uncertain whether reality

will offer them anything better.

   The flight from unsatisfactory reality into what, on account of the

biological damage involved, we call illness (though it is never without

an immediate yield of pleasure to the patient) takes place along the

path of involution, of regression, of a return to earlier phases of sexual

life, phases from which at one time satisfaction was not withheld. This

regression appears to be a twofold one: a temporal one, in so far as

the libido, the erotic needs, hark back to stages of development that

are earlier in time, and a formal one, in that the original and primitive

methods of psychical expression are employed in manifesting those

needs.  Both  these  kinds  of  regression,  however,  lead  back  to

childhood and unite in bringing about an infantile condition of sexual

life.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2235

 

   The deeper you penetrate into the pathogenesis of nervous illness,

the more you will find revealed the connection between the neuroses

and other productions of the human mind, including the most valuable.

You will be taught that we humans, with the high standards of our

civilization  and  under  the  pressure  of  our  internal  repressions,  findreality unsatisfying quite generally, and for that reason entertain a life

of  phantasy  in  which  we  like  to  make  up  for  the  insufficiencies  of

reality by the production of wish-fulfilments. These phantasies include

a  great  deal  of  the  true  constitutional  essence  of  the  subject’s

personality as well as of those of his impulses which are repressed

where reality is concerned. The energetic and successful man is one

who  succeeds  by  his  efforts  in  turning  his  wishful  phantasies  into

reality. Where this fails, as a result of the resistances of the external

world and of the subject’s own weakness, he begins to turn away from

reality and withdraws into his more satisfying world of phantasy, the

content of which is transformed into symptoms should he fall ill. In

certain favourable circumstances, it still remains possible for him to

find another path leading from these phantasies to reality, instead of

becoming permanently estranged from it by regressing to infancy. If a

person who is at loggerheads with reality possesses an artistic gift (a

thing that is still a psychological mystery to us), he can transform his

phantasies  into  artistic  creations  instead  of  into  symptoms.  In  this

manner he can escape the doom of neurosis and by this roundabout

path  regain  his  contact  with  reality.  (Cf.  Rank,  1907.)  If  there  is

persistent rebellion against the real world and if this precious gift is

absent or insufficient, it is almost inevitable that the libido, keeping to

the sources of the phantasies, will follow the path of regression, and

will revive infantile wishes and end in neurosis. To-day neurosis takes

the place of the monasteries which used to be the refuge of all whom

life had disappointed or who felt too weak to face it.

   Let me at this point state the principal finding to which we have been

led  by  the  psycho-analytic  investigation  of  neurotics.  The  neuroses

have no psychical content that is peculiar to them and that might not

equally  be  found  in  healthy  people.  Or,  as  Jung  has  expressed  it,

neurotics  fall  ill  of  the  same  complexes  against  which  we  healthy

people  struggle  as  well.  Whether  that  struggle  ends  in  health,  in

neurosis, or in a countervailing superiority of achievement, depends

on quantitative  considerations,  on  the  relative  strength  of  the

conflicting forces.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis                                                                                      2236

 

 

   I have not yet told you, Ladies and Gentlemen, of the most important

of  the  observations  which  confirm  our  hypothesis  of  the  sexual

instinctual  forces  operating  in  neuroses.  In  every  psycho-analytic

treatment of a neurotic patient the strange phenomenon that is known

as ‘transference’ makes its appearance. The patient, that is to say,

directs  towards  the  physician  a  degree  of  affectionate  feeling

(mingled,  often  enough,  with  hostility)  which  is  based  on  no  real

relation between them and which - as is shown by every detail of its

emergence - can only be traced back to old wishful phantasies of the

patient’s  which  have  become  unconscious.  Thus  the  part  of  the

patient’s emotional life which he can no longer recall to memory is re-

experienced by him in his relation to the physician; and it is only this

re-experiencing  in  the  ‘transference’  that  convinces  him  of  the

existence and of the power of these unconscious sexual impulses. His

symptoms,  to  take  an  analogy  from  chemistry,  are  precipitates  of

earlier experiences in the sphere of love (in the widest sense of the

word), and it is only in the raised temperature of his experience of the

transference that they can be resolved and reduced to other psychical

products. In this reaction the physician, if I may borrow an apt phrase

from  Ferenczi  (1909),  plays  the  part  of  a  catalytic  ferment,  which

temporarily  attracts  to  itself  the  affects  liberated  in  the  process.  A

study of transference, too, can give you the key to an understanding of

hypnotic suggestion, which we employed to begin with as a technical

method for investigating the unconscious in our patients. At that time

hypnosis was found to be a help therapeutically, but a hindrance to

the  scientific  understanding  of  the  facts;  for  it  cleared  away  the

psychical resistances in a certain area while building them up into an

unscalable wall at its frontiers. You must not suppose, moreover, that

the  phenomenon  of  transference  (of  which,  unfortunately,  I  can  tell

you  all  too  little  to-day)  is created  by  psycho-analytic  influence.

Transference arises spontaneously in all human relationships just as it

does between the patient and the physician. It is everywhere the true

vehicle  of  therapeutic  influence;  and  the  less  its  presence  is

suspected, the more powerfully it operates. So psycho-analysis doesnot create it, but merely reveals it to consciousness and gains control

of it in order to guide psychical processes towards the desired goal. I

cannot, however, leave the topic of transference without stressing the

fact that this phenomenon plays a decisive part in bringing conviction

not only to the patient but also to the physician. I know it to be true of

all my followers that they were only convinced of the correctness of

my  assertions  on  the  pathogenesis  of  the  neuroses  by  their

experiences  with  transference;  and  I  can  very  well  understand  that

such certainty of judgement cannot be attained before one has carried

out  psycho-analyses  and  has  oneself  observed  the  workings  of

transference.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2237

 

 

   Ladies and Gentlemen, from the intellectual point of view we must, I

think, take into account two special obstacles to recognizing psycho-

analytic trains of thought. In the first place, people are unaccustomed

to reckoning with a strict and universal application of determinism to

mental  life;  and  in  the  second  place,  they  are  ignorant  of  the

peculiarities which distinguish unconscious mental processes from the

conscious ones that are familiar to us. One of the most widespread

resistances to psycho-analytic work, in the sick and healthy alike, can

be  traced  to  the  second  of  these  two  factors.  People  are  afraid  of

doing  harm  by  psycho-analysis;  they  are  afraid  of  bringing  the

repressed sexual instincts into the patient’s consciousness, as though

that involved a danger of their overwhelming his higher ethical trends

and of their robbing him of his cultural acquisitions. People notice that

the patient has sore spots in his mind, but shrink from touching them

for fear of increasing his sufferings. We can accept this analogy. It is

no doubt kinder not to touch diseased spots if it can do nothing else

but cause pain. But, as we know, a surgeon does not refrain from

examining and handling a focus of disease, if he is intending to take

active measures which he believes will lead to a permanent cure. No

one thinks of blaming him for the inevitable suffering caused by theexamination or for the reactions to the operation, if only it gains its end

and  the  patient  achieves  a  lasting  recovery  as  a  result  of  the

temporary  worsening  of  his  state.  The  case  is  similar  with  psycho-

analysis. It may make the same claims as surgery: the increase in

suffering which it causes the patient during treatment is incomparably

less than what a surgeon causes, and is quite negligible in proportion

to the severity of the underlying ailment. On the other hand, the final

outcome that is so much dreaded - the destruction of the patient’s

cultural  character  by  the  instincts  which  have  been  set  free  from

repression - is totally impossible. For alarm on this score takes no

account  of  what  our  experiences  have  taught  us  with  certainty  -

namely that the mental and somatic power of a wishful impulse, when

once its repression has failed, is far stronger if it is unconscious than if

it is conscious; so that to make it conscious can only be to weaken it.

An unconscious wish cannot be influenced and it is independent of

any  contrary  tendencies,  whereas  a  conscious  one  is  inhibited  by

whatever  else  is  conscious  and  opposed  to  it.  Thus  the  work  of

psycho-analysis puts itself at the orders of precisely the highest and

most  valuable  cultural  trends,  as  a  better  substitute  for  the

unsuccessful repression.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2238

 

   What, then, becomes of the unconscious wishes which have been

set  free  by  psycho-analysis?  Along  what  paths  do  we  succeed  in

making them harmless to the subject’s life? There are several such

paths. The most frequent outcome is that, while the work is actually

going on, these wishes are destroyed by the rational mental activity of

the better impulses that are opposed to them. Repression is replaced

by a condemning judgement carried out along the best lines. That is

possible because what we have to get rid of is to a great extent only

the  consequences  arising  from  earlier  stages  of  the  ego’s

development. The subject only succeeded in the past in repressing

the  unserviceable  instinct  because  he  himself  was  at  that  time  still

imperfectly  organized  and  feeble.  In  his  present-day  maturity  andstrength, he will perhaps be able to master what is hostile to him with

complete success.

   A second outcome of the work of psycho-analysis is that it then

becomes possible for the unconscious instincts revealed by it to be

employed for the useful purposes which they would have found earlier

if  development  had  not  been  interrupted.  For  the  extirpation  of  the

infantile  wishful  impulses  is  by  no  means  the  ideal  aim  of

development.  Owing  to  their  repressions,  neurotics  have  sacrificed

many sources of mental energy whose contributions would have been

of great value in the formation of their character and in their activity in

life. We know of a far more expedient process of development, called

‘sublimation’, in which the energy of the infantile wishful impulses is

not cut off but remains ready for use - the unserviceable aim of the

various impulses being replaced by one that is higher, and perhaps no

longer  sexual.  It  happens  to  be  precisely  the  components  of  the

sexual instinct that are specially marked by a capacity of this kind for

sublimation, for exchanging their sexual aim for another one which is

comparatively remote and socially valuable. It is probable that we owe

our highest cultural successes to the contributions of energy made in

this  way  to  our  mental  functions.  Premature  repression  makes  the

sublimation of the repressed instinct impossible; when the repression

is lifted, the path to sublimation becomes free once more.

 


                        Five Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      2239

 

   We must not omit to consider the third of the possible outcomes of

the  work  of  psycho-analysis.  A  certain  portion  of  the  repressed

libidinal impulses has a claim to direct satisfaction and ought to find it

in life. Our civilized standards make life too difficult for the majority of

human organizations. Those standards consequently encourage the

retreat from reality and the generating of neuroses, without achieving

any surplus of cultural gain by this excess of sexual repression. We

ought not to exalt ourselves so high as completely to neglect what was

originally  animal  in  our  nature.  Nor  should  we  forget  that  the

satisfaction  of  the  individual’s  happiness  cannot  be  erased  fromamong the aims of our civilization. The plasticity of the components of

sexuality, shown by their capacity for sublimation, may indeed offer a

great temptation to strive for still greater cultural achievements by still

further  sublimation.  But,  just  as  we  do  not  count  on  our  machines

converting  more  than  a  certain  fraction  of  the  heat  consumed  into

useful mechanical work, we ought not to seek to alienate the whole

amount of the energy of the sexual instinct from its proper ends. We

cannot succeed in doing so; and if the restriction upon sexuality were

to be carried too far it would inevitably bring with it all the evils of soil-

exhaustion.

   It may be that you for your part will regard the warning with which I

close as an exaggeration. I shall only venture on an indirect picture of

my conviction by telling you an old story and leaving you to make what

use you like of it. German literature is familiar with a little town called

Schilda, to whose inhabitants clever tricks of every possible sort are

attributed. The citizens of Schilda, so we are told, possessed a horse

with  whose  feats  of  strength  they  were  highly  pleased  and  against

which they had only one objection - that it consumed such a large

quantity of expensive oats. They determined to break it of this bad

habit very gently by reducing its ration by a few stalks every day, till

they  had  accustomed  it  to  complete  abstinence.  For  a  time  things

went excellently: the horse was weaned to the point of eating only one

stalk a day, and on the succeeding day it was at length to work without

any oats at all. On the morning of that day the spiteful animal was

found dead; and the citizens of Schilda could not make out what it had

died of.

   We should be inclined to think that the horse was starved and that

no  work  at  all  could  be  expected  of  an  animal  without  a  certain

modicum of oats.

 

 

   I must thank you for your invitation and for the attention with which

you have listened to me.

                                                                                       2240

 

      LEONARDO DA VINCI AND A MEMORY OF HIS CHILDHOOD

                                        (1910)

 


                                                                                      2241

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2242

 

      LEONARDO DA VINCI AND A MEMORY OF HIS CHILDHOOD

 

                                            I

 

When psychiatric research, normally content to draw on frailer men for

its material, approaches one who is among the greatest of the human

race, it is not doing so for the reasons so frequently ascribed to it by

laymen. ‘To blacken the radiant and drag the sublime into the dust’ is

no part of its purpose, and there is no satisfaction for it in narrowing

the  gulf  which  separates  the  perfection  of  the  great  from  the

inadequacy of the objects that are its usual concern. But it cannot help

finding worthy of understanding everything that can be recognized in

those illustrious models, and it believes there is no one so great as to

be disgraced by being subject to the laws which govern both normal

and pathological activity with equal cogency.

      Leonardo  da  Vinci  (1452-1519)  was  admired  even  by  his

contemporaries as one of the greatest men of the Italian renaissance;

yet in their time he had already begun to seem an enigma, just as he

does to us to-day. He was a universal genius ‘whose outlines can only

be  surmised,  -  never  defined’.¹  In  his  own  time  his  most  decisive

influence  was  in  painting,  and  it  was  left  to  us  to  recognize  the

greatness of the natural scientist (and engineer) that was combined in

him  with  the  artist.  Though  he  left  behind  him  masterpieces  of

painting,  while  his  scientific  discoveries  remained  unpublished  andunused, the investigator in him never in the course of his development

left the artist entirely free, but often made severe encroachments on

him and perhaps in the end suppressed him. In the last hour of his life,

according to the words that Vasari gives him, he reproached himself

with having offended God and man by his failure to do his duty in his

art.² And even if this story of Vasari’s has neither external nor much

internal probability but belongs to the legend which began to be woven

around  the  mysterious  Master  even  before  his  death,  it  is  still  of

incontestable value as evidence of what men believed at the time.

 

   ¹ The words are Jacob Burckhardt’s, quoted by Konstantinowa (1907).

   ² ‘Egli per reverenza, rizzatosi a sedere sul letto, contando il mal suo e gli accidenti di

quello, mostrava tuttavia quanto avea offeso Dio e gli uomini del mondo, non avendo operato
nell’ arte come si conveniva.’ [‘He having raised himself out of reverence so as to sit on the
bed, and giving an account of his illness and its circumstances, yet showed how much he had
offended God and mankind in not having worked at his art as he should have done.’] Vasari.
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2243

 

      What  was  it  that  prevented  Leonardo’s  personality  from  being

understood by his contemporaries? The cause of this was certainly

not the versatility of his talents and the range of his knowledge, which

enabled him to introduce himself to the court of the Duke of Milan,

Lodovico Sforza, called Il Moro, as a performer on a kind of lute of his

own  invention,  or  allowed  him  to  write  the  remarkable  letter  to  the

same duke in which he boasted of his achievements as architect and

military engineer. For the days of the renaissance were quite familiar

with  such  a  combination  of  wide  and  diverse  abilities  in  a  single

individual - though we must allow that Leonardo himself was one of

the most brilliant examples of this. Nor did he belong to the type of

genius who has received a niggardly outward endowment from nature,

and who in his turn places no value on the outward forms of life, but in

a spirit of painful gloom flies from all dealings with mankind. On the

contrary,  he  was  tall  and  well  proportioned;  his  features  were  of

consummate  beauty  and  his  physical  strength  unusual;  he  was

charming  in  his  manner,  supremely  eloquent,  and  cheerful  and

amiable to everyone. He loved beauty in the things that surroundedhim; he was fond of magnificent clothing and valued every refinement

of living. In a passage from the treatise on painting, which reveals his

lively capacity for enjoyment, he compares painting with its sister arts

and describes the hardships that await the sculptor: ‘For his face is

smeared and dusted all over with marble powder so that he looks like

a baker, and he is completely covered with little chips of marble, so

that it seems as if his back had been snowed on; and his house is full

of splinters of stone and dust. In the case of the painter it is quite

different... for the painter sits in front of his work in perfect comfort. He

is well-dressed and handles the lightest of brushes which he dips in

pleasant colours. He wears the clothes he likes; and his house is full

of  delightful  paintings,  and  is  spotlessly  clean.  He  is  often

accompanied by music or by men who read from a variety of beautiful

works, and he can listen to these with great pleasure and without the

din of hammers and other noises.’¹

 

   ¹ Trattato della Pittura.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2244

 

   It is indeed quite possible that the idea of a radiantly happy and

pleasure-loving  Leonardo  is  only  applicable  to  the  first  and  longer

period of the artist’s life. Afterwards, when the downfall of Lodovico

Moro’s rule forced him to leave Milan, the city that was the centre of

his activity and where his position was assured, and to pursue a life

lacking in security and not rich in external successes, until he found

his last asylum in France, the sparkle of his temperament may have

grown  dim  and  some  strange  sides  of  his  nature  may  have  been

thrown into prominence. Moreover the turning of his interests from his

art to science, which increased as time went on, must have played its

part in widening the gulf between himself and his contemporaries. All

the efforts in which in their opinion he frittered away his time when he

could have been industriously painting to order and becoming rich (as,

for example, his former fellow-student Perugino did) seemed to them

to be merely capricious trifling or even caused him to be suspected of

being  in  the  service  of  the  ‘black  art’.  We  are  in  a  position  tounderstand him better, for we know from his notes what were the arts

that  he  practised.  In  an  age  which  was  beginning  to  replace  the

authority  of  the  Church  by  that  of  antiquity  and  which  was  not  yet

familiar  with  any  form  of  research  not  based  on  presuppositions,

Leonardo - the forerunner and by no means unworthy rival of Bacon

and  Copernicus  -  was  necessarily  isolated.  In  his  dissection  of  the

dead bodies of horses and human beings, in his construction of flying

machines,  and  in  his  studies  on  the  nutrition  of  plants  and  their

reactions  to  poisons,  he  certainly  departed  widely  from  the

commentators  on  Aristotle,  and  came  close  to  the  despised

alchemists,  in  whose  laboratories  experimental  research  had  found

some refuge at least in those unfavourable times.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2245

 

   The effect that this had on his painting was that he took up his brush

with reluctance, painted less and less, left what he had begun for the

most  part  unfinished  and  cared  little  about  the  ultimate  fate  of  his

works. And this was what he was blamed for by his contemporaries: to

them his attitude towards his art remained a riddle.

   Several of Leonardo’s later admirers have made attempts to acquit

his character of the flaw of instability. In his defence they claim that he

is  blamed  for  what  is  a  general  feature  of  great  artists:  even  the

energetic Michelangelo, a man entirely given up to his labours, left

many of his works incomplete, and it was no more his fault than it was

Leonardo’s in the parallel instance. Moreover, in the case of some of

the pictures, they urge, it is not so much a question of their being

unfinished as of his declaring them to be so. What appears to the

layman as a masterpiece is never for the creator of the work of art

more than an unsatisfactory embodiment of what he intended; he has

some dim notion of a perfection, whose likeness time and again he

despairs of reproducing. Least of all, they claim, is it right to make the

artist responsible for the ultimate fate of his works.

   Valid as some of these excuses may be, they still do not cover the

whole  state  of  affairs  that  confronts  us  in  Leonardo.  The  samedistressing  struggle  with  a  work,  the  final  flight  from  it  and  the

indifference to its future fate may recur in many other artists, but there

is no doubt that this behaviour is shown in Leonardo in an extreme

degree.  Solmi  (1910,  12)  quotes  the  remark  of  one  of  his  pupils:

‘Pareva che ad ogni ora tremasse, quando si poneva a dipingere, e

però non diede mai fine ad alcuna cosa cominciata, considerando la

grandezza dell’arte, tal che egli scorgeva errori in quelle cose, che ad

altri parevano miracoli.’¹ His last pictures, he goes on, the Leda, the

Madonna  di  Sant’  Onofrio,  Bacchus,  and  the  young  St.  John  the

Baptist, remained unfinished ‘come quasi intervenne di tutte le cose

sue . . .’² Lomazzo, who made a copy of the Last Supper, refers in a

sonnet to Leonardo’s notorious inability to finish his works:

 

                                                Protogen che il pennel di sue pitture
                                                Non levava, agguaglio il Vinci Divo

                                                Di cui opra non è finita pure.³

 

   ¹ [‘He appeared to tremble the whole time when he set himself to paint, and yet he never

completed any work he had begun, having so high a regard for the greatness of art that he
discovered faults in things that to others seemed miracles.’]

   ² [‘As happened more or less to all his works.’]

   ³ [‘Protogenes, who never lifted his brush from his work, was the equal of the divine Vinci,

who never finished anything at all.’] Quoted by Scognamiglio (1900).
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2246

 

      The  slowness  with  which  Leonardo  worked  was  proverbial.  He

painted at the Last Supper in the Convent of Santa Maria delle Grazie

in Milan, after the most thorough preparatory studies, for three whole

years. One of his contemporaries, Matteo Bandelli, the story-writer,

who at the time was a young monk in the convent, tells how Leonardo

often used to climb up the scaffolding early in the morning and remain

there  till  twilight  never  once  laying  his  brush  aside,  and  with  no

thought of eating or drinking. Then days would pass without his putting

his hand to it. Sometimes he would remain for hours in front of the

painting,  merely  examining  it  in  his  mind.  At  other  times  he  would

come  straight  to  the  convent  from  the  court  in  the  castle  at  Milan,where  he  was  making  the  model  of  the  equestrian  statue  for

Francesco  Sforza,  in  order  to  add  a  few  strokes  of  the  brush  to  a

figure, and then immediately break off.¹ According to Vasari he spent

four  years  in  painting  the  portrait  of  Mona  Lisa,  the  wife  of  the

Florentine Francesco del Giocondo, without being able to bring it to

final completion. This circumstance may also account for the fact that

the picture was never delivered to the man who commissioned it, but

instead remained with Leonardo and was taken to France by him.² It

was bought by King Francis I, and to-day forms one of the greatest

treasures of the Louvre.

   If these reports of the way in which Leonardo worked are compared

with  the  evidence  of  the  extraordinarily  numerous  sketches  and

studies  which  he  left  behind  him  and  which  exhibit  every motif

appearing in his paintings in a great variety of forms, we are bound

totally  to  reject  the  idea  that  traits  of  hastiness  and  unsteadiness

acquired the slightest influence over Leonardo’s relation to his art. On

the contrary, it is possible to observe a quite extraordinary profundity,

a wealth of possibilities between which a decision can only be reached

with  hesitation,  demands  which  can  hardly  be  satisfied,  and  an

inhibition in the actual execution which is not in fact to be explained

even by the artist inevitably falling short of his ideal. The slowness

which had all along been conspicuous in Leonardo’s work is seen to

be  a  symptom  of  this  inhibition  and  to  be  the  forerunner  of  his

subsequent  withdrawal  from  painting.³  It  was  this  too  which

determined  the  fate  of  the  Last  Supper  -  a  fate  that  was  not

undeserved. Leonardo could not become reconciled to fresco painting,

which demands rapid work while the ground is still moist, and this was

the reason why he chose oil colours, the drying of which permitted him

to protract the completion of the painting to suit his mood and leisure.

These pigments however detached themselves from the ground on

which  they  were  applied  and  which  separated  them  from  the  wall.

Added to this, the defects in the wall, and the later fortunes of the

building itself, determined what seems to be the inevitable ruin of the

        4
picture.

 

   ¹ Von Seidlitz (1909, 1, 203).

   ² Von Seidlitz (1909, 2, 48).   ³ Pater: ‘But it is certain that at one period of his life he had almost ceased to be an artist.’

4
    See von Seidlitz (1909, 1) for the history of the attempts to restore and preserve the

picture.
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2247

 

   The miscarriage of a similar technical experiment appears to have

caused the destruction of the Battle of Anghiari, the painting which, in

competition  with  Michelangelo,  he  began  to  paint  some  time

afterwards on a wall of the Sala del Consiglio in Florence, and which

he also abandoned in an unfinished condition. Here it seems as if an

alien interest - in experimentation - at first reinforced the artistic one,

only to damage the work later on.

   The character of Leonardo the man showed some other unusual

traits and apparent contradictions. A certain inactivity and indifference

seemed obvious in him. At a time when everyone was trying to gain

the  widest  scope  for  his  activity  -  a  goal  unattainable  without  the

development  of  energetic  aggressiveness  towards  other  people  -

Leonardo was notable for his quiet peaceableness and his avoidance

of  all  antagonism  and  controversy.  He  was  gentle  and  kindly  to

everyone; he declined, it is said, to eat meat, since he did not think it

justifiable  to  deprive  animals  of  their  lives;  and  he  took  particular

pleasure  in  buying  birds  in  the  market  and  setting  them  free.¹  He

condemned war and bloodshed and described man as not so much

the king of the animal world but rather the worst of the wild beasts.²

But  this  feminine  delicacy  of  feeling  did  not  deter  him  from

accompanying condemned criminals on their way to execution in order

to  study  their  features  distorted  by  fear  and  to  sketch  them  in  his

notebook.  Nor  did  it  stop  him  from  devising  the  cruellest  offensive

weapons  and  from  entering  the  service  of  Cesare  Borgia  as  chief

military engineer. He often gave the appearance of being indifferent to

good and evil, or he insisted on measurement by a special standard.

He accompanied Cesare in a position of authority during the campaign

that brought the Romagna into the possession of that most ruthless

and  faithless  of  adversaries.  There  is  not  a  line  in  Leonardo’s

notebooks which reveals any criticism of the events of those days, orany concern in them. A comparison suggests itself here with Goethe

during the French campaign.

 

   ¹ Müntz (1899, 18). A letter of a contemporary from India to one of the Medici alludes to this

characteristic behaviour of Leonardo. (See J. P. Richter.)

   ² Bottazzi (1910, 186).

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2248

 

      If  a  biographical  study  is  really  intended  to  arrive  at  an

understanding of its hero’s mental life it must not - as happens in the

majority  of  biographies  as  a  result  of  discretion  or  prudishness  -

silently pass over its subject’s sexual activity or sexual individuality.

What is known of Leonardo in this respect is little: but that little is full

of significance. In an age which saw a struggle between sensuality

without  restraint  and  gloomy  asceticism,  Leonardo  represented  the

cool repudiation of sexuality - a thing that would scarcely be expected

of  an  artist  and  a  portrayer  of  feminine  beauty.  Solmi  quotes  the

following sentence of his which is evidence of his frigidity: ‘The act of

procreation  and  everything  connected  with  it  is  so  disgusting  that

mankind would soon die out if it were not an old-established custom

and  if  there  were  not  pretty  faces  and  sensuous  natures.’¹  His

posthumous writings, which not only deal with the greatest scientific

problems but also contain trivialities that strike us as scarcely worthy

of so great a mind (an allegorical natural history, animal fables, jokes,

prophecies),² are chaste - one might say even abstinent - to a degree

that would cause surprise in a work of belles lettres even to-day. So

resolutely do they shun everything sexual that it would seem as if Eros

alone, the preserver of all living things, was not worthy material for the

investigator  in  his  pursuit  of  knowledge.³  It  is  well  known  how

frequently great artists take pleasure in giving vent to their phantasies

in erotic and even crudely obscene pictures. In Leonardo’s case on

the contrary we have only some anatomical sketches of the internal

                                                                                      4
female genitals, the position of the embryo in the womb and so on.

 

   ¹ Solmi (1908).   ² Herzfeld (1906).

   ³ An exception to this (though an unimportant one) is perhaps to be found in his collected

witticisms - belle facezie - which have not been translated. See Herzfeld (1906, 151).
  4
     [Footnote added  1919:]  Some  remarkable  errors  are  visible  in  a  drawing  made  by

Leonardo of the sexual act seen in anatomical sagittal section, which certainly cannot be
called obscene. They were discovered by Reitler (1917) and discussed by him in the light of
the account which I have given here of Leonardo’s character:
   ‘It is precisely in the process of portraying the act of procreation that this excessive instinct
for  research  has  totally  failed  -  obviously  only  as  a  result  of  his  even  greater  sexual
repression.  The  man’s  body  is  drawn  in  full,  the  woman’s  only  in  part.  If  the  drawing
reproduced in Fig. 1 is shown to an unprejudiced onlooker with the head visible but all the
lower  parts  covered  up,  it  may  be  safely  assumed  that  the  head  will  be  taken  to  be  a
woman’s.  The  wavy  locks  on  the  forehead,  and  the  others,  which  flow  down  the  back
approximately to the fourth or fifth dorsal vertebra, mark the head as more of a woman’s than
a man’s.
   ‘The woman’s breast reveals two defects. The first indeed is an artistic one, for its outline
gives it the appearance of a breast that is flabby and hangs down unpleasingly. The second
defect  is  anatomical,  for  Leonardo  the  researcher  had  obviously  been  prevented  by  his
fending off of sexuality from ever making a close examination of a nursing woman’s nipples.
Had he done so he would have been bound to notice that the milk flows out of a number of
separate excretory ducts. Leonardo, however, drew only a single duct extending far down into
the abdominal cavity and probably in his view drawing the milk from the cisterna chyli and
perhaps also connected in some way with the sex organs. It must of course be taken into
consideration that the study of the internal organs of the human body was at that time made
extremely difficult, since the dissection of bodies was regarded as desecration of the dead
and  was  most  severely  punished.  Whether  Leonardo,  who  had  certainly  only  very  little
material  for  dissection  at  his  disposal,  knew  anything  at  all  of  the  existence  of  a  lymph-
reservoir  in  the  abdominal  cavity  is  therefore  in  fact  highly  questionable,  although  in  his
drawing he included a cavity that is no doubt intended to be something of the sort. But from
his making the lactiferous duct extend still further downwards till it reaches the internal sex
organs we may suspect that he was trying to represent the synchronization of the beginning of
the secretion of milk and the end of pregnancy by means of visible anatomical connections as
well. However, even if we are ready to excuse the artist’s defective knowledge of anatomy by
referring it to the circumstances of his time, the striking fact still remains that it is precisely the
female genital that Leonardo has treated so carelessly. The vagina and something that looks
like the portio uteri can no doubt be made out, but the lines indicating the uterus itself are
completely confused.
  
                                          Fig. 1
 
   ‘The male genital on the other hand is depicted by Leonardo much more correctly. Thus, for
instance, he was not satisfied with drawing the testis but also put in the epididymis, which he
drew with perfect accuracy.
   ‘What is especially remarkable is the posture in which Leonardo makes coitus take place.
Pictures and drawings by famous artists exist which depict coitus a tergo, a latere, etc., but
when it comes to a drawing of the sexual act being performed standing up, we must surely
suppose that there was a sexual repression of quite special strength to have caused it to be
represented in this isolated and almost grotesque way. If one wants to enjoy oneself it is usual
to make oneself as comfortable as possible: this of course is true for both the primal instincts,
hunger and love. Most of the peoples of antiquity took their meals in a lying position and it is
normal in coitus to-day to lie down just as comfortably as did our ancestors. Lying down
implies more or less a wish to stay in the desired situation for some time.
   ‘Moreover the features of the man with the feminine head are marked by a resistance that is
positively  indignant.  His  brows  are  wrinkled  and  his  gaze  is  directed  sideways  with  an
expression of repugnance. The lips are pressed together and their corners are then drawn
down. In this face can be seen neither the pleasure of love’s blessings nor the happiness of
indulgence: it expresses only indignation and aversion.
      ‘The  clumsiest  blunder,  however,  was  made  by  Leonardo  in  drawing  the  two  lower
extremities. The man’s foot should in point of fact have been his right one; for since Leonardo
depicted the act of union in an anatomical sagittal section it follows of course that the man’sleft foot would be above the plane of the picture. Conversely, and for the same reason, the
woman’s foot should have belonged to her left side. But in fact Leonardo has interchanged
male  and  female.  The  male  figure  has  a  left  foot  and  the  female  one  a  right  foot.  This
interchange is easiest to grasp if one recalls that the big toes lie on the inner sides of the feet.
   ‘This anatomical drawing alone would have made it possible to deduce the repression of
libido - a repression which threw the great artist and investigator into something approaching
confusion.’
   [Added 1923:] These remarks of Reitler’s have been criticized, it is true, on the ground that
such serious conclusions should not be drawn from a hasty sketch, and that it is not even
certain whether the different parts of the drawing really belong together.
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2249

 

   It is doubtful whether Leonardo ever embraced a woman in passion;

nor is it known that he had any intimate mental relationship with a

woman, such as Michelangelo’s with Vittoria Colonna. While he was

still  an  apprentice,  living  in  the  house  of  his  master  Verrocchio,  a

charge of forbidden homosexual practices was brought against him,

along with some other young people, which ended in his acquittal. He

seems to have fallen under this suspicion because he had employed a

boy of bad reputation as a model.¹ When he had become a Master, he

surrounded himself with handsome boys and youths whom he took as

pupils. The last of these pupils, Francesco Melzi, accompanied him to

France, remained with him up to his death and was named by him as

his heir. Without sharing in the certainty of his modern biographers,

who naturally reject the possibility that there was a sexual relationship

between him and his pupils as a baseless insult to the great man, we

may  take  it  as  much  more  probable  that  Leonardo’s  affectionate

relations with the young men who - as was the custom with pupils at

that  time  -  shared  his  existence  did  not  extend  to  sexual  activity.

Moreover a high degree of sexual activity is not to be attributed to him.

 

   ¹ According to Scognamiglio (1900, 49) there is a reference to this episode in an obscure

and even variously read passage in the Codex Atlanticus: ‘Quando io feci Domeneddio putto
voi mi metteste in prigione, ora s’io lo fo grande, voi mi farete peggio.’ [‘When I represented
the Lord God as a baby, you put me in prison; now if I represent him as an adult you will do
worse to me. ‘]
               Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2250

 

   There is only one way in which the peculiarity of this emotional and

sexual life can be understood in connection with Leonardo’s double

nature  as  an  artist  and  as  a  scientific  investigator.  Among  his

biographers, to whom a psychological approach is often very alien,

there  is  to  my  knowledge  only  one,  Edmondo  Solmi,  who  has

approached the solution of the problem; but a writer who has chosen

Leonardo as the hero of a great historical novel, Dmitry Sergeyevich

Merezhkovsky, has made a similar reading of this unusual man the

basis of his portrait and has given clear expression to his conception,

not  indeed  in  plain  language,  but  (after  the  way  of  writers  of

imagination)  in  plastic  terms.¹  Solmi’s  verdict  on  Leonardo  is  as

follows (1908, 46): ‘But his insatiable desire to understand everything

around him, and to fathom in a spirit of cold superiority the deepest

secret of all that is perfect, had condemned Leonardo’s work to remain

for ever unfinished.’

      In  an  essay  in  the Conferenze  Fiorentine  the  following

pronouncement  of  Leonardo’s  is  quoted,  which  represents  his

confession of faith and provides the key to his nature: ‘Nessuna cosa

si può amare nè odiare, se prima non si ha cognition di quella.’² That

is to say: One has no right to love or hate anything if one has not

acquired  a  thorough  knowledge  of  its  nature.  And  the  same  is

repeated by Leonardo in a passage in the treatise on painting where

he seems to be defending himself against the charge of irreligion: ‘But

such carping critics would do better to keep silent. For that (line of

conduct) is the way to become acquainted with the Creator of so many

wonderful things, and this is the way to love so great an Inventor. For

in truth great love springs from great knowledge of the beloved object,

and if you know it but little you will be able to love it only a little or not

at all . . .’³

 

   ¹ Merezhkovsky (1902; German trans., 1903). Leonardo da Vinci forms the second work of

a great historical trilogy entitled Christ and Antichrist. The two other volumes are Julian the
Apostate and Peter and Alexis.

   ² Bottazzi (1910, 193).

   ³ Trattato della Pittura. 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2251

 

   The value of these remarks of Leonardo’s is not to be looked for in

their conveying an important psychological fact; for what they assert is

obviously false, and Leonardo must have known thus as well as we

do. It is not true that human beings delay loving or hating until they

have  studied  and  become  familiar  with  the  nature  of  the  object  to

which these affects apply. On the contrary they love impulsively, from

emotional  motives  which  have  nothing  to  do  with  knowledge,  and

whose operation is at most weakened by reflection and consideration.

Leonardo,  then,  could  only  have  meant  that  the  love  practised  by

human beings was not of the proper and unobjectionable kind: one

should love in such a way as to hold back the affect, subject it to the

process of reflection and only let it take its course when it has stood

up to the test of thought. And at the same time we understand that he

wishes to tell us that it happens so in his case and that it would be

worth while for everyone else to treat love and hatred as he does.

   And in his case it really seems to have been so. His affects were

controlled and subjected to the instinct for research; he did not love

and hate, but asked himself about the origin and significance of what

he  was  to  love  or  hate.  Thus  he  was  bound  at  first  to  appear

indifferent to good and evil, beauty and ugliness. During this work of

investigation love and hate threw off their positive or negative signs

and  were  both  alike  transformed  into  intellectual  interest.  In  reality

Leonardo was not devoid of passion; he did not lack the divine spark

which is directly or indirectly the driving force - il primo motore - behind

all human activity. He had merely converted his passion into a thirst

for  knowledge;  he  then  applied  himself  to  investigation  with  the

persistence, constancy and penetration which is derived from passion,

and at the climax of intellectual labour, when knowledge had been

won, he allowed the long restrained affect to break loose and to flow

away freely, as a stream of water drawn from a river is allowed to flow

away when its work is done. When, at the climax of a discovery, he

could survey a large portion of the whole nexus, he was overcome by

emotion, and in ecstatic language praised the splendour of the part ofcreation  that  he  had  studied,  or  -  in  religious  phraseology  -  the

greatness of his Creator. This process of transformation in Leonardo

has been rightly understood by Solmi. After quoting a passage of this

sort  in  which  Leonardo  celebrates  the  sublime  law  of  nature  (‘O

mirabile  necessità  .  .  .’),  he  writes  (1910,  11)  ‘Tale  trasfigurazione

della scienza della natura in emozione, quasi direi, religiosa, è uno dei

tratti caratteristici de’ manoscritti vinciani, e si trova cento e cento volte

espressa . . .’¹

 

   ¹ [’Such a transfiguration of natural science into a sort of religious emotion is one of the

characteristic features of Leonardo’s manuscripts, and there are hundreds and hundreds of
examples of it.’]
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2252

 

      Because  of  his  insatiable  and  indefatigable  thirst  for  knowledge

Leonardo  has  been  called  the  Italian  Faust.  But  quite  apart  from

doubts about a possible transformation of the instinct to investigate

back into an enjoyment of life - a transformation which we must take

as fundamental in the tragedy of Faust - the view may be hazarded

that Leonardo’s development approaches Spinoza’s mode of thinking.

      A  conversion  of  psychical  instinctual  force  into  various  forms  of

activity  can  perhaps  no  more  be  achieved  without  loss  than  a

conversion of physical forces. The example of Leonardo teaches us

how many other things we have to take into account in connection

with these processes. The postponement of loving until full knowledge

is acquired ends in a substitution of the latter for the former. A man

who has won his way to a state of knowledge cannot properly be said

to  love  and  hate;  he  remains  beyond  love  and  hatred.  He  has

investigated instead of loving. And that is perhaps why Leonardo’s life

was so much poorer in love than that of other great men, and of other

artists. The stormy passions of a nature that inspires and consumes,

passions in which other men have enjoyed their richest experience,

appear not to have touched him.

   There are some further consequences. Investigating has taken the

place of acting and creating as well. A man who has begun to have aninkling of the grandeur of the universe with all its complexities and its

laws readily forgets his own insignificant self. Lost in admiration and

filled with true humility, he all too easily forgets that he himself is a part

of those active forces and that in accordance with the scale of his

personal strength the way is open for him to try to alter a small portion

of the destined course of the world - a world in which the small is still

no less wonderful and significant than the great.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2253

 

   Leonardo’s researches had perhaps first begun, as Solmi believes,

in the service of his art;¹ he directed his efforts to the properties and

laws  of  light,  colours,  shadows  and  perspective  in  order  to  ensure

mastery in the imitation of nature and to point the same way to others.

It is probable that at that time he already overrated the value to the

artist  of  these  branches  of  knowledge.  Still  constantly  following  the

lead given by the requirements of his painting he was then driven to

investigate  the  painter’s  subjects,  animals  and  plants,  and  the

proportions of the human body, and, passing from their exterior, to

proceed to gain a knowledge of their internal structure and their vital

functions, which indeed also find expression in their appearance and

have a claim to be depicted in art. And finally the instinct, which had

become overwhelming, swept him away until the connection with the

demands of his art was severed, so that he discovered the general

laws  of  mechanics  and  divined  the  history  of  the  stratification  and

fossilization in the Arno valley, and until he could enter in large letters

in  his  book  the  discovery: Il  sole  non  si  move.²  His  investigations

extended to practically every branch of natural science, and in every

single one he was a discoverer or at least a prophet and pioneer.³ Yet

his  urge  for  knowledge  was  always  directed  to  the  external  world;

something  kept  him  far  away  from  the  investigation  of  the  human

mind. In the ‘Academia Vinciana’, for which he drew some cleverly

intertwined emblems, there was little room for psychology.

 

   ¹ Solmi (1910, 8): ‘Leonardo aveva posto, come regola al pittore, lo studio della natura . . .

poi la passione dello studio era divenuta dominante, egli aveva voluto acquistare non più lascienza per l’arte, ma la scienza per la scienza.’ [‘Leonardo had prescribed the study of nature
as a rule for the painter . . ., then the passion for study had become dominant, he had no
longer wished to acquire learning for the sake of art, but learning for the sake of learning.’]
   ² [‘The sun does not move.’]

   ³ See the enumeration of his scientific achievements in the fine biographical introduction by

Marie  Herzfeld  (1906),  in  the  various  essays  of  the Conferenze  Fiorentine  (1910),  and
elsewhere.
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2254

 

   Then, when he made the attempt to return from investigation to his

starting point, the exercise of his art, he found himself disturbed by the

new direction of his interests and the changed nature of his mental

activity. What interested him in a picture was above all a problem; and

behind the first one he saw countless other problems arising, just as

he used to in his endless and inexhaustible investigation of nature. He

was no longer able to limit his demands, to see the work of art in

isolation  and  to  tear  it  from  the  wide  context  to  which  he  knew  it

belonged. After the most exhausting efforts to bring to expression in it

everything which was connected with it in his thoughts, he was forced

to  abandon  it  in  an  unfinished  state  or  to  declare  that  it  was

incomplete.

   The artist had once taken the investigator into his service to assist

him; now the servant had become the stronger and suppressed his

master.

   When we find that in the picture presented by a person’s character a

single instinct has developed an excessive strength, as did the craving

for knowledge in Leonardo, we look for the explanation in a special

disposition  -  though  about  its  determinants  (which  are  probably

organic) scarcely anything is yet known. Our psycho-analytic studies

of  neurotic  people  have  however  led  us  to  form  two  further

expectations  which  it  would  be  gratifying  to  find  confirmed  in  each

particular case. We consider it probable that an instinct like this of

excessive  strength  was  already  active  in  the  subject’s  earliest

childhood, and that its supremacy was established by impressions in

the  child’s  life.  We  make  the  further  assumption  that  it  found

reinforcement from what were originally sexual instinctual forces, sothat later it could take the place of a part of the subject’s sexual life.

Thus a person of this sort would, for example, pursue research with

the same passionate devotion that another would give to his love, and

he would be able to investigate instead of loving. We would venture to

infer that it is not only in the example of the instinct to investigate that

there has been a sexual reinforcement, but also in most other cases

where an instinct is of special intensity.

   Observation of men’s daily lives shows us that most people succeed

in directing very considerable portions of their sexual instinctual forces

to  their  professional  activity.  The  sexual  instinct  is  particularly  well

fitted  to  make  contributions  of  this  kind  since  it  is  endowed  with  a

capacity  for  sublimation:  that  is,  it  has  the  power  to  replace  its

immediate aim by other aims which may be valued more highly and

which are not sexual. We accept this process as proved whenever the

history  of  a  person’s  childhood  -  that  is,  the  history  of  his  mental

development - shows that in childhood this over-powerful instinct was

in  the  service  of  sexual  interests.  We  find  further  confirmation  if  a

striking  atrophy  occurs  in  the  sexual  life  of  maturity,  as  though  a

portion of sexual activity had now been replaced by the activity of the

over-powerful instinct.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2255

 

   There seem to be special difficulties in applying these expectations

to  the  case  of  an  over-powerful  instinct  for  investigation,  since

precisely in the case of children there is a reluctance to credit them

with  either  this  serious  instinct  or  any  noteworthy  sexual  interests.

However, these difficulties are easily overcome. The curiosity of small

children is manifested in their untiring love of asking questions; this is

bewildering to the adult so long as he fails to understand that all these

questions are merely circumlocutions and that they cannot come to an

end because the child is only trying to make them take the place of a

question which he does not ask. When he grows bigger and becomes

better informed this expression of curiosity often comes to a sudden

end. Psycho-analytic investigation provides us with a full explanationby teaching us that many, perhaps most children, or at least the most

gifted ones, pass through a period, beginning when they are about

three, which may be called the period of infantile sexual researches.

So  far  as  we  know,  the  curiosity  of  children  of  this  age  does  not

awaken  spontaneously,  but  is  aroused  by  the  impression  made  by

some important event - by the actual birth of a little brother or sister, or

by  a  fear  of  it  based  on  external  experiences  -  in  which  the  child

perceives a threat to his selfish interests. Researches are directed to

the question of where babies come from, exactly as if the child were

looking for ways and means to avert so undesired an event. In this

way we have been astonished to learn that children refuse to believe

the  bits  of  information  that  are  given  them  -  for  example  that  they

energetically reject the fable of the stork with its wealth of mythological

meaning -, that they date their intellectual independence from this act

of disbelief, and that they often feel in serious opposition to adults and

in fact never afterwards forgive them for having deceived them here

about  the  true  facts  of  the  case.  They  investigate  along  their  own

lines,  divine  the  baby’s  presence  inside  its  mother’s  body,  and

following the lead of the impulses of their own sexuality form theories

of  babies  originating  from  eating,  of  their  being  born  through  the

bowels, and of the obscure part played by the father. By that time they

already have a notion of the sexual act, which appears to them to be

something hostile and violent. But since their own sexual constitution

has not yet reached the point of being able to produce babies, their

investigation  of  where  babies  come  from  must  inevitably  come  to

nothing too and be abandoned as insoluble. The impression caused

by this failure in the first attempt at intellectual independence appears

to be of a lasting and deeply depressing kind.¹

 

   ¹ These improbable-sounding assertions can be confirmed from a study of my ‘Analysis of a

Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy’ (1909b) and of similar observations. In a paper on ‘The Sexual
Theories of Children’ (1908c) I wrote: ‘This brooding and doubting, however, becomes the
prototype of all later intellectual work directed towards the solution of problems, and the first
failure has a crippling effect on the child’s whole future.’
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2256

    When the period of infantile sexual researches has been terminated

by a wave of energetic sexual repression, the instinct for research has

three  distinct  possible  vicissitudes  open  to  it  owing  to  its  early

connection with sexual interests. In the first of these, research shares

the fate of sexuality; thenceforward curiosity remains inhibited and the

free activity of intelligence may be limited for the whole of the subject’s

lifetime, especially as shortly after this the powerful religious inhibition

of  thought  is  brought  into  play  by  education.  This  is  the  type

characterized  by  neurotic  inhibition.  We  know  very  well  that  the

intellectual weakness which has been acquired in this way gives an

effective impetus to the outbreak of a neurotic illness. In a second type

the intellectual development is sufficiently strong to resist the sexual

repression which has hold of it. Some time after the infantile sexual

researches  have  come  to  an  end,  the  intelligence,  having  grown

stronger,  recalls  the  old  association  and  offers  its  help  in  evading

sexual repression, and the suppressed sexual activities of research

return  from  the  unconscious  in  the  form  of  compulsive  brooding,

naturally  in  a  distorted  and  unfree  form,  but  sufficiently  powerful  to

sexualize thinking itself and to colour intellectual operations with the

pleasure and anxiety that belong to sexual processes proper. Here

investigation becomes a sexual activity, often the exclusive one, and

the  feeling  that  comes  from  settling  things  in  one’s  mind  and

explaining  them  replaces  sexual  satisfaction;  but  the  interminable

character of the child’s researches is also repeated in the fact that this

brooding never ends and that the intellectual feeling, so much desired,

of having found a solution recedes more and more into the distance.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2257

 

   In virtue of a special disposition, the third type, which is the rarest

and  most  perfect,  escapes  both  inhibition  of  thought  and  neurotic

compulsive thinking. It is true that here too sexual repression comes

about, but it does not succeed in relegating a component instinct of

sexual desire to the unconscious. Instead, the libido evades the fate of

repression by being sublimated from the very beginning into curiosityand by becoming attached to the powerful instinct for research as a

reinforcement.  Here,  too,  the  research  becomes  to  some  extent

compulsive  and  a  substitute  for  sexual  activity;  but  owing  to  the

complete  difference  in  the  underlying  psychical  processes

(sublimation instead of an irruption from the unconscious ) the quality

of neurosis is absent; there is no attachment to the original complexes

of infantile sexual research, and the instinct can operate freely in the

service of intellectual interest. Sexual repression, which has made the

instinct so strong through the addition to it of sublimated libido, is still

taken into account by the instinct, in that it avoids any concern with

sexual themes.

   If we reflect on the concurrence in Leonardo of his over-powerful

instinct  for  research  and  the  atrophy  of  his  sexual  life  (which  was

restricted to what is called ideal homosexuality) we shall be disposed

to claim him as a model instance of our third type. The core of his

nature, and the secret of it, would appear to be that after his curiosity

had  been  activated  in  infancy  in  the  service  of  sexual  interests  he

succeeded in sublimating the greater part of his libido into an urge for

research. But it is not easy, to be sure, to prove that this view is right.

To do so we should need some picture of his mental development in

the  first  years  of  his  childhood,  and  it  seems  foolish  to  hope  for

material of that sort when the accounts of his life are so meagre and

so unreliable, and when moreover it is a question of information about

circumstances that escape the attention of observers even in relation

to people of our own generation.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2258

 

   About Leonardo’s youth we know very little. He was born in 1452 in

the  little  town  of  Vinci  between  Florence  and  Empoli;  he  was  an

illegitimate child, which in those days was certainly not considered a

grave social stigma; his father was Ser Piero da Vinci, a notary and

descended from a family of notaries and farmers who took their name

from the locality of Vinci; his mother was a certain Caterina, probably

a peasant girl, who later married another native of Vinci. This motherdoes not occur again in the history of Leonardo’s life, and it is only

Merezhkovsky - the novelist - who believes that he has succeeded in

finding some trace of her. The only definite piece of information about

Leonardo’s childhood comes in an official document of the year 1457;

it  is  a  Florentine  land-register  for  the  purpose  of  taxation,  which

mentions Leonardo among the members of the household of the Vinci

family as the five-year old illegitimate child of Ser Piero.¹ The marriage

of Ser Piero with a certain Donna Albiera remained childless, and it

was therefore possible for the young Leonardo to be brought up in his

father’s house. He did not leave this house till - at what age is not

known - he entered Andrea del Verrocchio’s studio as an apprentice.

In the year 1472 Leonardo’s name was already to be found in the list

of members of the ‘Compagnia dei Pittori’. That is all.

 

   ¹ Scognamiglio (1900, 15).

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2259

 

                                            II

 

There is, so far as I know, only one place in his scientific note books

where Leonardo inserts a piece of information about his childhood. In

a passage about the flight of vultures he suddenly interrupts himself to

pursue a memory from very early years which had sprung to his mind:

   ‘It seems that I was always destined to be so deeply concerned with

vultures; for I recall as one of my very earliest memories that while I

was in my cradle a vulture came down to me, and opened my mouth

with its tail, and struck me many times with its tail against my lips.’¹

   What we have here then is a childhood memory; and certainly one

of the strangest sort. It is strange on account of its content and on

account of the age to which it is assigned. That a person should be

able  to  retain  a  memory  of  his  suckling  period  is  perhaps  not

impossible, but it cannot by any means be regarded as certain. What,

however, this memory of Leonardo’s asserts - namely that a vulture

opened  the  child’s  mouth  with  its  tail  -  sounds  so  improbable,  so

fabulous, that another view of it, which at a single stroke puts an endto both difficulties, has more to commend it to our judgement. On this

view the scene with the vulture would not be a memory of Leonardo’s

but a phantasy, which he formed at a later date and transposed to his

childhood.²

 

   ¹ ‘Questo scriver si distintamente del nibio par che sia mio destino, perchè nella mia prima

recordatione della mia infantia e’ mi parea che, essendo io in culla, che un nibio venissi a me
e mi aprissi la bocca colla sua coda e molte volte mi percuotesse con tal coda dentro alle
labbra.’ (Codex Atlanticus, F. 65 v., as given by Scognamiglio.

    ² [Footnote added  1919:]  In  a  friendly  notice  of  this  book  Havelock  Ellis  (1910)  has

challenged the view put forward above. He objects that this memory of Leonardo’s may very
well have had a basis of reality: since children’s memories often reach very much further back
than  is  commonly  supposed;  the  large  bird  in  question  need  not  of  course  have  been  a
vulture. This is a point that I will gladly concede, and as a step towards lessening the difficulty
I in turn will offer a suggestion - namely that his mother observed the large bird’s visit to her
child - an event which may easily have had the significance of an omen in her eyes - and
repeatedly told him about it afterwards. As a result, I suggest, he retained the memory of his
mother’s story, and later, as so often happens, it became possible for him to take it for a
memory of an experience of his own. However, this alteration does no damage to the force of
my general account. It happens, indeed, as a general rule that the phantasies about their
childhood which people construct at a late date are attached to trivial but real events of this
early, and normally forgotten, period. There must thus have been some secret reason for
bringing into prominence a real event of no importance and for elaborating it in the sort of way
Leonardo  did  in  his  story  of  the  bird,  which  he  dubbed  a  vulture,  and  of  its  remarkable
behaviour.
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2260

 

   This is often the way in which childhood memories originate. Quite

unlike  conscious  memories  from  the  time  of  maturity,  they  are  not

fixed at the moment of being experienced and afterwards repeated,

but are only elicited at a later age when childhood is already past; in

the process they are altered and falsified, and are put into the service

of  later  trends,  so  that  generally  speaking  they  cannot  be  sharply

distinguished from phantasies. Their nature is perhaps best illustrated

by a comparison with the way in which the writing of history originated

among the peoples of antiquity. As long as a nation was small and

weak it gave no thought to the writing of its history. Men tilled the soil

of their land, fought for their existence against their neighbours, and

tried to gain territory from them and to acquire wealth. It was an age ofheroes, not of historians. Then came another age, an age of reflection:

men felt themselves to be rich and powerful, and now felt a need to

learn  where  they  had  come  from  and  how  they  had  developed.

Historical writing, which had begun to keep a continuous record of the

present, now also cast a glance back to the past, gathered traditions

and  legends,  interpreted  the  traces  of  antiquity  that  survived  in

customs and usages, and in this way created a history of the past. It

was inevitable that this early history should have been an expression

of present beliefs and wishes rather than a true picture of the past; for

many  things  had  been  dropped  from  the  nation’s  memory,  while

others were distorted, and some remains of the past were given a

wrong  interpretation  in  order  to  fit  in  with  contemporary  ideas.

Moreover people’s motive for writing history was not objective curiosity

but  a  desire  to  influence  their  contemporaries,  to  encourage  and

inspire them, or to hold a mirror up before them. A man’s conscious

memory of the events of his maturity is in every way comparable to

the first kind of historical writing; while the memories that he has of his

childhood  correspond,  as  far  as  their  origins  and  reliability  are

concerned,  to  the  history  of  a  nation’s  earliest  days,  which  was

compiled later and for tendentious reasons.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2261

 

   If, then, Leonardo’s story about the vulture that visited him in his

cradle is only a phantasy from a later period, one might suppose it

could hardly be worth while spending much time on it. One might be

satisfied with explaining it on the basis of his inclination, of which he

makes no secret, to regard his preoccupation with the flight of birds as

pre-ordained by destiny. Yet in underrating this story one would be

committing just as great an injustice as if one were carelessly to reject

the body of legends, traditions and interpretations found in a nation’s

early history. In spite of all the distortions and misunderstandings, they

still represent the reality of the past: they are what a people forms out

of  the  experience  of  its  early  days  and  under  the  dominance  of

motives that were once powerful and still operate to-day; and if it wereonly possible, by a knowledge of all the forces at work, to undo these

distortions, there would be no difficulty in disclosing the historical truth

lying  behind  the  legendary  material.  The  same  holds  good  for  the

childhood  memories  or  phantasies  of  an  individual.  What  someone

thinks he remembers from his childhood is not a matter of indifference;

as  a  rule  the  residual  memories  -  which  he  himself  does  not

understand  -  cloak  priceless  pieces  of  evidence  about  the  most

important features in his mental development.¹ As we now possess in

the techniques of psycho-analysis excellent methods for helping us to

bring this concealed material to light, we may venture to fill in the gap

in Leonardo’s life story by analysing his childhood phantasy. And if in

doing so we remain dissatisfied with the degree of certainty which we

achieve, we shall have to console ourselves with the reflection that so

many other studies of this great and enigmatic man have met with no

better fate.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1919:] Since I wrote the above words I have attempted to make similar

use of an unintelligible memory dating from the childhood of another man of genius. In the
account of his life that Goethe wrote when he was about sixty (‘Dichtung und Warheit’) there
is a description in the first few pages of how, with the encouragement of his neighbours, he
slung first some small and then some large pieces of crockery out of the window into the
street, so that they were smashed to pieces. This is, indeed, the only scene that he reports
from the earliest years of childhood. The sheer inconsequentiality of its content, the way in
which  it  corresponded  with  the  childhood  memories  of  other  human  beings  who  did  not
become  particularly  great,  and  the  absence  in  this  passage  of  any  mention  of  the  young
brother who was born when Goethe was three and three-quarters, and who died when he was
nearly ten - all this induced me to undertake an analysis of this childhood memory. (This child
is in fact mentioned at a later point in the book, where Goethe dwells on the many illnesses of
childhood.) I hoped to be able as a result to replace it by something which would be more in
keeping with the context of Goethe’s account and whose content would make it worthy of
preservation and of the place he has given it in the history of his life. The short analysis made
it possible for the throwing-out of the crockery to be recognized as a magical act directed
against a troublesome intruder; and at the place in the book where he describes the episode
the intention is to triumph over the fact that a second son was not in the long run permitted to
disturb Goethe’s close relation with his mother. If the earliest memory of childhood, preserved
in disguises such as these, should be concerned - in Goethe’s case as well as in Leonardo’s -
with the mother, what would be so surprising in that?
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2262

 

      If  we  examine  with  the  eyes  of  a  psycho-analyst  Leonardo’sphantasy of the vulture, it does not appear strange for long. We seem

to recall having come across the same sort of thing in many places,

for  example  in  dreams;  so  that  we  may  venture  to  translate  the

phantasy from its own special language into words that are generally

understood. The translation is then seen to point to an erotic content.

A  tail,  ‘coda’,  is  one  of  the  most  familiar  symbols  and  substitutive

expressions  for  the  male  organ,  in  Italian  no  less  than  in  other

languages;  the  situation  in  the  phantasy,  of  a  vulture  opening  the

child’s  mouth  and  beating  about  inside  it  vigorously  with  its  tail,

corresponds to the idea of an act of fellatio, a sexual act in which the

penis is put into the mouth of the person involved. It is strange that

this  phantasy  is  so  completely  passive  in  character;  moreover  it

resembles certain dreams and phantasies found in women or passive

homosexuals (who play the part of the woman in sexual relations).

      I  hope  the  reader  will  restrain  himself  and  not  allow  a  surge  of

indignation  to  prevent  his  following  psycho-analysis  any  further

because it leads to an unpardonable aspersion on the memory of a

great and pure man the very first time it is applied to his case. Such

indignation, it is clear, will never be able to tell us the significance of

Leonardo’s  childhood  phantasy;  at  the  same  time  Leonardo  has

acknowledged the phantasy in the most unambiguous fashion, and we

cannot abandon our expectation - or, if it sounds better, our prejudice -

that a phantasy of this kind must have some meaning, in the same

way as any other psychical creation: a dream, a vision or a delirium.

Let us rather therefore give a fair hearing for a while to the work of

analysis, which indeed has not yet spoken its last word.

   The inclination to take a man’s sexual organ into the mouth and

suck  at  it,  which  in  respectable  society  is  considered  a  loathsome

sexual perversion, is nevertheless found with great frequency among

women of to-day - and of earlier times as well, as ancient sculptures

show -, and in the state of being in love it appears completely to lose

its  repulsive  character.  Phantasies  derived  from  this  inclination  are

found by doctors even in women who have not become aware of the

possibilities  of  obtaining  sexual  satisfaction  in  this  way  by  reading

Krafft  Ebing’s Psychopathia  Sexualis  or  from  other  sources  of

information. Women, it seems, find no difficulty in producing this kind

of wishful phantasy spontaneously.¹ Further investigation in forms usthat this situation, which morality condemns with such severity, may

be traced to an origin of the most innocent kind. It only repeats in a

different form a situation in which we all once felt comfortable - when

we were still in our suckling days (‘essendo io in culla’)² and took our

mother’s (or wet-nurse’s) nipple into our mouth and sucked at it. The

organic impression of this experience - the first source of pleasure in

our life - doubtless remains indelibly printed on us; and when at a later

date the child becomes familiar with the cow’s udder whose function is

that of a nipple, but whose shape and position under the belly make it

resemble a penis, the preliminary stage has been reached which will

later enable him to form the repellent sexual phantasy.

 

   ¹ On this point compare my ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’ (1905e).

   ² [‘While I was in my cradle.’]

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2263

 

      Now  we  understand  why  Leonardo  assigned  the  memory  of  his

supposed experience with the vulture to his suckling period. What the

phantasy  conceals  is  merely  a  reminiscence  of  sucking  -  or  being

suckled - at his mother’s breast, a scene of human beauty that he, like

so many artists, undertook to depict with his brush, in the guise of the

mother of God and her child. There is indeed another point which we

do  not  yet  understand  and  which  we  must  not  lose  sight  of:  this

reminiscence,  which  has  the  same  importance  for  both  sexes,  has

been transformed by the man Leonardo into a passive homosexual

phantasy. For the time being we shall put aside the question of what

there may be to connect homosexuality with sucking at the mother’s

breast, merely recalling that tradition does in fact represent Leonardo

as a man with homosexual feelings. In this connection, it is irrelevant

to  our  purpose  whether  the  charge  brought  against  the  young

Leonardo  was  justified  or  not.  What  decides  whether  we  describe

someone as an invert is not his actual behaviour, but his emotional

attitude.

      Our  interest  is  next  claimed  by  another  unintelligible  feature  of

Leonardo’s childhood phantasy. We interpret the phantasy as one ofbeing suckled by his mother, and we find his mother replaced by - a

vulture. Where does this vulture come from and how does it happen to

be found in its present place?

      At  this  point  a  thought  comes  to  the  mind  from  such  a  remote

quarter that it would be tempting to set it aside. In the hieroglyphics of

the  ancient  Egyptians  the  mother  is  represented  by  a  picture  of  a

vulture.¹ The Egyptians also worshipped a Mother Goddess, who was

represented  as  having  a  vulture’s  head,  or  else  several  heads,  of

which  at  least  one  was  a  vulture’s.²  This  goddess’s  name  was

pronounced Mut. Can the similarity to the sound of our word Mutter

[‘mother’]  be  merely  a  coincidence?  There  is,  then,  some  real

connection between vulture and mother - but what help is that to us?

For have we any right to expect Leonardo to know of it, seeing that the

first  man  who  succeeded  in  reading  hieroglyphics  was  François

Champollion (1790-1832)?³

   It would be interesting to enquire how it could be that the ancient

Egyptians came to choose the vulture as a symbol of motherhood.

Now  the  religion  and  civilization  of  the  Egyptians  were  objects  of

scientific  curiosity  even  to  the  Greeks  and  the  Romans:  and  long

before we ourselves were able to read the monuments of Egypt we

had at our disposal certain pieces of information about them derived

from the extant writings of classical antiquity. Some of these writings

were by well-known authors, such as Strabo, Plutarch and Ammianus

Marcellinus; while others bear unfamiliar names and are uncertain in

their  source  of  origin  and  their  date  of  composition,  like  the

Hieroglyphica  of  Horapollo  Nilous  and  the  book  of  oriental  priestly

wisdom  which  has  come  down  to  us  under  the  name  of  the  god

Hermes Trismegistos. We learn from these sources that the vulture

was  regarded  as  a  symbol  of  motherhood  because  only  female

vultures were believed to exist; there were, it was thought, no males of

              4
this species.  A  counterpart  to  this  restriction  to  one  sex  was  also

known to the natural history of antiquity: in the case of the scarabaeus

beetle, which the Egyptians worshipped as divine, it was thought that

                        5
only males existed.

 

   ¹ Horapollo (Hieroglyphica  1, 11): ‘Μητέgα δε γgάΦουτες . . . γΰπαζωγgαΦοΰσιυ.’ [‘To denote a

mother . . . they delineate a vulture.’]   ² Roscher (1894-97), Lanzone (1882).

   ³ Hartleben (1906).

4
    ‘γΰπα δε άggευα σΰ Φασι γιυέσθαι ποτε άλλά θηλείας άπάσας.’ [‘They say that no male vulture

has ever existed but all are females.’] Quoted by von Römer (1903, 732).
5
    Plutarch: ‘Veluti scarabaeos mares tantum esse putarunt Aegyptii sic inter vultures mares

non  inveniri  statuerunt.’  [‘Just  as  they  believed  that  only  male  scarabs  existed,  so  the
Egyptians concluded that no male vultures were to be found.’]
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2264

 

   How then were vultures supposed to be impregnated if all of them

were  female?  This  is  a  point  fully  explained  in  a  passage  in

Horapollo.¹ At a certain time these birds pause in mid-flight, open their

vagina and are impregnated by the wind.

   We have now unexpectedly reached a position where we can take

something as very probable which only a short time before we had to

reject as absurd. It is quite possible that Leonardo was familiar with

the scientific fable which was responsible for the vulture being used by

the Egyptians as a pictorial representation of the idea of mother. He

was a wide reader and his interest embraced all branches of literature

and learning. In the Codex Atlanticus we find a catalogue of all the

books he possessed at a particular date,² and in addition numerous

jottings on other books that he had borrowed from friends; and if we

may judge by the extracts from his notes by Richter,³ the extent of his

reading can hardly be overestimated. Early works on natural history

were well represented among them in addition to contemporary books;

and all of them were already in print at the time. Milan was in fact the

leading city in Italy for the new art of printing.

   On proceeding further we come across a piece of information which

can turn the probability that Leonardo knew the fable of the vulture

into a certainty. The learned editor and commentator on Horapollo has

the following note on the text already quoted above: ‘Caeterum hanc

fabulam de vulturibus cupide amplexi sunt Patres Ecclesiastici, ut ita

argumento ex rerum natura petito refutarent eos, qui Virginis partum

                                                                            4
negabant; itaque apud omnes fere hujus rei mentio occurit.’

    ¹ Horapollonis Niloi Hieroglyphica, ed. Leemans (1835, 14). The words that refer to the

vulture’s sex run:

‘πητέgα μέυ, έπειδή άggευ έυ τούτφ τvγέυει τώυ ζώωυ σύχ ύπάgχει.’ [‘(They use the picture of a

vulture to denote) a mother, because in this race of creatures there are no males.’]

   ² Müntz (1899, 282).

   ³ Müntz, (ibid.).

4
    [‘But this story about the vulture was eagerly taken up by the Fathers of the Church, in

order to refute, by means of a proof drawn from the natural order, those who denied the Virgin
Birth. The subject is therefore mentioned in almost all of them.’]
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2265

 

      So  the  fable  of  the  single  sex  of  vultures  and  their  mode  of

conception  remained  something  very  far  from  an  unimportant

anecdote like the analogous tale of the scarabaeus beetle; it had been

seized on by the Fathers of the Church so that they could have at their

disposal  a  proof  drawn  from  natural  history  to  confront  those  who

doubted  sacred  history.  If  vultures  were  described  in  the  best

accounts of antiquity as depending on the wind for impregnation, why

could not the same thing have also happened on one occasion with a

human female? Since the fable of the vulture could be turned to this

account  ‘almost  all’  the  Fathers  of  the  Church  made  a  practice  of

telling it, and thus it can hardly be doubted that Leonardo too came to

know of it through its being favoured by so wide a patronage.

   We can now reconstruct the origin of Leonardo’s vulture phantasy.

He  once  happened  to  read  in  one  of  the  Fathers  or  in  a  book  on

natural history the statement that all vultures were females and could

reproduce their kind without any assistance from a male: and at that

point a memory sprang to his mind, which was transformed into the

phantasy we have been discussing, but which meant to signify that he

also had been such a vulture-child - he had had a mother, but no

father. With this memory was associated, in the only way in which

impressions of so great an age can find expression, an echo of the

pleasure he had had at his mother’s breast. The allusion made by the

Fathers of the Church to the idea of the Blessed Virgin and her child -

an idea cherished by every artist - must have played its part in helping

the phantasy to appear valuable and important to him. Indeed in thisway he was able to identify himself with the child Christ, the comforter

and saviour not of this one woman alone.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2266

 

   Our aim in dissecting a childhood phantasy is to separate the real

memory that it contains from the later motives that modify and distort

it. In Leonardo’s case we believe that we now know the real content of

the phantasy: the replacement of his mother by the vulture indicates

that the child was aware of his father’s absence and found himself

alone with his mother. The fact of Leonardo’s illegitimate birth is in

harmony with his vulture phantasy; it was only on this account that he

could compare himself to a vulture-child. But the next reliable fact that

we possess about his youth is that by the time he was five he had

been received into his father’s household. We are completely ignorant

when that happened - whether it was a few months after his birth or

whether it was a few weeks before the drawing-up of the land-register.

It  is  here  that  the  interpretation  of  the  vulture  phantasy  comes  in:

Leonardo, it seems to tell us, spent the critical first years of his life not

by the side of his father and stepmother, but with his poor, forsaken,

real mother, so that he had time to feel the absence of his father. This

seems  a  slender  and  yet  a  somewhat  daring  conclusion  to  have

emerged  from  our  psycho-analytic  efforts,  but  its  significance  will

increase as we continue our investigation. Its certainty is reinforced

when  we  consider  the  circumstances  that  did  in  fact  operate  in

Leonardo’s childhood. In the same year that Leonardo was born, the

sources tell us, his father, Ser Piero da Vinci, married Donna Albiera,

a lady of good birth; it was to the childlessness of this marriage that

the  boy  owed  his  reception  into  his  father’s  (or  rather  his

grandfather’s) house - an event which had taken place by the time he

was five years old, as the document attests. Now it is not usual at the

start of a marriage to put an illegitimate offspring into the care of the

young bride who still expects to be blessed with children of her own.

Years of disappointment must surely first have elapsed before it was

decided to adopt the illegitimate child - who had probably grown up anattractive  young  boy  -  as  a  compensation  for  the  absence  of  the

legitimate  children  that  had  been  hoped  for.  It  fits  in  best  with  the

interpretation  of  the  vulture  phantasy  if  at  least  three  years  of

Leonardo’s  life,  and  perhaps  five,  had  elapsed  before  he  could

exchange the solitary person of his mother for a parental couple. And

by then it was too late. In the first three or four years of life certain

impressions become fixed and ways of reacting to the outside world

are established which can never be deprived of their importance by

later experiences.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2267

 

   If it is true that the unintelligible memories of a person’s childhood

and the phantasies that are built on them invariably emphasize the

most important elements in his mental development, then it follows

that  the  fact  which  the  vulture  phantasy  confirms,  namely  that

Leonardo spent the first years of his life alone with his mother, will

have been of decisive influence in the formation of his inner life. An

inevitable effect of this state of affairs was that the child - who was

confronted in his early life with one problem more than other children -

began to brood on this riddle with special intensity, and so at a tender

age became a researcher, tormented as he was by the great question

of where babies come from and what the father has to do with their

origin. It was a vague suspicion that his researches and the history of

his childhood were connected in this way which later prompted him to

exclaim  that  he  had  been  destined  from  the  first  to  investigate  the

problem of the flight of birds since he had been visited by a vulture as

he lay in his cradle. Later on it will not be difficult to show how his

curiosity  about  the  flight  of  birds  was  derived  from  the  sexual

researches of his childhood.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2268

 

                                            III 

In Leonardo’s childhood phantasy we have taken the element of the

vulture to represent the real content of his memory, while the context

in  which  Leonardo  himself  placed  his  phantasy  his  thrown  a  bright

light  on  the  importance  which  that  content  had  for  his  later  life.  In

proceeding with our work of interpretation we now come up against

the  strange  problem  of  why  this  content  has  been  recast  into  a

homosexual situation. The mother who suckles her child - or to put it

better, at whose breast the child sucks - has been turned into a vulture

that  puts  its  tail  into  the  child’s  mouth.  We  have  asserted  that,

according  to  the  usual  way  in  which  language  makes  use  of

substitutes, the vulture’s ‘coda’ cannot possibly signify anything other

than  a  male  genital,  a  penis.  But  we  do  not  understand  how

imaginative  activity  can  have  succeeded  in  endowing  precisely  this

bird which is a mother with the distinguishing mark of masculinity; and

in view of this absurdity we are at a loss how to reduce this creation of

Leonardo’s phantasy to any rational meaning.

   However, we should not despair, as we reflect on the number of

apparently absurd dreams that we have in the past compelled to give

up their meaning. Is there any reason why a memory of childhood

should offer us more difficulty than a dream?

   Remembering that it is unsatisfactory when a peculiar feature is

found singly, let us hasten to add another to it which is even more

striking.

      The  vulture-headed  Egyptian  goddess  Mut,  a  figure  without  any

personal character according to Drexler’s article in Roscher’s lexicon,

was often merged with other mother goddesses of a more strongly

marked individuality, like Isis and Hathor, but at the same time she

maintained her separate existence and cult. A special feature of the

Egyptian pantheon was that the individual gods did not disappear in

the  process  of  syncretization.  Alongside  the  fusion  of  gods  the

individual  divinities  continued  to  exist  in  independence.  Now  this

vulture-headed  mother  goddess  was  usually  represented  by  the

Egyptians  with  a  phallus;¹  her  body  was  female,  as  the  breasts

indicated, but it also had a male organ in a state of erection.

 

   ¹ See the illustrations in Lanzone (1882, Plates CXXXVI - CXXXXVIII). 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2269

 

   In the goddess Mut, then, we find the same combination of maternal

and  masculine  characteristics  as  in  Leonardo’s  phantasy  of  the

vulture.  Are  we  to  explain  this  coincidence  by  assuming  that  from

studying  his  books  Leonardo  had  also  learnt  of  the  androgynous

nature  of  the  maternal  vulture?  Such  a  possibility  is  more  than

questionable;  it  appears  that  the  sources  to  which  he  had  access

contained  no  information  about  this  remarkable  feature.  It  is  more

plausible  to  trace  the  correspondence  back  to  a  common  factor

operative in both cases but still unknown.

      Mythology  can  teach  us  that  an  androgynous  structure,  a

combination of male and female sex characters, was an attribute not

only  of  Mut  but  also  of  other  deities  like  Isis  and  Hathor  -  though

perhaps of these only in so far as they too had a maternal nature and

became amalgamated with Mut (Römer, 1903). It teaches us further

that other Egyptian deities, like Neith of Sais - from whom the Greek

Athene  was  later  derived  -  were  originally  conceived  of  as

androgynous, i.e. as hermaphrodite, and that the same was true of

many  of  the Greek  gods,  especially  of  those  associated  with

Dionysus, but also of Aphrodite, who was later restricted to the role of

a female goddess of love. Mythology may then offer the explanation

that the addition of a phallus to the female body is intended to denote

the primal creative force of nature, and that all these hermaphrodite

divinities are expressions of the idea that only a combination of male

and  female  elements  can  give  a  worthy  representation  of  divine

perfection. But none of these considerations gives us an explanation

of the puzzling psychological fact that the human imagination does not

boggle at endowing a figure which is intended to embody the essence

of the mother with the mark of male potency which is the opposite of

everything maternal.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2270 

   Infantile sexual theories provide the explanation. There was once a

time when the male genital was found compatible with the picture of

the mother. When a male child first turns his curiosity to the riddles of

sexual life, he is dominated by his interest in his own genital. He finds

that part of his body too valuable and too important for him to be able

to believe that it could be missing in other people whom he feels he

resembles so much. As he cannot guess that there exists another type

of  genital  structure  of  equal  worth,  he  is  forced  to  make  the

assumption that all human beings, women as well as men, possess a

penis  like  his  own.  This  preconception  is  so  firmly  planted  in  the

youthful  investigator  that  it  is  not  destroyed  even  when  he  first

observes the genitals of little girls. His perception tells him, it is true,

that there is something different from what there is in him, but he is

incapable of admitting to himself that the content of this perception is

that he cannot find a penis in girls. That the penis could be missing

strikes him as an uncanny and intolerable idea, and so in an attempt

at a compromise he comes to the conclusion that little girls have a

penis as well, only it is still very small; it will grow later.¹ If it seems

from later observations that this expectation is not realized, he has

another remedy at his disposal: little girls too had a penis, but it was

cut off and in its place was left a wound. This theoretical advance

already makes use of personal experiences of a distressing kind: the

boy in the meantime has heard the threat that the organ which is so

dear to him will be taken away from him if he shows his interest in it

too plainly. Under the influence of this threat of castration he now sees

the  notion  he  has  gained  of  the  female  genitals  in  a  new  light;

henceforth he will tremble for his masculinity, but at the same time he

will  despise  the  unhappy  creatures  on  whom  the  cruel  punishment

has, as he supposes, already fallen.²

 

     ¹ Compare  the  observations  in  the Jahrbuch  für  psychoanalytische  und

psychopathologische Forschungen [added 1919:], in the Internationale Zeitschrift für ärtzliche
Psychoanalyse and in Imago.

   ² [Footnote added 1919:] The conclusion strikes me as inescapable that here we may also

trace one of the roots of the anti-semitism which appears with such elemental force and finds
such  irrational  expression  among  the  nations  of  the  West.  Circumcision  is  unconsciously
equated with castration. If we venture to carry our conjectures back to the primaeval days of
the  human  race  we  can  surmise  that  originally  circumcision  must  have  been  a  mildersubstitute, designed to take the place of castration.
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2271

 

      Before  the  child  comes  under  the  dominance  of  the  castration-

complex - at a time when he still holds women at full value - he begins

to display an intense desire to look, as an erotic instinctual activity. He

wants  to  see  other  people’s  genitals,  at  first  in  all  probability  to

compare them with his own. The erotic attraction that comes from his

mother soon culminates in a longing for her genital organ, which he

takes to be a penis. With the discovery, which is not made till later,

that  women  do  not  have  a  penis,  this  longing  often  turns  into  its

opposite and gives place to a feeling of disgust which in the years of

puberty can become the cause of psychical impotence, misogyny and

permanent homosexuality. But the fixation on the object that was once

strongly  desired,  the  woman’s  penis,  leaves  indelible  traces  on  the

mental life of the child, who has pursued that portion of his infantile

sexual researches with particular thoroughness. Fetishistic reverence

for a woman’s foot and shoe appears to take the foot merely as a

substitutive symbol for the woman’s penis which was once revered

and later missed; without knowing it, ‘coupeurs de nattes’¹ play the

part of people who carry out an act of castration on the female genital

organ.

   People will not reach a proper understanding of the activities of

children’s sexuality and will probably take refuge in declaring that what

has been said here is incredible, so long as they cling to the attitude

taken up by our civilization of depreciating the genitals and the sexual

functions.  To  understand  the  mental  life  of  children  we  require

analogies from primitive times. Through a long series of generations

the genitals have been for us the ‘pudenda’, objects of shame, and

even (as a result of further successful sexual repression) of disgust. If

one  makes  a  broad  survey  of  the  sexual  life  of  our  time  and  in

particular  of  the  classes  who  sustain  human  civilization,  one  is

tempted to declare that it is only with reluctance that the majority of

those alive to-day obey the command to propagate their kind; they feel

that  their  dignity  as  human  beings  suffers  and  is  degraded  in  theprocess. What is to be found among us in the way of another view of

sexual  life  is  confined  to  the  uncultivated  lower  strata  of  society;

among the higher and more refined classes it is concealed, since it is

considered culturally inferior, and it ventures to put itself into practice

only in the face of a bad conscience. In the primaeval days of the

human race it was a different story. The laborious compilations of the

student of civilization provide convincing evidence that originally the

genitals  were  the  pride  and  hope  of  living  beings;  they  were

worshipped  as  gods  and  transmitted  the  divine  nature  of  their

functions  to  all  newly  learned  human  activities.  As  a  result  of  the

sublimation of their basic nature there arose innumerable divinities;

and at the time when the connection between official religions and

sexual activity was already hidden from the general consciousness,

secret cults devoted themselves to keeping it alive among a number of

initiates. In the course of cultural development so much of the divine

and sacred was ultimately extracted from sexuality that the exhausted

remnant  fell  into  contempt.  But  in  view  of  the  indelibility  that  is

characteristic of all mental traces, it is surely not surprising that even

the  most  primitive  forms  of  genital-worship  can  be  shown  to  have

existed  in  very  recent  times  and  that  the  language,  customs  and

superstitions of mankind to-day contain survivals from every phase of

this process of development.²

 

   ¹ [Perverts who enjoy cutting off females’ hair.]

   ² Cf. Knight.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2272

 

  Impressive analogies from biology have prepared us to find that the

individual’s  mental  development  repeats  the  course  of  human

development  in  an  abbreviated  form;  and  the  conclusions  which

psycho-analytic research into the child’s mind has reached concerning

the high value set on the genitals in infancy will not therefore strike us

as improbable. The child’s assumption that his mother has a penis is

thus the common source from which are derived the androgynously-

formed mother goddesses such as the Egyptian Mut and the vultures’‘coda’ in Leonardo’s childhood phantasy. It is in fact only due to a

misunderstanding that we describe these representations of gods as

hermaphrodite in the medical sense of the word. In none of them is

there a combination of the true genitals of both sexes - a combination

which, to the abhorrence of all beholders, is found in some cases of

malformation; all that has happened is that the male organ has been

added to the breasts which are the mark of a mother, just as it was

present in the child’s first idea of his mother’s body. This form of the

mother’s body, the revered creation of primaeval phantasy, has been

preserved  for  the  faithful  by  mythology.  We  can  now  provide  the

following  translation  of  the  emphasis  given  to  the  vulture’s  tail  in

Leonardo’s phantasy: ‘That was a time when my fond curiosity was

directed  to  my  mother,  and  when  I  still  believed  she  had  a  genital

organ like my own.’ Here is more evidence of Leonardo’s early sexual

researches, which in our opinion had a decisive effect on the whole of

his later life.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2273

 

   At this point a little reflection will remind us that we ought not to feel

satisfied  yet  with  the  way  the  vulture’s  tail  in  Leonardo’s  childhood

phantasy  has  been  explained.  Something  more  seems  to  be

contained  in  it  which  we  do  not  yet  understand.  Its  most  striking

feature, after all, was that it changed sucking at the mother’s breast

into  being  suckled,  that  is,  into  passivity,  and  thus  into  a  situation

whose nature is undoubtedly homosexual. When we remember the

historical probability of Leonardo having behaved in his life as one

who  was  emotionally  homosexual,  the  question  is  forced  upon  us

whether  this  phantasy  does  not  indicate  the  existence  of  a  causal

connection between Leonardo’s relation with his mother in childhood

and his later manifest, if ideal, homosexuality. We should not venture

to  infer  a  connection  of  this  sort  from  Leonardo’s  distorted

reminiscence  if  we  did  not  know  from  the  psycho-analytic  study  of

homosexual patients that such a connection does exist and is in fact

an intimate and necessary one.      Homosexual  men,  who  have  in  our  times  taken  vigorous  action

against the restrictions imposed by law on their sexual activity, are

fond of representing themselves, through their theoretical spokesmen,

as being from the outset a distinct sexual species, as an intermediate

sexual  stage,  as  a  ‘third  sex’.  They  are,  they  claim,  men  who  are

innately compelled by organic determinants to find pleasure in men

and have been debarred from obtaining it in women. Much as one

would be glad on grounds of humanity to endorse their claims, one

must  treat  their  theories  with  some  reserve,  for  they  have  been

advanced without regard for the psychical genesis of homosexuality.

Psycho-analysis offers the means of filling this gap and of putting the

assertions of homosexuals to the test. It has succeeded in the task

only  in  the  case  of  a  small  number  of  persons,  but  all  the

investigations  undertaken  so  far  have  yielded  the  same  surprising

result.¹ In all our male homosexual cases the subjects had had a very

intense erotic attachment to a female person, as a rule their mother,

during the first period of childhood, which is afterwards forgotten; this

attachment was evoked or encouraged by too much tenderness on

the part of the mother herself, and further reinforced by the small part

played by the father during their childhood. Sadger emphasizes the

fact  that  the  mothers  of  his  homosexual  patients  were  frequently

masculine women, women with energetic traits of character, who were

able to push the father out of his proper place. I have occasionally

seen the same thing, but I was more strongly impressed by cases in

which the father was absent from the beginning or left the scene at an

early date, so that the boy found himself left entirely under feminine

influence. Indeed it almost seems as though the presence of a strong

father  would  ensure  that  the  son  made  the  correct  decision  in  his

choice of object, namely someone of the opposite sex.²

 

   ¹ I refer in particular to the investigations of I. Sadger, which I can in the main confirm from

my own experience. I am also aware that Wilhelm Stekel of Vienna and Sándor Ferenczi of
Budapest have arrived at the same results.

   ² [Footnote added  1919:]  Psycho-analytic  research  has  contributed  two  facts  that  are

beyond question to the understanding of homosexuality, without at the same time supposing
that it has exhausted the causes of this sexual aberration. The first is the fixation of the erotic
needs  on  the  mother  which  has  been  mentioned  above;  the  other  is  contained  in  the
statement that everyone, even the most normal person, is capable of making a homosexual
object-choice, and has done so at some time in his life, and either still adheres to it in hisunconscious  or  else  protects  himself  against  it  by  vigorous  counter-attitudes.  These  two
discoveries put an end both to the claim of homosexuals to be regarded as a ‘third sex’ and to
what  has  been  believed  to  be  the  important  distinction  between  innate  and  acquired
homosexuality. The presence of somatic characters of the other sex (the quota provided by
physical  hermaphroditism)  is  highly  conducive  to  the  homosexual  object-choice  becoming
manifest; but it is not decisive. It must be stated with regret that those who speak for the
homosexuals  in  the  field  of  science  have  been  incapable  of  learning  anything  from  the
established findings of psycho-analysis.
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2274

 

      After  this  preliminary  stage  a  transformation  sets  in  whose

mechanism is known to us but whose motive forces we do not yet

understand. The child’s love for his mother cannot continue to develop

consciously any further; it succumbs to repression. The boy represses

his love for his mother: he puts himself in her place, identifies himself

with her, and takes his own person as a model in whose likeness he

chooses the new objects of his love. In this way he has become a

homosexual. What he has in fact done is to slip back to auto-erotism:

for the boys whom he now loves as he grows up are after all only

substitutive figures and revivals of himself in childhood - boys whom

he loves in the way in which his mother loved him when he was a

child. He finds the objects of his love along the path of narcissism, as

we say; for Narcissus, according to the Greek legend, was a youth

who  preferred  his  own  reflection  to  everything  else  and  who  was

changed into the lovely flower of that name.

   Psychological considerations of a deeper kind justify the assertion

that  a  man  who  has  become  a  homosexual  in  this  way  remains

unconsciously  fixated  to  the  mnemic  image  of  his  mother.  By

repressing his love for his mother he preserves it in his unconscious

and from now on remains faithful to her. While he seems to pursue

boys and to be their lover, he is in reality running away from the other

women,  who  might  cause  him  to  be  unfaithful.  In  individual  cases

direct  observation  has  also  enabled  us  to  show  that  the  man  who

gives the appearance of being susceptible only to the charms of men

is in fact attracted by women in the same way as a normal man; but

on  each  occasion  he  hastens  to  transfer  the  excitation  he  has

received  from  women  on  to  a  male  object,  and  in  this  manner  herepeats over and over again the mechanism by which he acquired his

homosexuality.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2275

 

      We  are  far  from  wishing  to  exaggerate  the  importance  of  these

explanations  of  the  psychical  genesis  of  homosexuality.  It  is  quite

obvious that they are in sharp contrast to the official theories of those

who speak for homosexuals, but we know that they are not sufficiently

comprehensive  to  make  a  conclusive  explanation  of  the  problem

possible. What is for practical reasons called homosexuality may arise

from  a  whole  variety  of  psychosexual  inhibitory  processes;  the

particular process we have singled out is perhaps only one among

many, and is perhaps related to only one type of ‘homosexuality’. We

must also admit that the number of cases of our homosexual type in

which it is possible to point to the determinants which we require far

exceeds the number of those where the deduced effect actually, takes

place; We should not have had any cause at all for entering into the

psychical  genesis  of  the  form  of  homosexuality  we  have  studied  if

there were not a strong presumption that Leonardo, whose phantasy

of the vulture was our starting point, was himself a homosexual of this

very type.

   Few details are known about the sexual behaviour of the great artist

and scientist, but we may place confidence in the probability that the

assertions of his contemporaries were not grossly erroneous. In the

light  of  these  traditions,  then,  he  appears  as  a  man  whose  sexual

need and activity were exceptionally reduced, as if a higher aspiration

had raised him above the common animal need of mankind. It may

remain  open  to  doubt  whether  he  ever  sought  direct  sexual

satisfaction - and if so, in what manner - or whether he was able to

dispense with it altogether. We are however justified in looking in him

too for the emotional currents which drive other men imperatively on to

perform the sexual act; for we cannot imagine the mental life of any

human being in the formation of which sexual desire in the broadest

sense - libido - did not have its share, even if that desire has departedfar from its original aim, or has refrained from putting itself into effect.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2276

 

   We cannot expect to find in Leonardo anything more than traces of

untransformed sexual inclination. But these point in one direction and

moreover allow him to be reckoned as a homosexual. It has always

been  emphasized  that  he  took  only  strikingly  handsome  boys  and

youths as pupils. He treated them with kindness and consideration,

looked after them, and when they were ill nursed them himself, just as

a mother nurses her children and just as his own mother might have

tended him. As he had chosen them for their beauty and not for their

talent, none of them - Cesare da Sesto, Boltraffio, Andrea Salaino,

Francesco  Melzi  and  others  -  became  a  painter  of  importance.

Generally they were unable to make themselves independent of their

master, and after his death they disappeared without having left any

definite mark on the history of art. The others, whose works entitled

them to be called his pupils, like Luini and Bazi, called Sodoma, he

probably did not know personally.

   We realize that we shall have to meet the objection that Leonardo’s

behaviour  towards  his  pupils  has  nothing  at  all  to  do  with  sexual

motives  and  that  it  allows  no  conclusions  to  be  drawn  about  his

particular sexual inclination. Against this we wish to submit with all

caution that our view explains some peculiar features of the artist’s

behaviour which would otherwise have to remain a mystery. Leonardo

kept a diary; he made entries in his small hand (written from right to

left) which were meant only for himself. It is noteworthy that in this

diary  he  addressed  himself  in  the  second  person.  ‘Learn  the

multiplication  of  roots  from  Master  Luca.’  (Solmi,  1908,  152).  ‘Get

Master d’Abacco to show you how to square the circle.’ (Loc. cit.) Or

on the occasion of a journey: ‘I am going to Milan on business to do

with my garden . . . Have two baggage trunks made. Get Boltraffio to

show you the turning-lathe and get him to polish a stone on it. Leave

the book for Master Andrea il Todesco.’ (Ibid., 203.)¹ Or a resolution of

very different importance: ‘You have to show in your treatise that theearth is a star, like the moon or something like it, and thus prove the

nobility of our world.’ (Herzfeld, 1906, 141.)

 

   ¹ Leonardo is behaving here like someone whose habit it was to make his daily confession

to another person and who uses his diary as a substitute for him. For a conjecture as to who
this person may have been, see Merezhkovsky (1903, 367).
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2277

 

   In this diary, which, by the way, like the diaries of other mortals,

often dismisses the most important events of the day in a few words or

else passes them over in complete silence, there are some entries

which on account of their strangeness are quoted by all Leonardo’s

biographers. They are notes of small sums of money spent by the

artist - notes recorded with a minute exactness, as if they were made

by a pedantically strict and parsimonious head of a household. There

is on the other hand no record of the expenditure of larger sums or

any other evidence that the artist was at home in keeping accounts.

One of these notes has to do with a new cloak which he bought for his

pupil Andrea Salaino:¹

 

                Silver brocade     .     .     .     .     15  lire    4 soldi
                Crimson velvet for trimming   .   9  lire    - soldi
                Braid              .     .     .     .        .      -  lire    9 soldi
                Buttons          .     .     .     .     .        -  lire   12 soldi

 

      Another  very  detailed  note  brings  together  all  the  expenses  he

incurred  through  the  bad  character  and  thievish  habits  of  another

pupil:² ‘On the twenty-first day of April, 1490, I began this book and

made a new start on the horse.³ Jacomo came to me on St. Mary

Magdalen’s day, 1490: he is ten years old.’ (Marginal note: ‘thievish,

untruthful, selfish, greedy.’) ‘On the second day I had two shirts cut out

for him, a pair of trousers and a jacket, and when I put the money

aside to pay for these things, he stole the money from my purse, and it

was never possible to make him own up, although I was absolutely

sure  of  it.’  (Marginal  note:  ‘4  lire  .  .  .’)  The  report  of  the  child’s

misdeeds  runs  on  in  this  way  and  ends  with  the  reckoning  ofexpenses: ‘In the first year, a cloak, 2 lire; 6 shirts, 4 lire; 3 jackets, 6

                                            4
lire; 4 pairs of stockings, 7 lire; etc.’

 

   ¹ The text is that given by Merezhkovsky (1903, 282).

   ² Or model.

   ³ For the equestrian statue of Francesco Sforza.

4
    The full text is to be found in Herzfeld (1906, 45).

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2278

 

   Nothing is further from the wishes of Leonardo’s biographers than to

try to solve the problems in their hero’s mental life by starting from his

small weaknesses and peculiarities; and the usual comment that they

make  on  these  singular  accounts  is  one  which  lays  stress  on  the

artist’s kindness and consideration for his pupils. They forget that what

calls for explanation is not Leonardo’s behaviour, but the fact that he

left these pieces of evidence of it behind him. As it is impossible to

believe that his motive was that of letting proofs of his good nature fall

into  our  hands,  we  must  assume  that  it  was  another  motive,  an

affective one, which led him to write these notes down. What motive it

was is not easy to guess, and we should be unable to suggest one if

there  were  not  another  account  found  among  Leonardo’s  papers

which throws a vivid light on these strangely trifling notes about his

pupils’ clothing, etc.:

 

Expenses after Caterina’s death for her funeral          27 florins
2 pounds of wax              .         .          .          .          .      18     “
For transporting and erecting the cross      .          .      12     “
Catafalque                       .         .           .          .          .        4     ”
Pall-bearers                     .         .           .          .          .        8     ”
For 4 priests and 4 clerks       .           .          .          .      20     ”
Bell-ringing                      .         .           .          .           .        2     ”
For the grave-diggers    .         .           .          .           .     16     ”
For the licence - to the officials          .          .           .       1     ”
                                                                                          —————
                                                                        Total          108 florins
 
Previous expenses
   For the doctor             .         .          4 florins   For sugar and candles        .        12     ”
                                                                                            16 florins
                                                                                          —————
                                                            Grand total          124 florins.¹
 

   ¹ Merezhkovsky (1903, 372). - As a melancholy example of the uncertainty that surrounds

the information, which is in any case scanty enough, about Leonardo’s private life, I may
mention the fact that the same account is quoted by Solmi (1908, 104) with considerable
variations. The most serious one is that soldi are given instead of florins. It may be assumed
that florins in this account do not mean the old ‘gold florins’ but the monetary units which were
used later and were worth 1 2/3 lire or 33 1/3 soldi. Solmi makes Caterina a servant who had
looked after Leonardo’s household for some time. The source from which the two versions of
these accounts were taken was not accessible to me.
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2279

 

   The novelist Merezhkovsky alone is able to tell us who this Caterina

was.  From  two  other  short  notes¹  he  concludes  that  Leonardo’s

mother, the poor peasant woman of Vinci, came to Milan in 1493 to

visit her son, who was then 41; that she fell ill there, was taken to

hospital by Leonardo, and when she died was honoured by him with

this costly funeral.

   This interpretation by the psychological novelist cannot be put to the

proof, but it can claim so much inner probability, and is so much in

harmony  with  all  that  we  otherwise  know  of  Leonardo’s  emotional

activity,  that  I  cannot  refrain  from  accepting  it  as  correct.  He  had

succeeded in subjecting his feelings to the yoke of research and in

inhibiting their free utterance; but even for him there were occasions

when what had been suppressed obtained expression forcibly. The

death of the mother he had once loved so dearly was one of these.

What we have before us in the account of the costs of the funeral is

the expression - distorted out of all recognition - of his mourning for his

mother.  We  wonder  how  such  distortion  could  come  about,  and

indeed  we  cannot  understand  it  if  we  treat  it  as  a  normal  mental

process. But similar processes are well known to us in the abnormal

conditions of neurosis and especially of what is known as ‘obsessional

neurosis’. There we can see how the expression of intense feelings,

which  have  however  become  unconscious  through  repression,  is

displaced  on  to  trivial  and  even  foolish  actions.  The  expression  ofthese repressed feelings has been lowered by the forces opposed to

them  to  such  a  degree  that  one  would  have  had  to  form  a  most

insignificant  estimate  of  their  intensity;  but  the  imperative

compulsiveness  with  which  this  trivial  expressive  act  is  performed

betrays the real force of the impulses - a force which is rooted in the

unconscious  and  which  consciousness  would  like  to  deny.  Only  a

comparison such as this with what happens in obsessional neurosis

can  explain  Leonardo’s  account  of  the  expenses  of  his  mother’s

funeral.  In  his  unconscious  he  was  still  tied  to  her  by  erotically

coloured feelings, as he had been in childhood. The opposition that

came from the subsequent repression of this childhood love did not

allow him to set up a different and worthier memorial to her in his

diary. But what emerged as a compromise from this neurotic conflict

had to be carried out; and thus it was that the account was entered in

the diary, and has come to the knowledge of posterity as something

unintelligible.

 

   ¹ ‘Caterina arrived on July 16, 1493.’ - ‘Giovannina - a fabulous face - Call on Caterina in

the hospital and make enquiries.’
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2280

 

   It does not seem a very extravagant step to apply what we have

learnt  from  the  funeral  account  to  the  reckonings  of  the  pupils’

expenses.  They  would  then  be  another  instance  of  the  scanty

remnants  of  Leonardo’s  libidinal  impulses  finding  expression  in  a

compulsive manner and in a distorted form. On that view, his mother

and his pupils, the likenesses of his own boyish beauty, had been his

sexual objects - so far as the sexual repression which dominated his

nature allows us so to describe them - and the compulsion to note in

laborious detail the sums he spent on them betrayed in this strange

way  his  rudimentary  conflicts.  From  this  it  would  appear  that

Leonardo’s erotic life did really belong to the type of homosexuality

whose psychical development we have succeeded in disclosing, and

the  emergence  of  the  homosexual  situation  in  his  phantasy  of  the

vulture would become intelligible to us: for its meaning was exactlywhat  we  have  already  asserted  of  that  type.  We  should  have  to

translate it thus: ‘It was through this erotic relation with my mother that

I became a homosexual.’¹

 

   ¹ The forms of expression in which Leonardo’s repressed libido was allowed to show itself -

circumstantiality and concern over money - are among the traits of character which result from
anal erotism. See my ‘Character and Anal Erotism’ (1908b).
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2281

 

                                            IV

 

We  have  not  yet  done  with  Leonardo’s  vulture  phantasy.  In  words

which only too plainly recall a description of a sexual act (‘and struck

me many times with its tail against my lips’), Leonardo stresses the

intensity of the erotic relations between mother and child. From this

linking of his mother’s (the vulture’s) activity with the prominence of

the mouth zone it is not difficult to guess that a second memory is

contained  in  the  phantasy.  This  may  be  translated:  ‘My  mother

pressed innumerable passionate kisses on my mouth.’ The phantasy

is compounded from the memory of being suckled and being kissed

by his mother.

   Kindly nature has given the artist the ability to express his most

secret  mental  impulses,  which  are  hidden  even  from  himself,  by

means of the works that he creates; and these works have a powerful

effect  on  others  who  are  strangers  to  the  artist,  and  who  are

themselves  unaware  of  the  source  of  their  emotion.  Can  it  be  that

there is nothing in Leonardo’s life work to bear witness to what his

memory preserved as the strongest impression of his childhood? One

would certainly expect there to be something. Yet if one considers the

profound transformations through which an impression in an artist’s

life has to pass before it is allowed to make its contribution to a work

of  art,  one  will  be  bound  to  keep  any  claim  to  certainty  in  one’s

demonstration within very modest limits; and this is especially so in

Leonardo’s case.

   Anyone who thinks of Leonardo’s paintings will be reminded of aremarkable smile, at once fascinating and puzzling, which he conjured

up on the lips of his female subjects. It is an unchanging smile, on

long, curved lips; it has become a mark of his style and the name

‘Leonardesque’ has been chosen for it.¹ In the strangely beautiful face

of the Florentine Mona Lisa del Giocondo it has produced the most

powerful and confusing effect on whoever looks at it. This smile has

called  for  an  interpretation,  and  it  has  met  with  many  of  the  most

varied  kinds,  none  of  which  has  been  satisfactory.  ‘Voilà  quatre

siècles  bientôt  que  Monna  Lisa  fait  perdre  la  tête  à  tous  ceux  qui

parlent d’elle, après l’avoir longtemps regardée.’²

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1919:] The connoisseur of art will think here of the peculiar fixed smile

found in archaic Greek sculptures - in those, for example, from Aegina; he will perhaps also
discover something similar in the figures of Leonardo’s teacher Verrocchio and therefore have
some misgivings in accepting the arguments that follow.

   ² [‘For almost four centuries now Mona Lisa has caused all who talk of her, after having

gazed on her for long, to lose their heads.’] The words are Gruyer’s, quoted by von Seidlitz
(1909, 2, 280).
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2282

 

   Muther (1909, 1, 314) writes: ‘What especially casts a spell on the

spectator is the daemonic magic of this smile. Hundreds of poets and

authors have written about this woman who now appears to smile on

us so seductively, and now to stare coldly and without soul into space;

and no one has solved the riddle of her smile, no one has read the

meaning  of  her  thoughts.  Everything,  even  the  landscape,  is

mysteriously dream-like, and seems to be trembling in a kind of sultry

sensuality.’

   The idea that two distinct elements are combined in Mona Lisa’s

smile is one that has struck several critics. They accordingly find in the

beautiful  Florentine’s  expression  the  most  perfect  representation  of

the contrasts which dominate the erotic life of women; the contrast

between  reserve  and  seduction,  and  between  the  most  devoted

tenderness and a sensuality that is ruthlessly demanding - consuming

men as if they were alien beings. This is the view of Müntz (1899,

417):  ‘On  sait  quelle  énigme  indéchiffrable  et  passionnante  MonnaLisa Gioconda ne cesse depuis bientôt quatre siècles de proposer aux

admirateurs pressés devant elle. Jamais artiste (j’emprunte la plume

du délicat écrivain qui se cache sous le pseudonyme de Pierre de

Corlay) "a-t-il traduit ainsi l’essence même de la fémininité: tendresse

et coquetterie, pudeur et sourde volupté, tout le mystère d’un coeur

qui se réserve, d’un cerveau qui réfléchit, d’une personnalité qui se

garde et ne livre d’elle-même que son rayonnement . . ."'¹ The Italian

writer Angelo Conti (1910, 93) saw the picture in the Louvre brought to

life by a ray of sunshine. ‘La donna sorrideva in una calma regale: i

suoi  istinti  di  conquista,  di  ferocia,  tutta  l’eredità  della  specie,  la

volontà della seduzione e dell’ agguato, la grazia del inganno, la bontà

che cela un proposito crudele, tutto ciò appariva alternativamente e

scompariva  dietro  il  velo  ridente  e  si  fondeva  nel  poema  del  suo

sorriso . . . Buona e malvagia, crudele e compassionevole, graziosa e

felina, ella rideva . . .’²

 

   ¹ [‘We know what an insoluble and enthralling enigma Mona Lisa Gioconda has never

ceased through nearly four centuries to pose to the admirers that throng in front of her. No
artist  (I  borrow  the  words  from  the  sensitive  writer  who  conceals  himself  behind  the
pseudonym of Pierre de Corlay) "has ever expressed so well the very essence of femininity:
tenderness and coquetry, modesty and secret sensuous joy, all the mystery of a heart that
holds aloof, a brain that meditates, a personality that holds back and yields nothing of itself
save its radiance".’]

   ² [‘The lady smiled in regal calm: her instincts of conquest, of ferocity, all the heredity of the

species, the will to seduce and to ensnare, the charm of deceit, the kindness that conceals a
cruel purpose, - all this appeared and disappeared by turns behind the laughing veil and
buried itself in the poem of her smile . . . Good and wicked, cruel and compassionate, graceful
and feline, she laughed . . .’]
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2283

 

   Leonardo spent four years painting at this picture, perhaps from

1503 to 1507, during his second period of residence in Florence, when

he was over fifty. According to Vasari he employed the most elaborate

artifices to keep the lady amused during the sittings and to retain the

famous smile on her features. In its present condition the picture has

preserved  but  little  of  all  the  delicate  details  which  his  brush

reproduced on the canvas at that time; while it was being painted itwas  considered  to  be  the  highest  that  art  could  achieve,  but  it  is

certain that Leonardo himself was not satisfied with it, declaring it to

be  incomplete,  and  did  not  deliver  it  to  the  person  who  had

commissioned  it,  but  took  it  to  France  with  him,  where  his  patron,

Francis I, acquired it from him for the Louvre.

   Let us leave unsolved the riddle of the expression on Mona Lisa’s

face, and note the indisputable fact that her smile exercised no less

powerful a fascination on the artist than on all who have looked at it for

the  last  four  hundred  years.  From  that  date  the  captivating  smile

reappears in all his pictures and in those of his pupils. As Leonardo’s

Mona Lisa is a portrait, we cannot assume that he added on his own

account such an expressive feature to her face - a feature that she did

not herself possess. The conclusion seems hardly to be avoided that

he found this smile in his model and fell so strongly under its spell that

from then on he bestowed it on the free creations of his phantasy. This

interpretation, which cannot be called far-fetched, is put forward, for

example, by Konstantinowa (1907, 44):

   ‘During the long period in which the artist was occupied with the

portrait of Mona Lisa del Giocondo, he had entered into the subtle

details of the features on this lady’s face with such sympathetic feeling

that he transferred its traits - in particular the mysterious smile and the

strange gaze - to all the faces that he painted or drew afterwards. The

Gioconda’s peculiar facial expression can even be perceived in the

picture  of  John  the  Baptist  in  the  Louvre;  but  above  all  it  may  be

clearly recognized in the expression on Mary’s face in the "Madonna

and Child with St. Anne".’

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2284

 

   Yet this situation may also have come about in another way. The

need  for  a  deeper  reason  behind  the  attraction  of  La  Gioconda’s

smile, which so moved the artist that he was never again free from it,

has been felt by more than one of his biographers. Walter Pater, who

sees in the picture of Mona Lisa a ‘presence . . . expressive of what in

the  ways  of  a  thousand  years  men  had  come  to  desire’,  and  whowrites very sensitively of ‘the unfathomable smile, always with a touch

of something sinister in it, which plays over all Leonardo’s work’, leads

us to another clue when he declares (loc. cit.):

   ‘Besides, the picture is a portrait. From childhood we see this image

defining  itself  on  the  fabric  of  his  dreams;  and  but  for  express

historical testimony, we might fancy that this was but his ideal lady,

embodied and beheld at last . . .’

   Marie Herzfeld (1906, 88) has no doubt something very similar in

mind when she declares that in the Mona Lisa Leonardo encountered

his own self and for this reason was able to put so much of his own

nature into the picture ‘whose features had lain all along in mysterious

sympathy within Leonardo’s mind’.

   Let us attempt to clarify what is suggested here. It may very well

have been that Leonardo was fascinated by Mona Lisa’s smile for the

reason that it awoke something in him which had for long lain dormant

in his mind - probably an old memory. This memory was of sufficient

importance  for  him  never  to  get  free  of  it  when  it  had  once  been

aroused; he was continually forced to give it new expression. Pater’s

confident assertion that we can see, from childhood, a face like Mona

Lisa’s defining itself on the fabric of his dreams, seems convincing and

deserves to be taken literally.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2285

 

      Vasari  mentions  that  ‘teste  di  femmine,  che  ridono’¹  formed  the

subject of Leonardo’s first artistic endeavours. The passage - which,

since it is not intended to prove anything, is quite beyond suspicion -

runs more fully according to Schorn’s translation (1843, 3, 6): ‘In his

youth  he  made  some  heads  of  laughing  women  out  of  clay,  which

were reproduced in plaster, and some children’s heads which were as

beautiful as if they had been modelled by the hand of a master . . .’

   Thus we learn that he began his artistic career by portraying two

kinds of objects; and these cannot fail to remind us of the two kinds of

sexual objects that we have inferred from the analysis of his vulture-

phantasy. If the beautiful children’s heads were reproductions of hisown person as it was in his childhood, then the smiling women are

nothing other than repetitions of his mother Caterina, and we begin to

suspect  the  possibility  that  it  was  his  mother  who  possessed  the

mysterious smile - the smile that he had lost and that fascinated him

so much when he found it again in the Florentine lady.²

   The painting of Leonardo’s which stands nearest to the Mona Lisa in

point of time is the so-called ‘St. Anne with Two Others’, St. Anne with

the  Madonna  and  child.  In  it  the  Leonardesque  smile  is  most

beautifully and markedly portrayed on both the women’s faces. It is

not possible to discover how long before or after the painting of the

Mona  Lisa  Leonardo  began  to  paint  this  picture.  As  both  works

extended over years, it may, I think, be assumed that the artist was

engaged  on  them  at  the  same  time.  It  would  best  agree  with  our

expectation if it was the intensity of Leonardo’s preoccupation with the

features of Mona Lisa which stimulated him to create the composition

of St. Anne out of his phantasy. For if the Gioconda’s smile called up

in his mind the memory of his mother, it is easy to understand how it

drove him at once to create a glorification of motherhood, and to give

back to his mother the smile he had found in the noble lady. We may

therefore permit our interest to pass from Mona Lisa’s portrait to this

other picture - one which is hardly less beautiful, and which to-day

also hangs in the Louvre.

 

   ¹ [’Heads of laughing women.’] Quoted by Scognamiglio (1900, 32).

   ² The same assumption is made by Merezhkovsky. But the history of Leonardo’s childhood

as he imagines it departs at the essential points from the conclusions we have drawn from the
phantasy of the vulture. Yet if the smile had been that of Leonardo himself tradition would
hardly have failed to inform us of the coincidence.
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2286

 

   St. Anne with her daughter and her grandchild is a subject that is

rarely handled in Italian painting. At all events Leonardo’s treatment of

it differs widely from all other known versions. Muther (1909, 1, 309)

writes:

   ‘Some artists, like Hans Fries, the elder Holbein and Girolamo daiLibri, made Anne sit beside Mary and put the child between them.

Others, like Jakob Cornelisz in his Berlin picture, painted what was

truly a "St. Anne with Two Others"; in other words, they represented

her as holding in her arms the small figure of Mary upon which the still

smaller figure of the child Christ is sitting.’ In Leonardo’s picture Mary

is sitting on her mother’s lap, leaning forward, and is stretching out

both arms towards the boy, who is playing with a young lamb and

perhaps treating it a little unkindly. The grandmother rests on her hip

the  arm  that  is  not  concealed  and  gazes  down  on  the  pair  with  a

blissful smile. The grouping is certainly not entirely unconstrained. But

although  the  smile  that  plays  on  the  lips  of  the  two  women  is

unmistakably the same as that in the picture of Mona Lisa, it has lost

its  uncanny  and  mysterious  character;  what  it  expresses  is  inward

feeling and quiet blissfulness.¹

   After we have studied this picture for some time, it suddenly dawns

on us that only Leonardo could have painted it, just as only he could

have  created  the  phantasy  of  the  vulture.  The  picture  contains  the

synthesis of the history of his childhood: its details are to be explained

by reference to the most personal impressions in Leonardo’s life. In

his  father’s  house  he  found  not  only  his  kind  stepmother,  Donna

Albiera, but also his grandmother, his father’s mother, Monna Lucia,

who  -  so  we  will  assume  -  was  no  less  tender  to  him  than

grandmothers usually are. These circumstances might well suggest to

him  a  picture  representing  childhood  watched  over  by  mother  and

grandmother.  Another  striking  feature  of  the  picture  assumes  even

greater  significance.  St.  Anne,  Mary’s  mother  and  the  boy’s

grandmother,  who  must  have  been  a  matron,  is  here  portrayed  as

being perhaps a little more mature and serious than the Virgin Mary,

but as still being a young woman of unfaded beauty. In point of fact

Leonardo has given the boy two mothers, one who stretches her arms

out to him, and another in the background; and both are endowed with

the  blissful  smile  of  the  joy  of  motherhood.  This  peculiarity  of  the

picture  has  not  failed  to  surprise  those  who  have  written  about  it;

Muther, for example, is of the opinion that Leonardo could not bring

himself to paint old age, lines and wrinkles, and for this reason made

Anne too into a woman of radiant beauty. But can we be satisfied with

this explanation? Others have had recourse to denying that there isany similarity in age between the mother and daughter.² But Muther’s

attempt  at  an  explanation  is  surely  enough  to  prove  that  the

impression that St. Anne has been made more youthful derives from

the picture and is not an invention for an ulterior purpose.

 

   ¹ Konstantinowa (1907): ‘Mary gazes down full of inward feeling on her darling, with a smile

that recalls the mysterious expression of La Gioconda.’ In another passage she says of Mary:
‘The Gioconda’s smile hovers on her features.’

   ² Von Seidlitz (1909, 2, 274, notes).

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2287

 

   Leonardo’s childhood was remarkable in precisely the same way as

this picture. He had had two mothers: first, his true mother Caterina,

from whom he was torn away when he was between three and five,

and  then  a  young  and  tender  stepmother,  his  father’s  wife,  Donna

Albiera. By his combining this fact about his childhood with the one

mentioned above (the presence of his mother and grandmother) and

by his condensing them into a composite unity, the design of ‘St. Anne

with  Two  Others’  took  shape  for  him.  The  maternal  figure  that  is

further  away  from  the  boy  -  the  grandmother  -  corresponds  to  the

earlier and true mother, Caterina, in its appearance and in its special

relation to the boy. The artist seems to have used the blissful smile of

St.  Anne  to  disavow  and  to  cloak  the  envy  which  the  unfortunate

woman felt when she was forced to give up her son to her better-born

rival, as she had once given up his father as well.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1919:] If an attempt is made to separate the figures of Anne and Mary in

this picture and to trace the outline of each, it will not be found altogether easy. One is inclined
to say that they are fused with each other like badly condensed dream-figures, so that in
some places it is hard to say where Anne ends and where Mary begins. But what appears to a
critic’s eye as a fault, as a defect in composition, is vindicated in the eyes of analysis by
reference to its secret meaning. It seems that for the artist the two mothers of his childhood
were melted into a single form.
   [Added 1923:] It is especially tempting to compare the ‘St. Anne with Two Others’ of the
Louvre  with  the  celebrated  London  cartoon,  where  the  same  material  is  used  to  form  a
different composition. Here the forms of the two mothers are fused even more closely and
their separate outlines are even harder to make out, so that critics, far removed from any
attempt to offer an interpretation, have been forced to say that it seems ‘as if two heads weregrowing from a single body’.
 
















 
                                          Fig. 2.
 
   Most authorities are in agreement in pronouncing the London cartoon to be the earlier work
and in assigning its origin to Leonardo’s first period in Milan (before 1500). Adolf Rosenberg
(1898),  on  the  other  hand,  sees  the  composition  of  the  cartoon  as  a  later  -  and  more
successful - version of the same theme, and follows Anton Springer in dating it even after the
Mona Lisa. It would fit in excellently with our arguments if the cartoon were to be much the
earlier work. It is also not hard to imagine how the picture in the Louvre arose out of the
cartoon, while the reverse course of events would make to sense. If we take the composition
shown in the cartoon as our starting point, we can see how Leonardo may have felt the need
to undo the dream-like fusion of the two women - a fusion corresponding to his childhood
memory - and to separate the two heads in space. This came about as follows: From the
group formed by the mothers he detached Mary’s head and the upper part of her body and
bent them downwards. To provide a reason for this displacement the child Christ had to come
down from her lap on to the ground. There was then no room for the little St. John, who was
replaced by the lamb.
   [Added 1919:] A remarkable discovery has been made in the Louvre picture by Oskar
Pfister, which is of undeniable interest, even if one may not feel inclined to accept it without
reserve. In Mary’s curiously arranged and rather confusing drapery he has discovered the
outline of a vulture and he interprets it as an unconscious picture-puzzle:-
   ‘In the picture that represents the artist’s mother the vulture, the symbol of motherhood, is
perfectly clearly visible.
   ‘In the length of blue cloth, which is visible around the hip of the woman in front and which
extends in the direction of her lap and her right knee, one can see the vulture’s extremely
characteristic head, its neck and the sharp curve where its body begins. Hardly any observer
whom I have confronted with my little find has been able to resist the evidence of this picture-
puzzle.’ (Pfister, 1913, 147.)
   At this point the reader will not, I feel sure, grudge the effort of looking at the accompanying
illustration, to see if he can find in it the outlines of the vulture seen by Pfister. The piece of
blue cloth, whose border marks the edges of the picture-puzzle, stands out in the reproductionas a light grey field against the darker ground of the rest of the drapery.
 

















 
                                          Fig. 3.
 
   Pfister continues: ‘The important question however is: How far does the picture-puzzle
extend? If we follow the length of cloth, which stands out so sharply from its surroundings,
starting at the middle of the wing and continuing from there, we notice that one part of it runs
down to the woman’s foot, while the other part extends in an upward direction and rests on
her shoulder and on the child. The former of these parts might more or less represent the
vulture’s wing and tail, as it is in nature; the latter might be a pointed belly and - especially
when we notice the radiating lines which resemble the outlines of feathers - a bird’s outspread
tail, whose right-hand end, exactly as in Leonardo’s fateful childhood dream [sic], leads to the
mouth of the child, i.e. of Leonardo himself.’
      The  author  goes  on  to  examine  the  interpretation  in  greater  detail,  and  discusses  the
difficulties to which it gives rise.
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2288

 

   We thus find a confirmation in another of Leonardo’s works of our

suspicion that the smile of Mona Lisa del Giocondo had awakened in

him  as  a  grown  man  the  memory  of  the  mother  of  his  earliest

childhood. From that time onward, madonnas and aristocratic ladies

were  depicted  in  Italian  painting  humbly  bowing  their  heads  and

smiling the strange, blissful smile of Caterina, the poor peasant girl

who had brought into the world the splendid son who was destined to

paint, to search and to suffer.   If Leonardo was successful in reproducing on Mona Lisa’s face the

double meaning which this smile contained, the promise of unbounded

tenderness and at the same time sinister menace (to quote Pater’s

phrase),  then  here  too  he  had  remained  true  to  the  content  of  his

earliest memory. For his mother’s tenderness was fateful for him; it

determined his destiny and the privations that were in store for him.

The  violence  of  the  caresses,  to  which  his  phantasy  of  the  vulture

points, was only too natural. In her love for her child the poor forsaken

mother had to give vent to all her memories of the caresses she had

enjoyed as well as her longing for new ones; and she was forced to do

so not only to compensate herself for having no husband, but also to

compensate her child for having no father to fondle him. So, like all

unsatisfied mothers, she took her little son in place of her husband,

and by the too early maturing of his erotism robbed him of a part of his

masculinity. A mother’s love for the infant she suckles and cares for is

something far more profound than her later affection for the growing

child. It is in the nature of a completely satisfying love-relation, which

not only fulfils every mental wish but also every physical need; and if it

represents one of the forms of attainable human happiness, that is in

no little measure due to the possibility it offers of satisfying, without

reproach,  wishful  impulses  which  have  long  been  repressed  and

which must be called perverse.¹ In the happiest young marriage the

father  is  aware  that  the  baby,  especially  if  he  is  a  baby  son,  has

become  his  rival,  and  this  is  the  starting-point  of  an  antagonism

towards the favourite which is deeply rooted in the unconscious.

 

   ¹ See my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d).

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2289

 

   When, in the prime of life, Leonardo once more encountered the

smile of bliss and rapture which had once played on his mother’s lips

as she fondled him, he had for long been under the dominance of an

inhibition which forbade him ever again to desire such caresses from

the lips of women. But he had become a painter, and therefore he

strove to reproduce the smile with his brush, giving it to all his pictures(whether he in fact executed them himself or had them done by his

pupils  under  his  direction)  -  to  Leda,  to  John  the  Baptist  and  to

Bacchus. The last two are variants of the same type. ‘Leonardo has

turned the locust-eater of the Bible’, says Muther, ‘into a Bacchus, a

young Apollo, who, with a mysterious smile on his lips, and with his

smooth  legs  crossed,  gazes  at  us  with  eyes  that  intoxicate  the

senses.’ These pictures breathe a mystical air into whose secret one

dares not penetrate; at the very most one can attempt to establish

their connection with Leonardo’s earlier creations. The figures are still

androgynous, but no longer in the sense of the vulture-phantasy. They

are beautiful youths of feminine delicacy and with effeminate forms;

they do not cast their eyes down, but gaze in mysterious triumph, as if

they knew of a great achievement of happiness, about which silence

must be kept. The familiar smile of fascination leads one to guess that

it is a secret of love. It is possible that in these figures Leonardo has

denied the unhappiness of his erotic life and has triumphed over it in

his  art,  by  representing  the  wishes  of  the  boy,  infatuated  with  his

mother,  as  fulfilled  in  this  blissful  union  of  the  male  and  female

natures.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2290

 

                                            V

 

Among  the  entries  in  Leonardo’s  notebooks  there  is  one  which

catches  the  reader’s  attention  owing  to  the  importance  of  what  it

contains and to a minute formal error.

   In July 1504 he writes:

   ‘Adì 9 di Luglio 1504 mercoledi a ore 7 morì Ser Piero da Vinci,

notalio al palazzo del Potestà, mio padre, a ore 7. Era d’età d’anni 80,

lasciò 10 figlioli maschi e 2 femmine.’¹

   As we see, the note refers to the death of Leonardo’s father. The

small error in its form consists of the repetition of the time of day ‘a ore

7' [at 7 o’clock], which is given twice, as if Leonardo had forgotten at

the end of the sentence that he had already written it at the beginning.It is only a small detail, and anyone who was not a psycho-analyst

would attach no importance to it. He might not even notice it, and if his

attention  was  drawn  to  it  he  might  say  that  a  thing  like,  that  can

happen to anyone in a moment of distraction or of strong feeling, and

that it has no further significance.

   The psycho-analyst thinks differently. To him nothing is too small to

be a manifestation of hidden mental processes. He his learnt long ago

that such cases of forgetting or repetition are significant, and that it is

the ‘distraction’ which allows impulses that are otherwise hidden to be

revealed.

   We would say that this note, like the account for Caterina’s funeral

and the bills of the pupils’ expenses, is a case in which Leonardo was

unsuccessful in suppressing his affect and in which something that

had  long  been  concealed  forcibly  obtained  a  distorted  expression.

Even the form is similar: there is the same pedantic exactness, and

the same prominence given to numbers.²

 

   ¹ [’On July 9, 1504, Wednesday at 7 o’clock died Ser Piero da Vinci, notary at the palace of

the Podestà, my father, at 7 o’clock. He was 80 years old, and left 10 sons and 2 daughters.’]
After Müntz (1899, 13 n.).

   ² I am leaving on one side a greater error made by Leonardo in this note by giving his

father’s age as 80 instead of 77.
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2291

 

   We call a repetition of this kind a perseveration. It is an excellent

means  of  indicating  affective  colour.  One  recalls,  for  example,  St.

Peter’s tirade in Dante’s Paradiso against his unworthy representative

on earth:

 

                                                Quegli ch’usurpa in terra il luogo mio,
                                                Il luogo mio, il luogo mio, che vaca
                                                Nella presenza del Figliuol di Dio,
 

                                                Fatto ha del cimiterio mio cloaca.¹

 

   Without Leonardo’s affective inhibition the entry in his diary mighthave run somewhat as follows: ‘To-day at 7 o’clock my father died -

Ser  Piero  da  Vinci,  my  poor  father!’  But  the  displacement  of  the

perseveration  on  to  the  most  indifferent  detail  in  the  report  of  his

death, the hour at which he died, robs the entry of all emotion, and

further  lets  us  see  that  here  was  something  to  be  concealed  and

suppressed.

   Ser Piero da Vinci, notary and descendant of notaries, was a man of

great energy who reached a position of esteem and prosperity. He

was married four times. His first two wives died childless, and it was

only his third wife who presented him with his first legitimate son, in

1476, by which time Leonardo had reached the age of 24 and had

long  ago  exchanged  his  father’s  home  for  the  studio  of  his  master

Verrocchio. By his fourth and last wife, whom he married when he was

already in his fifties, he had nine more sons and two daughters.²

   It cannot be doubted that his father too came to play an important

part in Leonardo’s psychosexual development, and not only negatively

by his absence during the boy’s first childhood years, but also directly

by his presence in the later part of Leonardo’s childhood. No one who

as a child desires his mother can escape wanting to put himself in his

father’s place, can fail to identify himself with him in his imagination,

and later to make it his task in life to gain ascendancy over him. When

Leonardo  was  received  into  his  grandfather’s  house  before  he  had

reached the age of five, his young step-mother Albiera must certainly

have taken his mother’s place where his feelings were concerned, and

he  must  have  found  himself  in  what  may  be  called  the  normal

relationship of rivalry with his father. As we know, a decision in favour

of homosexuality only takes place round about the years of puberty.

When  this  decision  had  been  arrived  at  in  Leonardo’s  case,  his

identification with his father lost all significance for his sexual life, but it

nevertheless  continued  in  other  spheres  of  non-erotic  activity.  We

hear  that  he  was  fond  of  magnificence  and  fine  clothes,  and  kept

servants  and  horses,  although,  in  Vasari’s  words,  ‘he  possessed

almost nothing and did little work’. The responsibility for these tastes is

not to be attributed solely to his feeling for beauty: we recognize in

them at the same time a compulsion to copy and to outdo his father.

His father had been a great gentleman to the poor peasant girl, and

the  son,  therefore,  never  ceased  to  feel  the  spur  to  play  the  greatgentleman as well, the urge ‘to out-herod Herod’,³ to show his father

what a great gentleman really looks like.

 

   ¹ [‘He who usurps on earth my place, my place, my place, which in the presence of the Son

of God is vacant, has made a sewer of the ground where I am buried.’] Canto XXVII, 22-25.

   ² Leonardo has apparently made a further mistake in this passage in his diary over the

number of his brothers and sisters - a remarkable contrast to the apparent exactness of the
passage.

   ³ [The last three words are in English in the original.]

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2292

 

   There is no doubt that the creative artist feels towards his works like

a father. The effect which Leonardo’s identification with his father had

on his paintings was a fateful one. He created them and then cared no

more  about  them,  just  as  his  father  had  not  cared  about  him.  His

father’s later concern could change nothing in this compulsion; for the

compulsion  derived  from  the  impressions  of  the  first  years  of

childhood,  and  what  has  been  repressed  and  has  remained

unconscious cannot be corrected by later experiences.

   In the days of the Renaissance -(and even much later - every artist

stood in need of a gentleman of rank, a benefactor and patron, who

gave  him  commissions  and  in  whose  hands  his  fortune  rested.

Leonardo found his patron in Lodovico Sforza, called Il Moro, a man of

ambition and a lover of splendour, astute in diplomacy, but of erratic

and unreliable character. At his court in Milan Leonardo passed the

most brilliant period of his life, and in his service his creative power

attained its most uninhibited expansion, to which the Last Supper and

the equestrian statue of Francesco Sforza bore witness. He left Milan

before catastrophe overtook Lodovico Sforza, who died a prisoner in a

French  dungeon.  When  the  news  of  his  patron’s  fate  reached

Leonardo, he wrote in his diary: ‘The duke lost his dukedom and his

property and his liberty, and none of the works that he undertook was

completed.’¹ It is remarkable, and certainly not without significance,

that he here cast the same reproach at his patron which posterity was

to bring against himself. It is as if he wanted to make someone fromthe class of his fathers responsible for the fact that he himself left his

works unfinished. In point of fact he was not wrong in what he said

about the duke.

 

   ¹ ‘II duca perse to stato e la roba e libertà e nessuna sua opera si finì per lui.’ Quoted by

Von Seidlitz (1909, 2, 270).
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2293

 

   But if his imitation of his father did him damage as an artist, his

rebellion against his father was the infantile determinant of what was

perhaps  an  equally  sublime  achievement  in  the  field  of  scientific

research. In Merezhkovsky’s admirable simile (1903, 348), he was like

a man who had awoken too early in the darkness, while everyone else

was still asleep. He dared to utter the bold assertion which contains

within  itself  the  justification  for  all  independent  research:  ‘He  who

appeals to authority when there is a difference of opinion works with

his memory rather than with his reason.’¹ Thus he became the first

modern  natural  scientist,  and  an  abundance  of  discoveries  and

suggestive ideas rewarded his courage for being the first man since

the time of the Greeks to probe the secrets of nature while relying

solely  on  observation  and  his  own  judgement.  But  in  teaching  that

authority should be looked down on and that imitation of the ‘ancients’

should be repudiated, and in constantly urging that the study of nature

was the source of all truth, he was merely repeating - in the highest

sublimation attainable by man - the one-sided point of view which had

already forced itself on the little boy as he gazed in wonder on the

world. If we translate scientific abstraction back again into concrete

individual experience, we see that the ‘ancients’ and authority simply

correspond to his father, and nature once more becomes the tender

and  kindly  mother  who  had  nourished  him.  In  most  other  human

beings - no less to-day than in primaeval times - the need for support

from an authority of some sort is so compelling that their world begins

to totter if that authority is threatened. Only Leonardo could dispense

with that support; he would not have been able to do so had he not

learnt in the first years of his life to do without his father. His laterscientific  research,  with  all  its  boldness  and  independence,

presupposed the existence of infantile sexual researches uninhibited

by his father, and was a prolongation of them with the sexual element

excluded.

 

   ¹ ‘Chi disputa allegando l’autorità non adopra l’ingegno ma piuttosto la memoria.’ Quoted by

Solmi (1910, 13).
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2294

 

   When anyone has, like Leonardo, escaped being intimidated by his

father during his earliest childhood, and has in his researches cast

away the fetters of authority, it would be in the sharpest contradiction

to our expectation if we found that he had remained a believer and

had been unable to escape from dogmatic religion. Psycho-analysis

has made us familiar with the intimate connection between the father-

complex and belief in God; it has shown us that a personal God is,

psychologically, nothing other than an exalted father, and it brings us

evidence every day of how young people lose their religious beliefs as

soon as their father’s authority breaks down. Thus we recognize that

the  roots  of  the  need  for  religion  are  in  the  parental  complex;  the

almighty  and  just  God,  and  kindly  Nature,  appear  to  us  as  grand

sublimations  of  father  and  mother,  or  rather,  as  revivals  and

restorations of the young child’s ideas of them. Biologically speaking,

religiousness is to be traced to the small human child’s long-drawn-out

helplessness and need of help; and when at a later date he perceives

how truly forlorn and weak he is when confronted with the great forces

of life, he feels his condition as he did in childhood, and attempts to

deny his own despondency by a regressive revival of the forces which

protected his infancy. The protection against neurotic illness, which

religion vouchsafes to those who believe in it, is easily explained: it

removes  their  parental  complex,  on  which  the  sense  of  guilt  in

individuals as well as in the whole human race depends, and disposes

of it, while the unbeliever has to grapple with the problem on his own.

               Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2295

 

   It does not seem as if the instance of Leonardo could show this view

of  religious  belief  to  be  mistaken.  Accusations  charging  him  with

unbelief or (what at that time came to the same thing) with apostasy

from Christianity were brought against him while he was still alive, and

are clearly described in the first biography which Vasari wrote of him,

(Müntz, 1899, 292 ff.) In the second (1568) edition of his Vite Vasari

omitted these observations. In view of the extraordinary sensitiveness

of  his  age  where  religious  matters  were  in  question,  we  can

understand  perfectly  why  even  in  his  notebooks  Leonardo  should

have refrained from directly stating his attitude to Christianity. In his

researches he did not allow himself to be led astray in the slightest

degree by the account of the Creation in Holy Writ; he challenged, for

example,  the  possibility  of  a  universal  Deluge,  and  in  geology  he

calculated in terms of hundreds of thousands of years with no more

hesitation than men in modern times.

   Among his ‘prophecies’ there are some things that would have been

bound to offend the sensitive feelings of a Christian believer. Take for

example, ‘On the practice of praying to the images of saints’:

   ‘Men will speak to men that perceive nothing, that have their eyes

open and see nothing; they will talk to them and receive no answer;

they will implore the grace of those that have ears and hear not; they

will kindle lights for one that is blind.’ (After Herzfeld, 1906, 292.)

   Or ‘On the mourning on Good Friday’:

   ‘In every part of Europe great people will weep for the death of a

single man who died in the East.’ (Ibid., 297.)

   The view has been expressed about Leonardo’s art that he took

from the sacred figures the last remnant of their connection with the

Church and made them human, so as to represent by their means

great  and  beautiful  human  emotions.  Muther  praises  him  for

overcoming  the  prevailing  mood  of  decadence  and  for  restoring  to

man his right to sensuality and the joy of living. In the notes that show

Leonardo engrossed in fathoming the great riddles of nature there is

no  lack  of  passages  where  he  expresses  his  admiration  for  the

Creator,  the  ultimate  cause  of  all  these  noble  secrets;  but  there  isnothing  which  indicates  that  he  wished  to  maintain  any  personal

relation  with  this  divine  power.  The  reflections  in  which  he  has

recorded  the  deep  wisdom  of  his  last  years  of  life  breathe  the

resignation of the human being who subjects himself to ‘’Ανάγχη', to the

laws of nature, and who expects no alleviation from the goodness or

grace  of  God.  There  is  scarcely  any  doubt  that  Leonardo  had

prevailed over both dogmatic and personal religion, and had by his

work of research removed himself far from the position from which the

Christian believer surveys the world.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2296

 

   The findings, mentioned above, which we have reached concerning

the development of the mental life of children suggest the view that in

Leonardo’s case too the first researches of childhood were concerned

with the problems of sexuality. Indeed he himself gives this away in a

transparent  disguise  by  connecting  his  urge  for  research  with  the

vulture phantasy, and by singling out the problem of the flight of birds

as one to which, as the result of a special chain of circumstances, he

was destined to turn his attention. A highly obscure passage in his

notes which is concerned with the flight of birds, and which sounds

like a prophecy, gives a very good demonstration of the degree of

affective  interest  with  which  he  clung  to  his  wish  to  succeed  in

imitating the art of flying himself: ‘The great bird will take its first flight

from  the  back  of  its  Great  Swan;  it  will  fill  the  universe  with

stupefaction, and all writings with renown, and be the eternal glory of

the nest where it was born.’¹ He probably hoped that he himself would

be able to fly one day, and we know from wish-fulfilling dreams what

bliss is expected from the fulfilment of that hope.

   But why do so many people dream of being able to fly? The answer

that  psycho-analysis  gives  is  that  to  fly  or  to  be  a  bird  is  only  a

disguise for another wish, and that more than one bridge, involving

words or things, leads us to recognize what it is. When we consider

that inquisitive children are told that babies are brought by a large bird,

such  as  the  stork;  when  we  find  that  the  ancients  represented  thephallus as having wings; that the commonest expression in German

for male sexual activity is ‘vögeln’ [‘to bird’: ‘Vogel’ is the German for

‘bird’]; that the male organ is actually called ‘l’uccello’ [‘the bird’] in

Italian - all of these are only small fragments from a whole mass of

connected ideas, from which we learn that in dreams the wish to be

able to fly is to be understood as nothing else than a longing to be

capable of sexual performance.² This is an early infantile wish. When

an adult recalls his childhood it seems to him to have been a happy

time,  in  which  one  enjoyed  the  moment  and  looked  to  the  future

without any wishes; it is for this reason that he envies children. But if

children  themselves  were  able  to  give  us  information  earlier  they

would probably tell a different story. It seems that childhood is not the

blissful  idyll  into  which  we  distort  it  in  retrospect,  and  that,  on  the

contrary, children are goaded on through the years of childhood by the

one wish to get big and do what grown-ups do. This wish is the motive

of all their games. Whenever children feel in the course of their sexual

researches  that  in  the  province  which  is  so  mysterious  but

nevertheless  so  important  there  is  something  wonderful  of  which

adults are capable but which they are forbidden to know of and do,

they are filled with a violent wish to be able to do it, and they dream of

it in the form of flying, or they prepare this disguise of their wish to be

used in their later flying dreams. Thus aviation, too, which in our day is

at last achieving its aim, has its infantile erotic roots.

 

   ¹ After Herzfeld (1906, 32). ‘The Great Swan’ seems to mean Monte Cecero, a hill near

Florence.

   ² [Footnote added 1919:] This statement is based on the researches of Paul Federn and of

Mourly Vold (1912), a Norwegian man of science who had no contact with psycho-analysis.
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2297

 

   In admitting to us that ever since his childhood he felt bound up in a

special and personal way with the problem of flight, Leonardo gives us

confirmation  that  his  childhood  researches  were  directed  to  sexual

matters; and this is what we were bound to expect as a result of our

investigations on children in our own time. Here was one problem atleast which had escaped the repression that later estranged him from

sexuality. With slight changes in meaning, the same subject continued

to interest him from his years of childhood until the time of his most

complete intellectual maturity; and it may very well be that the skill that

he desired was no more attainable by him in its primary sexual sense

than in its mechanical one, and that he remained frustrated in both

wishes.

   Indeed, the great Leonardo remained like a child for the whole of his

life in more than one way; it is said that all great men are bound to

retain some infantile part. Even as an adult he continued to play, and

this  was  another  reason  why  he  often  appeared  uncanny  and

incomprehensible  to  his  contemporaries.  It  is  only  we  who  are

unsatisfied  that  he  should  have  constructed  the  most  elaborate

mechanical toys for court festivities and ceremonial receptions, for we

are  reluctant  to  see  the  artist  turning  his  power  to  such  trifles.  He

himself seems to have shown no unwillingness to spend his time thus,

for Vasari tells us that he made similar things when he had not been

commissioned to do so: ‘There (in Rome) he got a soft lump of wax,

and made very delicate animals out of it, filled with air; when he blew

into them they flew around, and when the air ran out they fell to the

ground. For a peculiar lizard which was found by the wine-grower of

Belvedere he made wings from skin torn from other lizards, and filled

them  with  quicksilver,  so  that  they  moved  and  quivered  when  it

walked. Next he made eyes, a beard and horns for it, tamed it and put

it in a box and terrified all his friends with it.’¹ Such ingenuities often

served to express thoughts of a serious kind. ‘He often had a sheep’s

intestines cleaned so carefully that they could have been held in the

hollow of the hand. He carried them into a large room, took a pair of

blacksmith’s bellows into an adjoining room, fastened the intestines to

them and blew them up, until they took up the whole room and forced

people to take refuge in a corner. In this way he showed how they

gradually became transparent and filled with air; and from the fact that

at  first  they  were  limited  to  a  small  space  and  gradually  spread

through the whole breadth of the room, he compared them to genius.’²

The same playful delight in harmlessly concealing things and giving

them ingenious disguises is illustrated by his fables and riddles. The

latter are cast into the form of ‘prophecies’: almost all are rich in ideasand to a striking degree devoid of any element of wit.

 

   ¹ Vasari, from Schorn’s translation (1843, 39).

   ² Ibid., 39.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2298

 

   The games and pranks which Leonardo allowed his imagination

have in some cases led his biographers, who misunderstood this side

of  his  character,  grievously  astray.  In  Leonardo’s  Milanese

manuscripts  there  are,  for  example,  some  drafts  of  letters  to  the

‘Diodario of Sorio (Syria), Viceroy of the Holy Sultan of Babylonia’, in

which Leonardo presents himself as an engineer sent to those regions

of  the  East  to  construct  certain  works;  defends  himself  against  the

charge of laziness; supplies geographical descriptions of towns and

mountains,  and  concludes  with  an  account  of  a  great  natural

phenomenon that occurred while he was there.¹

   In 1883 an attempt was made by J. P. Richter to prove from these

documents  that  it  was  really  a  fact  that  Leonardo  had  made  these

observations while travelling in the service of the Sultan of Egypt, and

had even adopted the Mohammedan religion when in the East. On

this view his visit there took place in the period before 1483 - that is,

before he took up residence at the court of the Duke of Milan. But the

acumen  of  other  authors  has  had  no  difficulty  in  recognizing  the

evidences of Leonardo’s supposed Eastern journey for what they are -

imaginary productions of the youthful artist, which he created for his

own amusement and in which he may have found expression for a

wish to see the world and meet with adventures.

   Another probable example of a creation of his imagination is to be

found in the ‘Academia Vinciana’ which has been postulated from the

existence  of  five  or  six  emblems,  intertwined  patterns  of  extreme

intricacy, which contain the Academy’s name. Vasari mentions these

designs  but  not  the  Academy.²  Müntz,  who  put  one  of  these

ornaments on the cover of his large work on Leonardo, is among the

few who believe in the reality of an ‘Academia Vinciana’.

   It is probable that Leonardo’s play-instinct vanished in his matureryears, and that it too found its way into the activity of research which

represented the latest and highest expansion of his personality. But its

long duration can teach us how slowly anyone tears himself from his

childhood if in his childhood days he has enjoyed the highest erotic

bliss, which is never again attained.

 

   ¹ For these letters and the various questions connected with them see Müntz (1899, 82 ff.);

the actual texts and other related notes will be found in Herzfeld (1906, 223 ff.).

   ² ‘Besides, he lost some time by even making a drawing of knots of cords, in which it was

possible to trace the thread from one end to the other until it formed a completely circular
figure. A very complex and beautiful design of this sort is engraved on copper; in the middle
can be read the words "Leonardus Vinci Academia".’ Schorn (1843, 8).
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2299

 

                                            VI

 

It would be futile to blind ourselves to the fact that readers to-day find

all  pathography  unpalatable.  They  clothe  their  aversion  in  the

complaint that a pathographical review of a great man never results in

an understanding of his importance and his achievements, and that it

is therefore a piece of useless impertinence to make a study of things

in him that could just as easily be found in the first person one came

across.  But  this  criticism  is  so  manifestly  unjust  that  it  is  only

understandable when taken as a pretext and a disguise.(Pathography

does not in the least aim at making the great man’s achievements

intelligible; and surely no one should be blamed for not carrying out

something  he  has  never  promised  to  do.  The  real  motives  for  the

opposition are different. We can discover them if we bear in mind that

biographers are fixated on their heroes in a quite special way. In many

cases  they  have  chosen  their  hero  as  the  subject  of  their  studies

because - for reasons of their personal emotional life - they have felt a

special affection for him from the very first. They then devote their

energies to a task of idealization, aimed at enrolling the great man

among the class of their infantile models - at reviving in him, perhaps,

the child’s idea of his father. To gratify this wish they obliterate the

individual features of their subject’s physiognomy; they smooth overthe traces of his life’s struggles with internal and external resistances,

and  they  tolerate  in  him  no  vestige  of  human  weakness  or

imperfection. They thus present us with what is in fact a cold, strange,

ideal  figure,  instead  of  a  human  being  to  whom  we  might  feel

ourselves distantly related. That they should do this is regrettable, for

they  thereby  sacrifice  truth  to  an  illusion,  and  for  the  sake  of  their

infantile phantasies abandon the opportunity of penetrating the most

fascinating secrets of human nature.¹

   Leonardo himself, with his love of truth and his thirst for knowledge,

would not have discouraged an attempt to take the trivial peculiarities

and  riddles  in  his  nature  as  a  starting-point,  for  discovering  what

determined his mental and intellectual development. We do homage

to him by learning from him. It does not detract from his greatness if

we  make  a  study  of  the  sacrifices  which  his  development  from

childhood  must  have  entailed,  and  if  we  bring  together  the  factors

which have stamped him with the tragic mark of failure.

 

   ¹ This criticism applies quite generally and is not to be taken as being aimed at Leonardo’s

biographers in particular.
 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2300

 

   We must expressly insist that we have never reckoned Leonardo as

a neurotic or a ‘nerve case’, as the awkward phrase goes. Anyone

who protests at our so much as daring to examine him in the light of

discoveries gained in the field of pathology is still clinging to prejudices

which  we  have  to-day  rightly  abandoned.  We  no  longer  think  that

health  and  illness,  normal  and  neurotic  people,  are  to  be  sharply

distinguished  from  each  other,  and  that  neurotic  traits  must

necessarily  be  taken  as  proofs  of  a  general  inferiority.  To-day  we

know that neurotic symptoms are structures which are substitutes for

certain achievements of repression that we have to carry out in the

course of our development from a child to a civilized human being. We

know too that we all produce such substitutive structures, and that it is

only their number, intensity and distribution which justify us in using

the  practical  concept  of  illness  and  in  inferring  the  presence  ofconstitutional  inferiority.  From  the  slight  indications  we  have  about

Leonardo’s personality we should be inclined to place him close to the

type  of  neurotic  that  we  describe  as  ‘obsessional’;  and  we  may

compare his researches to the ‘obsessive brooding’ of neurotics, and

his inhibitions to what are known as their ‘abulias’.

      The  aim  of  our  work  has  been  to  explain  the  inhibitions  in

Leonardo’s sexual life and in his artistic activity. With this in view we

may be allowed to summarize what we have been able to discover

about the course of his psychical development.

   We have no information about the circumstances of his heredity; on

the  other  hand  we  have  seen  that  the  accidental  conditions  of  his

childhood had a profound and disturbing effect on him. His illegitimate

birth deprived him of his father’s influence until perhaps his fifth year,

and left him open to the tender seductions of a mother whose only

solace  he  was.  After  being  kissed  by  her  into  precocious  sexual

maturity, he must no doubt have embarked on a phase of infantile

sexual  activity  of  which  only  one  single  manifestation  is  definitely

attested - the intensity of his infantile sexual researches. The instinct

to look and the instinct to know were those most strongly excited by

the  impressions  of  his  early  childhood;  the  erotogenic  zone  of  the

mouth was given an emphasis which it never afterwards surrendered.

From  his  later  behaviour  in  the  contrary  direction,  such  as  his

exaggerated sympathy for animals, we can conclude that there was

no lack of strong sadistic traits in this period of his childhood.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2301

 

   A powerful wave of repression brought this childhood excess to an

end, and established the dispositions which were to become manifest

in the years of puberty. The most obvious result of the transformation

was the avoidance of every crudely sensual activity; Leonardo was

enabled to live in abstinence and to give the impression of being an

asexual human being. When the excitations of puberty came in their

flood upon the boy they did not, however, make him ill by forcing him

to develop substitutive structures of a costly and harmful kind. Owingto his very early inclination towards sexual curiosity the greater portion

of the needs of his sexual instinct could be sublimated into a general

urge to know, and thus evaded repression. A much smaller portion of

his libido continued to be devoted to sexual aims and represented a

stunted adult sexual life. Because his love for his mother had been

repressed, this portion was driven to take up a homosexual attitude

and manifested itself in ideal love for boys. The fixation on his mother

and on the blissful memories of his relations with her continued to be

preserved in the unconscious, but for the time being it remained in an

inactive  state.  In  this  way  repression,  fixation  and  sublimation  all

played  their  part  in  disposing  of  the  contributions  which  the  sexual

instinct made to Leonardo’s mental life.

   Leonardo emerges from the obscurity of his boyhood as an artist, a

painter and a sculptor, owing to a specific talent which may have been

reinforced by the precocious awakening in the first years of childhood

of his scopophilic instinct. We should be most glad to give an account

of the way in which artistic activity derives from the primal instincts of

the mind if it were not just here that our capacities fail us. We must be

content to emphasize the fact - which it is hardly any longer possible

to doubt - that what an artist creates provides at the same time an

outlet for his sexual desire; and in Leonardo’s case we can point to the

information which comes from Vasari, that heads of laughing women

and  beautiful  boys  -  in  other  words,  representations  of  his  sexual

objects  -  were  notable  among  his  first  artistic  endeavours.  In  the

bloom of his youth Leonardo appears at first to have worked without

inhibition. Just as he modelled himself on his father in the outward

conduct of his life, so too he passed through a period of masculine

creative  power  and  artistic  productiveness  in  Milan,  where  a  kindly

fate enabled him to find a father substitute in the duke Lodovico Moro.

But soon we and confirmation of our experience that the almost total

repression of a real sexual life does not provide the most favourable

conditions for the exercise of sublimated sexual trends. The pattern

imposed by sexual life made itself felt. His activity and his ability to

form quick decisions began to fail; his tendency towards deliberation

and delay was already noticeable as a disturbing element in the ‘Last

Supper’, and by influencing his technique it had a decisive effect on

the fate of that great painting. Slowly there occurred in him a processwhich  can  only  be  compared  to  the  regressions  in  neurotics.  The

development that turned him into an artist at puberty was overtaken by

the process which led him to be an investigator, and which had its

determinants  in  early  infancy.  The  second  sublimation  of  his  erotic

instinct gave place to the original sublimation for which the way had

been prepared on the occasion of the first repression. He became an

investigator, at first still in the service of his art, but later independently

of it and away from it. With the loss of his patron, the substitute for his

father, and with the increasingly sombre colours which his life took on,

this  regressive  shift  assumed  larger  and  larger  proportions.  He

became  ‘impacientissimo  al  pennello’,¹  as  we  are  told  by  a

correspondent  of  the  Countess  Isabella  d’Este,  who  was  extremely

eager  to  possess  a  painting  from  his  hand.  His  infantile  past  had

gained control over him. But the research which now took the place of

artistic creation seems to have contained some of the features which

distinguish  the  activity  of  unconscious  instincts  -  insatiability,

unyielding  rigidity  and  the  lack  of  an  ability  to  adapt  to  real

circumstances.

 

   ¹ [‘Very impatient of painting.’] Von Seidlitz (1909, 2, 271).

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2302

 

   At the summit of his life, when he was in his early fifties - a time

when  in  women  the  sexual  characters  have  already  under  gone

involution and when in men the libido not infrequently makes a further

energetic advance - a new transformation came over him. Still deeper

layers of the contents of his mind became active once more: but this

further  regression  was  to  the  benefit  of  his  art,  which  was  in  the

process of becoming stunted. He met the woman who awakened his

memory  of  his  mother’s  happy  smile  of  sensual  rapture;  and,

influenced  by  this  revived  memory,  he  recovered  the  stimulus  that

guided  him  at  the  beginning  of  his  artistic  endeavours,  at  the  time

when he modelled the smiling women. He painted the Mona Lisa, the

‘St. Anne with Two Others’ and the series of mysterious pictures which

are characterized by the enigmatic smile. With the help of the oldest ofall  his  erotic  impulses  he  enjoyed  the  triumph  of  once  more

conquering the inhibition in his art. This final development is obscured

from  our  eyes  in  the  shadows  of  approaching  age.  Before  this  his

intellect  had  soared  upwards  to  the  highest  realizations  of  a

conception of the world that left his epoch far behind it.

   In the preceding chapters I have shown what justification can be

found for giving this picture of Leonardo’s course of development - for

proposing  these  subdivisions  of  his  life  and  for  explaining  his

vacillation  between  art  and  science  in  this  way.  If  in  making  these

statements I have provoked the criticism, even from friends of psycho-

analysis and from those who are expert in it, that I have merely written

a psycho-analytic novel, I shall reply that I am far from over-estimating

the certainty of these results. Like others I have succumbed to the

attraction  of  this  great  and  mysterious  man,  in  whose  nature  one

seems to detect powerful instinctual passions which can nevertheless

only express themselves in so remarkably subdued a manner.

   But whatever the truth about Leonardo’s life may be, we cannot

desist from our endeavour to find a psycho-analytic explanation for it

until we have completed another task. We must stake out in a quite

general  way  the  limits  which  are  set  to  what  psycho-analysis  can

achieve in the field of biography: otherwise every explanation that is

not forthcoming will be held up to us as a failure. The material at the

disposal  of  a  psycho-analytic  enquiry  consists  of  the  data  of  a

person’s life history: on the one hand the chance circumstances of

events  and  background  influences,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the

subject’s reported reactions. Supported by its knowledge of psychical

mechanisms it then endeavours to establish a dynamic basis for his

nature on the strength of his reactions, and to disclose the original

motive forces of his mind, as well as their later transformations and

developments. If this is successful the behaviour of a personality in

the course of his life is explained in terms of the combined operation

of constitution and fate, of internal forces and external powers. Where

such an undertaking does not provide any certain results - and this is

perhaps so in Leonardo’s case - the blame rests not with the faulty or

inadequate methods of psycho-analysis, but with the uncertainty and

fragmentary  nature  of  the  material  relating  to  him  which  tradition

makes  available.  It  is  therefore  only  the  author  who  is  to  be  heldresponsible  for  the  failure,  by  having  forced  psycho-analysis  to

pronounce an expert opinion on the basis of such insufficient material.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2303

 

      But  even  if  the  historical  material  at  our  disposal  were  very

abundant, and if the psychical mechanisms could be dealt with with

the  greatest  assurance,  there  are  two  important  points  at  which  a

psycho-analytic enquiry would not be able to make us understand how

inevitable it was that the person concerned should have turned out in

the way he did and in no other way. In Leonardo’s case we have had

to maintain the view that the accident of his illegitimate birth and the

excessive tenderness of his mother had the most decisive influence

on the formation of his character and on his later fortune, since the

sexual repression which set in after this phase of childhood caused

him to sublimate his libido into the urge to know, and established his

sexual inactivity for the whole of his later life. But this repression after

the  first  erotic  satisfactions  of  childhood  need  not  necessarily  have

taken place; in someone else it might perhaps not have taken place or

might  have  assumed  much  less  extensive  proportions.  We  must

recognize here a degree of freedom which cannot be resolved any

further by psycho-analytic means. Equally, one has no right to claim

that the consequence of this wave of repression was the only possible

one. It is probable that another person would not have succeeded in

withdrawing  the  major  portion  of  his  libido  from  repression  by

sublimating it into a craving for knowledge; under the same influences

he would have sustained a permanent injury to his intellectual activity

or  have  acquired  an  insurmountable  disposition  to  obsessional

neurosis. We are left, then, with these two characteristics of Leonardo

which  are  inexplicable  by  the  efforts  of  psycho-analysis:  his  quite

special  tendency  towards  instinctual  repressions,  and  his

extraordinary capacity for sublimating the primitive instincts.

      Instincts  and  their  transformations  are  at  the  limit  of  what  is

discernible  by  psycho-analysis.  From  that  point  it  gives  place  to

biological  research.  We  are  obliged  to  look  for  the  source  of  thetendency to repression and the capacity for sublimation in the organic

foundations  of  character  on  which  the  mental  structure  is  only

afterwards  erected.  Since  artistic  talent  and  capacity  are  intimately

connected  with  sublimation  we  must  admit  that  the  nature  of  the

artistic function is also inaccessible to us along psycho-analytic lines.

The  tendency  of  biological  research  to-day  is  to  explain  the  chief

features in a person’s organic constitution as being the result of the

blending  of  male  and  female  dispositions,  based  on  substances.

Leonardo’s physical beauty and his left-handedness might be quoted

in  support  of  this  view.  We  will  not,  however,  leave  the  ground  of

purely psychological research. Our aim remains that of demonstrating

the  connection  along  the  path  of  instinctual  activity  between  a

person’s  external  experiences  and  his  reactions.  Even  if  psycho-

analysis does not throw light on the fact of Leonardo’s artistic power, it

at least renders its manifestations and its limitations intelligible to us. It

seems at any rate as if only a man who had had Leonardo’s childhood

experiences could have painted the Mona Lisa and the St. Anne, have

secured so melancholy a fate for his works and have embarked on

such an astonishing career as a natural scientist, as if the key to all his

achievements and misfortunes lay hidden in the childhood phantasy of

the vulture.

 


              Leonardo Da Vinci And A Memory Of His Childhood

                                                                                      2304

 

   But may one not take objection to the findings of an enquiry which

ascribes to accidental circumstances of his parental constellation so

decisive an influence on a person’s fate - which, for example, makes

Leonardo’s fate depend on his illegitimate birth and on the barrenness

of his first stepmother Donna Albiera? I think one has no right to do

so. If one considers chance to be unworthy of determining our fate, it

is simply a relapse into the pious view of the Universe which Leonardo

himself was on the way to overcoming when he wrote that the sun

does not move. We naturally feel hurt that a just God and a kindly

providence do not protect us better from such influences during the

most defenceless period of our lives. At the same time we are all tooready to forget that in fact everything to do with our life is chance, from

our origin out of the meeting of spermatozoon and ovum onwards -

chance which nevertheless has a share in the law and necessity of

nature, and which merely lacks any connection with our wishes and

illusions.  The  apportioning  of  the  determining  factors  of  our  life

between the ‘necessities’ of our constitution and the ‘chances’ of our

childhood may still be uncertain in detail; but in general it is no longer

possible  to  doubt  the  importance  precisely  of  the  first  years  of  our

childhood. We all still show too little respect for Nature which (in the

obscure  words  of  Leonardo  which  recall  Hamlet’s  lines)  ‘is  full  of

countless causes [‘ragioni’] that never enter experience’.¹

   Every one of us human beings corresponds to one of the countless

experiments  in  which  these  ‘ragioni’  of  nature  force  their  way  into

experience.

 

   ¹ ‘La natura è piena d’infinite ragioni che non furono mai in isperienza’ (Herzfeld, 1906, 11).

                                                                                       2305

 

    THE FUTURE PROSPECTS OF PSYCHO-ANALYTIC THERAPY

                                        (1910)

 


                                                                                      2306

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2307

 

    THE FUTURE PROSPECTS OF PSYCHO-ANALYTIC THERAPY

 

GENTLEMEN, - Since the objects for which we are assembled here to-

day  are  mainly  practical,  I  shall  choose  a  practical  theme  for  my

introductory address and appeal to your medical, not to your scientific,

interest.  I  can  imagine  your  probable  views  on  the  results  of  our

therapy, and I assume that most of you have already passed through

the  two  stages  which  all  beginners  go  through,  the  stage  of

enthusiasm  at  the  unexpected  increase  in  our  therapeutic

achievements, and the stage of depression at the magnitude of the

difficulties which stand in the way of our efforts. At whatever point in

this  development,  however,  each  of  you  may  happen  to  be,  my

intention to-day is to show you that we have by no means come to the

end of our resources for combating the neuroses, and that we may

expect a substantial improvement in our therapeutic prospects before

long.

   This reinforcement will come, I think, from three directions:

   (1) from internal progress,

   (2) from increased authority, and

   (3) from the general effect of our work.

 

   (1) Under ‘internal progress’ I include advances (a) in our analytic

knowledge, (b) in our technique.

   (a) Advances in our knowledge. We are, of course, still a long wayfrom  knowing  all  that  is  required  for  an  understanding  of  the

unconscious  in  our  patients.  It  is  clear  that  every  advance  in  our

knowledge means an increase in our therapeutic power. As long as

we  have  understood  nothing,  we  have  accomplished  nothing;  the

more  we  understand,  the  more  we  shall  achieve.  At  its  beginning

psycho-analytic treatment was inexorable and exhausting. The patient

had to say everything himself, and the physician’s activity consisted of

urging him on incessantly. To-day things have a more friendly air. The

treatment is made up of two parts - what the physician infers and tells

the patient, and the patient’s working-over of what he has heard. The

mechanism  of  our  assistance  is  easy  to  understand:  we  give  the

patient  the  conscious  anticipatory  idea  and  he  then  finds  the

repressed unconscious idea in himself on the basis of its similarity to

the anticipatory one. This is the intellectual help which makes it easier

for  him  to  overcome  the  resistances  between  conscious  and

unconscious.  Incidentally,  I  may  remark  that  it  is  not  the  only

mechanism made use of in analytic treatment; you all know the far

more powerful one which lies in the use of the ‘transference’. It is my

intention in the near future to deal with these various factors, which

are  so  important  for  an  understanding  of  the  treatment,  in  an

Allgemeine Methodik der Psychoanalyse. And further, in speaking to

you I need not rebut the objection that the evidential value in support

of the correctness of our hypotheses is obscured in our treatment as

we practise it to-day; you will not forget that this evidence is to be

found elsewhere, and that a therapeutic procedure cannot be carried

out in the same way as a theoretical investigation.

 


              The Future Prospects Of Psycho-Analytic Therapy

                                                                                      2308

 

   Let me now touch upon one or two fields in which we have new

things to learn and do in fact discover new things every day. Above all,

there is the field of symbolism in dreams and in the unconscious - a

fiercely  contested  subject,  as  you  know.  It  is  no  small  merit  in  our

colleague, Wilhelm Stekel, that, untroubled by all the objections raised

by  our  opponents,  he  has  undertaken  a  study  of  dream-symbols.There is indeed still much to learn here; my Interpretation of Dreams,

which  was  written  in  1899,  awaits  important  amplification  from

researches into symbolism.

   I will say a few words about one of the symbols that has newly been

recognized. A little time ago I heard that a psychologist whose views

are  somewhat  different  from  ours  had  remarked  to  one  of  us  that,

when  all  was  said  and  done,  we  did  undoubtedly  exaggerate  the

hidden sexual significance of dreams: his own commonest dream was

of going upstairs, and surely there could not be anything sexual in

that. We were put on the alert by this objection, and began to turn our

attention to the appearance of steps, staircases and ladders in dreams

and were soon in a position to show that staircases (and analogous

things) were unquestionably symbols of copulation. It is not hard to

discover the basis of the comparison: we come to the top in a series of

rhythmical movements and with increasing breathlessness and then,

with  a  few  rapid  leaps,  we  can  get  to  the  bottom  again.  Thus  the

rhythmical pattern of copulation is reproduced in going upstairs. Nor

must we omit to bring in the evidence of linguistic usage. It shows us

that ‘mounting’ [German ‘steigen’] is used as a direct equivalent for the

sexual act. We speak of a man as a ‘Steiger’  [a  ‘mounter’]  and  of

‘nachsteigen’ [‘to run after’, literally ‘to climb after’]. In French the steps

on a staircase are called ‘marches’ and ‘un vieux marcheur’ has the

same meaning as our ‘ein alter Steiger’ [‘an old rake’]. The dream-

material from which these newly recognized symbols are derived will

in due time be put before you by the committee we are about to form

for a collective study of symbolism. You will find some remarks on

another  interesting  symbol,  on  ‘rescue’  and  its  changes  in

significance, in the second volume of our Jahrbuch. But I must break

off here or I shall not get to my other points.

 


              The Future Prospects Of Psycho-Analytic Therapy

                                                                                      2309

 

   Every one of you will know from his own experience what a very

different attitude he has towards a new case of illness when once he

has thoroughly grasped the structure of a few typical cases. Imaginethat  we  had  arrived  at  a  succinct  formula  of  the  factors  regularly

concerned in constructing the various forms of neuroses, as we have

so far succeeded in doing for the construction of hysterical symptoms,

and consider how firmly it would establish our prognostic judgement!

Just as an obstetrician can tell by examining the placenta whether it

has been completely expelled or whether noxious fragments of it still

remain,  so  should  we,  independently  of  the  outcome  and  of  the

patient’s condition at the moment, be able to say whether our work

had been definitely successful or whether we had to expect relapses

and fresh onsets of illness.

   (b) I will hasten on to the innovations in the field of technique, where

indeed nearly everything still awaits final settlement, and much is only

now beginning to become clear. There are now two aims in psycho-

analytic technique: to save the physician effort and to give the patient

the most unrestricted access to his unconscious. As you know, our

technique has undergone a fundamental transformation. At the time of

the cathartic treatment what we aimed at was the elucidation of the

symptoms;  we  then  turned  away  from  the  symptoms  and  devoted

ourselves instead to uncovering the ‘complexes’, to use a word which

Jung  has  made  indispensable;  now,  however,  our  work  is  aimed

directly at finding out and overcoming the ‘resistances’, and we can

justifiably rely on the complexes coming to light without difficulty as

soon as the resistances have been recognized and removed. Some of

you  have  since  felt  a  need  to  be  able  to  make  a  survey  of  these

resistances and classify them. I will ask you to examine your material

and see whether you can confirm the generalized statement that in

male patients the most important resistances in the treatment seem to

be derived from the father-complex and to express themselves in fear

of the father, in defiance of the father and in disbelief of the father.

   Other innovations in technique relate to the physician himself. We

have become aware of the ‘counter-transference’, which arises in him

as a result of the patient’s influence on his unconscious feelings, and

we are almost inclined to insist that he shall recognize this counter-

transference  in  himself  and  overcome  it.  Now  that  a  considerable

number of people are practising psycho-analysis and exchanging their

observations  with  one  another,  we  have  noticed  that  no  psycho-

analyst goes further than his own complexes and internal resistancespermit; and we consequently require that he shall begin his activity

with a self-analysis and continually carry it deeper while he is making

his observations on his patients. Anyone who fails to produce results

in a self-analysis of this kind may at once give up any idea of being

able to treat patients by analysis.

 


              The Future Prospects Of Psycho-Analytic Therapy

                                                                                      2310

 

   We are also now coming to the opinion that analytic technique must

be modified in certain ways according to the nature of the disease and

the dominant instinctual trends in the patient. We started out from the

treatment  of  conversion  hysteria;  in  anxiety  hysteria  (phobias)  we

must  to  some  extent  alter  our  procedure.  For  these  patient  cannot

bring out the material necessary for resolving their phobia so long as

they feel protected by obeying the condition which it lays down. One

cannot, of course, succeed in getting them to give up their protective

measures and work under the influence of anxiety from the beginning

of the treatment. One must therefore help them by interpreting their

unconscious to them until they can make up their minds to do without

the protection of their phobia and expose themselves to a now greatly

mitigated  anxiety.  Only  after  they  have  done  so  does  the  material

become  accessible,  which,  when  it  has  been  mastered,  leads  to  a

solution of the phobia. Other modifications of technique, which seem

to me not yet ripe for discussion, will be required in the treatment of

obsessional  neurosis.  In  this  connection  very  important  questions

arise, which have not hitherto been elucidated: how far the instincts

which the patient is combating are to be allowed some satisfaction

during  the  treatment,  and  what  difference  it  makes  whether  these

impulses are active (sadistic) or passive (masochistic) in their nature.

   I hope you will have formed an impression that, when we know all

that  we  now  only suspect  and  when  we  have  carried  out  all  the

improvements  in  technique  to  which  deeper  observation  of  our

patients  is  bound  to  lead  us,  our  medical  procedure  will  reach  a

degree of precision and certainty of success which is not to be found

in every specialized field of medicine. 


              The Future Prospects Of Psycho-Analytic Therapy

                                                                                      2311

 

 

   (2) I have said that we had much to expect from the increase in

authority which must accrue to us as time goes on. I need not say

much to you about the importance of authority. Only very few civilized

people are capable of existing without reliance on others or are even

capable of coming to an independent opinion. You cannot exaggerate

the  intensity  of  people’s  inner  lack  of  resolution  and  craving  for

authority. The extraordinary increase in neuroses since the power of

religions  has  waned  may  give  you  a  measure  of  it.  The

impoverishment of the ego due to the large expenditure of energy on

repression demanded of every individual by civilization may be one of

the principal causes of this state of things.

   Hitherto, this authority, with its enormous weight of suggestion, has

been against us. All our therapeutic successes have been achieved in

the face of this suggestion: it is surprising that any successes at all

could be gained in such circumstances. I must not let myself be led

into describing my agreeable experiences during the period when I

alone represented psycho-analysis. I can only say that when I assured

my  patients  that  I  knew  how  to  relieve  them  permanently  of  their

sufferings they looked round my modest abode, reflected on my lack

of fame and title, and regarded me like the possessor of an infallible

system at a gambling-resort, of whom people say that if he could do

what he professes he would look very different himself. Nor was it

really pleasant to carry out a psychical operation while the colleagues

whose duty it should have been to assist took particular pleasure in

spitting into the field of operation, and while at the first signs of blood

or  restlessness  in  the  patient  his  relatives  began  threatening  the

operating  surgeon.  An  operation  is  surely  entitled  to  produce

reactions; in surgery we became accustomed to that long ago. People

simply did not believe me, just as even to-day people do not much

believe  any  of  us.  Under  such  conditions  not  a  few  attempts  were

bound to fail. To estimate the increase in our therapeutic prospectswhen we have received general recognition, you should think of the

position of a gynaecologist in Turkey and in the West. In Turkey, all he

may do is to feel the pulse of all arm stretched out to him through a

hole in the wall: and his medical achievements are in proportion to the

inaccessibility of their object. Our opponents in the West wish to allow

us much the same degree of access to our patient’s minds. But now

that  the  force  of  social  suggestion  drives  sick  women  to  the

gynaecologist, he has become their helper and saviour. I trust you will

not say that the fact of the authority of society coming to our aid and

increasing our successes so greatly would do nothing to prove the

validity  of  our  hypotheses  -  arguing  as  you  might  that,  since

suggestion  is  supposed  to  be  able  to  do  anything,  our  successes

would then be successes of suggestion and not of psycho-analysis.

Social suggestion is at present favourable to treating nervous patients

by hydropathy, dieting and electro-therapy, but that does not enable

such measures to get the better of neuroses. Time will show whether

psycho-analytic treatment can accomplish more.

   Now, however, I must once more damp your expectations. Society

will  not  be  in  a  hurry  to  grant  us  authority.  It  is  bound  to  offer  us

resistance, for we adopt a critical attitude towards it; we point out to it

that it itself plays a great part in causing neuroses. Just as we make

an individual our enemy by uncovering what is repressed in him, so

society cannot respond with sympathy to a relentless exposure of its

injurious effects and deficiencies. Because we destroy illusions we are

accused of endangering ideals. It might seem, therefore, as though

the  condition  from  which  I  expect  such  great  advantages  for  our

therapeutic prospects will never be fulfilled. And yet the situation is not

so hopeless as one might think at the present time. Powerful though

men’s emotions and self-interest may be, yet intellect is a power too -

a power which makes itself felt, not, it is true, immediately, but all the

more  certainly  in  the  end.  The  harshest  truths  are  heard  and

recognized  at  last,  after  the  interests  they  have  injured  and  the

emotions they have roused have exhausted their fury. It has always

been so, and the unwelcome truths which we psycho-analysts have to

tell  the  world  will  have  the  same  fate.  Only  it  will  not  happen  very

quickly; we must be able to wait.

               The Future Prospects Of Psycho-Analytic Therapy

                                                                                      2312

 

 

   (3) Finally, I have to explain to you what I mean by the ‘general

effect’ of our work, and how I come to set hopes on it. What we have

here is a very remarkable therapeutic constellation, the like of which is

perhaps not to be found anywhere else and which will appear strange

to you too at first, until you recognize in it something you have long

been familiar with. You know, of course, that the psychoneuroses are

substitutive satisfactions of some instinct the presence of which one is

obliged to deny to oneself and others. Their capacity to exist depends

on this distortion and lack of recognition. When the riddle they present

is solved and the solution is accepted by the patients these diseases

cease  to  be  able  to  exist.  There  is  hardly  anything  like  this  in

medicine, though in fairy tales you hear of evil spirits whose power is

broken as soon as you can tell them their name - the name which they

have kept secret.

   In place of a single sick person let us put society - suffering as a

whole from neuroses, though composed of sick and healthy members;

and  in  place  of  individual  acceptance  in  the  one  case  let  us  put

general recognition in the other. A little reflection will then show you

that  this  substitution  cannot  in  any  way  alter  the  outcome.  The

success which the treatment can have with the individual must occur

equally with the community. Sick people will not be able to let their

various  neuroses  become  known  -  their  anxious  over-tenderness

which is meant to conceal their hatred, their agoraphobia which tells of

disappointed ambition, their obsessive actions which represent self-

reproaches for evil intentions and precautions against them - if all their

relatives  and  every  stranger  from  whom  they  wish  to  conceal  their

mental processes know the general meaning of such symptoms, and if

they themselves know that in the manifestations of their illness they

are producing nothing that other people cannot instantly interpret. The

effect,  however,  will  not  be  limited  to  the  concealment  of  the

symptoms which, incidentally, it is often impossible to carry out; for

this necessity for concealment destroys the use of being ill. Disclosure

of  the  secret  will  have  attacked,  at  its  most  sensitive  point,  the‘aetiological equation’ from which neuroses arise - it will have made

the gain from the illness illusory; and consequently the final outcome

of the changed situation brought about by the physician’s indiscretion

can only be that the production of the illness will be brought to a stop.

 


              The Future Prospects Of Psycho-Analytic Therapy

                                                                                      2313

 

   If this hope seems Utopian to you, you may remember that neurotic

phenomena  have  actually  been  dispelled  already  by  this  means,

although  only  in  quite  isolated  instances.  Think  how  common

hallucinations of the Virgin Mary used to be among peasant girls in

former  times.  So  long  as  such  a  phenomenon  brought  a  flock  of

believers and might lead to a chapel being built on the sacred spot,

the visionary state of these girls was inaccessible to influence. To-day

even our clergy have changed their attitude to such things; they allow

police  and  doctors  to  examine  the  visionary,  and  now  the  Virgin

makes only very rare appearances.

      Or  let  me  examine  these  developments,  which  I  have  been

describing  as  taking  place  in  the  future,  in  an  analogous  situation

which  is  on  a  smaller  scale  and  consequently  easier  to  take  in.

Suppose  a  number  of  ladies  and  gentlemen  in  good  society  have

planned to have a picnic one day at an inn in the country. The ladies

have arranged among themselves that if one of them wants to relieve

a natural need she will announce that she is going to pick flowers.

Some malicious person, however, has got wind of this secret and has

had printed on the programme which is sent round to the whole party:

‘Ladies who wish to retire are requested to announce that they are

going to pick flowers.’ After this, of course, no lady will think of availing

herself  of  this  flowery  pretext,  and,  in  the  same  way,  other  similar

formulas,  which  may  be  freshly  agreed  upon,  will  be  seriously

compromised.  What  will  be  the  result?  The  ladies  will  admit  their

natural needs without shame and none of the men will object.

 


              The Future Prospects Of Psycho-Analytic Therapy

                                                                                      2314 

   Let us return to our more serious case. A certain number of people,

faced in their lives by conflicts which they have found too difficult to

solve,  have  taken  flight  into  neurosis  and  in  this  way  won  an

unmistakable, although in the long run too costly, gain from illness.

What will these people have to do if their flight into illness is barred by

the  indiscreet  revelations  of  psycho-analysis?  They  will  have  to  be

honest,  confess  to  the  instincts  that  are  at  work  in  them,  face  the

conflict, fight for what they want, or go without it; and the tolerance of

society,  which  is  bound  to  ensue  as  a  result  of  psycho-analytic

enlightenment, will help them in their task.

   Let us remember, however, that our attitude to life ought not to be

that of a fanatic for hygiene or therapy. We must admit that the ideal

prevention of neurotic illnesses which we have in mind would not be of

advantage to every individual. A good number of those who now take

flight into illness would not, under the conditions we have assumed,

support  the  conflict  but  would  rapidly  succumb  or  would  cause  a

mischief greater than their own neurotic illness. Neuroses have in fact

their biological function as a protective contrivance and they have their

social justification: the ‘gain from illness’ they provide is not always a

purely subjective one. Is there one of you who has not at some time

looked into the causation of a neurosis and had to allow that it was the

mildest  possible  outcome  of  the  situation?  And  should  such  heavy

sacrifices be made in order to eradicate the neuroses in particular,

when the world is full of other unavoidable misery?

   Are we, then, to abandon our efforts to explain the hidden meaning

of neurosis as being in the last resort dangerous to the individual and

harmful to the workings of society? Are we to give up drawing the

practical conclusion from a piece of scientific insight? No; I think that

in spite of this our duty lies in the other direction. The gain from illness

provided by the neuroses is nevertheless on the whole and in the end

detrimental to individuals as well as to society. The unhappiness that

our work of enlightenment may cause will after all only affect some

individuals. The change-over to a more realistic and creditable attitude

on the part of society will not be bought too dearly by these sacrifices.

But  above  all,  all  the  energies  which  are  to-day  consumed  in  the

production of neurotic symptoms serving the purposes of a world ofphantasy isolated from reality, will, even if they cannot at once be put

to uses in life, help to strengthen the clamour for the changes in our

civilization through which alone we can look for the well-being of future

generations.

 


              The Future Prospects Of Psycho-Analytic Therapy

                                                                                      2315

 

   I should therefore like to let you go with an assurance that in treating

your  patients  psycho-analytically  you  are  doing  your  duty  in  more

senses  than  one.  You  are  not  merely  working  in  the  service  of

science, by making use of the one and only opportunity for discovering

the secrets of the neuroses; you are not only giving your patients the

most efficacious remedy for their sufferings that is available to-day;

you are contributing your share to the enlightenment of the community

from which we expect to achieve the most radical prophylaxis against

neurotic disorders along the indirect path of social authority.

                                                                                       2316

 

            THE ANTITHETICAL MEANING OF PRIMAL WORDS

                                        (1910)

 


                                                                                      2317

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2318

 

            THE ANTITHETICAL MEANING OF PRIMAL WORDS

 

In my Interpretation of Dreams I made a statement about one of the

findings of my analytic work which I did not then understand. I will

repeat it here by way of preface to this review:

      ‘The  way  in  which  dreams  treat  the  category  of  contraries  and

contradictories  is  highly  remarkable.  It  is  simply  disregarded.  "No"

seems  not  to  exist  so  far  as  dreams  are  concerned.  They  show  a

particular  preference  for  combining  contraries  into  a  unity  or  for

representing  them  as  one  and  the  same  thing.  Dreams  feel

themselves  at  liberty,  moreover,  to  represent  any  element  by  its

wishful contrary; so that there is no way of deciding at a first glance

whether any element that admits of a contrary is present in the dream-

thoughts as a positive or as a negative.’¹

   The dream-interpreters of antiquity seem to have made the most

extensive  use  of  the  notion  that  a  thing  in  a  dream  can  mean  its

opposite.  This  possibility  has  also  occasionally  been  recognized  by

modern  students  of  dreams,  in  so  far  as  they  concede  at  all  that

dreams have a meaning and can be interpreted.² Nor do I think that I

shall  be  contradicted  if  I  assume  that  all  who  have  followed  me  in

interpreting dreams on scientific lines have found confirmation of the

statement quoted above.

      I  did  not  succeed  in  understanding  the  dream-work’s  singular

tendency  to  disregard  negation  and  to  employ  the  same  means  ofrepresentation for expressing contraries until I happened by chance to

read a work by the philologist Karl Abel, which was published in 1884

as  a  separate  pamphlet  and  included  in  the  following  year  in  the

author’s Sprachwissenschaftliche Abhandlungen [Philological Essays].

The subject is of sufficient interest to justify my quoting here the full

text of the crucial passages in Abel’s paper (omitting, however, most

of the examples). We obtain from them the astonishing information

that the behaviour of the dream-work which I have just described is

identical with a peculiarity in the oldest languages known to us.

 

   ¹ The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a), p. 787.

   ² Cf. G. H. von Schubert (1814, Chapter II).

 


                    The Antithetical Meaning Of Primal Words

                                                                                      2319

 

   After stressing the antiquity of the Egyptian language which must

have been developed a very long time before the first hieroglyphic

inscriptions, Abel goes on (1884, 4):

   ‘Now in the Egyptian language, this sole relic of a primitive world,

there are a fair number of words with two meanings, one of which is

the exact opposite of the other. Let us suppose, if such an obvious

piece of nonsense can be imagined, that in German the word "strong"

meant both "strong" and "weak"; that in Berlin the noun "light" was

used  to  mean  both  "light"  and  "darkness";  that  one  Munich  citizen

called  beer  "beer",  while  another  used  the  same  word  to  speak  of

water:  this  is  what  the  astonishing  practice  amounts  to  which  the

ancient  Egyptians  regularly  followed  in  their  language.  How  could

anyone be blamed for shaking his head in disbelief? . . .’ (Examples

omitted.)

   (Ibid., 7): ‘In view of these and many similar cases of antithetical

meaning (see the Appendix) it is beyond doubt that in one language at

least there was a large number of words that denoted at once a thing

and its opposite. However astonishing it may be, we are faced with the

fact and have to reckon with it.’

   The author goes on to reject an explanation of these circumstances

which suggests that two words might happen by chance to have thesame sound, and is equally firm in repudiating an attempt to refer it to

the low stage of mental development in Egypt:

   (Ibid., 9): ‘But Egypt was anything but a home of nonsense. On the

contrary,  it  was  one  of  the  cradles  of  the  development  of  human

reason. . . . It recognized a pure and dignified morality and formulated

a great part of the Ten Commandments at a time when the peoples in

whose hands civilization rests to-day were in the habit of slaughtering

human  victims  as  a  sacrifice  to  bloodthirsty  idols.  A  people  that

kindled the torch of justice and culture in so dark an age cannot surely

have been completely stupid in everyday speech and thought. . . .

Men who were able to make glass and raise and move huge blocks by

machinery must at least have possessed sufficient sense not to regard

a thing as being simultaneously both itself and its opposite. How are

we  then  to  reconcile  this  with  the  fact  that  the  Egyptians  allowed

themselves such a strangely contradictory language? . . . that they

used to give one and the same phonetic vehicle to the most mutually

inimical thoughts, and used to bind together in a kind of indissoluble

union things that were in the strongest opposition to each other?’

 


                    The Antithetical Meaning Of Primal Words

                                                                                      2320

 

   Before any explanation is attempted, mention must also be made of

a  further  stage  in  this  unintelligible  behaviour  of  the  Egyptian

language. ‘Of all the eccentricities of the Egyptian vocabulary perhaps

the most extraordinary feature is that, quite apart from the words that

combine antithetical meanings, it possesses other compound words in

which two vocables of antithetical meanings are united so as to form a

compound  which  bears  the  meaning  of  only  one  of  its  two

constituents. Thus in this extraordinary language there are not only

words meaning equally "strong" or "weak", and "command" or "obey";

but  there  are  also  compounds  like  "old-young",  "far-near",  "bind-

sever", "outside-inside" . . . which, in spite of combining the extremes

of  difference,  mean  only  "young",  "near",  "bind"  and  "inside"

respectively              So  that  in  these  compound  words  contradictory

concepts  have  been  quite  intentionally  combined,  not  in  order  toproduce a third concept, as occasionally happens in Chinese, but only

in order to use the compound to express the meaning of one of its

contradictory parts - a part which would have had the same meaning

by itself . . .’

   However, the riddle is easier to solve than it appears to be. Our

concepts owe their existence to comparisons. ‘If it were always light

we should not be able to distinguish light from dark, and consequently

we should not be able to have either the concept of light or the word

for it . . .’ ‘It is clear that everything on this planet is relative and has an

independent existence only in so far as it is differentiated in respect of

its relations to other things . . .’ ‘Since every concept is in this way the

twin of its contrary, how could it be first thought of and how could it be

communicated to other people who were trying to conceive it, other

than by being measured against its contrary . . .’ (Ibid., 15): ‘Since the

concept  of  strength  could  not  be  formed  except  as  a  contrary  to

weakness,  the  word  denoting  "strong"  contained  a  simultaneous

recollection of "weak", as the thing by means of which it first came into

existence. In reality this word denoted neither "strong" nor "weak", but

the relation and difference between the two, which created both of

them equally . . .’ ‘Man was not in fact able to acquire his oldest and

simplest concepts except as contraries to their contraries, and only

learnt by degrees to separate the two sides of an antithesis and think

of one without conscious comparison with the other.’

 


                    The Antithetical Meaning Of Primal Words

                                                                                      2321

 

   Since language serves not only to express one’s own thoughts but

essentially to communicate them to others the question may be raised

how it was that the ‘primal Egyptian’ made his neighbour understand

‘which side of the twin concept he meant on any particular occasion’.

In the written language this was done with the help of the so-called

‘determinative’ signs which, placed after the alphabetical ones, assign

their meaning to them and are not themselves intended to be spoken.

(Ibid., 18): ‘If the Egyptian word "ken" is to mean "strong", its sound,

which is written alphabetically, is followed by the picture of an uprightarmed man; if the same word has to express "weak", the letters which

represent the sound are followed by the picture of a squatting, limp

figure. The majority of other words with two meanings are similarly

accompanied by explanatory pictures.’ Abel thinks that in speech the

desired meaning of the spoken word was indicated by gesture.

   According to Abel it is in the ‘oldest roots’ that antithetical double

meanings  are  found  to  occur.  In  the  subsequent  course  of  the

language’s development this ambiguity disappeared and, in Ancient

Egyptian  at  any  rate,  all  the  intermediate  stages  can  be  followed,

down to the unambiguousness of modern vocabularies. ‘A word that

originally bore two meanings separates in the later language into two

words with single meanings, in a process whereby each of the two

opposed  meanings  takes  over  a  particular  phonetic  "reduction"

(modification) of the original root.’ Thus, for example, in hieroglyphics

the word ‘ken’, ‘strong-weak’, already divides into ‘ken’, ‘strong’ and

‘kan’, ‘weak’. ‘In other words, the concepts which could only be arrived

at  by  means  of  an  antithesis  became  in  course  of  time  sufficiently

familiar to men’s minds to make an independent existence possible for

each of their two parts and accordingly to enable a separate phonetic

representative to be formed for each part.

 


                    The Antithetical Meaning Of Primal Words

                                                                                      2322

 

   Proof of the existence of contradictory primal meanings, which is

easily  established  in  Egyptian,  extends,  according  to  Abel,  to  the

Semitic  and  Indo-European  languages  as  well.  ‘How  far  this  may

happen  in  other  language-groups  remains  to  be  seen;  for  although

antithesis must have been present originally to the thinking minds of

every race, it need not necessarily have become recognizable or have

been retained everywhere in the meanings of words.’

   Abel further calls attention to the fact that the philosopher Bain,

apparently without knowledge that the phenomenon actually existed,

claimed this double meaning of words on purely theoretical grounds

as a logical necessity. The passage in question¹ begins with these

sentences:   ‘The essential relativity of all knowledge, thought or consciousness

cannot but show itself in language. If everything that we can know is

viewed as a transition from something else, every experience must

have two sides; and either every name must have a double meaning,

or else for every meaning there must be two names.’

   From the ‘Appendix of Examples of Egyptian, Indo-Germanic and

Arabic  Antithetical  Meanings’  I  select  a  few  instances  which  may

impress even those of us who are not experts in philology. In Latin

‘altus’ means ‘high’ and ‘deep’, ‘sacer’ ‘sacred’ and ‘accursed’; here

accordingly we have the complete antithesis in meaning without any

modification  of  the  sound  of  the  word.  Phonetic  alteration  to

distinguish contraries is illustrated by examples like ‘clamare’ (‘to cry’)

- ‘clam’ (‘softly’, ‘secretly’); ‘siccus’ (‘dry’) - ‘succus’ (‘juice’). In German

‘Boden’  [‘garret’  or  ‘ground’]  still  means  the  highest  as  well  as  the

lowest thing in the house. Our ‘bös’ (‘bad’) is matched by a word ‘bass’

(‘good’); in Old Saxon ‘bat’ (‘good’) corresponds to the English ‘bad’,

and the English ‘to lock’ to the German ‘Lücke’,’Loch’ [‘hole’]. We can

compare the German ‘kleben’ [‘to stick’] with the English ‘to cleave’ (‘to

split’); the German words ‘stumm’ [‘dumb’] and ‘Stimme’ [‘voice’], and

so on. In this way perhaps even the much derided derivation lucus a

non lucendo² would have some sense in it.

 

   ¹ Bain (1870, 1, 54).

   ² [‘Lucus’ (Latin for ‘a grove’) is said to be derived from ‘lucere’ (‘to shine’) because it does

not shine there. (Attributed to Quintilian.)]
 


                    The Antithetical Meaning Of Primal Words

                                                                                      2323

 

   In his essay on ‘The Origin of Language’ Abel (1885, 305) calls

attention to further traces of ancient difficulties in thinking. Even to-day

the  Englishman  in  order  to  express  ‘ohne’  says  ‘without’  (‘mitohne’

[‘with-without’] in German), and the East Prussian does the same. The

word  ‘with’  itself,  which  to-day  corresponds  to  the  German  ‘mit’,

originally meant ‘without’ as well as ‘with’, as can be recognized from

‘withdraw and ‘withhold’. The same transformation can be seen in the

German ‘wider’ (‘against’) and ‘wieder’ (‘together with’).      For  comparison  with  the  dream-work  there  is  another  extremely

strange  characteristic  of  the  ancient  Egyptian  language  which  is

significant. ‘In Egyptian, words can - apparently, we will say to begin

with - reverse their sound as well as their sense. Let us suppose that

the  German  word  "gut"  ["good"]  was  Egyptian:  it  could  then  mean

"bad" as well as "good", and be pronounced "tug" as well as "gut".

Numerous  examples  of  such  reversals  of  sound,  which  are  too

frequent  to  be  explained  as  chance  occurrences,  can  be  produced

from the Aryan and Semitic languages as well. Confining ourselves in

the first instance to Germanic languages we may note: Topf [pot] - pot;

boat - tub; wait - täuwen [tarry]; hurry - Ruhe [rest]; care - reck; Balken

[beam]  - Klobe  [log],  club.  If  we  take  the  other  Indo-Germanic

languages into consideration, the number of relevant instances grows

accordingly; for example, capere [Latin for "take"] - packen [German

for "seize"]; ren [Latin for "kidney"] - Niere [German for "kidney"]; leaf -

folium [Latin for "leaf"]; dum-a [Russian for "thought"], q υμός [Greek

for  "spirit",  "courage"]  - mêdh, mûdha  [Sanscrit  for  "mind"], Mut

[German  for  "courage"]; rauchen  [German  for  "to  smoke"]  - Kur-ít

[Russian for "to smoke"]; kreischen [German for "to shriek"] - to shriek,

etc.’

   Abel tries to explain the phenomenon of reversal of sound as a

doubling  or  reduplication  of  the  root.  Here  we  should  find  some

difficulty in following the philologist. We remember in this connection

how fond children are of playing at reversing the sound of words and

how  frequently  the  dream-work  makes  use  of  a  reversal  of  the

representational material for various purposes. (Here it is no longer

letters but images whose order is reversed.) We should therefore be

more  inclined  to  derive  reversal  of  sound  from  a  factor  of  deeper

origin.¹

   In the correspondence between the peculiarity of the dream-work

mentioned at the beginning of the paper and the practice discovered

by philology in the oldest languages, we may see a confirmation of the

view we have formed about the regressive, archaic character of the

expression of thoughts in dreams. And we psychiatrists cannot escape

the  suspicion  that  we  should  be  better  at  understanding  and

translating  the  language  of  dreams  if  we  knew  more  about  the

development of language.² 

   ¹ For the phenomenon of reversal of sound (metathesis), which it perhaps even more

intimately related to the dream-work than are contradictory meanings (antithesis), compare
also Meyer-Rinteln (1909).

   ² It is plausible to suppose, too, that the original antithetical meaning of words exhibits the

ready-made mechanism which is exploited for various purposes by slips of the tongue that
result in the opposite being said.

                                                                                       2324

 

      A SPECIAL TYPE OF CHOICE OF OBJECT MADE BY MEN

                    (CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE I)

                                        (1910)

 


                                                                                      2325

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2326

 

      A SPECIAL TYPE OF CHOICE OF OBJECT MADE BY MEN

                    (CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE I)

 

Up till now we have left it to the creative writer to depict for us the

‘necessary conditions for loving’ which govern people’s choice of an

object,  and  the  way  in  which  they  bring  the  demands  of  their

imagination into harmony with reality. The writer can indeed draw on

certain qualities which fit him to carry out such a task: above all, on a

sensitivity  that  enables  him  to  perceive  the  hidden  impulses  in  the

minds of other people, and the courage to let his own unconscious

speak.  But  there  is  one  circumstance  which  lessens  the  evidential

value  of  what  he  has  to  say.  Writers  are  under  the  necessity  to

produce  intellectual  and  aesthetic  pleasure,  as  well  as  certain

emotional effects. For this reason they cannot reproduce the stuff of

reality unchanged, but must isolate portions of it, remove disturbing

associations, tone down the whole and fill in what is missing. These

are the privileges of what is known as ‘poetic licence’. Moreover they

can  show  only  slight  interest  in  the  origin  and  development  of  the

mental  states  which  they  portray  in  their  completed  form.  In

consequence  it  becomes  inevitable  that  science  should  concern

herself with the same materials whose treatment by artists has given

enjoyment to mankind for thousands of years, though her touch must

be clumsier and the yield of pleasure less. These observations will, itmay  be  hoped,  serve  to  justify  us  in  extending  a  strictly  scientific

treatment to the field of human love. Science is, after all, the most

complete renunciation of the pleasure principle of which our mental

activity is capable.

 


              A Special Type Of Choice Of Object Made By Men

                                                                                      2327

 

 

      In  the  course  of  psycho-analytic  treatment  there  are  ample

opportunities for collecting impressions of the way in which neurotics

behave in love; while at the same time we can recall having observed

or heard of similar behaviour in people of average health or even in

those  with  outstanding  qualities.  When  the  material  happens  to  be

favourable and thus leads to an accumulation of such impressions,

distinct types emerge more clearly. I will begin here with a description

of one such type of object-choice - which occurs in men - since it is

characterized by a number of ‘necessary conditions for loving’ whose

combination  is  unintelligible,  and  indeed  bewildering,  and  since  it

admits of a simple explanation on psycho-analytic lines.

   (1) The first of these preconditions for loving can be described as

positively  specific:  wherever  it  is  found,  the  presence  of  the  other

characteristics of this type may be looked for. It may be termed the

precondition that there should be ‘an injured third party’; it stipulates

that the person in question shall never choose as his love-object a

woman who is disengaged - that is, an unmarried girl or an unattached

married woman - but only one to whom another man can claim right of

possession  as  her  husband,  fiancé  or  friend.  In  some  cases  this

precondition proves so cogent that a woman can be ignored, or even

rejected, so long as she does not belong to any man, but becomes the

object of passionate feelings immediately she comes into one of these

relationships with another man.

   (2) The second precondition is perhaps a less constant one, but it is

no less striking. It has to be found in conjunction with the first for the

type to be realized, whereas the first precondition seems very often to

occur independently as well. This second precondition is to the effectthat a woman who is chaste and whose reputation is irreproachable

never exercises an attraction that might raise her to the status of a

love-object, but only a woman who is in some way or other of bad

repute sexually, whose fidelity and reliability are open to some doubt.

This latter characteristic may vary within substantial limits, from the

faint  breath  of  scandal  attaching  to  a  married  woman  who  is  not

averse to a flirtation up to the openly promiscuous way of life of a

cocotte or of an adept in the art of love; but the men who belong to our

type will not be satisfied without something of the kind. This second

necessary  condition  may  be  termed,  rather  crudely,  ‘love  for  a

prostitute’.

 


              A Special Type Of Choice Of Object Made By Men

                                                                                      2328

 

   While the first precondition provides an opportunity for gratifying

impulses of rivalry and hostility directed at the man from whom the

loved woman is wrested, the second one, that of the woman’s being

like a prostitute, is connected with the experiencing of jealousy which

appears to be a necessity for lovers of this type. It is only when they

are able to be jealous that their passion reaches its height and the

woman  acquires  her  full  value,  and  they  never  fail  to  seize  on  an

occasion  that  allows  them  to  experience  these  most  powerful

emotions. What is strange is that it is not the lawful possessor of the

loved  one  who  becomes  the  target  of  this  jealousy,  but  strangers,

making  their  appearance  for  the  first  time,  in  relation  to  whom  the

loved one can be brought under suspicion. In glaring instances the

lover  shows  no  wish  for  exclusive  possession  of  the  woman  and

seems to be perfectly comfortable in the triangular situation. One of

my  patients,  who  had  been  made  to  suffer  terribly  by  his  lady’s

escapades, had no objection to her getting married, and did all he

could to bring it about; in the years that followed he never showed a

trace of jealousy towards her husband. Another typical patient had, it

is true, been very jealous of the husband in his first love affair, and

had  forced  the  lady  to  stop  having  marital  relations;  but  in  his

numerous subsequent affairs he behaved like the other members ofthis  type  and  no  longer  regarded  the  lawful  husband  as  an

interference.

   So much for the conditions required in the love-object. The following

points  describe  the  lover’s  behaviour  towards  the  object  he  has

chosen.

   (3) In normal love the woman’s value is measured by her sexual

integrity, and is reduced by any approach to the characteristic of being

like a prostitute [German Dirne]. Hence the fact that women with this

characteristic are considered by men of our type to be love-objects of

the highest value seems to be a striking departure from the normal.

Their  love-relationships  with  these  women  are  carried  on  with  the

highest  expenditure  of  mental  energy,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other

interests; they are felt as the only people whom it is possible to love,

and  the  demand  for  fidelity  which  the  lover  makes  upon  himself  is

repeated again and again, however often it may be broken in reality.

These features of the love-relationships which I am here describing

show their compulsive nature very clearly, though that is something

which is found up to a certain degree whenever anyone falls in love.

But the fidelity and intensity that mark the attachment must not lead

one to expect that a single love-relationship of this kind will make up

the whole erotic life of the person in question or occur only once in it.

On the contrary, passionate attachments of this sort are repeated with

the same peculiarities - each an exact replica of the others - again and

again in the lives of men of this type; in fact, owing to external events

such as changes of residence and environment, the love-objects may

replace one another so frequently that a long series of them is formed.

 


              A Special Type Of Choice Of Object Made By Men

                                                                                      2329

 

   (4) What is most startling of all to the observer in lovers of this type

is the urge they show to ‘rescue’ the woman they love. The man is

convinced that she is in need of him, that without him she would lose

all moral control and rapidly sink to a lamentable level. He rescues

her, therefore, by not giving her up. In some individual cases the idea

of having to rescue her can be justified by reference to her sexualunreliability and the dangers of her social position: but it is no less

conspicuous where there is no such basis in reality. One man of the

type  I  am  describing,  who  knew  how  to  win  his  ladies  by  clever

methods of seduction and subtle arguments, spared no efforts in the

subsequent course of these affairs to keep the woman he was for the

time being in love with on the path of ‘virtue’ by presenting her with

tracts of his own composition.

 

   If we survey the different features of the picture presented here - the

conditions  imposed  on  the  man  that  his  loved  one  should  not  be

unattached and should be like a prostitute, the high value he sets on

her, his need for feeling jealousy, his fidelity, which is nevertheless

compatible with being broken down into a long series of instances,

and the urge to rescue the woman - it will seem scarcely probable that

they should all be derived from a single source. Yet psycho-analytic

exploration into the life-histories of men of this type has no difficulty in

showing that there is such a single source. The object-choice which is

so strangely conditioned, and this very singular way of behaving in

love, have the same psychical origin as we find in the loves of normal

people. They are derived from the infantile fixation of tender feelings

on the mother, and represent one of the consequences of that fixation.

In  normal  love  only  a  few  characteristics  survive  which  reveal

unmistakably  the  maternal  prototype  of  the  object-choice,  as,  for

instance, the preference shown by young men for maturer women; the

detachment  of  libido  from  the  mother  has  been  effected  relatively

swiftly.  In  our  type,  on  the  other  hand,  the  libido  has  remained

attached to the mother for so long, even after the onset of puberty,

that the maternal characteristics remain stamped on the love-objects

that  are  chosen  later,  and  all  these  turn  into  easily  recognizable

mother-surrogates. The comparison with the way in which the skull of

a  newly  born  child  is  shaped  springs  to  mind  at  this  point:  after  a

protracted labour it always takes the form of a cast of the narrow part

of the mother’s pelvis.

 


              A Special Type Of Choice Of Object Made By Men

                                                                                      2330 

      We  have  now  to  show  the  plausibility  of  our  assertion  that  the

characteristic features of our type - its conditions for loving and its

behaviour in love - do in fact arise from the psychical constellation

connected with the mother. This would seem to be easiest where the

first precondition is concerned - the condition that the woman should

not be unattached, or that there should be an injured third party. It is at

once clear that for the child who is growing up in the family circle the

fact of the mother belonging to the father becomes an inseparable part

of the mother’s essence, and that the injured third party is none other

than the father himself. The trait of overvaluing the loved one, and

regarding her as unique and irreplaceable, can be seen to fall just as

naturally  into  the  context  of  the  child’s  experience,  for  no  one

possesses more than one mother, and the relation to her is based on

an event that is not open to any doubt and cannot be repeated.

   If we are to understand the love-objects chosen by our type as being

above all mother-surrogates, then the formation of a series of them,

which seems so flatly to contradict the condition of being faithful to

one,  can  now  also  be  understood.  We  have  learnt  from  psycho-

analysis in other examples that the notion of something irreplaceable,

when it is active in the unconscious, frequently appears as broken up

into an endless series: endless for the reason that every surrogate

nevertheless  fails  to  provide  the  desired  satisfaction.  This  is  the

explanation of the insatiable urge to ask questions shown by children

at a certain age: they have one single question to ask, but it never

crosses their lips. It explains, too, the garrulity of some people affected

by neurosis; they are under the pressure of a secret which is burning

to be disclosed but which, despite all temptation, they never reveal.

 


              A Special Type Of Choice Of Object Made By Men

                                                                                      2331

 

   On the other hand the second precondition for loving - the condition

that the object chosen should be like a prostitute - seems energetically

to  oppose  a  derivation  from  the  mother  complex.  The  adult’s

conscious  thought  likes  to  regard  his  mother  as  a  person  ofunimpeachable moral purity; and there are few ideas which he finds

so offensive when they come from others, or feels as so tormenting

when they spring from his own mind, as one which calls this aspect of

his  mother  in  question.  This  very  relation  of  the  sharpest  contrast

between ‘mother’ and ‘prostitute’ will however encourage us to enquire

into the history of the development of these two complexes and the

unconscious  relation  between  them,  since  we  long  ago  discovered

that what, in the conscious, is found split into a pair of opposites often

occurs in the unconscious as a unity. Investigation then leads us back

to  the  time  in  a  boy’s  life  at  which  he  first  gains  a  more  or  less

complete  knowledge  of  the  sexual  relations  between  adults,

somewhere  about  the  years  of  pre-puberty.  Brutal  pieces  of

information, which are undisguisedly intended to arouse contempt and

rebelliousness, now acquaint him with the secret of sexual life and

destroy the authority of adults, which appears incompatible with the

revelation of their sexual activities. The aspect of these disclosures

which affects the newly initiated child most strongly is the way in which

they apply to his own parents. This application is often flatly rejected

by him, in some such words as these: ‘Your parents and other people

may do something like that with one another, but my parents can’t

possibly do it.

 


              A Special Type Of Choice Of Object Made By Men

                                                                                      2332

 

   As an almost invariable corollary to this sexual enlightenment, the

boy at the same time gains a knowledge of the existence of certain

women who practise sexual intercourse as a means of livelihood, and

who are for this reason held in general contempt. The boy himself is

necessarily far from feeling this contempt: as soon as he learns that

he too can be initiated by these unfortunates into sexual life, which till

then he accepted as being reserved exclusively for ‘grown-ups’, he

regards them only with a mixture of longing and horror. When after

this he can no longer maintain the doubt which makes his parents an

exception to the universal and odious norms of sexual activity, he tells

himself with cynical logic that the difference between his mother and awhore is not after all so very great, since basically they do the same

thing.  The  enlightening  information  he  has  received  has  in  fact

awakened the memory-traces of the impressions and wishes of his

early infancy, and these have led to a reactivation in him of certain

mental impulses. He begins to desire his mother herself in the sense

with which he has recently become acquainted, and to hate his father

anew as a rival who stands in the way of this wish; he comes, as we

say,  under  the  dominance  of  the  Oedipus  complex.  He  does  not

forgive his mother for having granted the favour of sexual intercourse

not  to  himself  but  to  his  father,  and  he  regards  it  as  an  act  of

unfaithfulness. If these impulses do not quickly pass, there is no outlet

for them other than to run their course in phantasies which have as

their  subject  his  mother’s  sexual  activities  under  the  most  diverse

circumstances; and the consequent tension leads particularly readily

to  his  finding  relief  in  masturbation.  As  a  result  of  the  constant

combined  operation  of  the  two  driving  forces,  desire  and  thirst  for

revenge, phantasies of his mother’s unfaithfulness are by far the most

preferred; the lover with whom she commits her act of infidelity almost

always exhibits the features of the boy’s own ego, or more accurately,

of his own idealized personality, grown up and so raised to a level with

his father. What I have elsewhere¹ described as the ‘family romance’

comprises the manifold ramifications of this imaginative activity and

the way in which they are interwoven with various egoistic interests of

this period of life.

 

   ¹ In Rank’s The Myth of the Birth of the Hero (1909).

 


              A Special Type Of Choice Of Object Made By Men

                                                                                      2333

 

      Now  that  we  have  gained  an  insight  into  this  piece  of  mental

development  we  can  no  longer  regard  it  as  contradictory  and

incomprehensible that the precondition of the loved one’s being like a

prostitute should derive directly from the mother complex. The type of

male love which we have described bears the traces of this evolution

and is simple to understand as a fixation on the phantasies formed by

the boy in puberty - phantasies which have later after all found a wayout  into  real  life.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  assuming  that  the

masturbation assiduously practised in the years of puberty has played

its part in the fixation of the phantasies.

   To these phantasies which have succeeded in dominating the man’s

love in real life, the urge to rescue the loved one seems to bear merely

a loose and superficial relation, and one that is fully accounted for by

conscious reasons. By her propensity to be fickle and unfaithful the

loved  one  brings  herself  into  dangerous  situations,  and  thus  it  is

understandable that the lover should be at pains to protect her from

these dangers by watching over her virtue and counteracting her bad

inclinations.  However,  the  study  of  people’s  screen-memories,

phantasies  and  nocturnal  dreams  shows  that  we  have  here  a

particularly  felicitous  ‘rationalization’  of  an  unconscious  motive,  a

process which may be compared to a successful secondary revision

of a dream. In actual fact the ‘rescue-motif’ has a meaning and history

of its own, and is an independent derivative of the mother-complex, or

more accurately, of the parental complex. When a child hears that he

owes  his  life  to  his  parents,  or  that  his  mother gave  him  life,  his

feelings of tenderness unite with impulses which strive at power and

independence, and they generate the wish to return this gift to the

parents and to repay them with one of equal value. It is as though the

boy’s defiance were to make him say: ‘I want nothing from my father; I

will give him back all I have cost him.’ He then forms the phantasy of

rescuing his father from danger and saving his life; in this way he puts

his  account  square  with  him.  This  phantasy  is  commonly  enough

displaced  on  to  the  emperor,  king  or  some  other  great  man;  after

being thus distorted it becomes admissible to consciousness, and may

even be made use of by creative writers. In its application to a boy’s

father it is the defiant meaning in the idea of rescuing which is by far

the  most  important;  where  his  mother  is  concerned  it  is  usually  its

tender meaning. The mother gave the child life, and it is not easy to

find  a  substitute,  of  equal  value  for  this  unique  gift.  With  a  slight

change of meaning, such as is easily effected in the unconscious and

is comparable to the way in which in consciousness concepts shade

into  one  another,  rescuing  his  mother  takes  on  the  significance  of

giving her a child or making a child for her - needless to say, one like

himself. This is not too remote from the original sense of rescuing, andthe change in meaning is not an arbitrary one. His mother gave him a

life - his own life - and in exchange he gives her another life, that of a

child which has the greatest resemblance to himself. The son shows

his  gratitude  by  wishing  to  have  by  his  mother  a  son  who  is  like

himself:  in  other  words,  in  the  rescue-phantasy  he  is  completely

identifying himself with his father. All his instincts, those of tenderness,

gratitude, lustfulness, defiance and independence, find satisfaction in

the single wish to be his own father. Even the element of danger has

not been lost in the change of meaning; for the act of birth itself is the

danger from which he was saved by his mother’s efforts. Birth is both

the first of all dangers to life and the prototype of all the later ones that

cause us to feel anxiety, and the experience of birth has probably left

behind in us the expression of affect which we call anxiety. Macduff of

the Scottish legend, who was not born of his mother but ripped from

her womb, was for that reason unacquainted with anxiety.

 


              A Special Type Of Choice Of Object Made By Men

                                                                                      2334

 

   Artemidorus, the dream-interpreter of antiquity, was certainly right in

maintaining that the meaning of a dream depends on who the dreamer

happens  to  be.  Under  the  laws  governing  the  expression  of

unconscious thoughts, the meaning of rescuing may vary, depending

on whether the author of the phantasy is a man or a woman. It can

equally mean (in a man) making a child, i.e. causing it to be born, or

(in a woman) giving birth oneself to a child. These various meanings

of rescuing in dreams and phantasies can be recognized particularly

clearly when they are found in connection with water. A man rescuing

a  woman  from  the  water  in  a  dream  means  that  he  makes  her  a

mother,  which  in  the  light  of  the  preceding  discussion  amounts  to

making her his own mother. A woman rescuing someone else (a child)

from the water acknowledges herself in this way as the mother who

bore  him,  like  Pharoah’s  daughter  in  the  legend  of  Moses  (Rank,

1909). At times there is also a tender meaning contained in rescue-

phantasies  directed  towards  the  father.  In  such  cases  they  aim  at

expressing the subject’s wish to have his father as a son - that is, tohave a son who is like his father.

   It is on account of all these connections between the rescue-motif

and the parental complex that the urge to rescue the loved one forms

an  important  feature  of  the  type  of  loving  which  I  have  been

discussing.

 

   I do not feel that it is necessary for me to justify my method of work

on this subject; as in my presentation of anal erotism, so here too I

have in the first place aimed at singling out from the observational

material extreme and sharply defined types. In both cases we find a

far greater number of individuals in whom only a few features of the

type  can  be  recognized,  or  only  features  which  are  not  distinctly

marked, and it is obvious that a proper appreciation of these types will

not be possible until the whole context to which they belong has been

explored.

                                                                                       2335

 

      ON THE UNIVERSAL TENDENCY TO DEBASEMENT IN THE

                                SPHERE OF LOVE

                  (CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE II)

                                        (1912)

 


                                                                                      2336

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2337

 

      ON THE UNIVERSAL TENDENCY TO DEBASEMENT IN THE

                                SPHERE OF LOVE

                  (CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE II)

 

                                            I

 

If  the  practising  psycho-analyst  asks  himself  on  account  of  what

disorder people most often come to him for help, he is bound to reply -

disregarding the many forms of anxiety - that it is psychical impotence.

This singular disturbance affects men of strongly libidinous natures,

and manifests itself in a refusal by the executive organs of sexuality to

carry out the sexual act, although before and after they may show

themselves  to  be  intact  and  capable  of  performing  the  act,  and

although a strong psychical inclination to carry it out is present. The

first  clue  to  understanding  his  condition  is  obtained  by  the  sufferer

himself on making the discovery that a failure of this kind only arises

when the attempt is made with certain individuals; whereas with others

there is never any question of such a failure. He now becomes aware

that  it  is  some  feature  of  the  sexual  object  which  gives  rise  to  the

inhibition of his male potency, and sometimes he reports that he has a

feeling of an obstacle inside him, the sensation of a counter-will which

successfully  interferes  with  his  conscious  intention.  However,  he  isunable to guess what this internal obstacle is and what feature of the

sexual  object  brings  it  into  operation.  If  he  has  had  repeated

experience of a failure of this kind, he is likely, by the familiar process

of ‘erroneous connection’, to decide that the recollection of the first

occasion evoked the disturbing anxiety-idea and so caused the failure

to be repeated each time; while he derives the first occasion itself from

some ‘accidental’ impression.

 


      On The Universal Tendency To Debasement In The Sphere Of

                                          Love

                                                                                      2338

 

   Psycho-analytic studies of psychical impotence have already been

carried  out  and  published  by  several  writers.¹  Every  analyst  can

confirm  the  explanations  provided  by  them  from  his  own  clinical

experience. It is in fact a question of the inhibitory influence of certain

psychical  complexes  which  are  withdrawn  from  the  subject’s

knowledge.  An  incestuous  fixation  on  mother  or  sister,  which  has

never  been  surmounted,  plays  a  prominent  part  in  this  pathogenic

material  and  is  its  most  universal  content.  In  addition  there  is  the

influence  to  be  considered  of  accidental  distressing  impressions

connected with infantile sexual activity, and also those factors which in

a general way reduce the libido that is to be directed on to the female

sexual object.²

      When  striking  cases  of  psychical  impotence  are  exhaustively

investigated by means of psycho-analysis, the following information is

obtained  about  the  psychosexual  processes  at  work  in  them.  Here

again - as very probably in all neurotic disturbances - the foundation of

the disorder is provided by an inhibition in the developmental history of

the libido before it assumes the form which we take to be its normal

termination.  Two  currents  whose  union  is  necessary  to  ensure  a

completely  normal  attitude  in  love  have,  in  the  cases  we  are

considering, failed to combine. These two may be distinguished as the

affectionate and the sensual current.

   The affectionate current is the older of the two. It springs from the

earliest years of childhood; it is formed on the basis of the interests ofthe  self-preservative  instinct  and  is  directed  to  the  members  of  the

family and those who look after the child. From the very beginning it

carries  along  with  it  contributions  from  the  sexual  instincts  -

components of erotic interest - which can already be seen more or

less  clearly  even  in  childhood  and  in  any  event  are  uncovered  in

neurotics  by  psycho-analysis  later  on.  It  corresponds  to the  child’s

primary object-choice. We learn in this way that the sexual instincts

find their first objects by attaching themselves to the valuations made

by  the  ego-instincts,  precisely  in  the  way  in  which  the  first  sexual

satisfactions  are  experienced  in  attachment  to  the  bodily  functions

necessary  for  the  preservation  of  life.  The  ‘affection’  shown  by  the

child’s parents and those who look after him, which seldom fails to

betray its erotic nature (‘the child is an erotic plaything’), does a very

great deal to raise the contributions made by erotism to the cathexes

of his ego-instincts, and to increase them to an amount which is bound

to play a part in his later development, especially when certain other

circumstances lend their support.

 

   ¹ Steiner (1907), Stekel (1908), Ferenczi (1908).

   ² Stekel (1908, 191 ff.).

 


      On The Universal Tendency To Debasement In The Sphere Of

                                          Love

                                                                                      2339

 

      These  affectionate  fixations  of  the  child  persist  throughout

childhood,  and  continually  carry  along  with  them  erotism,  which  is

consequently diverted from its sexual aims. Then at the age of puberty

they  are  joined  by  the  powerful  ‘sensual’  current  which  no  longer

mistakes its aims. It never fails, apparently, to follow the earlier paths

and to cathect the objects of the primary infantile choice with quotas of

libido that are now far stronger. Here, however, it runs up against the

obstacles  that  have  been  erected  in  the  meantime  by  the  barrier

against incest; consequently it will make efforts to pass on from these

objects  which  are  unsuitable  in  reality,  and  find  a  way  as  soon  as

possible to other, extraneous objects with which a real sexual life may

be carried on. These new objects will still be chosen on the model(imago) of the infantile ones, but in the course of time they will attract

to themselves the affection that was tied to the earlier ones. A man

shall  leave  his  father  and  his  mother  -  according  to  the  biblical

command - and shall cleave unto his wife; affection and sensuality are

then united. The greatest intensity of sensual passion will bring with it

the highest psychical valuation of the object - this being the normal

overvaluation of the sexual object on the part of a man.

   Two factors will decide whether this advance in the developmental

path of the libido is to fail. First, there is the amount of frustration in

reality, which opposes the new object-choice and reduces its value for

the person concerned. There is after all no point in embarking upon an

object-choice  if  no  choice  is  to  be  allowed  at  all  or  if  there  is  no

prospect of being able to choose anything suitable. Secondly, there is

the amount of attraction which the infantile objects that have to be

relinquished are able to exercise, and which is in proportion to the

erotic cathexis attaching to them in childhood. If these two factors are

sufficiently strong, the general mechanism by which the neuroses are

formed  comes  into  operation.  The  libido  turns  away  from  reality,  is

taken  over  by  imaginative  activity  (the  process  of  introversion),

strengthens the images of the first sexual objects and becomes fixated

to  them.  The  obstacle  raised  against  incest,  however,  compels  the

libido that has turned to these objects to remain in the unconscious.

The masturbatory activity carried out by the sensual current, which is

now  part  of  the  unconscious,  makes  its  own  contribution  in

strengthening this fixation. Nothing is altered in this state of affairs if

the  advance  which  has  miscarried  in  reality  is  now  completed  in

phantasy, and if in the phantasy-situations that lead to masturbatory

satisfaction the original sexual objects are replaced by different ones.

As a result of this substitution the phantasies become admissible to

consciousness, but no progress is made in the allocation of the libido

in reality. In this way it can happen that the whole of a young man’s

sensuality becomes tied to incestuous objects in the unconscious, or

to  put  it  another  way,  becomes  fixated  to  unconscious  incestuous

phantasies.  The  result  is  then  total  impotence,  which  is  perhaps

further ensured by the simultaneous onset of an actual weakening of

the organs that perform the sexual act.

       On The Universal Tendency To Debasement In The Sphere Of

                                          Love

                                                                                      2340

 

   Less severe conditions are required to bring about the state known

specifically  as  psychical  impotence.  Here  the  fate  of  the  sensual

current must not be that its whole charge has to conceal itself behind

the affectionate current; it must have remained sufficiently strong or

uninhibited to secure a partial outlet into reality. The sexual activity of

such people shows the clearest signs, however, that it has not the

whole psychical driving force of the instinct behind it. It is capricious,

easily disturbed, often not properly carried out, and not accompanied

by much pleasure. But above all it is forced to avoid the affectionate

current.  A  restriction  has  thus  been  placed  on  object-choice.  The

sensual current that has remained active seeks only objects which do

not recall the incestuous figures forbidden to it;  if someone makes an

impression that might lead to a high psychical estimation of her, this

impression  does  not  find  an  issue  in  any  sensual  excitation  but  in

affection which has no erotic effect. The whole sphere of love in such

people  remains  divided  in  the  two  directions  personified  in  art  as

sacred  and  profane  (or  animal)  love.  Where  they  love  they  do  not

desire  and  where  they  desire  they  cannot  love.  They  seek  objects

which they do not need to love, in order to keep their sensuality away

from  the  objects  they  love;  and,  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of

‘complexive  sensitiveness’  and  of  the  return  of  the  repressed,  the

strange failure shown in psychical impotence makes its appearance

whenever an object which has been chosen with the aim of avoiding

incest  recalls  the  prohibited  object  through  some  feature,  often  an

inconspicuous one.

   The main protective measure against such a disturbance which men

have  recourse  to  in  this  split  in  their  love  consists  in  a  psychical

debasement  of  the  sexual  object,  the  overvaluation  that  normally

attaches to the sexual object being reserved for the incestuous object

and its representatives. As soon as the condition of debasement is

fulfilled,  sensuality  can  be  freely  expressed,  and  important  sexual

capacities  and  a  high  degree  of  pleasure  can  develop.  There  is  a

further factor which contributes to this result. People in whom therehas not been a proper confluence of the affectionate and the sensual

currents  do  not  usually  show  much  refinement  in  their  modes  of

behaviour  in  love;  they  have  retained  perverse  sexual  aims  whose

non-fulfilment  is  felt  as  a  serious  loss  of  pleasure,  and  whose

fulfilment on the other hand seems possible only with a debased and

despised sexual object.

   We can now understand the motives behind the boy’s phantasies

mentioned in the first of these ‘Contributions’ (above, p. 2331), which

degrade the mother to the level of a prostitute. They are efforts to

bridge  the  gulf  between  the  two  currents  in  love,  at  any  rate  in

phantasy, and by debasing the mother to acquire her as an object of

sensuality.

 


      On The Universal Tendency To Debasement In The Sphere Of

                                          Love

                                                                                      2341

 

                                            2

 

   In the preceding section we have approached the study of psychical

impotence from a medico-psychological angle of which the title of this

paper  gives  no  indication.  It  will  how  ever  become  clear  that  this

introduction was required by us to provide an approach to our proper

subject.

      We  have  reduced  psychical  impotence  to  the  failure  of  the

affectionate  and  the  sensual  currents  in  love  to  combine,  and  this

developmental inhibition has in turn been explained as being due to

the influences of strong childhood fixations and of later frustration in

reality through the intervention of the barrier against incest. There is

one principal objection to the theory we advance; it does too much. It

explains  why  certain  people  suffer  from  psychical  impotence,  but  it

leaves us with the apparent mystery of how others have been able to

escape this disorder. Since we must recognize that all the relevant

factors known to us - the strong childhood fixation, the incest-barrier

and the frustration in the years of development after puberty - are to

be  found  in  practically  all  civilized  human  beings,  we  should  bejustified in expecting psychical impotence to be a universal affliction

under civilization and not a disorder confined to some individuals.

   It would be easy to escape from this conclusion by pointing to the

quantitative factor in the causation of illness - to the greater or lesser

extent  of  the  contribution  made  by  the  various  elements  which

determine whether a recognizable illness results or not. But although I

accept this answer as correct, it is not my intention to make it a reason

for rejecting the conclusion itself. On the contrary, I shall put forward

the view that psychical impotence is much more widespread than is

supposed, and that a certain amount of this behaviour does in fact

characterize the love of civilized man.

      If  the  concept  of  psychical  impotence  is  broadened  and  is  not

restricted to failure to perform the act of coitus in circumstances where

a  desire  to  obtain  pleasure  is  present  and  the  genital  apparatus  is

intact, we may in the first place add all those men who are described

as psychanaesthetic: men who never fail in the act but who carry it out

without getting any particular pleasure from it - a state of affairs that is

more common than one would think. Psycho-analytic examination of

such  cases  discloses  the  same  aetiological  factors  as  we  found  in

psychical impotence in the narrower sense, without at first arriving at

any explanation of the difference between their symptoms. An easily

justifiable  analogy  takes  one  from  these  anaesthetic  men  to  the

immense  number  of  frigid  women;  and  there  is  no  better  way  to

describe or understand their behaviour in love than by comparing it

with the more conspicuous disorder of psychical impotence in men.¹

 

   ¹ I am at the same time very willing to admit that frigidity in women s a complex subject

which can also be approached from another angle.
 


      On The Universal Tendency To Debasement In The Sphere Of

                                          Love

                                                                                      2342

 

   If however we turn our attention not to an extension of the concept

of psychical impotence, but to the gradations in its symptomatology,

we cannot escape the conclusion that the behaviour in love of men in

the  civilized  world  to-day  bears  the  stamp  altogether  of  psychicalimpotence. There are only a very few educated people in whom the

two currents of affection and sensuality have become properly fused;

the man almost always feels his respect for the woman acting as a

restriction on his sexual activity, and only develops full potency when

he is with a debased sexual object; and this in its turn is partly caused

by the entrance of perverse components into his sexual aims, which

he  does  not  venture  to  satisfy  with  a  woman  he  respects.  He  is

assured of complete sexual pleasure only when he can devote himself

unreservedly to obtaining satisfaction, which with his well-brought-up

wife, for instance, he does not dare to do. This is the source of his

need for a debased sexual object, a woman who is ethically inferior, to

whom he need attribute no aesthetic scruples, who does not know him

in his other social relations and cannot judge him in them. It is to such

a woman that he prefers to devote his sexual potency, even when the

whole  of  his  affection  belongs  to  a  woman  of  a  higher  kind.  It  is

possible,  too,  that  the  tendency  so  often  observed  in  men  of  the

highest classes of society to choose a woman of a lower class as a

permanent mistress or even as a wife is nothing but a consequence of

their need for a debased sexual object, to whom, psychologically, the

possibility of complete satisfaction is linked.

 


      On The Universal Tendency To Debasement In The Sphere Of

                                          Love

                                                                                      2343

 

      I  do  not  hesitate  to  make  the  two  factors  at  work  in  psychical

impotence  in  the  strict  sense  -  the  factors  of  intense  incestuous

fixation  in  childhood  and  the  frustration  by  reality  in  adolescence  -

responsible, too, for this extremely common characteristic of the love

of civilized men. It sounds not only disagreeable but also paradoxical,

yet it must nevertheless be said that anyone who is to be really free

and happy in love must have surmounted his respect for women and

have come to terms with the idea of incest with his mother or sister.

Anyone  who  subjects  himself  to  a  serious  self-examination  on  the

subject  of  this  requirement  will  be  sure  to  find  that  he  regards  the

sexual  act  basically  as  something  degrading,  which  defiles  andpollutes not only the body. The origin of this low opinion, which he will

certainly not willingly acknowledge, must be looked for in the period of

his youth in which the sensual current in him was already strongly

developed but its satisfaction with an object outside the family was

almost as completely prohibited as it was with an incestuous one.

   In our civilized world women are under the influence of a similar

after-effect  of  their  upbringing,  and,  in  addition,  of  their  reaction  to

men’s behaviour. It is naturally just as unfavourable for a woman if a

man  approaches  her  without  his  full  potency  as  it  is  if  his  initial

overvaluation of her when he is in love gives place to undervaluation

after he has possessed her. In the case of women there is little sign of

a need to debase their sexual object. This is no doubt connected with

the  absence  in  them  as  a  rule  of  anything  similar  to  the  sexual

overvaluation found in men. But their long holding back from sexuality

and the lingering of their sensuality in phantasy has another important

consequence for them. They are subsequently often unable to undo

the connection between sensual activity and the prohibition, and prove

to be psychically impotent, that is, frigid, when such activity is at last

allowed  them.  This  is  the  origin  of  the  endeavour  made  by  many

women to keep even legitimate relations secret for a while; and of the

capacity  of  other  women  for  normal  sensation  as  soon  as  the

condition  of  prohibition  is  re-established  by  a  secret  love  affair:

unfaithful to their husband, they are able to keep a second order of

faith with their lover.

 


      On The Universal Tendency To Debasement In The Sphere Of

                                          Love

                                                                                      2344

 

   The condition of forbiddenness in the erotic life of women is, I think,

comparable to the need on the part of men to debase their sexual

object. Both are consequences of the long period of delay, which is

demanded by education for cultural reasons, between sexual maturity

and sexual activity. Both aim at abolishing the psychical impotence

that results from the failure of affectionate and sensual impulses to

coalesce. That the effect of the same causes should be so different inmen and in women may perhaps be traced to another difference in the

behaviour of the two sexes. Civilized women do not usually transgress

the prohibition on sexual activity in the period during which they have

to  wait,  and  thus  they  acquire  the  intimate  connection  between

prohibition and sexuality. Men usually break through this prohibition if

they can satisfy the condition of debasing the object, and so they carry

on this condition into their love in later life.

   In view of the strenuous efforts being made in the civilized world to-

day to reform sexual life, it will not be superfluous to give a reminder

that psycho-analytic research is as remote from tendentiousness as

any other kind of research. It has no other end in view than to throw

light on things by tracing what is manifest back to what is hidden. It is

quite satisfied if reforms make use of its findings to replace what is

injurious  by  something  more  advantageous;  but  it  cannot  predict

whether other institutions may not result in other, and perhaps graver,

sacrifices.

 

                                            3

 

      The  fact  that  the  curb  put  upon  love  by  civilization  involves  a

universal tendency to debase sexual objects will perhaps lead us to

turn  our  attention  from  the  object  to  the  instincts  themselves.  The

damage caused by the initial frustration of sexual pleasure is seen in

the fact that the freedom later given to that pleasure in marriage does

not bring full satisfaction. But at the same time, if sexual freedom is

unrestricted from the outset the result is no better. It can easily be

shown that the psychical value of erotic needs is reduced as soon as

their satisfaction becomes easy. An obstacle is required in order to

heighten libido; and where natural resistances to satisfaction have not

been sufficient men have at all times erected conventional ones so as

to be able to enjoy love. This is true both of individuals and of nations.

In  times  in  which  there  were  no  difficulties  standing  in  the  way  of

sexual satisfaction, such as perhaps during the decline of the ancient

civilizations,  love  became  worthless  and  life  empty,  and  strong

reaction-formations  were  required  to  restore  indispensable  affective

values. In this connection it may be claimed that the ascetic current in

Christianity  created  psychical  values  for  love  which  pagan  antiquitywas  never  able  to  confer  on  it.  This  current  assumed  its  greatest

importance with the ascetic monks, whose lives were almost entirely

occupied with the struggle against libidinal temptation.

 


      On The Universal Tendency To Debasement In The Sphere Of

                                          Love

                                                                                      2345

 

      One’s  first  inclination  is  no  doubt  to  trace  back  the  difficulties

revealed here to universal characteristics of our organic instincts. It is

no  doubt  also  true  in  general  that  the  psychical  importance  of  an

instinct  rises  in  proportion  to  its  frustration.  Suppose  a  number  of

totally different human beings were all equally exposed to hunger. As

their imperative need for food mounted, all the individual differences

would  disappear  and  in  their  place  one  would  see  the  uniform

manifestations of the one unappeased instinct. But is it also true that

with the satisfaction of an instinct its psychical value always falls just

as sharply? Consider, for example, the relation of a drinker to wine. Is

it not true that wine always provides the drinker with the same toxic

satisfaction,  which  in  poetry  has  so  often  been  compared  to  erotic

satisfaction - a comparison acceptable from the scientific point of view

as well? Has one ever heard of the drinker being obliged constantly to

change his drink because he soon grows tired of keeping to the same

one? On the contrary, habit constantly tightens the bond between a

man and the kind of wine he drinks. Does one ever hear of a drinker

who  needs  to  go  to  a  country  where  wine  is  dearer  or  drinking  is

prohibited,  so  that  by  introducing  obstacles  he  can  reinforce  the

dwindling satisfaction that he obtains? Not at all. If we listen to what

our great alcoholics, such as Böcklin,¹ say about their relation to wine,

it sounds like the most perfect harmony, a model of a happy marriage.

Why is the relation of the lover to his sexual object so very different?

   It is my belief that, however strange it may sound, we must reckon

with the possibility that something in the nature of the sexual instinct

itself is unfavourable to the realization of complete satisfaction. If we

consider the long and difficult developmental history of the instinct,

two  factors  immediately  spring  to  mind  which  might  be  maderesponsible for this difficulty Firstly, as a result of the diphasic onset of

object-choice, and the interposition of the barrier against incest, the

final object of the sexual instinct is never any longer the original object

but only a surrogate for it. Psycho-analysis has shown us that when

the original object of a wishful impulse has been lost as a result of

repression,  it  is  frequently  represented  by  an  endless  series  of

substitutive objects none of which, however, brings full satisfaction.

This  may  explain  the  inconstancy  in  object-choice,  the  ‘craving  for

stimulation’ which is so often a feature of the love of adults.

 

   ¹ Floerke (1902, 16).

 


      On The Universal Tendency To Debasement In The Sphere Of

                                          Love

                                                                                      2346

 

   Secondly, we know that the sexual instinct is originally divided into a

great  number  of  components  -  or  rather,  it  develops  out  of  them  -

some of which cannot be taken up into the instinct in its later form, but

have at an earlier stage to be suppressed or put to other uses. These

are  above  all  the  coprophilic  instinctual  components,  which  have

proved incompatible with our aesthetic standards of culture, probably

since, as a result of our adopting an erect gait, we raised our organ of

smell  from  the  ground.  The  same  is  true  of  a  large  portion  of  the

sadistic  urges  which  are  a  part  of  erotic  life.  But  all  such

developmental processes affect only the upper layers of the complex

structure. The fundamental processes which produce erotic excitation

remain  unaltered.  The  excremental  is  all  too  intimately  and

inseparably bound up with the sexual; the position of the genitals -

inter  unrinas  et  faeces  -  remains  the  decisive  and  unchangeable

factor. One might say here, varying a well-known saying of the great

Napoleon:  ‘Anatomy  is  destiny.’  The  genitals  themselves  have  not

taken part in the development of the human body in the direction of

beauty: they have remained animal, and thus love, too, has remained

in essence just as animal as it ever was. The instincts of love are hard

to educate; education of them achieves now too much, now too little.

What  civilization  aims  at  making  out  of  them  seems  unattainableexcept at the price of a sensible loss of pleasure; the persistence of

the impulses that could not be made use of can be detected in sexual

activity in the form of non-satisfaction.

   Thus we may perhaps be forced to become reconciled to the idea

that it is quite impossible to adjust the claims of the sexual instinct to

the  demands  of  civilization;  that  in  consequence  of  its  cultural

development  renunciation  and  suffering,  as  well  as  the  danger  of

extinction  in  the  remotest  future,  cannot  be  avoided  by  the  human

race. This gloomy prognosis rests, it is true, on the single conjecture

that the non-satisfaction that goes with civilization is the necessary

consequence  of  certain  peculiarities  which  the  sexual  instinct  has

assumed  under  the  pressure  of  culture.  The  very  incapacity  of  the

sexual instinct to yield complete satisfaction as soon as it submits to

the first demands of civilization becomes the source, however, of the

noblest cultural achievements which are brought into being by ever

more  extensive  sublimation  of  its  instinctual  components.  For  what

motive would men have for putting sexual instinctual forces to other

uses  if,  by  any  distribution  of  those  forces,  they  could  obtain  fully

satisfying  pleasure?  They  would  never  abandon  that  pleasure  and

they would never make any further progress. It seems, therefore, that

the irreconcilable difference between the demands of the two instincts

- the sexual and the egoistic - has made men capable of ever higher

achievements,  though  subject,  it  is  true,  to  a  constant  danger,  to

which, in the form of neurosis, the weaker are succumbing to-day.

   It is not the aim of science either to frighten or to console. But I

myself am quite ready to admit that such far-reaching conclusions as

those I have drawn should be built on a broader foundation, and that

perhaps  developments  in  other  directions  may  enable  mankind  to

correct the results of the developments I have here been considering

in isolation.

                                                                                       2347

 

                            THE TABOO OF VIRGINITY

                  (CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE III)

                                        (1918)

 


                                                                                      2348

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2349

 

                            THE TABOO OF VIRGINITY

                  (CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE III)

 

Few details of the sexual life of primitive peoples are so alien to our

own feelings as their estimate of virginity, the state in a woman of

being  untouched.  The  high  value  which  her  suitor  places  on  a

woman’s virginity seems to us so firmly rooted, so much a matter of

course,  that  we  find  ourselves  almost  at  a  loss  if  we  have  to  give

reasons for this opinion. The demand that a girl shall not bring to her

marriage with a particular man any memory of sexual relations with

another is, indeed, nothing other than a logical continuation of the right

to  exclusive  possession  of  a  woman,  which  forms  the  essence  of

monogamy, the extension of this monopoly to cover the past.

   From this point we have no trouble in justifying what looked at first

like a prejudice, by referring to our views on the erotic life of women.

Whoever  is  the  first  to  satisfy  a  virgin’s  desire  for  love,  long  and

laboriously  held  in  check,  and  who  in  doing  so  overcomes  the

resistances which have been built up in her through the influences of

her milieu and education, that is the man she will take into a lasting

relationship, the possibility of which will never again be open to any

other man. This experience creates a state of bondage in the woman

which guarantees that possession of her shall continue undisturbed

and makes her able to resist new impressions and enticements fromoutside.

   The expression ‘sexual bondage’ was chosen by von Krafft Ebing

(1892)  to  describe  the  phenomenon  of  a  person’s  acquiring  an

unusually  high  degree  of  dependence  and  lack  of  self-reliance  in

relation to another person with whom he has a sexual relationship.

This bondage can on occasion extend very far, as far as the loss of all

independence  will  and  as  far  as  causing  a  person  to  suffer  the

greatest sacrifices of his own interests; the author, however, does not

fail  to  remark  that  a  certain  measure  of  such  dependence  ‘is

absolutely necessary, if the tie is to last for any length of time’. Some

such  measure  of  sexual  bondage  is,  indeed,  indispensable  to  the

maintenance  of  civilized  marriage  and  to  holding  at  bay  the

polygamous  tendencies  which  threaten  it,  and  in  our  social

communities this factor is regularly reckoned upon.

 


                                The Taboo Of Virginity

                                                                                      2350

 

   Von Krafft-Ebing derives the formation of sexual bondage from a

conjunction of an ‘uncommon degree of the state of being in love and

of weakness of character’ in one person and unbounded egoism in the

other. Analytic experience, however, will not let us rest satisfied with

this  simple  attempt  at  explanation.  We  can  see,  rather,  that  the

decisive factor is the amount of sexual resistance that is overcome

and in addition the fact that the process of overcoming the resistance

is  concentrated  and  happens  only  once.  This  state  of  bondage  is,

accordingly,  far  more  frequent  and  more  intense  in  women  than  in

men, though it is true it occurs in the latter more often nowadays than

it did in ancient times. Wherever we have been able to study sexual

bondage in men it has shown itself as resulting from an overcoming of

psychical impotence through one particular woman, to whom the man

in  question  has  remained  subsequently  bound.  Many  strange

marriages and not a few tragic events - even some with far-reaching

consequences - seem to owe their explanation to this origin.

   Turning to the attitude of primitive peoples, it is incorrect to describe

it by declaring that they set no value on virginity and to submit as proofof  this  the  fact  that  they  perform  the  defloration  of  girls  outside

marriage  and  before  the  first  act  of  marital  intercourse.  On  the

contrary, it appears that for them, too, defloration is a significant act;

but it has become the subject of a taboo - of a prohibition which may

be  described  as  religious.  Instead  of  reserving  it  for  the  girl’s

bridegroom and future partner in marriage, custom demands that he

shall shun the performance of it.¹

   It is no part of my purpose to make a full collection of the literary

evidence for the existence of this custom of prohibition, to pursue its

geographical distribution and to enumerate all the forms in which it is

expressed. I shall content myself, therefore, with stating the fact that

the practice of rupturing the hymen in this way outside the subsequent

marriage is very widespread among primitive races living to-day. As

Crawley says ‘This marriage ceremony consists in perforation of the

hymen by some appointed person other than the husband; it is most

common  in  the  lowest  stages  of  culture,  especially  in  Australia.’

(Crawley, 1902, 347.)

 

   ¹ Cf. Crawley (1902), Ploss and Bartels (1891), Frazer (1911) and Havelock Ellis.

 


                                The Taboo Of Virginity

                                                                                      2351

 

   If, however, defloration is not to result from the first act of marital

intercourse, then it must have been carried out beforehand - whatever

the way and whoever the agent may have been. I shall quote a few

passages  from  Crawley’s  book,  mentioned  above,  which  provide

information  on  these  points  but  also  give  grounds  for  some  critical

observations.

   (Ibid., 191.) ‘Thus in the Dieri and neighbouring tribes (in Australia) it

is  the  universal  custom  when  a  girl  reaches  puberty  to  rupture  the

hymen (Journal of the Royal Antrhopological Institute, 24, 169). In the

Portland and Glenelg tribes this is done to the bride by an old woman;

and  sometimes  white  men  are  asked  for  this  reason  to  deflower

maidens (Brough Smith, 2, 319).’

   (Ibid., 307.) ‘The artificial rupture of the hymen sometimes takes

place in infancy, but generally at puberty. . . . It is often combined, asin Australia, with a ceremonial act of intercourse.’

      (Ibid.,  348.)  (Of  Australian  tribes  among  which  the  well  known

exogamous  marriage-restrictions  are  in  force,  from  communications

by Spencer and Gillen:) ‘The hymen is artificially perforated, and then

the assisting men have access (ceremonial, be it observed) to the girl

in  a  stated  order.  .  .  .  The  act  is  in  two  parts,  perforation  and

intercourse.’

      (Ibid.,  349.)  ‘An  important  preliminary  of  marriage  amongst  the

Masai (in Equatorial Africa) is the performance of this operation on the

girl (J. Thomson, 2, 258). This defloration is performed by the father of

the bride amongst the Sakais (Malay), Battas (Sumatra), and Alfoers

of Celebes (Ploss and Bartels, 2, 490). In the Philippines there were

certain men whose profession it was to deflower brides, in case the

hymen had not been ruptured in childhood by an old woman who was

sometimes employed for this (Featherman, 2, 474). The defloration of

the bride was amongst some Eskimo tribes entrusted to the angekok,

or priest (ibid., 3, 406).’

 


                                The Taboo Of Virginity

                                                                                      2352

 

   The critical remarks I referred to are concerned with two points.

Firstly, it is a pity that in these reports a more careful distinction is not

made between simple rupture of the hymen without intercourse, and

intercourse for the purpose of effecting this rupture. There is only one

passage in which we are told expressly that the procedure falls into

two actions: defloration (carried out by hand or with some instrument)

and the act of intercourse which follows it. The material in Ploss and

Bartels  (1891),  in  other  respects  so  rich,  is  almost  useless  for  our

purpose,  because  in  their  presentation  of  it  the  psychological

importance of the act of defloration is completely displaced in favour of

its anatomical results. Secondly, we should be glad to be informed

how  the  ‘ceremonial’  (purely  formal,  ritual,  or  official)  coitus,  which

takes  place  on  these  occasions,  differs  from  ordinary  sexual

intercourse. The authors to whom I have had access either have been

too  embarrassed  to  discuss  the  matter  or  have  once  againunderestimated the psychological importance of such sexual details. It

is  to  be  hoped  that  the  first-hand  accounts  of  travellers  and

missionaries may be more complete and less ambiguous, but since

this literature, which is for the most part foreign, is for the time being

inaccessible I cannot say anything definite on the subject. Besides, we

may get round the problem arising over this second point if we bear in

mind  the  fact  that  a  ceremonial  mock-coitus  would  after  all  only

represent a substitute for, and perhaps replace altogether, an act that

in earlier times would have been carried out completely.¹

      There  are  various  factors  which  can  be  adduced  to  explain  this

taboo  of  virginity  and  which  I  will  enumerate  and  consider  briefly.

When  a  virgin  is  deflowered,  her  blood  is  as  a  rule  shed;  the  first

attempt at explanation, then, is based on the horror of blood among

primitive races who consider blood as the seat of life. This blood taboo

is seen in numerous kinds of observances which have nothing to do

with sexuality; it is obviously connected with the prohibition against

murder and forms a protective measure against the primal thirst for

blood, primaeval man’s pleasure in killing. According to this view the

taboo of virginity is connected with the taboo of menstruation which is

almost universally maintained. Primitive people cannot dissociate the

puzzling  phenomenon  of  this  monthly  flow  of  blood  from  sadistic

ideas. Menstruation, especially its first appearance, is interpreted as

the bite of some spirit-animal, perhaps as a sign of sexual intercourse

with this spirit. Occasionally some report gives grounds for recognizing

the spirit as that of an ancestor and then, supported by other findings,²

we understand that the menstruating girl is taboo because she is the

property of this ancestral spirit.

 

   ¹ In numerous other examples of marriage ceremonies there can be no doubt that people

other  than  the  bridegroom,  for  example  his  assistants  and  companions  (our  traditional
‘groomsmen’ [‘Kranzelherrn’]), are granted full sexual access to the bride.

   ² Cf. Totem and Taboo (1912-13).

 


                                The Taboo Of Virginity

                                                                                      2353

 

   Other considerations, however, warn us not to over-estimate theinfluence of a factor such as the horror of blood. It has not, after all,

been  strong  enough  to  suppress  practices  like  the  circumcision  of

boys  and  the  still  more  cruel  equivalent  with  girls  (excision  of  the

clitoris and labia minora) which are to some extent the custom in these

same  races,  nor  to  abolish  the  prevalence  of  other  ceremonies

involving bloodshed. It would not therefore be surprising, either, if this

horror were overcome for the benefit of the husband on the occasion

of the first cohabitation.

   There is a second explanation, also unconcerned with sexuality,

which  has,  however,  a  much  more  general  scope  than  the  first.  It

suggests  that  primitive  man  is  prey  to  a  perpetual  lurking

apprehensiveness,  just  as  in  the  psycho-analytic  theory  of  the

neuroses we claim to be the case with people suffering from anxiety

neurosis.  This  apprehensiveness  will  appear  most  strongly  on  all

occasions  which  differ  in  any  way  from  the  usual,  which  involve

something new or unexpected, something not understood or uncanny.

This is also the origin of the ceremonial practices, widely adopted in

later religions, which are connected with the beginning of every new

undertaking, the start of every new period of time, the first-fruits of

human,  animal  and  plant  life.  The  dangers  which  the  anxious  man

believes  to  be  threatening  him  never  appear  more  vivid  in  his

expectation than on the threshold of a dangerous situation, and then,

too, is the only time when protecting himself against them is of any

use. The first act of intercourse in marriage can certainly claim, on

grounds  of  importance,  to  be  preceded  by  such  precautionary

measures.  These  two  attempts  at  explanation,  based  on  horror  of

blood and on fear of first occurrences, do not contradict but rather

reinforce  each  other.  The  first  occasion  of  sexual  intercourse  is

certainly a critical action, all the more so if it is to involve a flow of

blood.

 


                                The Taboo Of Virginity

                                                                                      2354

 

   A third explanation - the one which Crawley prefers - draws attention

to the fact that the taboo of virginity is part of a large totality whichembraces the whole of sexual life. It is not only the first coitus with a

woman which is taboo but sexual intercourse in general; one might

almost  say  that  women  are  altogether  taboo.  A  woman  is  not  only

taboo  in  particular  situations  arising  from  her  sexual  life  such  as

menstruation,  pregnancy,  childbirth  and  lying-in;  apart  from  these

situations,  intercourse  with  women  is  subject  to  such  solemn  and

numerous restrictions that we have every reason to doubt the reputed

sexual  freedom  of  savages.  It  is  true  that,  on  particular  occasions,

primitive man’s sexuality will override all inhibitions; but for the most

part it seems to be more strongly held in check by prohibitions than it

is at higher levels of civilization. Whenever the man undertakes some

special  enterprise,  like  setting  out  on  an  expedition,  a  hunt  or  a

campaign, he is obliged to keep away from his wife and especially

from  sexual  intercourse  with  her;  otherwise  she  will  paralyse  his

strength and bring him bad luck. In the usages of daily life as well

there is an unmistakable tendency to keep the sexes apart. Women

live  with  women,  men  with  men;  family  life,  in  our  sense,  seems

scarcely to exist in many primitive tribes. This separation sometimes

goes  so  far  that  one  sex  is  not  allowed  to  say  aloud  the  personal

names of members of the other sex, and that the women develop a

language with a special vocabulary. Sexual needs will from time to

time break through these barriers of separation afresh, but in some

tribes even the encounters of husband and wife have to take place

outside the house and in secret.

   Wherever primitive man has set up a taboo he fears some danger

and  it  cannot  be  disputed  that  a  generalized  dread  of  women  is

expressed in all these rules of avoidance. Perhaps this dread is based

on  the  fact  that  woman  is  different  from  man,  forever

incomprehensible  and  mysterious,  strange  and  therefore  apparently

hostile. The man is afraid of being weakened by the woman, infected

with her femininity and of then showing himself incapable. The effect

which coitus has on discharging tensions and causing flaccidity may

be  the  prototype  of  what  the  man  fears;  and  realization  of  the

influence which the woman gains over him through sexual intercourse,

the  consideration  she  thereby  forces  from  him,  may  justify  the

extension  of  this  fear.  In  all  this  there  is  nothing  obsolete,  nothing

which is not still alive among ourselves. 


                                The Taboo Of Virginity

                                                                                      2355

 

   Many observers of primitive races living to-day have put forward the

view that their impulsions in love are relatively weak and never reach

the  degree  of  intensity  which  we  are  accustomed  to  meet  with  in

civilized men. Other observers have contradicted this opinion, but in

any case the practice of the taboos we have described testifies to the

existence  of  a  force  which  opposes  love  by  rejecting  women  as

strange and hostile.

   Crawley, in language which differs only slightly from the current

terminology  of  psycho-analysis,  declares  that  each  individual  is

separated from the others by a ‘taboo of personal isolation’, and that it

is precisely the minor differences in people who are otherwise alike

that form the basis of feelings of strangeness and hostility between

them. It would be tempting to pursue this idea and to derive from this

‘narcissism of minor differences’ the hostility which in every human

relation we see fighting successfully against feelings of fellowship and

overpowering  the  commandment  that  all  men  should  love  one

another. Psycho-analysis believes that it has discovered a large part

of what underlies the narcissistic rejection of women by men, which is

so much mixed up with despising them, in drawing attention to the

castration complex and its influence on the opinion in which women

are held.

   We can see, however, that these latter considerations have led us to

range far beyond our subject. The general taboo of women throws no

light on the particular rules concerning the first sexual act with a virgin.

As far as they are concerned, we have not got beyond the first two

explanations, based on horror of blood and fear of first occurrences,

and even these, we must point out, do not touch the core of the taboo

in question. It is quite clear that the intention underlying this taboo is

that  of denying  or  sparing  precisely  the  future  husband  something

which  cannot  be  dissociated  from  the  first  sexual  act,  although

according  to  our  introductory  observations  this  very  relation  would

lead to the woman becoming specially bound to this one man. 


                                The Taboo Of Virginity

                                                                                      2356

 

   It is not our task on this occasion to discuss the origin and ultimate

significance of taboo observances. I have done this in my book Totem

and Taboo, where I have given due consideration to the part played

by primal ambivalence in determining the formation of taboo and have

traced the genesis of the latter from the prehistoric events which led to

the  founding  of  the  human  family.  We  can  no  longer  recognize  an

original meaning of this kind in taboos observed among primitive tribes

to-day. We forget all too easily, in expecting to find any such thing,

that even the most primitive peoples exist in a culture far removed

from that of primaeval days, which is just as old as our own from the

point of view of time and like ours corresponds to a later, if different,

stage of development.

   To-day we find taboos among primitive peoples already elaborated

into an intricate system of just the sort that neurotics among ourselves

develop in their phobias, and we find old motifs replaced by new ones

that fit together harmoniously. Leaving aside these genetic problems,

then, we will go back to the idea that primitive man institutes a taboo

where  he  fears  some  danger.  Taking  it  generally  this  danger  is  a

psychical one, for primitive man is not impelled at this point to make

two distinctions, which to us it seems cannot be disregarded. He does

not separate material from psychical danger, nor real from imaginary.

In his consistently applied animistic view of the universe, every danger

springs  from  the  hostile  intention  of  some  being  with  a  soul  like

himself, and this is as much the case with dangers which threaten him

from some natural force as it is with those from other human beings or

animals. But on the other hand he is accustomed to project his own

internal impulses of hostility on to the external world, to ascribe them,

that is, to the objects which he feels to be disagreeable or even merely

strange. In this way women also are regarded as being a source of

such dangers, and the first act of sexual intercourse with a woman

stands out as a danger of particular intensity.

                                 The Taboo Of Virginity

                                                                                      2357

 

   Now I believe that we shall receive some indication as to what this

heightened  danger  is  and  why  it  threatens  precisely  the  future

husband, if we examine more closely the behaviour under the same

circumstances of women of our own stage of civilization to-day. I will

submit  in  advance,  as  the  result  of  this  examination,  that  such  a

danger really exists, so that with the taboo of virginity primitive man is

defending  himself  against  a  correctly  sensed,  although  psychical,

danger.

      We  consider  it  to  be  the  normal  reaction  for  a  woman  after

intercourse to embrace the man, pressing him to her at the climax of

satisfaction, and we see this as an expression of her gratitude and a

token of lasting bondage. But we know it is by no means the rule that

the first occasion of intercourse should lead to this behaviour; very

frequently it means only disappointment for the woman, who remains

cold  and  unsatisfied,  and  it  usually  requires  quite  a  long  time  and

frequent  repetition  of  the  sexual  act  before  she  too  begins  to  find

satisfaction  in  it.  There  is  an  unbroken  series  from  these  cases  of

mere  initial  frigidity  which  soon  vanishes,  up  to  the  cheerless

phenomenon  of  permanent  and  obstinate  frigidity  which  no  tender

efforts on the part of the husband can overcome. I believe this frigidity

in  women  is  not  yet  sufficiently  understood  and,  except  for  those

cases which must be blamed on the man’s insufficient potency, calls

for elucidation, possibly through allied phenomena.

   I do not want to introduce at this point the attempts - which are so

frequent - to take flight from the first occasion of sexual intercourse,

because they are open to several interpretations and are in the main,

although  not  altogether,  to  be  understood  as  an  expression  of  the

general female tendency to take a defensive line. As against this, I do

believe that light is thrown on the riddle of female frigidity by certain

pathological  cases  in  which,  after  the  first  and  indeed  after  each

repeated  instance  of  sexual  intercourse,  the  woman  gives

unconcealed expression to her hostility towards the man by abusing

him, raising her hand against him or actually striking him. In one very

clear  case  of  this  kind,  which  I  was  able  to  submit  to  a  thoroughanalysis,  this  happened  although  the  woman  loved  the  man  very

much,  used  to  demand  intercourse  herself  and  unmistakably  found

great satisfaction in it. I think that this strange, contradictory reaction is

the result of the very same impulses which ordinarily can only find

expression  as  frigidity  -  which,  that  is,  can  hold  back  the  tender

reaction without at the same time being able to put themselves into

effect. In the pathological case we find separated so to speak into its

two components what in the far more common instance of frigidity is

united to produce an inhibiting effect, just like the process we have

long recognized in the so-called ‘diphasic symptoms’ of obsessional

neurosis. The danger which is thus aroused through the defloration of

a woman would consist in drawing her hostility down upon oneself,

and the prospective husband is just the person who would have every

reason to avoid such enmity.

 


                                The Taboo Of Virginity

                                                                                      2358

 

   Now analysis enables us to infer without difficulty which impulses in

women take part in bringing about this paradoxical behaviour, in which

I expect to find the explanation of frigidity. The first act of intercourse

mobilizes a number of impulses which are out of place in the desired

feminine attitude, some of which, incidentally, need not recur during

subsequent intercourse. In the first place we think of the pain which

defloration  causes  a  virgin,  and  we  are  perhaps  even  inclined  to

consider  this  factor  as  decisive  and  to  give  up  the  search  for  any

others. But we cannot well ascribe such importance to this pain; we

must rather substitute for it the narcissistic injury which proceeds from

the  destruction  of  an  organ  and  which  is  even  represented  in  a

rationalized  form  in  the  knowledge  that  loss  of  virginity  brings  a

diminution of sexual value. The marriage customs of primitive peoples,

however,  contain  a  warning  against  over-estimating  this.  We  have

heard  that  in  some  cases  the  rite  falls  into  two  phases:  after  the

hymen has been ruptured (by hand or with some instrument) there

follows  a  ceremonial  act  of  coitus  or  mock-intercourse  with  the

representatives of the husband, and this proves to us that the purposeof  the  taboo  observance  is  not  fulfilled  by  avoiding  anatomical

defloration, that the husband is to be spared something else as well as

the woman’s reaction to the painful injury.

   We find a further reason for the disappointment experienced in the

first act of intercourse in the fact that, with civilized women at least,

fulfilment  cannot  be  in  accordance  with  expectations.  Before  this,

sexual intercourse has been associated in the strongest possible way

with prohibitions; lawful and permissible intercourse is not, therefore,

felt to be the same thing. Just how close this association can be is

demonstrated in an almost comic fashion by the efforts of so many

girls about to be married to keep their new love-relationship secret

from  everyone  outside,  and  indeed  even  from  their  parents,  where

there is no real necessity to do so and no objection can be looked for.

Girls  often  say  openly  that  their  love  loses  value  for  them  if  other

people know of it. On occasion this feeling can become dominating

and can completely prevent the development of any capacity for love

in a marriage. The woman only recovers her susceptibility to tender

feelings in an illicit relationship which has to be kept secret, and in

which alone she knows for certain that her own will is uninfluenced.

   However, this motive does not go deep enough either; besides,

being  bound  up  with  civilized  conditions,  it  fails  to  provide  a

satisfactory  connection  with  the  state  of  affairs  among  primitive

people. All the more important, therefore, is the next factor, which is

based  on  the  evolution  of  the  libido.  We  have  learnt  from  analytic

researches how universal and how powerful the earliest allocations of

libido  are.  In  these  we  are  concerned  with  infantile  sexual  wishes

which are clung to (in women usually a fixation of the libido on the

father  or  a  brother  who  takes  his  place)  -  wishes  which  frequently

enough  were  directed  towards  other  things  than  intercourse,  or

included  it  only  as  a  dimly  perceived  goal.  The  husband  is  almost

always so to speak only a substitute, never the right man; it is another

man - in typical cases the father - who has first claim to a woman’s

love, the husband at most takes second place. It depends on how

intense this fixation is and on how obstinately it is maintained whether

the substitute is rejected as unsatisfying. Frigidity is thus among the

genetic determinants of neuroses. The more powerful the psychical

element in a woman’s sexual life is, the greater will be the capacity for