                                                                                      5079

 

                            ANTI-SEMITISM IN ENGLAND

                                        (1938)

 

                                                              20 Maresfield Gardens

                                                                        London, N.W.3.

                                                                              16.11.1938.

 

To the Editor of Time and Tide.

   I came to Vienna as a child of 4 years from a small town in Moravia.

After 78 years of assiduous work I had to leave my home, saw the

Scientific Society I had founded, dissolved, our institutions destroyed,

our Printing Press (‘Verlag’) taken over by the invaders, the books I

had published confiscated or reduced to pulp, my children expelled

from  their  professions.  Don’t  you  think  you  ought  to  reserve  the

columns  of  your  special  number  for  the  utterances  of  non-Jewish

people, less personally involved than myself?

   In this connection my mind gets hold of an old French saying:

 

                                                                Le bruit est pour le fat
                                                                La plainte est pour le sot;
                                                                L’honnête homme trompé

                                                                S’en va et ne dit mot.¹

 

   I feel deeply affected by the passage in your letter acknowledging ‘a

certain  growth  of  anti-semitism  even  in  this  country’.  Ought  this

present persecution not rather give rise to a wave of sympathy in this

country?

                                                                    Respectfully yours

                                                                          Sigm. Freud.

 

   ¹ [‘A fuss becomes the Fop

       A Fool’s complaints are heard;
       A Gentleman betrayed
       Departs without a word.’]

  

                                  About This Edition

 

  The  intention  of  this  edition  is  to  make  Freud  freely  available  to

anyone who wants him.

  You are encouraged to distribute this file. On no account, however,

may anything, other than a nominal fee for its distribution, be charged.

  This text is also available in the following formats:

   Microsoft® CHM (Freud_Complete_Works.chm)

   Adobe® PDF (Freud_Complete_Works.pdf)

   EPUB® (Freud_Complete_Works.epub)

   DJVU (Freud_Complete_Works.djvu)

   Isilo® PDB (Freud_Complete_Works.pdb)

   Microsoft® HLP (Frcw2.zip)

    The  text  in  all  seven  versions  is,  apart  from  a  few  minor  textual

corrections, identical.

 

  Ivan Smith  2000, 2007, 2010, 2011.

  All rights reserved.

 