 

 

   Hoffmann is the unrivalled master of the uncanny in literature. His

novel, Die Elixire des Teufels, contains a whole mass of themes to

which one is tempted to ascribe the uncanny effect of the narrative;

but it is too obscure and intricate a story for us to venture upon a

summary of it. Towards the end of the book the reader is told the

facts, hitherto concealed from him, from which the action springs; with

the result, not that he is at last enlightened, but that he falls into a

state of complete bewilderment. The author has piled up too much

material of the same kind. In consequence one’s grasp of the story as

a whole suffers, though not the impression it makes. We must content

ourselves with selecting those themes of uncanniness which are most

prominent, and with seeing whether they too can fairly be traced back

to  infantile  sources.  These  themes  are  all  concerned  with  the

phenomenon  of  the  ‘double’,  which  appears  in  every  shape  and  in

every degree of development. Thus we have characters who are to be

considered  identical  because  they  look  alike.  This  relation  is

accentuated  by  mental  processes  leaping  from  one  of  these

characters to another - by what we should call telepathy -, so that the

one possesses knowledge, feelings and experience in common with

the other. Or it is marked by the fact that the subject identifies himself

with someone else, so that he is in doubt as to which his self is, or

substitutes the extraneous self for his own. In other words, there is a

doubling, dividing and interchanging of the self. And finally there is the

constant  recurrence  of  the  same  thing  -  the  repetition  of  the  same

features or character-traits or vicissitudes, of the same crimes, or even

the same names through several consecutive generations.

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3687

 

   The theme of the ‘double’ has been very thoroughly treated by Otto

Rank (1914). He has gone into the connections which the ‘double’ has

with reflections in mirrors, with shadows, with guardian spirits, with the

belief in the soul and with the fear of death; but he also lets in a floodof light on the surprising evolution of the idea. For the ‘double’ was

originally  an  insurance  against  the  destruction  of  the  ego,  an

‘energetic denial of the power of death’, as Rank says; and probably

the ‘immortal’ soul was the first ‘double’ of the body. This invention of

doubling as a preservation against extinction has its counterpart in the

language  of  dreams,  which  is  fond  of  representing  castration  by  a

doubling or multiplication of a genital symbol. The same desire led the

Ancient Egyptians to develop the art of making images of the dead in

lasting materials. Such ideas, however, have sprung from the soil of

unbounded  self-love,  from  the  primary  narcissism  which  dominates

the mind of the child and of primitive man. But when this stage has

been surmounted, the ‘double’ reverses its aspect. From having been

an  assurance  of  immortality,  it  becomes  the  uncanny  harbinger  of

death.

   The idea of the ‘double’ does not necessarily disappear with the

passing of primary narcissism, for it can receive fresh meaning from

the later stages of the ego’s development. A special agency is slowly

formed there, which is able to stand over against the rest of the ego,

which  has  the  function  of  observing  and  criticizing  the  self  and  of

exercising a censorship within the mind, and which we become aware

of as our ‘conscience’. In the pathological case of delusions of being

watched, this mental agency becomes isolated, dissociated from the

ego, and discernible to the physician’s eye. The fact that an agency of

this kind exists, which is able to treat the rest of the ego like an object

- the fact, that is, that man is capable of self-observation - renders it

possible to invest the old idea of a ‘double’ with a new meaning and to

ascribe a number of things to it - above all, those things which seem to

self-criticism to belong to the old surmounted narcissism of earliest

times.¹

 

   ¹ I believe that when poets complain that two souls dwell in the human breast, and when

popular psychologists talk of the splitting of people’s egos, what they are thinking of is this
division (in the sphere of ego-psychology) between the critical agency and the rest of the ego,
and  not  the  antithesis  discovered  by  psycho-analysis  between  the  ego  and  what  is
unconscious and repressed. It is true that the distinction between these two antitheses is to
some extent effaced by the circumstance that foremost among the things that are rejected by
the criticism of the ego are derivatives of the repressed.
                                       The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3688

 

   But it is not only this latter material, offensive as it is to the criticism

of the ego, which may be incorporated in the idea of a double. There

are also all the unfulfilled but possible futures to which we still like to

cling in phantasy, all the strivings of the ego which adverse external

circumstances have crushed, and all our suppressed acts of volition

which nourish in us the illusion of Free Will.¹

      But  after  having  thus  considered  the manifest  motivation  of  the

figure of a ‘double’, we have to admit that none of this helps us to

understand  the  extraordinarily  strong  feeling  of  something  uncanny

that  pervades  the  conception;  and  our  knowledge  of  pathological

mental  processes  enables  us  to  add  that  nothing  in  this  more

superficial material could account for the urge towards defence which

has  caused  the  ego  to  project  that  material  outward  as  something

foreign to itself. When all is said and done, the quality of uncanniness

can only come from the fact of the ‘double’ being a creation dating

back to a very early mental stage, long since surmounted - a stage,

incidentally, at which it wore a more friendly aspect. The ‘double’ has

become a thing of terror, just as, after the collapse of their religion, the

gods turned into demons.²

      The  other  forms  of  ego-disturbance  exploited  by  Hoffmann  can

easily be estimated along the same lines as the theme of the ‘double’.

They are a harking-back to particular phases in the evolution of the

self-regarding feeling, a regression to a time when the ego had not yet

marked  itself  off  sharply  from  the  external  world  and  from  other

people.  I  believe  that  these  factors  are  partly  responsible  for  the

impression  of  uncanniness,  although  it  is  not  easy  to  isolate  and

determine exactly their share of it.

 

   ¹ In Ewers’s Der Student von Prag, which serves as the starting-point of Rank’s study on

the ‘double’, the hero has promised his beloved not to kill his antagonist in a duel. But on his
way to the duelling-ground he meets his ‘double’, who has already killed his rival.

   ² Heine, Die Götter im Exil.

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'                                                                                      3689

 

   The factor of the repetition of the same thing will perhaps not appeal

to  everyone  as  a  source  of  uncanny  feeling.  From  what  I  have

observed,  this  phenomenon  does  undoubtedly,  subject  to  certain

conditions  and  combined  with  certain  circumstances,  arouse  an

uncanny feeling, which, furthermore, recalls the sense of helplessness

experienced in some dream states. As I was walking, one hot summer

afternoon, through the deserted streets of a provincial town in Italy

which  was  unknown  to  me,  I  found  myself  in  a  quarter  of  whose

character I could not long remain in doubt. Nothing but painted women

were to be seen at the windows of the small houses, and I hastened to

leave the narrow street at the next turning. But after having wandered

about for a time without enquiring my way, I suddenly found myself

back in the same street, where my presence was now beginning to

excite attention. I hurried away once more, only to arrive by another

détour at the same place yet a third time. Now, however, a feeling

overcame me which I can only describe as uncanny, and I was glad

enough  to  find  myself  back  at  the  piazza  I  had  left  a  short  while

before,  without  any  further  voyages  of  discovery.  Other  situations

which have in common with my adventure an unintended recurrence

of  the  same  situation,  but  which  differ  radically  from  it  in  other

respects,  also  result  in  the  same  feeling  of  helplessness  and  of

uncanniness. So, for instance, when, caught in a mist perhaps, one

has  lost  one’s  way  in  a  mountain  forest,  every  attempt  to  find  the

marked or familiar path may bring one back again and again to one

and  the  same  spot,  which  one  can  identify  by  some  particular

landmark. Or one may wander about in a dark, strange room, looking

for the door or the electric switch, and collide time after time with the

same piece of furniture - though it is true that Mark Twain succeeded

by  wild  exaggeration  in  turning  this  latter  situation  into  something

irresistibly comic.

   If we take another class of things, it is easy to see that there, too, it

is only this factor of involuntary repetition which surrounds what would

otherwise  be  innocent  enough  with  an  uncanny  atmosphere,  and

forces upon us the idea of something fateful and inescapable when

otherwise we should have spoken only of ‘chance’. For instance, wenaturally  attach  no  importance  to  the  event  when  we  hand  in  an

overcoat and get a cloak room ticket with the number, let us say, 62;

or when we find that our cabin on a ship bears that number. But the

impression  is  altered  if  two  such  events,  each  in  itself  indifferent,

happen close together - if we come across the number 62 several

times in a single day, or if we begin to notice that everything which has

a number - addresses, hotel rooms, compartments in railway trains -

invariably has the same one, or at all events one which contains the

same figures. We do feel this to be uncanny. And unless a man is

utterly hardened and proof against the lure of superstition, he will be

tempted to ascribe a secret meaning to this obstinate recurrence of a

number; he will take it, perhaps, as an indication of the span of life

allotted to him. Or suppose one is engaged in reading the works of the

famous  physiologist,  Hering,  and  within  the  space  of  a  few  days

receives two letters from two different countries, each from a person

called  Hering,  though  one  has  never  before  had  any  dealings  with

anyone of that name. Not long ago an ingenious scientist (Kammerer,

1919) attempted to reduce coincidences of this kind to certain laws,

and  so  deprive  them  of  their  uncanny  effect.  I  will  not  venture  to

decide whether he has succeeded or not.

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3690

 

   How exactly we can trace back to infantile psychology the uncanny

effect of such similar recurrences is a question I can only lightly touch

on  in  these  pages;  and  I  must  refer  the  reader  instead  to  another

work, already completed, in which this has been gone into in detail,

but  in  a  different  connection.  For  it  is  possible  to  recognize  the

dominance  in  the  unconscious  mind  of  a  ‘compulsion  to  repeat’

proceeding from the instinctual impulses and probably inherent in the

very nature of the instincts - a compulsion powerful enough to overrule

the  pleasure  principle,  lending  to  certain  aspects  of  the  mind  their

daemonic character, and still very clearly expressed in the impulses of

small children; a compulsion, too, which is responsible for a part of the

course  taken  by  the  analyses  of  neurotic  patients.  All  theseconsiderations prepare us for the discovery that whatever reminds us

of this inner ‘compulsion to repeat’ is perceived as uncanny.

 

   Now, however, it is time to turn from these aspects of the matter,

which are in any case difficult to judge, and look for some undeniable

instances of the uncanny, in the hope that an analysis of them will

decide whether our hypothesis is a valid one.

   In the story of ‘The Ring of Polycrates’, the King of Egypt turns away

in horror from his host, Polycrates, because he sees that his friend’s

every wish is at once fulfilled, his every care promptly removed by

kindly  fate.  His  host  has  become  ‘uncanny’  to  him.  His  own

explanation, that the too fortunate man has to fear the envy of the

gods,  seems  obscure  to  us;  its  meaning  is  veiled  in  mythological

language.  We  will  therefore  turn  to  another  example  in  a  less

grandiose setting. In the case history of an obsessional neurotic,¹ I

have  described  how  the  patient  once  stayed  in  a  hydropathic

establishment  and  benefited  greatly  by  it.  He  had  the  good  sense,

however, to attribute his improvement not to the therapeutic properties

of  the  water,  but  to  the  situation  of  his  room,  which  immediately

adjoined that of a very accommodating nurse. So on his second visit

to the establishment he asked for the same room, but was told that it

was already occupied by an old gentleman, whereupon he gave vent

to his annoyance in the words: ‘I wish he may be struck dead for it.’ A

fortnight later the old gentleman really did have a stroke. My patient

thought this an ‘uncanny’ experience. The impression of uncanniness

would have been stronger still if less time had elapsed between his

words  and  the  untoward  event,  or  if  he  had  been  able  to  report

innumerable  similar  coincidences.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  he  had  no

difficulty in producing coincidences of this sort; but then not only he

but  every  obsessional  neurotic  I  have  observed  has  been  able  to

relate  analogous  experiences.  They  are  never  surprised  at  their

invariably running up against someone they have just been thinking of,

perhaps for the first time for a long while. If they say one day ‘I haven’t

had any news of so-and-so for a long time’, they will be sure to get a

letter from him the next morning, and an accident or a death will rarely

take  place  without  having  passed  through  their  mind  a  little  while

before. They are in the habit of referring to this state of affairs in themost  modest  manner,  saying  that  they  have  ‘presentiments’  which

‘usually’ come true.

 

   ¹ ‘Notes upon a Case of Obsessional Neurosis’ (1909d).

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3691

 

   One of the most uncanny and wide-spread forms of superstition is

the dread of the evil eye, which has been exhaustively studied by the

Hamburg  oculist  Seligmann  (1910-11).  There  never  seems  to  have

been any doubt about the source of this dread. Whoever possesses

something  that  is  at  once  valuable  and  fragile  is  afraid  of  other

people’s envy, in so far as he projects on to them the envy he would

have felt in their place. A feeling like this betrays itself by a look even

though it is not put into words; and when a man is prominent owing to

noticeable,  and  particularly  owing  to  unattractive,  attributes,  other

people are ready to believe that his envy is rising to a more than usual

degree of intensity and that this intensity will convert it into effective

action. What is feared is thus a secret intention of doing harm, and

certain signs are taken to mean that that intention has the necessary

power at its command.

      These  last  examples  of  the  uncanny  are  to  be  referred  to  the

principle  which  I  have  called  ‘omnipotence  of  thoughts’,  taking  the

name from an expression used by one of my patients. And now we

find  ourselves  on  familiar  ground.  Our  analysis  of  instances  of  the

uncanny  has  led  us  back  to  the  old,  animistic  conception  of  the

universe.  This  was  characterized  by  the  idea  that  the  world  was

peopled with the spirits of human beings; by the subject’s narcissistic

overvaluation  of  his  own  mental  processes;  by  the  belief  in  the

omnipotence of thoughts and the technique of magic based on that

belief;  by  the  attribution  to  various  outside  persons  and  things  of

carefully graded magical powers, or ‘mana’; as well as by all the other

creations with the help of which man, in the unrestricted narcissism of

that stage of development, strove to fend off the manifest prohibitions

of reality. It seems as if each one of us has been through a phase of

individual  development  corresponding  to  this  animistic  stage  inprimitive  men,  that  none  of  us  has  passed  through  it  without

preserving certain residues and traces of it which are still capable of

manifesting themselves, and that everything which now strikes us as

‘uncanny’ fulfils the condition of touching those residues of animistic

mental activity within us and bringing them to expression.¹

   At this point I will put forward two considerations which, I think,

contain the gist of this short study. In the first place, if psycho-analytic

theory  is  correct  in  maintaining  that  every  affect  belonging  to  an

emotional impulse, whatever its kind, is transformed, if it is repressed,

into anxiety, then among instances of frightening things there must be

one  class  in  which  the  frightening  element  can  be  shown  to  be

something  repressed  which recurs.  This  class  of  frightening  things

would  then  constitute  the  uncanny;  and  it  must  be  a  matter  of

indifference whether what is uncanny was itself originally frightening or

whether it carried some other affect. In the second place, if this is

indeed  the  secret  nature  of  the  uncanny,  we  can  understand  why

linguistic  usage  has  extended das Heimliche  into  its  opposite, das

Unheimliche (p. 3680); for this uncanny is in reality nothing new or

alien, but something which is familiar and old-established in the mind

and which has become alienated from it only through the process of

repression.  This  reference  to  the  factor  of  repression  enables  us,

furthermore,  to  understand  Schelling’s  definition  of  the  uncanny  as

something  which  ought  to  have  remained  hidden  but  has  come  to

light.

 

     ¹ Cf.  my  book Totem  and  Taboo  (1912-13),  Essay  III,  ‘Animism,  Magic  and  the

Omnipotence of Thoughts’, where the following footnote will be found: ‘We appear to attribute
an "uncanny" quality to impressions that seek to confirm the omnipotence of thoughts and the
animistic  mode  of  thinking  in  general,  after  we  have  reached  a  stage  at  which,  in  our
judgement, we have abandoned such beliefs.’
 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3692

 

   It only remains for us to test our new hypothesis on one or two more

examples of the uncanny.

   Many people experience the feeling in the highest degree in relation

to death and dead bodies, to the return of the dead, and to spirits andghosts.  As  we  have  seen  some  languages  in  use  to-day  can  only

render the German expression ‘an unheimlich house’ by ‘a haunted

house’.  We  might  indeed  have  begun  our  investigation  with  this

example, perhaps the most striking of all, of something uncanny, but

we refrained from doing so because the uncanny in it is too much

intermixed with what is purely gruesome and is in part overlaid by it.

There is scarcely any other matter, however, upon which our thoughts

and feelings have changed so little since the very earliest times, and

in which discarded forms have been so completely preserved under a

thin  disguise,  as  our  relation  to  death.  Two  things  account  for  our

conservatism: the strength of our original emotional reaction to death

and the insufficiency of our scientific knowledge about it. Biology has

not yet been able to decide whether death is the inevitable fate of

every  living  being  or  whether  it  is  only  a  regular  but  yet  perhaps

avoidable event in life. It is true that the statement ‘All men are mortal’

is  paraded  in  text-books  of  logic  as  an  example  of  a  general

proposition; but no human being really grasps it, and our unconscious

has as little use now as it ever had for the idea of its own mortality.

Religions continue to dispute the importance of the undeniable fact of

individual death and to postulate a life after death; civil governments

still believe that they cannot maintain moral order among the living if

they  do  not  uphold  the  prospect  of  a  better  life  hereafter  as  a

recompense  for  mundane  existence.  In  our  great  cities,  placards

announce lectures that undertake to tell us how to get into touch with

the souls of the departed; and it cannot be denied that not a few of the

most  able  and  penetrating  minds  among  our  men  of  science  have

come  to  the  conclusion,  especially  towards  the  close  of  their  own

lives, that a contact of this kind is not impossible. Since almost all of

us still think as savages do on this topic, it is no matter for surprise

that the primitive fear of the dead is still so strong within us and always

ready to come to the surface on any provocation. Most likely our fear

still implies the old belief that the dead man becomes the enemy of his

survivor  and  seeks  to  carry  him  off  to  share  his  new  life  with  him.

Considering our unchanged attitude towards death, we might rather

enquire what has become of the repression, which is the necessary

condition  of  a  primitive  feeling  recurring  in  the  shape  of  something

uncanny. But repression is there, too. All supposedly educated peoplehave ceased to believe officially that the dead can become visible as

spirits,  and  have  made  any  such  appearances  dependent  on

improbable  and  remote  conditions;  their  emotional  attitude  towards

their dead, moreover, once a highly ambiguous and ambivalent one,

has  been  toned  down  in  the  higher  strata  of  the  mind  into  an

unambiguous feeling of piety.¹

 

   ¹ Cf. Totem and Taboo.

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3693

 

   We have now only a few remarks to add - for animism, magic and

sorcery,  the  omnipotence  of  thoughts,  man’s  attitude  to  death,

involuntary repetition and the castration complex comprise practically

all  the  factors  which  turn  something  frightening  into  something

uncanny.

   We can also speak of a living person as uncanny, and we do so

when we ascribe evil intentions to him. But that is not all; in addition to

this we must feel that his intentions to harm us are going to be carried

out with the help of special powers. A good instance of this is the

‘Gettatore’,  that  uncanny  figure  of  Romanic  superstition  which

Schaeffer, with intuitive poetic feeling and profound psycho-analytic

understanding,  has  transformed  into  a  sympathetic  character  in  his

Josef Montfort. But the question of these secret powers brings us back

again to the realm of animism. It was the pious Gretchen’s intuition

that Mephistopheles possessed secret powers of this kind that made

him so uncanny to her.

 

                                                Sie fühlt dass ich ganz sicher ein Genie,

                                                Vielleicht sogar der Teufel bin.¹

 

   The uncanny effect of epilepsy and of madness has the same origin.

The layman sees in them the working of forces hitherto unsuspected

in his fellow-men, but at the same time he is dimly aware of them in

remote corners of his own being. The Middle Ages quite consistently

ascribed all such maladies to the influence of demons, and in this theirpsychology was almost correct. Indeed, I should not be surprised to

hear that psycho-analysis, which is concerned with laying bare these

hidden forces, has itself become uncanny to many people for that very

reason. In one case, after I had succeeded - though none too rapidly -

in effecting a cure in a girl who had been an invalid for many years, I

myself heard this view expressed by the patient’s mother long after

her recovery.

 

   ¹ [She feels that surely I’m a genius now, -

      Perhaps the very Devil indeed!]

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3694

 

   Dismembered limbs, a severed head, a hand cut off at the wrist, as

in a fairy tale of Hauff’s, feet which dance by themselves, as in the

book  by  Schaeffer  which  I  mentioned  above  -  all  these  have

something peculiarly uncanny about them, especially when, as in the

last instance, they prove capable of independent activity in addition.

As  we  already  know,  this  kind  of  uncanniness  springs  from  its

proximity to the castration complex. To some people the idea of being

buried  alive  by  mistake  is  the  most  uncanny  thing  of  all.  And  yet

psycho-analysis has taught us that this terrifying phantasy is only a

transformation  of  another  phantasy  which  had  originally  nothing

terrifying about it at all, but was qualified by a certain lasciviousness -

the phantasy, I mean, of intra-uterine existence.

 

   There is one more point of general application which I should like to

add,  though,  strictly  speaking,  it  has  been  included  in  what  has

already been said about animism and modes of working of the mental

apparatus that have been surmounted; for I think it deserves special

emphasis. This is that an uncanny effect is often and easily produced

when  the  distinction  between  imagination  and  reality  is  effaced,  as

when something that we have hitherto regarded as imaginary appears

before us in reality, or when a symbol takes over the full functions of

the thing it symbolizes, and so on. It is this factor which contributes not

a  little  to  the  uncanny  effect  attaching  to  magical  practices.  Theinfantile element in this, which also dominates the minds of neurotics,

is  the  over-accentuation  of  psychical  reality  in  comparison  with

material  reality  -  a  feature  closely  allied  to  the  belief  in  the

omnipotence of thoughts. In the middle of the isolation of war-time a

number  of  the  English Strand  Magazine  fell  into  my  hands;  and,

among  other  somewhat  redundant  matter,  I  read  a  story  about  a

young married couple who move into a furnished house in which there

is a curiously shaped table with carvings of crocodiles on it. Towards

evening an intolerable and very specific smell begins to pervade the

house; they stumble over something in the dark; they seem to see a

vague  form  gliding  over  the  stairs  -  in  short,  we  are  given  to

understand that the presence of the table causes ghostly crocodiles to

haunt the place, or that the wooden monsters come to life in the dark,

or something of the sort. It was a naïve enough story, but the uncanny

feeling it produced was quite remarkable.

      To  conclude  this  collection  of  examples,  which  is  certainly  not

complete,  I  will  relate  an  instance  taken  from  psycho-analytic

experience; if it does not rest upon mere coincidence, it furnishes a

beautiful confirmation of our theory of the uncanny. It often happens

that neurotic men declare that they feel there is something uncanny

about the female genital organs. This unheimlich place, however, is

the entrance to the former Heim of all human beings, to the place

where each one of us lived once upon a time and in the beginning.

There is a joking saying that ‘Love is home-sickness’; and whenever a

man dreams of a place or a country and says to himself, while he is

still dreaming: ‘this place is familiar to me, I’ve been here before’, we

may interpret the place as being his mother’s genitals or her body. In

this case too, then, the unheimlich is what was once heimlich, familiar;

the prefix ‘un’ is the token of repression.

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3695

 

 

                                            III

 

      In  the  course  of  this  discussion  the  reader  will  have  felt  certaindoubts arising in his mind; and he must now have an opportunity of

collecting them and bringing them forward.

      It  may  be  true  that  the  uncanny  is  something  which  is  secretly

familiar, which has undergone repression and then returned from it,

and  that  everything  that  is  uncanny  fulfils  this  condition.  But  the

selection of material on this basis does not enable us to solve the

problem of the uncanny. For our proposition is clearly not convertible.

Not everything that fulfils this condition - not everything that recalls

repressed desires and surmounted modes of thinking belonging to the

prehistory  of  the  individual  and  of  the  race  -  is  on  that  account

uncanny.

   Nor shall we conceal the fact that for almost every example adduced

in support of our hypothesis one may be found which rebuts it. The

story of the severed hand in Hauff’s fairy tale certainly has an uncanny

effect, and we have traced that effect back to the castration complex;

but most readers will probably agree with me in judging that no trace

of uncanniness is provoked by Herodotus’s story of the treasure of

Rhampsinitus, in which the master-thief, whom the princess tries to

hold fast by the hand, leaves his brother’s severed hand behind with

her instead. Again, the prompt fulfilment of the wishes of Polycrates

undoubtedly affects us in the same uncanny way as it did the king of

Egypt; yet our own fairy stories are crammed with instantaneous wish-

fulfilments which produce no uncanny effect whatever. In the story of

‘The Three Wishes’, the woman is tempted by the savoury smell of a

sausage to wish that she might have one too, and in an instant it lies

on a plate before her. In his annoyance at her hastiness her husband

wishes it may hang on her nose. And there it is, dangling from her

nose. All this is very striking but not in the least uncanny. Fairy tales

quite  frankly  adopt  the  animistic  standpoint  of  the  omnipotence  of

thoughts and wishes, and yet I cannot think of any genuine fairy story

which has anything uncanny about it. We have heard that it is in the

highest degree uncanny when an inanimate object - a picture or a doll

- comes to life; nevertheless in Hans Andersen’s stories the household

utensils, furniture and tin soldiers are alive, yet nothing could well be

more remote from the uncanny. And we should hardly call it uncanny

when Pygmalion’s beautiful statue comes to life.

                                       The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3696

 

      Apparent  death  and  the  re-animation  of  the  dead  have  been

represented as most uncanny themes. But things of this sort too are

very  common  in  fairy  stories.  Who  would  be  so  bold  as  to  call  it

uncanny, for instance, when Snow-White opens her eyes once more?

And the resuscitation of the dead in accounts of miracles, as in the

New Testament, elicits feelings quite unrelated to the uncanny. Then,

too, the theme that achieves such an indubitably uncanny effect, the

unintended  recurrence  of  the  same  thing,  serves  other  and  quite

different purposes in another class of cases. We have already come

across one example in which it is employed to call up a feeling of the

comic; and we could multiply instances of this kind. Or again, it works

as a means of emphasis, and so on. And once more: what is the origin

of the uncanny effect of silence, darkness and solitude? Do not these

factors point to the part played by danger in the genesis of what is

uncanny, notwithstanding that in children these same factors are the

most  frequent  determinants  of  the  expression  of  fear?  And  are  we

after all justified in entirely ignoring intellectual uncertainty as a factor,

seeing that we have admitted its importance in relation to death?

   It is evident therefore, that we must be prepared to admit that there

are other elements besides those which we have so far laid down as

determining  the  production  of  uncanny  feelings.  We  might  say  that

these preliminary results have satisfied psycho-analytic interest in the

problem of the uncanny, and that what remains probably calls for an

aesthetic enquiry. But that would be to open the door to doubts about

what exactly is the value of our general contention that the uncanny

proceeds from something familiar which has been repressed.

   We have noticed one point which may help us to resolve these

uncertainties: nearly all the instances that contradict our hypothesis

are  taken  from  the  realm  of  fiction,  of  imaginative  writing.  This

suggests that we should differentiate between the uncanny that we

actually experience and the uncanny that we merely picture or read

about.

   What is experienced as uncanny is much more simply conditioned

but comprises far fewer instances. We shall find, I think, that it fits inperfectly  with  our  attempt  at  a  solution,  and  can  be  traced  back

without exception to something familiar that has been repressed. But

here,  too,  we  must  make  a  certain  important  and  psychologically

significant differentiation in our material, which is best illustrated by

turning to suitable examples.

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3697

 

      Let  us  take  the  uncanny  associated  with  the  omnipotence  of

thoughts,  with  the  prompt  fulfilment  of  wishes,  with  secret  injurious

powers and with the return of the dead. The condition under which the

feeling  of  uncanniness  arises  here  is  unmistakable.  We  -  or  our

primitive  forefathers  -  once  believed  that  these  possibilities  were

realities, and were convinced that they actually happened. Nowadays

we no longer believe in them, we have surmounted these modes of

thought; but we do not feel quite sure of our new beliefs, and the old

ones still exist within us ready to seize upon any confirmation. As soon

as something actually happens in our lives which seems to confirm the

old, discarded beliefs we get a feeling of the uncanny; it is as though

we were making a judgement something like this: ‘So, after all, it is

true that one can kill a person by the mere wish!’ or, ‘So the dead do

live on and appear on the scene of their former activities!’ and so on.

Conversely,  anyone  who  has  completely  and  finally  rid  himself  of

animistic beliefs will be insensible to this type of the uncanny. The

most  remarkable  coincidences  of  wish  and  fulfilment,  the  most

mysterious repetition of similar experiences in a particular place or on

a particular date, the most deceptive sights and suspicious noises -

none of these things will disconcert him or raise the kind of fear which

can be described as ‘a fear of something uncanny’. The whole thing is

purely an affair of ‘reality-testing’, a question of the material reality of

the phenomena.¹

 

   ¹ Since the uncanny effect of a ‘double’ also belongs to this same group it is interesting to

observe what the effect is of meeting one’s own image unbidden and unexpected. Ernst Mach
has related two such observations in his Analyse der Empfindungen (1900, 3). On the first
occasion he was not a little startled when he realized that the face before him was his own.The second time he formed a very unfavourable opinion about the supposed stranger who
entered the omnibus, and thought ‘What a shabby-looking school-master that man is who is
getting in!’ - I can report a similar adventure. I was sitting alone in my wagon-lit compartment
when  a  more  than  usually  violent  jolt  of  the  train  swung  back  the  door  of  the  adjoining
washing-cabinet, and an elderly gentleman in a dressing-gown and a travelling cap came in. I
assumed that in leaving the washing-cabinet, which lay between the two compartments, he
had taken the wrong direction and come into my compartment by mistake. Jumping up with
the intention of putting him right, I at once realized to my dismay that the intruder was nothing
but  my  own  reflection  in  the  looking-glass  on  the  open  door.  I  can  still  recollect  that  I
thoroughly disliked his appearance. Instead, therefore, of being frightened by our ‘doubles’,
both Mach and I simply failed to recognize them as such. Is it not possible, though, that our
dislike of them was a vestigial trace of the archaic reaction which feels the ‘double’ to be
something uncanny?
 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3698

 

   The state of affairs is different when the uncanny proceeds from

repressed  infantile  complexes,  from  the  castration  complex,  womb-

phantasies, etc.; but experiences which arouse this kind of uncanny

feeling are not of very frequent occurrence in real life. The uncanny

which proceeds from actual experience belongs for the most part to

the  first  group.  Nevertheless  the  distinction  between  the  two  is

theoretically very important. Where the uncanny comes from infantile

complexes the question of material reality does not arise; its place is

taken by psychical reality. What is involved is an actual repression of

some content of thought and a return of this repressed content, not a

cessation of belief in the reality of such a content. We might say that in

the  one  case  what  had  been  repressed  is  a  particular  ideational

content, and in the other the belief in its (material) reality. But this last

phrase no doubt extends the term ‘repression’ beyond its legitimate

meaning. It would be more correct to take into account a psychological

distinction which can be detected here, and to say that the animistic

beliefs of civilized people are in a state of having been (to a greater or

lesser extent) surmounted. Our conclusion could then be stated thus:

an uncanny experience occurs either when infantile complexes which

have been repressed are once more revived by some impression, or

when primitive beliefs which have been surmounted seem once more

to be confirmed. Finally, we must not let our predilection for smooth

solutions  and  lucid  exposition  blind  us  to  the  fact  that  these  twoclasses of uncanny experience are not always sharply distinguishable.

When we consider that primitive beliefs are most intimately connected

with infantile complexes, and are, in fact, based on them, we shall not

be greatly astonished to find that the distinction is often a hazy one.

   The uncanny as it is depicted in literature, in stories and imaginative

productions, merits in truth a separate discussion. Above all, it is a

much more fertile province than the uncanny in real life, for it contains

the whole of the latter and something more besides, something that

cannot  be  found  in  real  life.  The  contrast  between  what  has  been

repressed and what has been surmounted cannot be transposed on to

the uncanny in fiction without profound modification; for the realm of

phantasy  depends  for  its  effect  on  the  fact  that  its  content  is  not

submitted to reality-testing. The somewhat paradoxical result is that in

the first place a great deal that is not uncanny in fiction would be so if

it happened in real life; and in the second place, that there are many

more means of creating uncanny effects in fiction than there are in

real life.

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3699

 

   The imaginative writer has this licence among many others, that he

can select his world of representation so that it either coincides with

the  realities  we  are  familiar  with  or  departs  from  them  in  what

particulars he pleases. We accept his ruling in every case. In fairy

tales, for instance, the world of reality is left behind from the very start,

and  the  animistic  system  of  beliefs  is  frankly  adopted.  Wish-

fulfilments,  secret  powers,  omnipotence  of  thoughts,  animation  of

inanimate objects, all the elements so common in fairy stories, can

exert no uncanny influence here; for, as we have learnt, that feeling

cannot  arise  unless  there  is  a  conflict  of  judgement  as  to  whether

things which have been ‘surmounted’ and are regarded as incredible

may not, after all, be possible; and this problem is eliminated from the

outset by the postulates of the world of fairy tales. Thus we see that

fairy stories, which have furnished us with most of the contradictions

to  our  hypothesis  of  the  uncanny,  confirm  the  first  part  of  ourproposition - that in the realm of fiction many things are not uncanny

which would be so if they happened in real life. In the case of these

stories  there  are  other  contributory  factors,  which  we  shall  briefly

touch upon later.

   The creative writer can also choose a setting which though less

imaginary than the world of fairy tales, does yet differ from the real

world by admitting superior spiritual beings such as daemonic spirits

or ghosts of the dead. So long as they remain within their setting of

poetic  reality,  such  figures  lose  any  uncanniness  which  they  might

possess. The souls in Dante’s Inferno, or the supernatural apparitions

in Shakespeare’s Hamlet, Macbeth or Julius Caesar, may be gloomy

and  terrible  enough,  but  they  are  no  more  really  uncanny  than

Homer’s  jovial  world  of  gods.  We  adapt  our  judgement  to  the

imaginary reality imposed on us by the writer, and regard souls, spirits

and ghosts as though their existence had the same validity as our own

has  in  material  reality.  In  this  case  too  we  avoid  all  trace  of  the

uncanny.

   The situation is altered as soon as the writer pretends to move in the

world  of  common  reality.  In  this  case  he  accepts  as  well  all  the

conditions  operating  to  produce  uncanny  feelings  in  real  life;  and

everything that would have an uncanny effect in reality has it in his

story. But in this case he can even increase his effect and multiply it

far  beyond  what  could  happen  in  reality,  by  bringing  about  events

which never or very rarely happen in fact. In doing this he is in a sense

betraying  us  to  the  superstitiousness  which  we  have  ostensibly

surmounted; he deceives us by promising to give us the sober truth,

and then after all overstepping it. We react to his inventions as we

would have reacted to real experiences; by the time we have seen

through his trick it is already too late and the author has achieved his

object. But it must be added that his success is not unalloyed. We

retain  a  feeling  of  dissatisfaction,  a  kind  of  grudge  against  the

attempted  deceit.  I  have  noticed  this  particularly  after  reading

Schnitzler’s Die Weissagung  and  similar  stories  which  flirt  with  the

supernatural. However, the writer has one more means which he can

use  in  order  to  avoid  our  recalcitrance  and  at  the  same  time  to

improve his chances of success. He can keep us in the dark for a long

time  about  the  precise  nature  of  the  presuppositions  on  which  theworld he writes about is based, or he can cunningly and ingeniously

avoid  any  definite  information  on  the  point  to  the  last.  Speaking

generally, however, we find a confirmation of the second part of our

proposition  -  that  fiction  presents  more  opportunities  for  creating

uncanny feelings than are possible in real life.

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3700

 

   Strictly speaking, all these complications relate only to that class of

the uncanny which proceeds from forms of thought that have been

surmounted. The class which proceeds from repressed complexes is

more  resistant  and  remains  as  powerful  in  fiction  as  in  real

experience, subject to one exception. The uncanny belonging to the

first  class  -  that  proceeding  from  forms  of  thought  that  have  been

surmounted retains its character not only in experience but in fiction

as well, so long as the setting is one of material reality; but where it is

given an arbitrary and artificial setting in fiction, it is apt to lose that

character.

   We have clearly not exhausted the possibilities of poetic licence and

the privileges enjoyed by story-writers in evoking or in excluding an

uncanny feeling. In the main we adopt an unvarying passive attitude

towards  real  experience  and  are  subject  to  the  influence  of  our

physical  environment.  But  the  story-teller  has  a peculiarly  directive

power over us; by means of the moods he can put us into, he is able

to guide the current of our emotions, to dam it up in one direction and

make it flow in another, and he often obtains a great variety of effects

from the same material. All this is nothing new, and has doubtless

long since been fully taken into account by students of aesthetics. We

have drifted into this field of research half involuntarily, through the

temptation to explain certain instances which contradicted our theory

of the causes of the uncanny. Accordingly we will now return to the

examination of a few of those instances.

   We have already asked why it is that the severed hand in the story

of the treasure of Rhampsinitus has no uncanny effect in the way that

the severed hand has in Hauff’s story. The question seems to havegained in importance now that we have recognized that the class of

the uncanny which proceeds from repressed complexes is the more

resistant of the two. The answer is easy. In the Herodotus story our

thoughts are concentrated much more on the superior cunning of the

master-thief than on the feelings of the princess. The princess may

very well have had an uncanny feeling, indeed she very probably fell

into a swoon; but we have no such sensations, for we put ourselves in

the  thief’s  place,  not  in  hers.  In  Nestroy’s  farce, Der  Zerrissene,

another means is used to avoid any impression of the uncanny in the

scene in which the fleeing man, convinced that he is a murderer, lifts

up one trap door after another and each time sees what he takes to be

the ghost of his victim rising up out of it. He calls out in despair, ‘But

I’ve only killed one man. Why this ghastly multiplication?’ We know

what went before this scene and do not share his error, so what must

be uncanny to him has an irresistibly comic effect on us. Even a ‘real’

ghost,  as  in  Oscar  Wilde’s Canterville Ghost,  loses  all  power  of  at

least arousing gruesome feelings in us as soon as the author begins

to amuse himself by being ironical about it and allows liberties to be

taken with it. Thus we see how independent emotional effects can be

of  the  actual  subject-matter  in  the  world  of  fiction.  In  fairy  stories

feelings of fear - including therefore uncanny feelings - are ruled out

altogether.  We  understand  this,  and  that  is  why  we  ignore  any

opportunities we find in them for developing such feelings.

   Concerning the factors of silence, solitude and darkness, we can

only  say  that  they  are  actually  elements  in  the  production  of  the

infantile anxiety from which the majority of human beings have never

become quite free. This problem has been discussed from a psycho-

analytic point of view elsewhere.

                                                                                       3701

 

      PREFACE TO REIK’S RITUAL: PSYCHO-ANALYTIC STUDIES

                                        (1919)

 


                                                                                      3702

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3703

 

      PREFACE TO REIK’S RITUAL: PSYCHO-ANALYTIC STUDIES

 

Psycho-analysis was born out of medical necessity. It sprang from the

need for bringing help to neurotic patients, who had found no relief

through  rest-cures,  through  the  arts  of  hydropathy  or  through

electricity. A most remarkable observation made by Josef Breuer had

excited  a  hope  that  the  more  one  understood  of  the  hitherto

unexplored origin of their symptoms the more extensive would be the

help one could afford them. Thus it came about that psycho-analysis,

being originally a purely medical technique, was from the first directed

towards research, towards the discovery of causal chains at once far-

reaching and recondite.

      Its  further  course  led  it  away  from  the  study  of  the  somatic

determinants of nervous disease to an extent that was bewildering to

physicians.  Instead,  it  was  brought  into  contact  with  the  mental

substance of human lives - the lives not only of the sick, but of the

healthy, the normal and the supernormal. It had to deal with emotions

and passions, and most of all with those which the poets never tire of

depicting and celebrating - the emotions of love. It learnt to recognize

the power of memories, the unsuspected importance of the years of

childhood  in  shaping  the  adult,  and  the  strength  of  wishes,  which

falsify  human  judgements  and  lay  down  fixed  lines  for  human

endeavour.

   For a time psycho-analysis seemed fated to merge into psychologywithout being able to show why the psychology of the sick differed

from that of the normal. In the course of its advance, however, it came

up against the problem of dreams, which are abnormal products of the

mind created by normal men under regularly recurrent physiological

conditions. When psycho-analysis had solved the problem of dreams,

it  had  discovered  in unconscious  psychical  processes  the  common

ground in which the highest and the lowest of mental impulses have

their roots and from which spring the most normal as well as the most

morbid  and  erratic  of  mental  productions.  The  new  picture  of  the

workings of the mind began to grow ever clearer and more complete.

It was a picture of obscure instinctual forces organic in origin, striving

towards inborn aims, and, above them, of an agency comprising more

highly organized mental structures - acquisitions of human evolution

made under the impact of human history -, an agency which has taken

over portions of the instinctual impulses, has developed them further

or has even directed them towards higher aims, but which in any case

binds  them  firmly  and  manipulates  their  energy  to  suit  its  own

purposes. This higher organization, however, which is known to us as

the  ego,  has  rejected  another  portion  of  these  same  elementary

instinctual impulses as being unserviceable because they cannot be

fitted  into  the  organic  unity  of  the  individual  or  because  they  rebel

against the individual’s cultural aims. The ego is not in a position to

exterminate these unsubdued mental powers, but it turns its back on

them, lets them remain at the lowest psychological level, defends itself

from  their  demands  by  the  energetic  erection  of  protective  and

antithetical barriers or seeks to come to terms with them by means of

substitutive satisfactions. These instincts which have fallen victim to

repression - untamed and indestructible, yet inhibited from any kind of

activity - together with their primitive mental representatives, constitute

the mental underworld, the nucleus of the true unconscious, and are

at every moment ready to assert their demands and, by hook or by

crook, to force their way forward to satisfaction. To this is due the

instability of the proud superstructure of the mind, the emergence at

night of the proscribed and repressed material in the form of dreams,

and the tendency to fall ill with neuroses and psychoses as soon as

the balance of power between the ego and the repressed shifts to the

disadvantage of the ego. 


              Preface To Reik's Ritual: Psycho-Analytic Studies

                                                                                      3704

 

   A little reflection was bound to show that it would be impossible to

restrict to the provinces of dreams and nervous disorders a view such

as this of the life of the human mind. If that view has hit upon a truth, it

must  apply  equally  to normal  mental  events,  and  even  the  highest

achievements of the human spirit must bear a demonstrable relation

to  the  factors  found  in  pathology  -  to  repression,  to  the  efforts  at

mastering  the  unconscious  and  to  the  possibilities  of  satisfying  the

primitive  instincts.  There  was  thus  an  irresistible  temptation  and,

indeed, a scientific duty, to apply the research methods of psycho-

analysis,  in  regions  far  remote  from  its  native  soil,  to  the  various

mental sciences. And indeed psycho-analytic work upon patients itself

pointed persistently in the direction of this new task, for it was obvious

that the forms assumed by the different neuroses echoed the most

highly  admired  productions  of  our  culture.  Thus  hysterics  are

undoubtedly imaginative artists, even if they express their phantasies

mimetically in the main and without considering their intelligibility to

other  people;  the  ceremonials  and  prohibitions  of  obsessional

neurotics drive us to suppose that they have created a private religion

of  their  own;  and  the  delusions  of  paranoics  have  an  unpalatable

external  similarity  and  internal  kinship  to  the  systems  of  our

philosophers.  It  is  impossible  to  escape  the  conclusion  that  these

patients are, in an asocial fashion, making the very attempts at solving

their conflicts and appeasing their pressing needs which, when those

attempts are carried out in a fashion that is acceptable to the majority,

are known as poetry, religion and philosophy.

   In 1913 Otto Rank and Hanns Sachs, in an extremely interesting

work, brought together the results which had been achieved up to that

time in the application of psycho-analysis to the mental sciences. The

most  easily  accessible  branches  of  those  sciences  seem  to  be

mythology and the history of literature and religion. No final formula

has yet been found enabling us to give an appropriate place to myths

in this connection. Otto Rank, in a large volume on the incest complex(1912), has produced evidence of the surprising fact that the choice of

subject matter, especially for dramatic works, is principally determined

by  the  ambit  of  what  psycho-analysis  has  termed  the  ‘Oedipus

complex’. By working it over with the greatest variety of modifications,

distortions and disguises, the dramatist seeks to deal with his own

most personal relations to this emotional theme. It is in attempting to

master the Oedipus complex - that is to say, a person’s emotional

attitude towards his family, or in a narrower sense towards his father

and  mother  -  that  individual  neurotics  come  to  grief,  and  for  this

reason that complex habitually forms the nucleus of their neuroses. It

does  not  owe  its  importance  to  any  unintelligible  conjunction;  the

emphasis  laid  upon  the  relation  of  children  to  their  parents  is  an

expression of the biological facts that the young of the human race

pass through a long period of dependence and are slow in reaching

maturity,  as  well  as  that  their  capacity  for  love  undergoes  a

complicated course of development. Consequently, the overcoming of

the  Oedipus  complex  coincides  with  the  most  efficient  way  of

mastering the archaic, animal heritage of humanity. It is true that that

heritage comprises all the forces that are required for the subsequent

cultural development of the individual, but they must first be sorted out

and worked over. This archaic heirloom is not fit to be used for the

purposes of civilized social life in the form in which it is inherited by the

individual.

 


              Preface To Reik's Ritual: Psycho-Analytic Studies

                                                                                      3705

 

   To find the starting-point for the psycho-analytic view of religious life

we must go a step further. What is to-day the heritage of the individual

was once a new acquisition and has been handed on from one to

another of a long series of generations. Thus the Oedipus complex too

may have had stages of development, and the study of prehistory may

enable  us  to  trace  them  out.  Investigation  suggests  that  life  in  the

human family took a quite different form in those remote days from

that with which we are now familiar. And this idea is supported by

findings based on observations of contemporary primitive races. If theprehistoric and ethnological material on this subject is worked over

psycho-analytically,  we  arrive  at  an  unexpectedly  precise  result:

namely that God the Father once walked upon earth in bodily form

and exercised his sovereignty as chieftain of the primal human horde

until his sons united to slay him. It emerges further that this crime of

liberation and the reactions to it had as their result the appearance of

the first social ties, the basic moral restrictions and the oldest form of

religion, totemism. But the later religions too have the same content,

and on the one hand they are concerned with obliterating the traces of

that crime or with expiating it by bringing forward other solutions of the

struggle between the father and sons, while on the other hand they

cannot  avoid  repeating  once  more  the  elimination  of  the  father.

Incidentally, an echo of this monstrous event, which overshadowed

the whole course of human development, is also to be found in myths.

   This hypothesis, which is founded on the observations of Robertson

Smith and was developed by me in Totem and Taboo, has been taken

by Theodor Reik as the basis of his studies on the problems of the

psychology of religion, of which this is the first volume. In accordance

with  psycho-analytic  technique  these  studies  start  out  from  hitherto

unexplained details of religious life, and by means of their elucidation

gain  access  to  the  fundamental  postulates  and  ultimate  aims  of

religions; moreover they keep steadily in view the relation between

prehistoric man and contemporary primitive societies as well as the

connection  between  the  products  of  civilization  and  the  substitutive

structures of neurotics. In conclusion, I would draw attention to the

author’s  own  introduction  and  express  my  belief  that  his  work  will

recommend  itself  to  the  notice  of  specialists  in  the  branch  of

knowledge with which it deals.

                                                                                       3706

 

    A NOTE ON PSYCHO-ANALYTIC PUBLICATIONS AND PRIZES

                                        (1919)

 

In the Autumn of 1918 a member of the Budapest Psycho-Analytical

Society  informed  me  that  a  Fund  had  been  set  aside  for  cultural

purposes from the profits made by industrial undertakings during the

war. The decision as to its use lay jointly with himself and the Chief

Burgermaster of the city of Budapest, Dr. Stephan Bárczy. They had

agreed to devote the considerable sum of money concerned to the

purposes  of  the  psycho-analytic  movement  and  to  hand  over  its

administration to me. I accepted this commission, and I now fulfil my

duty of offering public thanks to the Chief Burgermaster (who soon

afterwards received the Psycho-Analytical Congress in Budapest with

so  much  honour)  as  well  as  to  the  anonymous  member  who  has

performed such a high service to the cause of psycho-analysis.

   The Fund thus placed at my disposal, which was given my name,

was  allotted  by  me  to  the  foundation  of  an  international  psycho-

analytic  publishing  business.  I  considered  that  in  the  present

circumstances this was our most important need.

      Unlike  many  other  scientific  undertakings,  our  two  periodical

publications, the Internationale Zeitschrift für ärztliche Psychoanalyse

and Imago, did not come to an end during the war. We succeeded in

keeping  them  in  existence,  but  in  consequence  of  the  increasing

difficulties, closing of frontiers and rise in prices which accompanied

the war, it became necessary to reduce them considerably in size and

to allow undesirably long intervals to elapse between the publication of

successive issues. Of the four editors of the two journals (Ferenczi,

Jones, Rank and Sachs) one, being a subject of an enemy State, was

cut  off  from  us;  two  others  had  joined  the  forces  and  were  fully

engaged in their military duties; only Dr. Sachs was left at work, and

he  self-sacrificingly  assumed  the  whole  burden.  A  few  of  the  local

psycho-analytical  societies  found  it  necessary  to  suspend  their

meetings entirely; the number of contributors shrank, as did that of the

subscribers.  It  was  easy  to  foresee  that  the  publisher’s  naturaldissatisfaction  would  soon  put  in  question  the  continuance  of  the

journals  to  which  we  attached  so  much  importance.  Yet  numerous

indications,  which  reached  us  even  from  the  front-line  trenches,

pointed to the fact that contemporary interest in psycho-analysis had

not diminished. I think I was justified in my intention to put an end to

these  difficulties  and  dangers  by  the  foundation  of  an  international

psycho-analytic publishing business. This publishing house is already

in  existence  to-day,  as  a  limited  liability  company;  it  is  under  the

direction of Dr. Otto Rank, who has been for so many years secretary

of  the  Vienna  Society  and  co-editor  of  the  two  psycho-analytic

journals, and who has returned after many years’ absence on active

service to his earlier work in the service of psycho-analysis.

 


            A Note On Psycho-Analytic Publications And Prizes

                                                                                      3707

 

   The new publishing house, supported by the funds of the Budapest

endowment,  has  assumed  the  task  of  ensuring  the  regular

appearance and reliable distribution of the two journals. As soon as

the difficulties of external circumstances permit, it is intended that they

shall  be  restored  to  their  former  dimensions,  and  that  these

dimensions may if necessary be increased, without any extra charge

to the subscribers. But in addition to this, and without waiting for an

improvement,  the  publishing  house  will  proceed  to  print  books  and

pamphlets  dealing  with  the  field  of  medical  and  applied  psycho-

analysis; and since it is not a profit-making concern, it will be able to

pay better heed to the interests of authors than is usually done by

commercial publishers.

      Simultaneously  with  the  establishment  of  the  psycho-analytic

publishing  house  it  was  decided  to  award  annual  prizes  out  of  the

interest  on  the  Budapest  endowment,  to  two  outstanding  pieces  of

work, one each in the field of medical and of applied psycho-analysis.

These prizes - to the amount of 1,000 Austrian Kronen - are intended

to be awarded, not to authors, but to individual works, so that there will

be a possibility of the same author winning a prize repeatedly. The

decision on the question of which among the writings published duringa particular period are to receive prizes has not been transferred to a

committee  but  will  be  kept  in  the  hands  of  a  single  person,  the

Administrator of the fund for the time being; otherwise, if a committee

of  adjudicators  were  to  be  formed  of  the  most  experienced  and

discerning analysts, their own writings would have to be excluded from

consideration,  and  the  scheme  might  easily  fail  in  its  intention  of

distinguishing exemplary achievements in psycho-analytic literature. If

the adjudicator finds himself hesitating between two works of almost

equal value, he will be empowered to divide the prize between them,

without the award of a half-prize implying any less appreciation of the

work in question.

   It is intended that these prizes shall in general be awarded every

year and that the choice should lie between the whole of the psycho-

analytically  important  literature  published  during  that  period,

irrespectively  of  whether  the  author  of  the  work  in  question  is  a

Member of the International Psycho-Analytical Association.

   The first prizes have already been awarded and relate to papers

published during the period of the war, from 1914 to 1918. The prize

for  medical  psycho-analysis  has  been  divided  between  Karl

Abraham’s paper ‘The First Pregenital Stage of the Libido’ (1916) and

Ernst  Simmel’s  pamphlet Kriegsneurosen  und  psychisches  Trauma

(1918). The prize for applied psycho-analysis has been awarded to

Theodor Reik’s paper ‘Die Pubertätsriten der Wilden’ (1915).

                                                                                FREUD.    

 


            A Note On Psycho-Analytic Publications And Prizes

                                                                                      3708

 

[Two  further  announcements  on  the  same  subject  appeared

subsequently: ‘Preiszuteilungen’ (Int. Z. Psychoanal., 7, 381 [1921]),

and ‘Preisausschreibung’ (ibid., 8, 527 [1922]).]

 

                                    ‘AWARD OF PRIZES

 

   ‘A recent gift made by Dr. Max Eitingon, the director of the Berlin

Clinic, has made it possible for me to revive the award of prizes (first

made in 1919) for psycho-analytic writings of peculiar merit. The prizefor medical psycho-analysis has been awarded to A. Stärcke (of Den

Dolder, Holland) for his two publications "Der Kastrationskomplex" and

"Psychoanalyse und Psychiatrie" (both of them Congress papers), of

which the first appeared in the current volume of this periodical and

the second as a supplementary issue. The prize for applied psycho-

analysis has gone to Dr. G. Róheim (of Budapest) for his paper "Das

Selbst" and his Congress paper on Australian Totemism. The amount

of each prize was one thousand marks.

                                                                                FREUD.’   

 

                                      ‘PRIZE OFFER

 

   ‘At the Seventh International Psycho-Analytical Congress, in Berlin, I

laid down as the subject for a prize: "The Relation between Analytic

Technique and Analytic Theory." The questions to be discussed are

how  far  the  technique  has  influenced  the  theory  and  how  far  they

assist or hinder each other at the present time.

   ‘Works dealing with this subject should be sent to me at the address

given below before May 1, 1923. They should be legibly typewritten.

They should have a motto attached and should be accompanied by a

sealed envelope enclosing the author’s name. They must be written

either in German or English. In judging the works submitted I shall

have the assistance of Dr. K. Abraham and Dr. M. Eitingon.

   ‘The prize amounts to 20,000 marks at the value current at the time

of the Congress.

   ‘Berggasse 19, Vienna IX.

                                                                                FREUD.’   

                                                                                       3709

 

                                  JAMES J. PUTNAM

                                        (1919)

 

   Among the first pieces of news to reach us after the raising of the

barrier  separating  us  from  the  Anglo-Saxon  countries  comes  the

painful report of the death of Putnam, the President of the great pan-

American  psycho-analytic  group.  He  lived  to  be  over  seventy-two

years  old,  remained  intellectually  active  to  the  end,  and  died

peacefully  of  heart-failure  during  his  sleep  in  November  1918.

Putnam, who was until a few years ago Professor of Neuropathology

at  Harvard  University,  was  the  great  support  of  psycho-analysis  in

America. His numerous theoretical works (a few of which made their

first appearance in the Internationale Zeitschrift) have, by their clarity

and wealth of ideas, and by the decisively favourable line they took,

contributed  immensely  towards  creating  the  high  esteem  which

psycho-analysis now enjoys in America both in psychiatric teaching

and in public opinion. His example may have been no less effective.

He was universally respected for his unimpeachable character, and it

was  recognized  that  he  was  influenced  only  by  the  highest  ethical

considerations. His closer personal acquaintances could not escape

the conclusion that he was one of those happily compensated people

of the obsessional type for whom what is noble is second nature and

for  whom  any  concession  to  unworthiness  has  become  an

impossibility.

   J. J. Putnam’s personal appearance was made familiar to European

analysts through the part he took in the Weimar Congress of 1911.

The editor of the Zeitschrift hopes to include in its next issue a portrait

of  our  honoured  friend  and  a  detailed  appreciation  of  his  scientific

achievements.

 

   [Freud also translated one of Putnam’s papers (1910) anonymously and added the following
footnote  to  the  translation  (Zbl. Psychoan., 1  (1911),  137):  ‘This  lecture  delivered  by  the
Professor of Neurology at Boston University is offered to our readers as an offset to the many
unjust and uncomprehending attacks that are levelled against psycho-analysis, in place of
counter-criticisms which might easily lead to embittered feelings. J. Putnam is not only one of
the most eminent neurologists in America but also a man everywhere greatly respected for hisunimpeachable character and high moral standards. Although he has left his youth far behind
him, he took his open stand last year in the front rank of the champions of psycho-analysis.’]

                                                                                       3710

 

                                    VICTOR TAUSK

                                        (1919)

 

Among the sacrifices, fortunately few in number, claimed by the war

from the ranks of psycho-analysis, we must count Dr. Victor Tausk.

This rarely-gifted man, a Vienna specialist in nervous diseases, took

his own life before peace was signed.

   Dr. Tausk, who was only in his forty-second year, had for more than

ten years been one of the closer circle of Freud’s followers. Originally

a  lawyer  by  profession,  he  had  for  some  considerable  time  been

acting  as  a  magistrate  in  Bosnia  when,  under  the  stress  of  severe

personal troubles, he abandoned his career and turned to journalism,

for which he was peculiarly suited by his wide general education. After

working for some time as a journalist in Berlin, he came to Vienna in

the same capacity. Here he became acquainted with psycho-analysis

and soon decided to devote himself to it entirely. Although he was to

longer  a  young  man  and  was  the  father  of  a  family,  he  was  not

deterred by the great difficulties and sacrifices involved in yet another

change in profession, and one which must necessitate an interruption

of several years before he could once more earn his living. For he

embarked on the tedious study of medicine only as a means to enable

him to carry on a psycho-analytic practice.

   Shortly before the outbreak of the World War, Tausk had obtained

his second doctor’s degree and set up in Vienna as a nerve-specialist.

Here,  after  a  relatively  short  time,  he  had  begun  building  up  a

considerable practice and had achieved some excellent results. These

activities promised the rising young doctor full satisfaction as well as a

means of support; but he was all at once violently torn from them by

the war. He was called up immediately for active service and soon

promoted  to  senior  rank.  He  carried  out  his  medical  duties  with

devotion in the various theatres of war in the North and in the Balkans

(finally  in  Belgrade),  and  received  official  commendation.  It  is  also

greatly  to  his  honour  that  during  the  war  he  threw  himself

wholeheartedly,  and  with  complete  disregard  of  the  consequences,into  exposing  the  numerous  abuses  which  so  many  doctors

unfortunately tolerated in silence or for which they even shared the

responsibility.

 


                                      Victor Tausk

                                                                                      3711

 

   The stresses of many years’ service in the field could not fail to

exercise  a  severely  damaging  psychological  effect  on  so  intensely

conscientious a man. At the last Psycho-Analytical Congress, which

we held in Budapest in September 1918 and which brought analysts

together once more after many years of separation, Dr. Tausk, who

had long been suffering from physical ill-health, was already showing

signs of unusual nervous irritability. When, soon afterwards, in the late

autumn of last year, he came to the end of his military service and

returned to Vienna, he was faced for the third time, in his state of

mental exhaustion, with the hard task of building up a new existence -

this time under the most unfavourable internal and external conditions.

In addition to this, Dr. Tausk, who has left two grown-up sons to whom

he  was  a  devoted  father,  was  on  the  brink  of  contracting  a  new

marriage.  He  was  no  longer  able  to  cope  with  the  many  demands

imposed on him in his ailing state by harsh reality. On the morning of

July 3rd he put an end to his life.

   Dr. Tausk had been a member of the Vienna Psycho Analytical

Society since the autumn of 1909. He was well known to the readers

of  this  journal  from  his  numerous  contributions,  which  were

distinguished by sharp observation, sound judgement and a particular

clearness  of  expression.  These  writings  exhibit  plainly  the

philosophical training which the author was able so happily to combine

with the exact methods of science. His strong need to establish things

on a philosophical foundation and to achieve epistemological clarity

compelled him to formulate, and seek as well to master, the whole

profundity and comprehensive meaning of the very difficult problems

involved. Perhaps he sometimes went too far in this direction, in his

impetuous urge for investigation. Perhaps the time was not yet ripe for

laying  such  general  foundations  as  these  for  the  young  science  ofpsycho-analysis.  The  psycho-analytic  consideration  of  philosophical

problems,  for  which  Tausk  showed  special  aptitude,  promises  to

become more and more fruitful. One of his last works, on the psycho-

analysis  of  the  function  of  judgement,  which  was  delivered  at  the

Budapest Congress and has not yet been published, gives evidence

of this direction taken by his interest.

 


                                      Victor Tausk

                                                                                      3712

 

   In addition to his gift for philosophy and attraction towards it, Tausk

possessed  a  quite  exceptional  medico-psychological  capacity  and

produced some excellent work in that field too. His clinical activities, to

which  we  owe  valuable  researches  into  various  psychoses  (e.g.

melancholia and schizophrenia) justified the fairest hopes and gave

him the prospective appointment to a University Lectureship for which

he had applied.

   Psycho-analysis was particularly indebted to Dr. Tausk, who was a

brilliant  speaker,  for  the  courses  of  lectures  which  he  gave  over  a

period of many years to large audiences of both sexes and in which

he introduced them to the principles and problems of psycho-analysis.

His audiences were able to admire the clarity and didactic skill of his

lectures no less than the profundity with which he handled individual

topics.

   All those who knew him well valued his straightforward character,

his honesty towards himself and towards others and the superiority of

a  nature  which  was  distinguished  by  a  striving  for  nobility  and

perfection.  His  passionate  temperament  found  expression  in  sharp,

and sometimes too sharp, criticisms, which however were combined

with a brilliant gift for exposition. These personal qualities exercised a

great  attraction  on  many  people,  and  some,  too,  may  have  been

repelled by them. No one, however, could escape the impression that

here was a man of importance.

      How  much  psycho-analysis  meant  for  him,  even  up  to  his  last

moments,  is  shown  by  letters  which  he  left  behind,  in  which  he

expressed  his  unreserved  belief  in  it  and  his  hope  that  it  will  findrecognition at a not too distant date. There is no doubt that this man,

of whom our science and his friends in Vienna have been prematurely

robbed,  has  contributed  to  that  aim.  He  is  sure  of  an  honourable

memory in the history of psycho-analysis and its earliest struggles.

                                                                                       3713

 

                      BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE

                                        (1920)

 


                                                                                      3714

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3715

 

                      BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE

 

                                            I

 

In the theory of psycho-analysis we have no hesitation in assuming

that the course taken by mental events is automatically regulated by

the pleasure principle. We believe, that is to say, that the course of

those events is invariably set in motion by an unpleasurable tension,

and that it takes a direction such that its final outcome coincides with a

lowering of that tension - that is, with an avoidance of unpleasure or a

production  of  pleasure.  In  taking  that  course  into  account  in  our

consideration of the mental processes which are the subject of our

study, we are introducing an ‘economic’ point of view into our work;

and if,in describing those processes, we try to estimate this ‘economic’

factor in addition to the ‘topographical’ and ‘dynamic’ ones, we shall, I

think, be giving the most complete description of them of which we

can at present conceive, and one which deserves to be distinguished

by the term ‘metapsychological’.

   It is of no concern to us in this connection to enquire how far, with

this  hypothesis  of  the  pleasure  principle,  we  have  approached  or

adopted any particular, historically established, philosophical system.

We have arrived at these speculative assumptions in an attempt to

describe and to account for the facts of daily observation in our field of

study.  Priority  and  originality  are  not  among  the  aims  that  psycho-analytic  work  sets  itself;  and  the  impressions  that  underlie  the

hypothesis  of  the  pleasure  principle  are  so  obvious  that  they  can

scarcely be overlooked. On the other hand we would readily express

our gratitude to any philosophical or psychological theory which was

able  to  inform  us  of  the  meaning  of  the  feelings  of  pleasure  and

unpleasure which act so imperatively upon us. But on this point we

are, alas, offered nothing to our purpose. This is the most obscure and

inaccessible region of the mind, and, since we cannot avoid contact

with it, the least rigid hypothesis, it seems to me, will be the best. We

have  decided  to  relate  pleasure  and  unpleasure  to  the  quantity  of

excitation that is present in the mind but is not in any way ‘bound’; and

to relate them in such a manner that unpleasure corresponds to an

increase  in  the  quantity  of  excitation  and  pleasure  to  a diminution.

What  we  are  implying  by  this  is  not  a  simple  relation  between  the

strength  of  the  feelings  of  pleasure  and  unpleasure  and  the

corresponding modifications in the quantity of excitation; least of all -

in  view  of  all  we  have  been  taught  by  psycho-physiology  -  are  we

suggesting any directly proportional ratio: the factor that determines

the  feeling  is  probably  the  amount  of  increase  or  diminution  in  the

quantity  of  excitation in  a  given  period  of  time.  Experiment  might

possibly play a part here; but it is not advisable for us analysts to go

into the problem further so long as our way is not pointed by quite

definite observations

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3716

 

   We cannot, however, remain indifferent to the discovery that an

investigator of such penetration as G. T. Fechner held a view on the

subject of pleasure and unpleasure which coincides in all essentials

with the one that has been forced upon us by psycho-analytic work.

Fechner’s statement is to be found contained in a small work, Einige

Ideen zur Schöpfungs- und Entwicklungsgeschichte der Organismen,

1873 (Part XI, Supplement, 94), and reads as follows: ‘In so far as

conscious  impulses  always  have  some  relation  to  pleasure  or

unpleasure, pleasure and unpleasure too can be regarded as having apsycho-physical relation to conditions of stability and instability. This

provides  a  basis  for  a  hypothesis  into  which  I  propose  to  enter  in

greater detail elsewhere. According to this hypothesis, every psycho-

physical  motion  rising  above  the  threshold  of  consciousness  is

attended  by  pleasure  in  proportion  as,  beyond  a  certain  limit,  it

approximates to complete stability, and is attended by unpleasure in

proportion  as,  beyond  a  certain  limit,  it  deviates  from  complete

stability;  while  between  the  two  limits,  which  may  be  described  as

qualitative thresholds of pleasure and unpleasure, there is a certain

margin of aesthetic indifference. . . .’

   The facts which have caused us to believe in the dominance of the

pleasure principle in mental life also find expression in the hypothesis

that  the  mental  apparatus  endeavours  to  keep  the  quantity  of

excitation  present  in  it  as  low  as  possible  or  at  least  to  keep  it

constant.  This  latter  hypothesis  is  only  another  way  of  stating  the

pleasure principle; for if the work of the mental apparatus is directed

towards keeping the quantity of excitation low, then anything that is

calculated to increase that quantity is bound to be felt as adverse to

the  functioning  of  the  apparatus,  that  is  as  unpleasurable.  The

pleasure principle follows from the principle of constancy: actually the

latter principle was inferred from the facts which forced us to adopt the

pleasure  principle.  Moreover,  a  more  detailed  discussion  will  show

that the tendency which we thus attribute to the mental apparatus is

subsumed  as  a  special  case  under  Fechner’s  principle  of  the

‘tendency towards stability’, to which he has brought the feelings of

pleasure and unpleasure into relation.

   It must be pointed out, however, that strictly speaking it is incorrect

to talk of the dominance of the pleasure principle over the course of

mental processes. If such a dominance existed, the immense majority

of our mental processes would have to be accompanied by pleasure

or  to  lead  to  pleasure,  whereas  universal  experience  completely

contradicts any such conclusion. The most that can be said, therefore,

is that there exists in the mind a strong tendency towards the pleasure

principle, but that that tendency is opposed by certain other forces or

circumstances, so that the final outcome cannot always be in harmony

with the tendency towards pleasure. We may compare what Fechner

(1873,  90)  remarks  on  a  similar  point:  ‘Since  however  a  tendencytowards an aim does not imply that the aim is attained, and since in

general the aim is attainable only by approximations. . . .’

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3717

 

   If we turn now to the question of what circumstances are able to

prevent the pleasure principle from being carried into effect, we find

ourselves  once  more  on  secure  and  well-trodden  ground  and,  in

framing our answer, we have at our disposal a rich fund of analytic

experience.

   The first example of the pleasure principle being inhibited in this way

is  a  familiar  one  which  occurs  with  regularity.  We  know  that  the

pleasure principle is proper to a primary method of working on the part

of the mental apparatus, but that, from the point of view of the self-

preservation  of  the  organism  among  the  difficulties  of  the  external

world, it is from the very outset inefficient and even highly dangerous.

Under  the  influence  of  the  ego’s  instincts  of  self-preservation,  the

pleasure  principle  is  replaced  by  the reality  principle.  This  latter

principle  does  not  abandon  the  intention  of  ultimately  obtaining

pleasure,  but  it  nevertheless  demands  and  carries  into  effect  the

postponement  of  satisfaction,  the  abandonment  of  a  number  of

possibilities  of  gaining  satisfaction  and  the  temporary  toleration  of

unpleasure  as  a  step  on  the  long  indirect  road  to  pleasure.  The

pleasure principle long persists, however, as the method of working

employed by the sexual instincts, which are so hard to ‘educate’, and,

starting from those instincts, or in the ego itself, it often succeeds in

overcoming the reality principle, to the detriment of the organism as a

whole.

      There  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  that  the  replacement  of  the

pleasure  principle  by  the  reality  principle  can  only  be  made

responsible for a small number, and by no means the most intense, of

unpleasurable  experiences.  Another  occasion  of  the  release  of

unpleasure, which occurs with no less regularity, is to be found in the

conflicts and dissensions that take place in the mental apparatus while

the ego is passing through its development into more highly compositeorganizations. Almost all the energy with which the apparatus is filled

arises  from  its  innate  instinctual  impulses.  But  these  are  not  all

allowed to reach the same phases of development. In the course of

things it happens again and again that individual instincts or parts of

instincts turn out to be incompatible in their aims or demands with the

remaining ones, which are able to combine into the inclusive unity of

the ego. The former are then split off from this unity by the process of

repression, held back at lower levels of psychical development and cut

off, to begin with, from the possibility of satisfaction. If they succeed

subsequently,  as  can  so  easily  happen  with  repressed  sexual

instincts, in struggling through, by roundabout paths, to a direct or to a

substitutive satisfaction, that event, which would in other cases have

been an opportunity for pleasure, is felt by the ego as unpleasure. As

a consequence of the old conflict which ended in repression, a new

breach has occurred in the pleasure principle at the very time when

certain instincts were endeavouring, in accordance with the principle,

to  obtain  fresh  pleasure.  The  details  of  the  process  by  which

repression turns a possibility of pleasure into a source of unpleasure

are not yet clearly understood or cannot be clearly represented; but

there is no doubt that all neurotic unpleasure is of that kind-pleasure

that cannot be felt as such.¹

   The two sources of unpleasure which I have just indicated are very

far from covering the majority of our unpleasurable experiences. But

as  regards  the  remainder  it  can  be  asserted  with  some  show  of

justification that their presence does not contradict the dominance of

the pleasure principle. Most of the unpleasure that we experience is

perceptual unpleasure. It may be perception of pressure by unsatisfied

instincts; or it may be external perception which is either distressing in

itself  or  which  excites  unpleasurable  expectations  in  the  mental

apparatus  -  that  is,  which  is  recognized  by  it  as  a  ‘danger’.  The

reaction to these instinctual demands, a reaction which constitutes the

proper  activity  of  the  mental  apparatus,  can  then  be  directed  in  a

correct  manner  by  the  pleasure  principle  or  the  reality  principle  by

which the former is modified. This does not seem to necessitate any

far-reaching  limitation  of  the  pleasure  principle.  Nevertheless  the

investigation of the mental reaction to external danger is precisely in a

position to produce new material and raise fresh questions bearingupon our present problem.

 

   ¹ No doubt the essential point is that pleasure and unpleasure, being conscious feelings,

are attached to the ego

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3718

 

                                            II

 

   A condition has long been known and described which occurs after

severe mechanical concussions, railway disasters and other accidents

involving  a  risk  to  life;  it  has  been  given  the  name  of  ‘traumatic

neurosis’. The terrible war which has just ended gave rise to a great

number  of  illnesses  of  this  kind,  but  it  at  least  put  an  end  to  the

temptation to attribute the cause of the disorder to organic lesions of

the  nervous  system  brought  about  by  mechanical  force.¹  The

symptomatic picture presented by traumatic neurosis approaches that

of hysteria in the wealth of its similar motor symptoms, but surpasses

it as a rule in its strongly marked signs of subjective ailment (in which

it resembles hypochondria or melancholia) as well as in the evidence

it  gives  of  a  far  more  comprehensive  general  enfeeblement  and

disturbance of the mental capacities. No complete explanation has yet

been reached either of war neuroses or of the traumatic neuroses of

peace.  In  the  case  of  the  war  neuroses,  the  fact  that  the  same

symptoms  sometimes  came  about  without  the  intervention  of  any

gross mechanical force seemed at once enlightening and bewildering.

In  the  case  of  the  ordinary  traumatic  neuroses  two  characteristics

emerge  prominently:  first,  that  the  chief  weight  in  their  causation

seems to rest upon the factor of surprise, of fright; and secondly, that

a wound or injury inflicted simultaneously works as a rule against the

development of a neurosis. ‘Fright’, ‘fear’ and ‘anxiety’ are improperly

used as synonymous expressions; they are in fact capable of clear

distinction in their relation to danger. ‘Anxiety’ describes a particular

state of expecting the danger or preparing for it, even though it may be

an unknown one. ‘Fear’ requires a definite object of which to be afraid.

‘Fright’, however, is the name we give to the state a person gets intowhen  he  has  run  into  danger  without  being  prepared  for  it;  it

emphasizes the factor of surprise. I do not believe anxiety itself can

produce a traumatic neurosis. There is something about anxiety that

protects its subject against fright and so against fright-neuroses. We

shall return to this point later.¹

 

   ¹ Cf. the discussion on the psycho-analysis of war neuroses by Freud, Ferenczi, Abraham,

Simmel and Jones (1919).

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3719
 

     The  study  of  dreams  may  be  considered  the  most  trustworthy

method  of  investigating  deep  mental  processes.  Now  dreams

occurring in traumatic neuroses have the characteristic of repeatedly

bringing the patient back into the situation of his accident, a situation

from which he wakes up in another fright. This astonishes people far

too little. They think the fact that the traumatic experience is constantly

forcing  itself  upon  the  patient  even  in  his  sleep  is  a  proof  of  the

strength of that experience: the patient is, as one might say, fixated to

his trauma. Fixations to the experience which started the illness have

long  been  familiar  to  us  in  hysteria.  Breuer  and  Freud  declared  in

1893  that  ‘hysterics  suffer  mainly  from  reminiscences’.  In  the  war

neuroses, too, observers like Ferenczi and Simmel have been able to

explain certain motor symptoms by fixation to the moment at which the

trauma occurred.

      I  am  not  aware,  however,  that  patients  suffering  from  traumatic

neurosis are much occupied in their waking lives with memories of

their accident. Perhaps they are more concerned with not thinking of

it. Anyone who accepts it as something self-evident that their dreams

should put them back at night into the situation that caused them to

fall ill has misunderstood the nature of dreams. It would be more in

harmony with their nature if they showed the patient pictures from his

healthy past or of the cure for which he hopes. If we are not to be

shaken  in  our  belief  in  the  wish-fulfilling  tenor  of  dreams  by  the

dreams of traumatic neurotics, we still have one resource open to us:

we  may  argue  that  the  function  of  dreaming,  like  so  much  else,  isupset in this condition and diverted from its purposes, or we may be

driven to reflect on the mysterious masochistic trends of the ego.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3720

 

 

   At this point I propose to leave the dark and dismal subject of the

traumatic neurosis and pass on to examine the method of working

employed  by  the  mental  apparatus  in  one  of  its  earliest normal

activities - I mean in children’s play.

   The different theories of children’s play have only recently been

summarized and discussed from the psycho-analytic point of view by

Pfeifer  (1919),  to  whose  paper  I  would  refer  my  readers.  These

theories attempt to discover the motives which lead children to play,

but  they  fail  to  bring  into  the  foreground  the economic  motive,  the

consideration  of  the  yield  of  pleasure  involved.  Without  wishing  to

include  the  whole  field  covered  by  these  phenomena,  I  have  been

able, through a chance opportunity which presented itself, to throw

some light upon the first game played by a little boy of one and a half

and invented by himself. It was more than a mere fleeting observation,

for I lived under the same roof as the child and his parents for some

weeks, and it was some time before I discovered the meaning of the

puzzling activity which he constantly repeated

   The child was not at all precocious in his intellectual development.

At the age of one and a half he could say only a few comprehensible

words;  he  could  also  make  use  of  a  number  of  sounds  which

expressed  a  meaning  intelligible  to  those  around  him.  He  was,

however, on good terms with his parents and their one servant-girl,

and tributes were paid to his being a ‘good boy’. He did not disturb his

parents at night, he conscientiously obeyed orders not to touch certain

things or go into certain rooms, and above all he never cried when his

mother  left  him  for  a  few  hours.  At  the  same  time,  he  was  greatly

attached to his mother, who had not only fed him herself but had also

looked  after  him  without  any  outside  help.  This  good  little  boy,

however,  had  an  occasional  disturbing  habit  of  taking  any  smallobjects he could get hold of and throwing them away from him into a

corner, under the bed, and so on, so that hunting for his toys and

picking them up was often quite a business. As he did this he gave

vent  to  a  loud,  long-drawn-out  ‘o-o-o-o’,  accompanied  by  an

expression of interest and satisfaction. His mother and the writer of

the present account were agreed in thinking that this was not a mere

interjection  but  represented  the  German  word  ‘fort’.  I  eventually

realized that it was a game and that the only use he made of any of

his toys was to play ‘gone’ with them. One day I made an observation

which confirmed my view. The child had a wooden reel with a piece of

string tied round it. It never occurred to him to pull it along the floor

behind him, for instance, and play at its being a carriage. What he did

was to hold the reel by the string and very skilfully throw it over the

edge of his curtained cot, so that it disappeared into it, at the same

time uttering his expressive ‘o-o-o-o’. He then pulled the reel out of the

cot again by the string and hailed its reappearance with a joyful ‘da’.

This, then, was the complete game - disappearance and return. As a

rule one only witnessed its first act, which was repeated untiringly as a

game in itself, though there is no doubt that the greater pleasure was

attached to the second act.¹

 

   ¹ A further observation subsequently confirmed this interpretation fully. One day the child’s

mother had been away for several hours and on her return was met with the words ‘Baby o-o-
o-o!’ which was at first incomprehensible. It soon turned out, however, that during this long
period  of  solitude  the  child  had  found  a  method  of  making himself  disappear.  He  had
discovered his reflection in a full-length mirror which did not quite reach to the ground, so that
by crouching down he could make his mirror-image ‘gone’.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3721
 

   The interpretation of the game then became obvious. It was related

to the child’s great cultural achievement - the instinctual renunciation

(that is, the renunciation of instinctual satisfaction) which be had made

in allowing his mother to go away without protesting. He compensated

himself for this, as it were, by himself staging the disappearance and

return  of  the  objects  within  his  reach.  It  is  of  course  a  matter  of

indifference from the point of view of judging the effective nature of thegame whether the child invented it himself or took it over on some

outside suggestion. Our interest is directed to another point. The child

cannot  possibly  have  felt  his  mother’s  departure  as  something

agreeable  or  even  indifferent.  How  then  does  his  repetition  of  this

distressing experience as a game fit in with the pleasure principle? It

may perhaps be said in reply that her departure had to be enacted as

a necessary preliminary to her joyful return, and that it was in the latter

that  lay  the  true  purpose  of  the  game.  But  against  this  must  be

counted  the  observed  fact  that  the  first  act,  that  of  departure,  was

staged as a game in itself and far more frequently than the episode in

its entirety, with its pleasurable ending.

   No certain decision can be reached from the analysis of a single

case like this. On an unprejudiced view one gets an impression that

the child turned his experience into a game from another motive. At

the outset he was in a passive situation - he was overpowered by the

experience;  but,  by  repeating  it,  unpleasurable  though  it  was,  as  a

game, he took on an active part. These efforts might be put down to

an instinct for mastery that was acting independently of whether the

memory was in itself pleasurable or not. But still another interpretation

may  be  attempted.  Throwing  away  the  object  so  that  it  was  ‘gone’

might satisfy an impulse of the child’s, which was suppressed in his

actual life, to revenge himself on his mother for going away from him.

In that case it would have a defiant meaning: ‘All right, then, go away!

I don’t need you. I’m sending you away myself.’ A year later, the same

boy whom I had observed at his first game used to take a toy, if he

was  angry  with  it,  and  throw  it  on  the  floor,  exclaiming:  ‘Go  to  the

fwont!’ He had heard at that time that his absent father was ‘at the

front’,  and  was  far  from  regretting  his  absence;  on  the  contrary  he

made it quite clear that he had no desire to be disturbed in his sole

possession of his mother.¹ We know of other children who liked to

express similar hostile impulses by throwing away objects instead of

persons.² We are therefore left in doubt as to whether the impulse to

work over in the mind some overpowering experience so as to make

oneself  master  of  it  can  find  expression  as  a  primary  event,  and

independently of the pleasure principle. For, in the case we have been

discussing, the child may, after all, only have been able to repeat his

unpleasant  experience  in  play  because  the  repetition  carried  alongwith it a yield of pleasure of another sort but none the less a direct

one.

 

   ¹ When this child was five and three-quarters, his mother died. Now that she was really

‘gone’ (‘o-o-o’), the little boy showed no signs of grief. It is true that in the interval a second
child had been born and had roused him to violent jealousy.

   ² Cf. my note on a childhood memory of Goethe’s (1917b).

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3722
 

   Nor shall we be helped in our hesitation between these two views by

further considering children’s play. It is clear that in their play children

repeat everything that has made a great impression on them in real

life, and that in doing so they abreact the strength of the impression

and, as one might put it, make themselves master of the situation. But

on the other hand it is obvious that all their play is influenced by a wish

that dominates them the whole time - the wish to be grown-up and to

be able to do what grown-up people do. It can also be observed that

the unpleasurable nature of an experience does not always unsuit it

for play. If the doctor looks down a child’s throat or carries out some

small operation on him, we may be quite sure that these frightening

experiences will be the subject of the next game; but we must not in

that connection overlook the fact that there is a yield of pleasure from

another  source.  As  the  child  passes  over  from  the  passivity  of  the

experience to the activity of the game, he hands on the disagreeable

experience to one of his playmates and in this way revenges himself

on a substitute.

   Nevertheless, it emerges from this discussion that there is no need

to  assume  the  existence  of  a  special  imitative  instinct  in  order  to

provide a motive for play. Finally, a reminder may be added that the

artistic play and artistic imitation carried out by adults, which, unlike

children’s, are aimed at an audience, do not spare the spectators (for

instance, in tragedy) the most painful experiences and can yet be felt

by them as highly enjoyable. This is convincing proof that, even under

the dominance of the pleasure principle, there are ways and means

enough of making what is in itself unpleasurable into a subject to berecollected and worked over in the mind. The consideration of these

cases  and  situations,  which  have  a  yield  of  pleasure  as  their  final

outcome, should be undertaken by some system of aesthetics with an

economic approach to its subject-matter. They are of no use for our

purposes, since they presuppose the existence and dominance of the

pleasure  principle;  they  give  no  evidence  of  the  operation  of

tendencies beyond the pleasure principle, that is, of tendencies more

primitive than it and independent of it.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3723

 

                                            III

 

Twenty five years of intense work have had as their result that the

immediate aims of psycho-analytic technique are quite other to-day

than they were at the outset. At first the analysing physician could do

no more than discover the unconscious material that was concealed

from  the  patient,  put  it  together,  and,  at  the  right  moment,

communicate it to him. Psychoanalysis was then first and foremost an

art of interpreting. Since this did not solve the therapeutic problem, a

further aim quickly came in view: to oblige the patient to confirm the

analyst’s construction from his own memory. In that endeavour the

chief emphasis lay upon the patient’s resistances: the art consisted

now in uncovering these as quickly as possible, in pointing them out to

the patient and in inducing him by human influence - this was where

suggestion operating as ‘transference’ played its part - to abandon his

resistances.

   But it became ever clearer that the aim which had been set up - the

aim  that  what  was  unconscious  should  become  conscious  -  is  not

completely attainable by that method. The patient cannot remember

the whole of what is repressed in him, and what he cannot remember

may be precisely the essential part of it. Thus he acquires no sense of

conviction  of  the  correctness  of  the  construction  that  has  been

communicated to him. He is obliged to repeat the repressed material

as  a  contemporary  experience  instead  of,  as  the  physician  wouldprefer to see, remembering it as something belonging to the past.¹

These  reproductions,  which  emerge  with  such  unwished-for

exactitude,  always  have  as  their  subject  some  portion  of  infantile

sexual life - of the Oedipus complex, that is, and its derivatives; and

they are invariably acted out in the sphere of the transference, of the

patient’s  relation  to  the  physician.  When  things  have  reached  this

stage, it may be said that the earlier neurosis has now been replaced

by  a  fresh,  ‘transference  neurosis’.  It  has  been  the  physician’s

endeavour  to  keep  this  transference  neurosis  within  the  narrowest

limits: to force as much as possible into the channel of memory and to

allow as little as possible to emerge as repetition. The ratio between

what is remembered and what is reproduced varies from case to case.

The physician cannot as a rule spare his patient this phase of the

treatment.  He  must  get  him  to  re-experience  some  portion  of  his

forgotten life, but must see to it, on the other hand, that the patient

retains some degree of aloofness, which will enable him, in spite of

everything, to recognize that what appears to be reality is in fact only a

reflection of a forgotten past. If this can be successfully achieved, the

patient’s  sense  of  conviction  is  won,  together  with  the  therapeutic

success that is dependent on it.

 

  ¹ See my paper on ‘Recollecting, Repeating and Working Through‘ (1914g).

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3724

 

   In order to make it easier to understand this ‘compulsion to repeat’,

which emerges during the psycho-analytic treatment of neurotics, we

must above all get rid of the mistaken notion that what we are dealing

with in our struggle against resistances is resistance on the part of the

unconscious. The unconscious - that is to say, the ‘repressed’ - offers

no resistance whatever to the efforts of the treatment. Indeed, it itself

has no other endeavour than to break through the pressure weighing

down on it and force its way either to consciousness or to a discharge

through some real action. Resistance during treatment arises from the

same higher strata and systems of the mind which originally carried

out repression. But the fact that, as we know from experience, themotives of the resistances, and indeed the resistances themselves,

are unconscious at first during the treatment, is a hint to us that we

should correct a shortcoming in our terminology. We shall avoid a lack

of clarity if we make our contrast not between the conscious and the

unconscious but between the coherent ego and the repressed. It is

certain that much of the ego is itself unconscious, and notably what

we may describe as its nucleus; only a small part of it is covered by

the  term  ‘preconscious’.  Having  replaced  a  purely  descriptive

terminology by one which is systematic or dynamic, we can say that

the  patient’s  resistance  arises  from  his  ego,  and  we  then  at  once

perceive  that  the  compulsion  to  repeat  must  be  ascribed  to  the

unconscious repressed. It seems probable that the compulsion can

only express itself after the work of treatment has gone half-way to

meet it and has loosened the repression.¹

 

   ¹ I have argued elsewhere that what thus comes to the help of the compulsion to repeat is

the  factor  of  ‘suggestion’  in  the  treatment  -  that  is,  the  patient’s  submissiveness  to  the
physician, which has its roots deep in his unconscious parental complex.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3725
 

     There  is  no  doubt  that  the  resistance  of  the  conscious  and

unconscious ego operates under the sway of the pleasure principle: it

seeks  to  avoid  the  unpleasure  which  would  be  produced  by  the

liberation of the repressed. Our efforts, on the other hand, are directed

towards procuring the toleration of that unpleasure by an appeal to the

reality  principle.  But  how  is  the  compulsion  to  repeat  -  the

manifestation of the power of the repressed - related to the pleasure

principle? It is clear that the greater part of what is re-experienced

under the compulsion to repeat must cause the ego unpleasure, since

it  brings  to  light  activities  of  repressed  instinctual  impulses.  That,

however,  is  unpleasure  of  a  kind  we  have  already  considered  and

does not contradict the pleasure principle: unpleasure for one system

and simultaneously satisfaction for the other. But we come now to a

new and remarkable fact, namely that the compulsion to repeat also

recalls  from  the  past  experiences  which  include  no  possibility  ofpleasure,  and  which  can  never,  even  long  ago,  have  brought

satisfaction  even  to  instinctual  impulses  which  have  since  been

repressed.

      The  early  efflorescence  of  infantile  sexual  life  is  doomed  to

extinction because its wishes are incompatible with reality and with the

inadequate stage of development which the child has reached. That

efflorescence comes to an end in the most distressing circumstances

and to the accompaniment of the most painful feelings. Loss of love

and failure leave behind them a permanent injury to self-regard in the

form  of  a  narcissistic  scar,  which  in  my  opinion,  as  well  as  in

Marcinowski’s (1918), contributes more than anything to the ‘sense of

inferiority’  which  is  so  common  in  neurotics.  The  child’s  sexual

researches, on which limits are imposed by his physical development,

lead to no satisfactory conclusion; hence such later complaints as ‘I

can’t  accomplish  anything;  I  can’t  succeed  in  anything’.  The  tie  of

affection, which binds the child as a rule to the parent of the opposite

sex, succumbs to disappointment, to a vain expectation of satisfaction

or to jealousy over the birth of a new baby - unmistakable proof of the

infidelity  of  the  object  of  the  child’s  affections.  His  own  attempt  to

make  a  baby  himself,  carried  out  with  tragic  seriousness,  fails

shamefully.  The  lessening  amount  of  affection  he  receives,  the

increasing  demands  of  education,  hard  words  and  an  occasional

punishment - these show him at last the full extent to which he has

been  scorned.  These  are  a  few  typical  and  constantly  recurring

instances of the ways in which the love characteristic of the age of

childhood is brought to a conclusion.

      Patients  repeat  all  of  these  unwanted  situations  and  painful

emotions  in  the  transference  and  revive  them  with  the  greatest

ingenuity. They seek to bring about the interruption of the treatment

while it is still incomplete; they contrive once more to feel themselves

scorned, to oblige the physician to speak severely to them and treat

them  coldly;  they  discover  appropriate  objects  for  their  jealousy;

instead  of  the  passionately  desired  baby  of  their  childhood,  they

produce a plan or a promise of some grand present - which turns out

as  a  rule  to  be  no  less  unreal.  None  of  these  things  can  have

produced pleasure in the past, and it might be supposed that they

would cause less unpleasure to-day if they emerged as memories ordreams instead of taking the form of fresh experiences. They are of

course the activities of instincts intended to lead to satisfaction; but no

lesson  has  been  learnt  from  the  old  experience  of  these  activities

having  led  instead  only  to  unpleasure.  In  spite  of  that,  they  are

repeated, under pressure of a compulsion.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3726

 

   What psycho-analysis reveals in the transference phenomena of

neurotics can also be observed in the lives of some normal people.

The impression they give is of being pursued by a malignant fate or

possessed  by  some  ‘daemonic’  power;  but  psycho-analysis  has

always taken the view that their fate is for the most part arranged by

themselves  and  determined  by  early  infantile  influences.  The

compulsion  which  is  here  in  evidence  differs  in  no  way  from  the

compulsion to repeat which we have found in neurotics, even though

the people we are now considering have never shown any signs of

dealing with a neurotic conflict by producing symptoms. Thus we have

come across people all of whose human relationships have the same

outcome: such as the benefactor who is abandoned in anger after a

time by each of his protégés, however much they may otherwise differ

from  one  another,  and  who  thus  seems  doomed  to  taste  all  the

bitterness  of  ingratitude;  or  the  man  whose  friendships  all  end  in

betrayal by his friend; or the man who time after time in the course of

his life raises someone else into a position of great private or public

authority and then, after a certain interval, himself upsets that authority

and replaces him by a new one; or, again, the lover each of whose

love  affairs  with  a  woman  passes  through  the  same  phases  and

reaches the same conclusion. This ‘perpetual recurrence of the same

thing’ causes us no astonishment when it relates to active behaviour

on the part of the person concerned and when we can discern in him

an essential character-trait which always remains the same and which

is  compelled  to  find  expression  in  a  repetition  of  the  same

experiences.  We  are  much  more  impressed  by  cases  where  the

subject appears to have a passive experience, over which he has noinfluence, but in which he meets with a repetition of the same fatality.

There  is  the  case,  for  instance,  of  the  woman  who  married  three

successive husbands each of whom fell ill soon afterwards and had to

be nursed by her on their death-beds.¹ The most moving poetic picture

of  a  fate  such  as  this  is  given  by  Tasso  in  his  romantic  epic

Gerusalemme Liberata. Its hero, Tancred, unwittingly kills his beloved

Clorinda in a duel while she is disguised in the armour of an enemy

knight. After her burial he makes his way into a strange magic forest

which  strikes  the  Crusaders’  army  with  terror.  He  slashes  with  his

sword at a tall tree; but blood streams from the cut and the voice of

Clorinda, whose soul is imprisoned in the tree, is heard complaining

that he has wounded his beloved once again.

   If we take into account observations such as these, based upon

behaviour in the transference and upon the life-histories of men and

women, we shall find courage to assume that there really does exist in

the  mind  a  compulsion  to  repeat  which  overrides  the  pleasure

principle. Now too we shall be inclined to relate to this compulsion the

dreams  which  occur  in  traumatic  neuroses  and  the  impulse  which

leads children to play.

 

   ¹ Cf. the apt remarks on this subject by C. G. Jung (1909).

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3727

 

   But it is to be noted that only in rare instances can we observe the

pure  effects  of  the  compulsion  to  repeat,  unsupported  by  other

motives. In the case of children’s play we have already laid stress on

the other ways in which the emergence of the compulsion may be

interpreted; the compulsion to repeat and instinctual satisfaction which

is  immediately  pleasurable  seem  to  converge  here  into  an  intimate

partnership. The phenomena of transference are obviously exploited

by  the  resistance  which  the  ego  maintains  in  its  pertinacious

insistence  upon  repression;  the  compulsion  to  repeat,  which  the

treatment tries to bring into its service is, as it were, drawn over by the

ego to its side (clinging as the ego does to the pleasure principle). A

great deal of what might be described as the compulsion of destinyseems  intelligible  on  a  rational  basis;  so  that  we  are  under  no

necessity to call in a new and mysterious motive force to explain it.

   The least dubious instance is perhaps that of traumatic dreams. But

on maturer reflection we shall be forced to admit that even in the other

instances  the  whole  ground  is  not  covered  by  the  operation  of  the

familiar  motive  forces.  Enough  is  left  unexplained  to  justify  the

hypothesis of a compulsion to repeat - something that seems more

primitive,  more  elementary,  more  instinctual  than  the  pleasure

principle which it overrides. But if a compulsion to repeat does operate

in the mind, we should be glad to know something about it, to learn

what function it corresponds to, under what conditions it can emerge

and what its relation is to the pleasure principle - to which, after all, we

have hitherto ascribed dominance over the course of the processes of

excitation in mental life.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3728

 

                                            IV

 

What follows is speculation, often far-fetched speculation, which the

reader will consider or dismiss according to his individual predilection.

It  is  further  an  attempt  to  follow  out  an  idea  consistently,  out  of

curiosity to see where it will lead.

      Psycho-analytic  speculation  takes  as  its  point  of  departure  the

impression,  derived  from  examining  unconscious  processes,  that

consciousness  may  be,  not  the  most  universal  attribute  of  mental

processes,  but  only  a  particular  function  of  them.  Speaking  in

metapsychological terms, it asserts that consciousness is a function of

a  particular  system  which  it  describes  as Cs.  What  consciousness

yields consists essentially of perceptions of excitations coming from

the external world and of feelings of pleasure and unpleasure which

can  only  arise  from  within  the  mental  apparatus;  it  is  therefore

possible to assign to the system Pcpt.-Cs. a position in space. It must

lie on the borderline between outside and inside; it must be turned

towards  the  external  world  and  must  envelop  the  other  psychicalsystems. It will be seen that there is nothing daringly new in these

assumptions; we have merely adopted the views on localization held

by cerebral anatomy, which locates the ‘seat’ of consciousness in the

cerebral cortex - the outermost, enveloping layer of the central organ.

Cerebral  anatomy  has  no  need  to  consider  why,  speaking

anatomically, consciousness should be lodged on the surface of the

brain instead of being safely housed somewhere in its inmost interior.

Perhaps we shall be more successful in accounting for this situation in

the case of our system Pcpt.-Cs.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3729

 

   Consciousness is not the only distinctive character which we ascribe

to the processes in that system. On the basis of impressions derived

from  our  psycho-analytic  experience,  we  assume  that  all  excitatory

processes  that  occur  in  the other  systems  leave  permanent  traces

behind in them which form the foundation of memory. Such memory-

traces, then, have nothing to do with the fact of becoming conscious;

indeed  they  are  often  most  powerful  and  most  enduring  when  the

process  which  left  them  behind  was  one  which  never  entered

consciousness. We find it hard to believe, however, that permanent

traces of excitation such as these are also left in the system Pcpt.-Cs.

If they remained constantly conscious, they would very soon set limits

to the system’s aptitude for receiving fresh excitations.¹ If, on the other

hand, they were unconscious, we should be faced with the problem of

explaining the existence of unconscious processes in a system whose

functioning  was  otherwise  accompanied  by  the  phenomenon  of

consciousness.  We  should,  so  to  say,  have  altered  nothing  and

gained nothing by our hypothesis relegating the process of becoming

conscious  to  a  special  system.  Though  this  consideration  is  not

absolutely  conclusive,  it  nevertheless  leads  us  to  suspect  that

becoming  conscious  and  leaving  behind  a  memory-trace  are

processes  incompatible  with  each  other  within  one  and  the  same

system. Thus we should be able to say that the excitatory process

becomes conscious in the system Cs. but leaves no permanent tracebehind there; but that the excitation is transmitted to the systems lying

next within and that it is in them that its traces are left. I followed these

same lines in the schematic picture which I included in the speculative

section of my Interpretation of Dreams. It must be borne in mind that

little  enough  is  known  from  other  sources  of  the  origin  of

consciousness;  when,  therefore,  we  lay  down  the  proposition  that

consciousness  arises  instead  of  a  memory-trace,  the  assertion

deserves consideration, at all events on the ground of its being framed

in fairly precise terms.

   If this is so, then, the system Cs. is characterized by the peculiarity

that in it (in contrast to what happens in the other psychical systems)

excitatory processes do not leave behind any permanent change in its

elements  but  expire,  as  it  were,  in  the  phenomenon  of  becoming

conscious. An exception of this sort to the general rule requires to be

explained by some factor that applies exclusively to that one system.

Such a factor, which is absent in the other systems, might well be the

exposed situation of the system Cs., immediately abutting as it does

on the external world.

 

  ¹ What follows is based throughout on Breuer’s views in Studies on Hysteria (Breuer and

Freud, 1895).
 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3730

 

   Let us picture a living organism in its most simplified possible form

as  an  undifferentiated  vesicle  of  a  substance  that  is  susceptible  to

stimulation. Then the surface turned towards the external world will

from its very situation be differentiated and will serve as an organ for

receiving stimuli. Indeed embryology, in its capacity as a recapitulation

of developmental history, actually shows us that the central nervous

system originates from the ectoderm; the grey matter of the cortex

remains a derivative of the primitive superficial layer of the organism

and may have inherited some of its essential properties. It would be

easy  to  suppose,  then,  that  as  a  result  of  the  ceaseless  impact  of

external stimuli on the surface of the vesicle, its substance to a certain

depth  may  have  become  permanently  modified,  so  that  excitatoryprocesses run a different course in it from what they run in the deeper

layers. A crust would thus be formed which would at last have been so

thoroughly  ‘baked  through’  by  stimulation  that  it  would  present  the

most favourable possible conditions for the reception of stimuli and

become incapable of any further modification. In terms of the system

Cs.,  this  would  mean  that  its  elements  could  undergo  no  further

permanent modification from the passage of excitation, because they

had already been modified in the respect in question to the greatest

possible extent: now, however, they would have become capable of

giving  rise  to  consciousness.  Various  ideas  may  be  formed  which

cannot at present be verified as to the nature of this modification of the

substance and of the excitatory process. It may be supposed that, in

passing from one element to another, an excitation has to overcome a

resistance, and that the diminution of resistance thus effected is what

lays down a permanent trace of the excitation, that is, a facilitation. In

the  system Cs.,  then,  resistance  of  this  kind  to  passage  from  one

element to another would no longer exist. This picture can be brought

into  relation  with  Breuer’s  distinction  between  quiescent  (or  bound)

and  mobile  cathectic  energy  in  the  elements  of  the  psychical

systems;¹  the  elements  of  the  system Cs.  would  carry  no  bound

energy  but  only  energy  capable  of  free  discharge.  It  seems  best,

however, to express oneself as cautiously as possible on these points.

None the less, this speculation will have enabled us to bring the origin

of consciousness into some sort of connection with the situation of the

system Cs.  and  with  the  peculiarities  that  must  be  ascribed  to  the

excitatory processes taking place in it.

 

   ¹ Breuer and Freud, 1895.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3731

 

      But  we  have  more  to  say  of  the  living  vesicle  with  its  receptive

cortical layer. This little fragment of living substance is suspended in

the  middle  of  an  external  world  charged  with  the  most  powerful

energies;  and  it  would  be  killed  by  the  stimulation  emanating  from

these if it were not provided with a protective shield against stimuli. Itacquires the shield in this way: its outermost surface ceases to have

the  structure  proper  to  living  matter,  becomes  to  some  degree

inorganic  and  thenceforward  functions  as  a  special  envelope  or

membrane resistant to stimuli. In consequence, the energies of the

external world are able to pass into the next underlying layers, which

have remained living, with only a fragment of their original intensity;

and these layers can devote themselves, behind the protective shield,

to the reception of the amounts of stimulus which have been allowed

through it. By its death, the outer layer has saved all the deeper ones

from a similar fate - unless, that is to say, stimuli reach it which are so

strong that they break through the protective shield. Protection against

stimuli is an almost more important function for the living organism

than reception of stimuli. The protective shield is supplied with its own

store of energy and must above all endeavour to preserve the special

modes of transformation of energy operating in it against the effects

threatened by the enormous energies at work in the external world -

effects which tend towards a levelling out of them and hence towards

destruction. The main purpose of the reception of stimuli is to discover

the  direction  and  nature  of  the  external  stimuli;  and  for  that  it  is

enough to take small specimens of the external world, to sample it in

small quantities. In highly developed organisms the receptive cortical

layer of the former vesicle has long been withdrawn into the depths of

the interior of the body, though portions of it have been left behind on

the  surface  immediately  beneath  the  general  shield  against  stimuli.

These are the sense organs, which consist essentially of apparatus for

the reception of certain specific effects of stimulation, but which also

include special arrangements for further protection against excessive

amounts of stimulation and for excluding unsuitable kinds of stimuli. It

is characteristic of them that they deal only with very small quantities

of external stimulation and only take in samples of the external world.

They may perhaps be compared with feelers which are all the time

making  tentative  advances  towards  the  external  world  and  then

drawing back from it.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3732 

   At this point I shall venture to touch for a moment upon a subject

which  would  merit  the  most  exhaustive  treatment.  As  a  result  of

certain  psycho-analytic  discoveries,  we  are  to-day  in  a  position  to

embark on a discussion of the Kantian theorem that time and space

are  ‘necessary  forms  of  thought’.  We  have  learnt  that  unconscious

mental processes are in themselves ‘timeless’. This means in the first

place that they are not ordered temporally, that time does not change

them in any way and that the idea of time cannot be applied to them.

These  are  negative  characteristics  which  can  only  be  clearly

understood if a comparison is made with conscious mental processes.

On  the  other  hand,  our  abstract  idea  of  time  seems  to  be  wholly

derived from the method of working of the system Pcpt.-Cs. and to

correspond to a perception on its own part of that method of working.

This  mode  of  functioning  may  perhaps  constitute  another  way  of

providing  a  shield  against  stimuli.  I  know  that  these  remarks  must

sound very obscure, but I must limit myself to these hints.

   We have pointed out how the living vesicle is provided with a shield

against stimuli from the external world; and we had previously shown

that the cortical layer next to that shield must be differentiated as an

organ  for  receiving  stimuli  from  without.  This  sensitive  cortex,

however,  which  is  later  to  become  the  system Cs.,  also  receives

excitations  from within.  The  situation  of  the  system  between  the

outside  and  the  inside  and  the  difference  between  the  conditions

governing the reception of excitations in the two cases have a decisive

effect  on  the  functioning  of  the  system  and  of  the  whole  mental

apparatus. Towards the outside it is shielded against stimuli, and the

amounts  of  excitation  impinging  on  it  have  only  a  reduced  effect.

Towards the inside there can be no such shield; the excitations in the

deeper  layers  extend  into  the  system  directly  and  in  undiminished

amount, in so far as certain of their characteristics give rise to feelings

in the pleasure-unpleasure series. The excitations coming from within

are, however, in their intensity and in other, qualitative, respects - in

their  amplitude,  perhaps  -  more  commensurate  with  the  system’s

method of working than the stimuli which stream in from the external

world.  This  state  of  things  produces  two  definite  results.  First,  the

feelings of pleasure and unpleasure (which are an index to what ishappening  in  the  interior  of  the  apparatus)  predominate  over  all

external stimuli. And secondly, a particular way is adopted of dealing

with any internal excitations which produce too great an increase of

unpleasure: there is a tendency to treat them as though they were

acting, not from the inside, but from the outside, so that it may be

possible to bring the shield against stimuli into operation as a means

of  defence  against  them.  This  is  the  origin  of projection,  which  is

destined  to  play  such  a  large  part  in  the  causation  of  pathological

processes.

   I have an impression that these last considerations have brought us

to a better understanding of the dominance of the pleasure principle;

but  no  light  has  yet  been  thrown  on  the  cases  that  contradict  that

dominance.  Let  us  therefore  go  a  step  further.  We  describe  as

‘traumatic’ any excitations from outside which are powerful enough to

break through the protective shield. It seems to me that the concept of

trauma necessarily implies a connection of this kind with a breach in

an otherwise efficacious barrier against stimuli. Such an event as an

external trauma is bound to provoke a disturbance on a large scale in

the functioning of the organism’s energy and to set in motion every

possible defensive measure. At the same time, the pleasure principle

is for the moment put out of action. There is no longer any possibility

of  preventing  the  mental  apparatus  from  being  flooded  with  large

amounts  of  stimulus,  and  another  problem  arises  instead  -  the

problem of mastering the amounts of stimulus which have broken in

and of binding them, in the psychical sense, so that they can then be

disposed of.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3733

 

   The specific unpleasure of physical pain is probably the result of the

protective shield having been broken through in a limited area. There

is  then  a  continuous  stream  of  excitations  from  the  part  of  the

periphery  concerned  to  the  central  apparatus  of  the  mind,  such  as

could normally arise only from within the apparatus. And how shall we

expect  the  mind  to  react  to  this  invasion?  Cathectic  energy  issummoned  from  all  sides  to  provide  sufficiently  high  cathexes  of

energy  in  the  environs  of  the  breach.  An  ‘anticathexis’  on  a  grand

scale is set up, for whose benefit all the other psychical systems are

impoverished,  so  that  the  remaining  psychical  functions  are

extensively  paralysed  or  reduced.  We  must  endeavour  to  draw  a

lesson from examples such as this and use them as a basis for our

metapsychological speculations. From the present case, then, we infer

that a system which is itself highly cathected is capable of taking up

an additional stream of fresh inflowing energy and of converting it into

quiescent  cathexis,  that  is  of  binding  it  psychically.  The  higher  the

system’s own quiescent cathexis, the greater seems to be its binding

force; conversely, therefore, the lower its cathexis, the less capacity

will it have for taking up inflowing energy and the more violent must be

the consequences of such a breach in the protective shield against

stimuli. To this view it cannot be justly objected that the increase of

cathexis round the breach can be explained far more simply as the

direct result of the inflowing masses of excitation. If that were so, the

mental apparatus would merely receive an increase in its cathexes of

energy, and the paralysing character of pain and the impoverishment

of all the other systems would remain unexplained. Nor do the very

violent phenomena of discharge to which pain gives rise affect our

explanation, for they occur in a reflex manner - that is, they follow

without the intervention of the mental apparatus. The indefiniteness of

all  our  discussions  on  what  we  describe  as  metapsychology  is  of

course  due  to  the  fact  that  we  know  nothing  of  the  nature  of  the

excitatory process that takes place in the elements of the psychical

systems, and that we do not feel justified in framing any hypothesis on

the subject. We are consequently operating all the time with a large

unknown factor, which we are obliged to carry over into every new

formula. It may be reasonably supposed that this excitatory process

can be carried out with energies that vary quantitatively; it may also

seem  probable  that  it  has  more  than  one quality  (in  the  nature  of

amplitude,  for  instance).  As  a  new  factor  we  have  taken  into

consideration Breuer’s hypothesis that charges of energy occur in two

forms; so that we have to distinguish between two kinds of cathexis of

the psychical systems or their elements - a freely flowing cathexis that

presses  on  towards  discharge  and  a  quiescent  cathexis.  We  mayperhaps suspect that the binding of the energy that streams into the

mental apparatus consists in its change from a freely flowing into a

quiescent state.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3734

 

   We may, I think, tentatively venture to regard the common traumatic

neurosis as a consequence of an extensive breach being made in the

protective shield against stimuli. This would seem to reinstate the old,

naïve  theory  of  shock,  in  apparent  contrast  to  the  later  and

psychologically  more  ambitious  theory  which  attributes  aetiological

importance not to the effects of mechanical violence but to fright and

the  threat  to  life.  These  opposing  views  are  not,  however,

irreconcilable;  nor  is  the  psycho-analytic  view  of  the  traumatic

neurosis identical with the shock theory in its crudest form. The latter

regards the essence of the shock as being the direct damage to the

molecular  structure  or  even  to  the  histological  structure  of  the

elements of the nervous system; whereas what we seek to understand

are the effects produced on the organ of the mind by the breach in the

shield against stimuli and by the problems that follow in its train. And

we still attribute importance to the element of fright. It is caused by

lack of any preparedness for anxiety, including lack of hypercathexis

of the systems that would be the first to receive the stimulus. Owing to

their low cathexis those systems are not in a good position for binding

the  inflowing  amounts  of  excitation  and  the  consequences  of  the

breach  in  the  protective  shield  follow  all  the  more  easily.  It  will  be

seen, then, that preparedness for anxiety and the hypercathexis of the

receptive  systems  constitute  the  last  line  of  defence  of  the  shield

against  stimuli.  In  the  case  of  quite  a  number  of  traumas,  the

difference between systems that are unprepared and systems that are

well prepared through being hypercathected may be a decisive factor

in determining the outcome; though where the strength of a trauma

exceeds a certain limit this factor will no doubt cease to carry weight.

The  fulfilment  of  wishes  is,  as  we  know,  brought  about  in  a

hallucinatory  manner  by  dreams,  and  under  the  dominance  of  thepleasure principle this has become their function. But it is not in the

service  of  that  principle  that  the  dreams  of  patients  suffering  from

traumatic neuroses lead them back with such regularity to the situation

in which the trauma occurred. We may assume, rather, that dreams

are  here  helping  to  carry  out  another  task,  which  must  be

accomplished before the dominance of the pleasure principle can ever

begin.  These  dreams  are  endeavouring  to  master  the  stimulus

retrospectively,  by  developing  the  anxiety  whose  omission  was  the

cause  of  the  traumatic  neurosis.  They  thus  afford  us  a  view  of  a

function of the mental apparatus which, though it does not contradict

the pleasure principle, is nevertheless independent of it and seems to

be more primitive than the purpose of gaining pleasure and avoiding

unpleasure.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3735

 

   This would seem to be the place, then, at which to admit for the first

time  an  exception  to  the  proposition  that  dreams  are  fulfilments  of

wishes. Anxiety dreams, as I have shown repeatedly and in detail,

offer no such exception. Nor do ‘punishment dreams’, for they merely

replace the forbidden wish-fulfilment by the appropriate punishment

for it; that is to say, they fulfil the wish of the sense of guilt which is the

reaction to the repudiated impulse. But it is impossible to classify as

wish-fulfilments the dreams we have been discussing which occur in

traumatic  neuroses,  or  the  dreams  during  psycho-analyses  which

bring  to  memory  the  psychical  traumas  of  childhood.  They  arise,

rather, in obedience to the compulsion to repeat, though it is true that

in  analysis  that  compulsion  is  supported  by  the  wish  (which  is

encouraged by ‘suggestion’) to conjure up what has been forgotten

and repressed. Thus it would seem that the function of dreams, which

consists  in  setting  aside  any  motives  that  might  interrupt  sleep,  by

fulfilling  the  wishes  of  the  disturbing  impulses,  is  not  their original

function. It would not be possible for them to perform that function until

the whole of mental life had accepted the dominance of the pleasure

principle.  If  there  is  a  ‘beyond  the  pleasure  principle’,  it  is  onlyconsistent to grant that there was also a time before the purpose of

dreams was the fulfilment of wishes. This would imply no denial of

their later function. But if once this general rule has been broken, a

further  question  arises.  May  not  dreams  which,  with  a  view  to  the

psychical  binding  of  traumatic  impressions,  obey  the  compulsion  to

repeat - may not such dreams occur outside analysis as well? And the

reply can only be a decided affirmative.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3736

 

   I have argued elsewhere¹ that ‘war neuroses’ (in so far as that term

implies something more than a reference to the circumstances of the

illness’s onset) may very well be traumatic neuroses which have been

facilitated by a conflict in the ego. The fact to which I have referred in

the first paragraph of Chapter II, that a gross physical injury caused

simultaneously by the trauma diminishes the chances that a neurosis

will develop, becomes intelligible if one bears in mind two facts which

have  been  stressed  by  psycho-analytic  research:  firstly,  that

mechanical  agitation  must  be  recognized  as  one  of  the  sources  of

sexual  excitation,²  and  secondly,  that  painful  and  feverish  illnesses

exercise a powerful effect, so long as they last, on the distribution of

libido. Thus, on the one hand, the mechanical violence of the trauma

would liberate a quantity of sexual excitation which, owing to the lack

of preparation for anxiety, would have a traumatic effect; but, on the

other  hand,  the  simultaneous  physical  injury,  by  calling  for  a

narcissistic hypercathexis of the injured organ,³ would bind the excess

of excitation. It is also well known, though the libido theory has not yet

made  sufficient  use  of  the  fact,  that  such  severe  disorders  in  the

distribution of libido as melancholia are temporarily brought to an end

by intercurrent organic illness, and indeed that even a fully developed

condition of dementia praecox is capable of a temporary remission in

these same circumstances.

 

   ¹ See my introduction (1919d) to Psycho-analysis and the War Neuroses.

   ² Cf. my remarks elsewhere (Three Essays) on the effect of swinging and railway-travel   ³ See my paper on narcissism (1914c).

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3737

 

                                            V

 

The fact that the cortical layer which receives stimuli is without any

protective shield against excitations from within must have as its result

that these latter transmissions of stimulus have a preponderance in

economic  importance  and  often  occasion  economic  disturbances

comparable with traumatic neuroses. The most abundant sources of

this  internal  excitation  are  what  are  described  as  the  organism’s

‘instincts’  -  the  representatives  of  all  the  forces  originating  in  the

interior of the body and transmitted to the mental apparatus - at once

the most important and the most obscure element of psychological

research.

   It will perhaps not be thought too rash to suppose that the impulses

arising from the instincts do not belong to the type of bound nervous

processes  but  of freely  mobile  processes  which  press  towards

discharge.  The  best  part  of  what  we  know  of  these  processes  is

derived from our study of the dream-work. We there discovered that

the  processes  in  the  unconscious  systems  were  fundamentally

different from those in the preconscious (or conscious) systems. In the

unconscious, cathexes can easily be completely transferred, displaced

and condensed. Such treatment, however, could produce only invalid

results if it were applied to preconscious material; and this accounts

for  the  familiar  peculiarities  exhibited  by  manifest  dreams  after  the

preconscious residues of the preceding day have been worked over in

accordance with the laws operating in the unconscious. I described

the  type  of  process  found  in  the  unconscious  as  the  ‘primary’

psychical  process,  in  contradistinction  to  the  ‘secondary’  process

which  is  the  one  obtaining  in  our  normal  waking  life.  Since  all

instinctual impulses have the unconscious systems as their point of

impact, it is hardly an innovation to say that they obey the primary

process. Again, it is easy to identify the primary psychical process with

Breuer’s  freely  mobile  cathexis  and  the  secondary  process  withchanges in his bound or tonic cathexis.¹ If so, it would be the task of

the  higher  strata  of  the  mental  apparatus  to  bind  the  instinctual

excitation reaching the primary process. A failure to effect this binding

would provoke a disturbance analogous to a traumatic neurosis; and

only after the binding has been accomplished would it be possible for

the dominance of the pleasure principle (and of its modification, the

reality principle) to proceed unhindered. Till then the other task of the

mental apparatus, the task of mastering or binding excitations, would

have precedence - not, indeed, in opposition to the pleasure principle,

but independently of it and to some extent in disregard of it.

 

   ¹ Cf. my Interpretation of Dreams, Chapter VII.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3738

 

      The  manifestations  of  a  compulsion  to  repeat  (which  we  have

described as occurring in the early activities of infantile mental life as

well as among the events of psycho-analytic treatment) exhibit to a

high degree an instinctual character and, when they act in opposition

to  the  pleasure  principle,  give  the  appearance  of  some  ‘daemonic’

force at work. In the case of children’s play we seemed to see that

children repeat unpleasurable experiences for the additional reason

that they can master a powerful impression far more thoroughly by

being active than they could by merely experiencing it passively. Each

fresh repetition seems to strengthen the mastery they are in search of.

Nor can children have their pleasurable experiences repeated often

enough, and they are inexorable in their insistence that the repetition

shall be an identical one. This character trait disappears later on. If a

joke  is  heard  for  a  second  time  it  produces  almost  no  effect;  a

theatrical production never creates so great an impression the second

time as the first; indeed, it is hardly possible to persuade an adult who

has  very  much  enjoyed  reading  a  book  to  re-read  it  immediately.

Novelty is always the condition of enjoyment. But children will never

tire of asking an adult to repeat a game that he has shown them or

played with them, till he is too exhausted to go on. And if a child has

been told a nice story, he will insist on hearing it over and over againrather than a new one; and he will remorselessly stipulate that the

repetition shall be an identical one and will correct any alterations of

which the narrator may be guilty - though they may actually have been

made in the hope of gaining fresh approval. None of this contradicts

the  pleasure  principle;  repetition,  the  re-experiencing  of  something

identical,  is  clearly  in  itself  a  source  of  pleasure.  In  the  case  of  a

person  in  analysis,  on  the  contrary,  the  compulsion  to  repeat  the

events of his childhood in the transference evidently disregards the

pleasure  principle  in  every  way.  The  patient  behaves  in  a  purely

infantile fashion and thus shows us that the repressed memory-traces

of his primaeval experiences are not present in him in a bound state

and  are  indeed  in  a  sense  incapable  of  obeying  the  secondary

process. It is to this fact of not being bound, moreover, that they owe

their  capacity  for  forming,  in  conjunction  with  the  residues  of  the

previous day, a wishful phantasy that emerges in a dream. This same

compulsion  to  repeat  frequently  meets  us  as  an  obstacle  to  our

treatment when at the end of an analysis we try to induce the patient

to detach himself completely from his physician. It may be presumed,

too, that when people unfamiliar with analysis feel an obscure fear - a

dread of rousing something that, so they feel, is better left sleeping -

what they are afraid of at bottom is the emergence of this compulsion

with its hint of possession by some ‘daemonic’ power.

      But  how  is  the  predicate  of  being  ‘instinctual’  related  to  the

compulsion to repeat? At this point we cannot escape a suspicion that

we may have come upon the track of a universal attribute of instincts

and  perhaps  of  organic  life  in  general  which  has  not  hitherto  been

clearly recognized or at least not explicitly stressed. It seems, then,

that an instinct is an urge inherent in organic life to restore an earlier

state of things which the living entity has been obliged to abandon

under the pressure of external disturbing forces; that is, it is a kind of

organic  elasticity,  or,  to  put  it  another  way,  the  expression  of  the

inertia inherent in organic life.¹

 

   ¹ I have no doubt that similar notions as to the nature of ‘instincts’ have already been put

forward repeatedly.
 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle                                                                                      3739

 

      This  view  of  instincts  strikes  us  as  strange  because  we  have

become used to see in them a factor impelling towards change and

development, whereas we are now asked to recognize in them the

precise contrary - an expression of the conservative nature of living

substance. On the other hand we soon call to mind examples from

animal life which seem to confirm the view that instincts are historically

determined.  Certain  fishes,  for  instance,  undertake  laborious

migrations  at  spawning-time  in  order  to  deposit  their  spawn  in

particular  waters  far  removed  from  their  customary  haunts.  In  the

opinion of many biologists what they are doing is merely to seek out

the localities in which their species formerly resided but which in the

course of time they have exchanged for others. The same explanation

is believed to apply to the migratory flights of birds of passage - but we

are quickly relieved of the necessity for seeking for further examples

by the reflection that the most impressive proofs of there being an

organic compulsion to repeat lie in the phenomena of heredity and the

facts of embryology. We see how the germ of a living animal is obliged

in  the  course  of  its  development  to  recapitulate  (even  if  only  in  a

transient and abbreviated fashion) the structures of all the forms from

which it is sprung, instead of proceeding quickly by the shortest path

to  its  final  shape.  This  behaviour  is  only  to  a  very  slight  degree

attributable  to  mechanical  causes,  and  the  historical  explanation

cannot accordingly be neglected. So too the power of regenerating a

lost organ by growing afresh a precisely similar one extends far up

into the animal kingdom.

   We shall be met by the plausible objection that it may very well be

that,  in  addition  to  the  conservative  instincts  which  impel  towards

repetition, there may be others which push forward towards progress

and the production of new forms. This argument must certainly not be

overlooked, and it will be taken into account at a later stage. But for

the  moment  it  is  tempting  to  pursue  to  its  logical  conclusion  the

hypothesis that all instincts tend towards the restoration of an earlier

state of things. The outcome may give an impression of mysticism or

of sham profundity; but we can feel quite innocent of having had any

such purpose in view. We seek only for the sober results of researchor  of  reflection  based  on  it;  and  we  have  no  wish  to  find  in  those

results any quality other than certainty.¹

 

   ¹ The  reader  should  not  overlook  the  fact  that  what  follows  is  the  development  of  an

extreme line of thought. Later on, when account is taken of the sexual instincts, it will be found
that the necessary limitations and corrections are applied to it.
 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3740

 

   Let us suppose, then, that all the organic instincts are conservative,

are acquired historically and tend towards the restoration of an earlier

state of things. It follows that the phenomena of organic development

must be attributed to external disturbing and diverting influences. The

elementary living entity would from its very beginning have had no

wish to change; if conditions remained the same, it would do no more

than constantly repeat the same course of life. In the last resort, what

has left its mark on the development of organisms must be the history

of the earth we live in and of its relation to the sun. Every modification

which  is  thus  imposed  upon  the  course  of  the  organism’s  life  is

accepted  by  the  conservative  organic  instincts  and  stored  up  for

further  repetition.  Those  instincts  are  therefore  bound  to  give  a

deceptive  appearance  of  being  forces  tending  towards  change  and

progress, whilst in fact they are merely seeking to reach an ancient

goal by paths alike old and new. Moreover it is possible to specify this

final  goal  of  all  organic  striving.  It  would  be  in  contradiction  to  the

conservative nature of the instincts if the goal of life were a state of

things which had never yet been attained. On the contrary, it must be

an old state of things, an initial state from which the living entity has at

one time or other departed and to which it is striving to return by the

circuitous paths along which its development leads. If we are to take it

as  a  truth  that  knows  no  exception  that  everything  living  dies  for

internal reasons - becomes inorganic once again - then we shall be

compelled to say that ‘the aim of life is death’ and, looking backwards,

that ‘inanimate things existed before living ones’.

   The attributes of life were at some time evoked in inanimate matter

by the action of a force of whose nature we can form no conception. Itmay perhaps have been a process similar in type to that which later

caused the development of consciousness in a particular stratum of

living matter. The tension which then arose in what had hitherto been

an inanimate substance endeavoured to cancel itself out. In this way

the first instinct came into being: the instinct to return to the inanimate

state. It was still an easy matter at that time for a living substance to

die;  the  course  of  its  life  was  probably  only  a  brief  one,  whose

direction was determined by the chemical structure of the young life.

For a long time, perhaps, living substance was thus being constantly

created afresh and easily dying, till decisive external influences altered

in such a way as to oblige the still surviving substance to diverge ever

more widely from its original course of life and to make ever more

complicated détours before reaching its aim of death. These circuitous

paths to death, faithfully kept to by the conservative instincts, would

thus present us to-day with the picture of the phenomena of life. If we

firmly  maintain  the  exclusively  conservative  nature  of  instincts,  we

cannot arrive at any other notions as to the origin and aim of life.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3741

 

   The implications in regard to the great groups of instincts which, as

we  believe,  lie  behind  the  phenomena  of  life  in  organisms  must

appear  no  less  bewildering.  The  hypothesis  of  self-preservative

instincts, such as we attribute to all living beings, stands in marked

opposition to the idea that instinctual life as a whole serves to bring

about  death.  Seen  in  this  light,  the  theoretical  importance  of  the

instincts of self-preservation, of self-assertion and of mastery greatly

diminishes.  They  are  component  instincts  whose  function  it  is  to

assure that the organism shall follow its own path to death, and to

ward off any possible ways of returning to inorganic existence other

than those which are immanent in the organism itself. We have no

longer to reckon with the organism’s puzzling determination (so hard

to  fit  into  any  context)  to  maintain  its  own  existence  in  the  face  of

every obstacle. What we are left with is the fact that the organism

wishes to die only in its own fashion. Thus these guardians of life, too,were originally the myrmidons of death. Hence arises the paradoxical

situation that the living organism struggles most energetically against

events  (dangers,  in  fact)  which  might  help  it  to  attain  its  life’s  aim

rapidly  -  by  a  kind  of  short-circuit.  Such  behaviour  is,  however,

precisely  what  characterizes  purely  instinctual  as  contrasted  with

intelligent efforts.

   But let us pause for a moment and reflect. It cannot be so. The

sexual  instincts,  to  which  the  theory  of  the  neuroses  gives  a  quite

special place, appear under a very different aspect.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3742

 

   The external pressure which provokes a constantly increasing extent

of development has not imposed itself upon every organism. Many

have  succeeded  in  remaining  up  to  the  present  time  at  their  lowly

level. Many, though not all, such creatures, which must resemble the

earliest stages of the higher animals and plants, are, indeed, living to-

day. In the same way, the whole path of development to natural death

is  not  trodden  by all  the  elementary  entities  which  compose  the

complicated body of one of the higher organisms. Some of them, the

germ-cells, probably retain the original structure of living matter and,

after a certain time, with their full complement of inherited and freshly

acquired  instinctual  dispositions,  separate  themselves  from  the

organism as a whole. These two characteristics may be precisely what

enables  them  to  have  an  independent  existence.  Under  favourable

conditions, they begin to develop - that is, to repeat the performance

to  which  they  owe  their  existence;  and  in  the  end  once  again  one

portion of their substance pursues its development to a finish, while

another portion harks back once again as a fresh residual germ to the

beginning of the process of development. These germ-cells, therefore,

work against the death of the living substance and succeed in winning

for it what we can only regard as potential immortality, though that

may mean no more than a lengthening of the road to death. We must

regard as in the highest degree significant the fact that this function of

the germ-cell is reinforced, or only made possible, if it coalesces withanother cell similar to itself and yet differing from it.

   The instincts which watch over the destinies of these elementary

organisms that survive the whole individual, which provide them with a

safe  shelter  while  they  are  defenceless  against  the  stimuli  of  the

external world, which bring about their meeting with other germ-cells,

and so on - these constitute the group of the sexual instincts. They are

conservative in the same sense as the other instincts in that they bring

back earlier states of living substance; but they are conservative to a

higher  degree  in  that  they  are  peculiarly  resistant  to  external

influences; and they are conservative too in another sense in that they

preserve life itself for a comparatively long period.¹ They are the true

life instincts. They operate against the purpose of the other instincts,

which  leads,  by  reason  of  their  function,  to  death;  and  this  fact

indicates  that  there  is  an  opposition  between  them  and  the  other

instincts, an opposition whose importance was long ago recognized by

the theory of the neuroses. It is as though the life of the organism

moved with a vacillating rhythm. One group of instincts rushes forward

so as to reach the final aim of life as swiftly as possible; but when a

particular stage in the advance has been reached, the other group

jerks back to a certain point to make a fresh start and so prolong the

journey. And even though it is certain that sexuality and the distinction

between  the  sexes  did  not  exist  when  life  began,  the  possibility

remains that the instincts which were later to be described as sexual

may have been in operation from the very first, and it may not be true

that it was only at a later time that they started upon their work of

opposing the activities of the ‘ego-instincts’.²

 

   ¹ Yet it is to them alone that we can attribute an internal impulse towards ‘progress’ and

towards higher development! (See below)

   ² It should be understood from the context that the term ‘ego-instincts’ is used here as a

provisional description and derives from the earliest psycho-analytical terminology.
 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3743

 

   Let us now hark back for a moment ourselves and consider whether

there is any basis at all for these speculations. Is it really the casethat, apart from the sexual instincts, there are no instincts that do not

seek to restore an earlier state of things? that there are none that aim

at a state of things which has never yet been attained? I know of no

certain  example  from  the  organic  world  that  would  contradict  the

characterization  I  have  thus  proposed.  There  is  unquestionably  no

universal  instinct  towards  higher  development  observable  in  the

animal or plant world, even though it is undeniable that development

does in fact occur in that direction. But on the one hand it is often

merely  a  matter  of  opinion  when  we  declare  that  one  stage  of

development is higher than another, and on the other hand biology

teaches us that higher development in one respect is very frequently

balanced or outweighed by involution in another. Moreover there are

plenty of animal forms from whose early stages we can infer that their

development has, on the contrary, assumed a retrograde character.

Both  higher  development  and  involution  might  well  be  the

consequences of adaptation to the pressure of external forces; and in

both cases the part played by instincts might be limited to the retention

(in  the  form  of  an  internal  source  of  pleasure)  of  an  obligatory

modification.¹

 

   ¹ Ferenczi  (1913,  137)  has  reached  the  same  conclusion  along  different  lines:  ‘If  this

thought is pursued to its logical conclusion, one must make oneself familiar with the idea of a
tendency to perseveration or regression dominating organic life as well, while the tendency to
further development, to adaptation, etc., would become active only as a result of external
stimuli.’
 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3744

 

   It may be difficult, too, for many of us, to abandon the belief that

there is an instinct towards perfection at work in human beings, which

has  brought  them  to  their  present  high  level  of  intellectual

achievement and ethical sublimation and which may be expected to

watch over their development into supermen. I have no faith, however,

in the existence of any such internal instinct and I cannot see how this

benevolent illusion is to be preserved. The present development of

human beings requires, as it seems to me, no different explanation

from that of animals. What appears in a minority of human individualsas  an  untiring  impulsion  towards  further  perfection  can  easily  be

understood  as  a  result  of  the  instinctual  repression  upon  which  is

based all that is most precious in human civilization. The repressed

instinct never ceases to strive for complete satisfaction, which would

consist  in  the  repetition  of  a  primary  experience  of  satisfaction.  No

substitutive or reactive formations and no sublimations will suffice to

remove  the  repressed  instinct’s  persisting  tension;  and  it  is  the

difference  in  amount  between  the  pleasure  of  satisfaction  which  is

demanded  and  that  which  is  actually achieved  that  provides  the

driving factor which will permit of no halting at any position attained,

but,  in  the  poet’s  words,  ‘ungebändigt  immer  vorwärts  dringt’.¹ The

backward  path  that  leads  to  complete  satisfaction  is  as  a  rule

obstructed  by  the  resistances  which  maintain  the  repressions.  So

there is no alternative but to advance in the direction in which growth

is  still  free  -  though  with  no  prospect  of  bringing  the  process  to  a

conclusion or of being able to reach the goal. The processes involved

in the formation of a neurotic phobia, which is nothing else than an

attempt at flight from the satisfaction of an instinct, present us with a

model of the manner of origin of this supposititious ‘instinct towards

perfection’ - an instinct which cannot possibly be attributed to every

human being. The dynamic conditions for its development are, indeed,

universally  present;  but  it  is  only  in  rare  cases  that  the economic

situation appears to favour the production of the phenomenon.

   I will add only a word to suggest that the efforts of Eros to combine

organic  substances  into  ever  larger  unities  probably  provide  a

substitute  for  this  ‘instinct  towards  perfection’  whose  existence  we

cannot admit. The phenomena that are attributed to it seem capable of

explanation  by  these  efforts  of  Eros  taken  in  conjunction  with  the

results of repression.

 

   ¹ Mephistopheles in Faust, Part I.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3745

 

                                            VI

 The upshot of our enquiry so far has been the drawing of a sharp

distinction between the ‘ego-instincts’ and the sexual instincts, and the

view that the former exercise pressure towards death and the latter

towards  a  prolongation  of  life.  But  this  conclusion  is  bound  to  be

unsatisfactory  in  many  respects  even  to  ourselves.  Moreover,  it  is

actually only of the former group of instincts that we can predicate a

conservative,  or  rather  retrograde,  character  corresponding  to  a

compulsion to repeat. For on our hypothesis the ego-instincts arise

from the coming to life of inanimate matter and seek to restore the

inanimate state; whereas as regards the sexual instincts, though it is

true that they reproduce primitive states of the organism, what they

are clearly aiming at by every possible means is the coalescence of

two germ-cells which are differentiated in a particular way. If this union

is not effected, the germ-cell dies along with all the other elements of

the multicellular organism. It is only on this condition that the sexual

function  can  prolong  the  cell’s  life  and  lend  it  the  appearance  of

immortality.  But  what  is  the  important  event  in  the  development  of

living substance which is being repeated in sexual reproduction, or in

its fore-runner, the conjugation of two protista? We cannot say; and

we  should  consequently  feel  relieved  if  the  whole  structure  of  our

argument turned out to be mistaken. The opposition between the ego

or death instincts and the sexual or life instincts would then cease to

hold  and  the  compulsion  to  repeat  would  no  longer  possess  the

importance we have ascribed to it.

   Let us turn back, then, to one of the assumptions that we have

already made, with the expectation that we shall be able to give it a

categorical denial. We have drawn far-reaching conclusions from the

hypothesis  that  all  living  substance  is  bound  to  die  from  internal

causes. We made this assumption thus carelessly because it does not

seem to us to be an assumption. We are accustomed to think that

such  is  the  fact,  and  we  are  strengthened  in  our  thought  by  the

writings of our poets. Perhaps we have adopted the belief because

there is some comfort in it. If we are to die ourselves, and first to lose

in  death  those  who  are  dearest  to  us,  it  is  easier  to  submit  to  a

remorseless law of nature, to the sublime ‘Anagch, than to a chance

which might perhaps have been escaped. It may be, however, that

this belief in the internal necessity of dying is only another of thoseillusions  which  we  have  created  ‘um  die  Schwere  des  Daseins  zu

ertragen’. It is certainly not a primaeval belief. The notion of ‘natural

death’ is quite foreign to primitive races; they attribute every death that

occurs among them to the influence of an enemy or of an evil spirit.

We must therefore turn to biology in order to test the validity of the

belief.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3746

 

   If we do so, we may be astonished to find how little agreement there

is among biologists on the subject of natural death and in fact that the

whole concept of death melts away under their hands. The fact that

there  is  a  fixed  average  duration  of  life  at  least  among  the  higher

animals naturally argues in favour of there being such a thing as death

from  natural  causes.  But  this  impression  is  countered  when  we

consider  that  certain  large  animals  and  certain  gigantic  arboreal

growths reach a very advanced age and one which cannot at present

be computed. According to the large conception of Wilhelm Fliess, all

the phenomena of life exhibited by organisms - and also, no doubt,

their  death  -  are  linked  with  the  completion  of  fixed  periods,  which

express the dependence of two kinds of living substance (one male

and the other female) upon the solar year. When we see, however,

how easily and how extensively the influence of external forces is able

to modify the date of the appearance of vital phenomena (especially in

the plant world) - to precipitate them or hold them back - doubts must

be cast upon the rigidity of Fliess’s formulas or at least upon whether

the laws laid down by him are the sole determining factors.

   The greatest interest attaches from our point of view to the treatment

given to the subject of the duration of life and the death of organisms

in the writings of Weismann (1882, 1884, 1892, etc.) It was he who

introduced the division of living substance into mortal and immortal

parts. The mortal part is the body in the narrower sense - the ‘soma’ -

which alone is subject to natural death. The germ-cells, on the other

hand, are potentially immortal, in so far as they are able, under certain

favourable conditions, to develop into a new individual, or, in otherwords, to surround themselves with a new soma. (Weismann, 1884.)

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3747

 

   What strikes us in this is the unexpected analogy with our own view,

which was arrived at along such a different path. Weismann, regarding

living  substance  morphologically,  sees  in  it  one  portion  which  is

destined  to  die  -  the  soma,  the  body  apart  from  the  substance

concerned with sex and inheritance - and an immortal portion - the

germ-plasm, which is concerned with the survival of the species, with

reproduction.  We,  on  the  other  hand,  dealing  not  with  the  living

substance  but  with  the  forces  operating  in  it,  have  been  led  to

distinguish two kinds of instincts: those which seek to lead what is

living to death, and others, the sexual instincts, which are perpetually

attempting and achieving a renewal of life. This sounds like a dynamic

corollary to Weismann’s morphological theory.

   But the appearance of a significant correspondence is dissipated as

soon as we discover Weismann’s views on the problem of death. For

he  only  relates  the  distinction  between  the  mortal  soma  and  the

immortal  germ-plasm  to multicellular  organisms;  in  unicellular

organisms the individual and the reproductive cell are still one and the

same  (Weismann,  1882,  38).  Thus  he  considers  that  unicellular

organisms  are  potentially  immortal,  and  that  death  only  makes  its

appearance with the multicellular metazoa. It is true that this death of

the higher organisms is a natural one, a death from internal causes;

but it is not founded on any primal characteristic of living substance

(Weismann,  1884,  84)  and  cannot  be  regarded  as  an  absolute

necessity with its basis in the very nature of life (Weismann, 1882, 33).

Death is rather a matter of expediency, a manifestation of adaptation

to the external conditions of life; for, when once the cells of the body

have been divided into soma and germ-plasm, an unlimited duration of

individual  life  would  become  a  quite  pointless  luxury.  When  this

differentiation  had  been  made  in  the  multicellular  organisms,  death

became possible and expedient. Since then, the soma of the higher

organisms  has  died  at  fixed  periods  for  internal  reasons,  while  theprotista have remained immortal. It is not the case, on the other hand,

that reproduction was only introduced at the same time as death. On

the contrary, it is a primal characteristic of living matter, like growth

(from which it originated), and life has been continuous from its first

beginning upon earth. (Weismann, 1884, 84 f.)

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3748

 

      It  will  be  seen  at  once  that  to  concede  in  this  way  that  higher

organisms have a natural death is of very little help to us. For if death

is a late acquisition of organisms, then there can be no question of

there having been death instincts from the very beginning of life on

this earth. Multicellular organisms may die for internal reasons, owing

to defective differentiation or to imperfections in their metabolism, but

the matter is of no interest from the point of view of our problem. An

account  of  the  origin  of  death  such  as  this  is  moreover  far  less  at

variance  with  our  habitual  modes  of  thought  than  the  strange

assumption of ‘death instincts’.

   The discussion which followed upon Weismann’s suggestions led,

so far as I can see, to no conclusive results in any direction.¹ Some

writers returned to the views of Goette (1883), who regarded death as

a direct result of reproduction. Hartmann (1906, 29) does not regard

the  appearance  of  a  ‘dead  body’  -  a  dead  portion  of  the  living

substance  -  as  the  criterion  of  death,  but  defines  death  as  ‘the

termination of individual development’. In this sense protozoa too are

mortal; in their case death always coincides with reproduction, but is

to  some  extent  obscured  by  it,  since  the  whole  substance  of  the

parent animal may be transmitted directly into the young offspring.

   Soon afterwards research was directed to the experimental testing

on unicellular organisms of the alleged immortality of living substance.

An  American  biologist,  Woodruff,  experimenting  with  a  ciliate

infusorian, the ‘slipper-animalcule’, which reproduces by fission into

two individuals, persisted until the 3029th generation (at which point

he  broke  off  the  experiment),  isolating  one  of  the  part-products  on

each occasion and placing it in fresh water. This remote descendentof the first slipper-animalcule was just as lively as its ancestor and

showed no signs of ageing or degeneration. Thus, in so far as figures

of this kind prove anything, the immortality of the protista seemed to

be experimentally demonstrable.²

 

   ¹ Cf. Hartmann (1906), Lipschütz (1914) and Doflein (1919).

   ² For this and what follows see Lipschütz (1914, 26 and 52 ff.).

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3749

 

   Other experimenters arrived at different results. Maupas, Calkins

and others, in contrast to Woodruff, found that after a certain number

of divisions these infusoria become weaker, diminish in size, suffer the

loss  of  some  part  of  their  organization  and  eventually  die,  unless

certain  recuperative  measures  are  applied  to  them.  If  this  is  so,

protozoa would appear to die after a phase of senescence exactly like

the  higher  animals  -  thus  completely  contradicting  Weismann’s

assertion that death is a late acquisition of living organisms.

   From the aggregate of these experiments two facts emerge which

seem to offer us a firm footing.

   First: If two of the animalculae, at the moment before they show

signs of senescence, are able to coalesce with each other, that is to

‘conjugate’  (soon  after  which  they  once  more  separate),  they  are

saved from growing old and become ‘rejuvenated’. Conjugation is no

doubt the fore-runner of the sexual reproduction of higher creatures; it

is as yet unconnected with propagation and is limited to the mixing of

the substances of the two individuals. (Weismann’s ‘amphimixis’.) The

recuperative  effects  of  conjugation  can,  however,  be  replaced  by

certain stimulating agents, by alterations in the composition of the fluid

which provides their nourishment, by raising their temperature or by

shaking them. We are reminded of the celebrated experiment made

by J. Loeb, in which, by means of certain chemical stimuli, he induced

segmentation  in  sea-urchins’  eggs  -  a  process  which  can  normally

occur only after fertilization.

   Secondly: It is probable nevertheless that infusoria die a natural

death as a result of their own vital processes. For the contradictionbetween  Woodruff’s  findings  and  the  others  is  due  to  his  having

provided each generation with fresh nutrient fluid. If he omitted to do

so,  he  observed  the  same  signs  of  senescence  as  the  other

experimenters. He concluded that the animalculae were injured by the

products of metabolism which they extruded into the surrounding fluid.

He was then able to prove conclusively that it was only the products of

its own metabolism which had fatal results for the particular kind of

animalcule. For the same animalculae which inevitably perished if they

were  crowded  together  in  their  own  nutrient  fluid  flourished  in  a

solution  which  was  over-saturated  with  the  waste  products  of  a

distantly related species. An infusorian, therefore, if it is left to itself,

dies a natural death owing to its incomplete voidance of the products

of  its  own  metabolism.  (It  may  be  that  the  same  incapacity  is  the

ultimate cause of the death of all higher animals as well.)

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3750

 

   At this point the question may well arise in our minds whether any

object whatever is served by trying to solve the problem of natural

death from a study of the protozoa. The primitive organization of these

creatures  may  conceal  from  our  eyes  important  conditions  which,

though  in  fact  present  in  them  too,  only  become visible  in  higher

animals where they are able to find morphological expression. And if

we abandon the morphological point of view and adopt the dynamic

one,  it  becomes  a  matter  of  complete  indifference  to  us  whether

natural  death  can  be  shown  to  occur  in  protozoa  or  not.  The

substance  which  is  later  recognized  as  being  immortal  has  not  yet

become separated in them from the mortal one. The instinctual forces

which  seek  to  conduct  life  into  death  may  also  be  operating  in

protozoa  from  the  first,  and  yet  their  effects  may  be  so  completely

concealed by the life-preserving forces that it may be very hard to find

any direct evidence of their presence. We have seen, moreover, that

the observations made by biologists allow us to assume that internal

processes of this kind leading to death do occur also in protista. But

even if protista turned out to be immortal in Weismann’s sense, hisassertion  that  death  is  a  late  acquisition  would  apply  only  to  its

manifest phenomena and would not make impossible the assumption

of processes tending towards it.

      Thus  our  expectation  that  biology  would  flatly  contradict  the

recognition of death instincts has not been fulfilled. We are at liberty to

continue concerning ourselves with their possibility, if we have other

reasons  for  doing  so.  The  striking  similarity  between  Weismann’s

distinction of soma and germ-plasm and our separation of the death

instincts from the life instincts persists and retains its significance.

   We may pause for a moment over this pre-eminently dualistic view

of  instinctual  life.  According  to  E.  Hering’s  theory,  two  kinds  of

processes  are  constantly  at  work  in  living  substance,  operating  in

contrary  directions,  one  constructive  or  assimilatory  and  the  other

destructive or dissimilatory. May we venture to recognize in these two

directions  taken  by  the  vital  processes  the  activity  of  our  two

instinctual impulses, the life instincts and the death instincts? There is

something else, at any rate, that we cannot remain blind to. We have

unwittingly  steered  our  course  into  the  harbour  of  Schopenhauer’s

philosophy. For him death is the ‘true result and to that extent the

purpose of life’,¹ while the sexual instinct is the embodiment of the will

to live.

 

   ¹ Schopenhauer (1851; Sämtliche Werke, ed. Hübscher, 1938, 5, 236).

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3751

 

   Let us make a bold attempt at another step forward. It is generally

considered that the union of a number of cells into a vital association -

the  multicellular  character  of  organisms  -  has  become  a  means  of

prolonging their life. One cell helps to preserve the life of another, and

the community of cells can survive even if individual cells have to die.

We  have  already  heard  that  conjugation,  too,  the  temporary

coalescence of two unicellular organisms, has a life-preserving and

rejuvenating effect on both of them. Accordingly, we might attempt to

apply the libido theory which has been arrived at in psycho-analysis to

the  mutual  relationship  of  cells.  We  might  suppose  that  the  lifeinstincts or sexual instincts which are active in each cell take the other

cells as their object, that they partly neutralize the death instincts (that

is, the processes set up by them) in those cells and thus preserve

their life; while the other cells do the same for them, and still others

sacrifice themselves in the performance of this libidinal function. The

germ-cells  themselves  would  behave  in  a  completely  ‘narcissistic’

fashion  -  to  use  the  phrase  that  we  are  accustomed  to  use  in  the

theory of the neuroses to describe a whole individual who retains his

libido in his ego and pays none of it out in object-cathexes. The germ-

cells  require  their  libido,  the  activity  of  their  life  instincts,  for

themselves, as a reserve against their later momentous constructive

activity.  (The  cells  of  the  malignant  neoplasms  which  destroy  the

organism  should  also  perhaps  be  described  as  narcissistic  in  this

same sense: pathology is prepared to regard their germs as innate

and to ascribe embryonic attributes to them.) In this way the libido of

our  sexual  instincts  would  coincide  with  the  Eros  of  the  poets  and

philosophers which holds all living things together.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3752

 

      Here  then  is  an  opportunity  for  looking  back  over  the  slow

development of our libido theory. In the first instance the analysis of

the  transference  neuroses  forced  upon  our  notice  the  opposition

between the ‘sexual instincts’, which are directed towards an object,

and  certain  other  instincts,  with  which  we  were  very  insufficiently

acquainted  and  which  we  described  provisionally  as  the  ‘ego-

instincts’. A foremost place among these was necessarily given to the

instincts  serving  the  self-preservation  of  the  individual.  It  was

impossible  to  say  what  other  distinctions  were  to  be  drawn  among

them. No knowledge would have been more valuable as a foundation

for  true  psychological  science  than  an  approximate  grasp  of  the

common  characteristics  and  possible  distinctive  features  of  the

instincts. But in no region of psychology were we groping more in the

dark. Everyone assumed the existence of as many instincts or ‘basic

instincts’ as he chose, and juggled with them like the ancient Greeknatural  philosophers  with  their  four  elements  -  earth,  air,  fire  and

water.  Psycho-analysis,  which  could  not  escape  making some

assumption about the instincts, kept at first to the popular division of

instincts typified in the phrase ‘hunger and love’. At least there was

nothing  arbitrary  in  this;  and  by  its  help  the  analysis  of  the

psychoneuroses was carried forward quite a distance. The concept of

‘sexuality’, and at the same time of the sexual instinct, had, it is true,

to be extended so as to cover many things which could not be classed

under the reproductive function; and this caused no little hubbub in an

austere, respectable or merely hypocritical world.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3753

 

   The next step was taken when psycho-analysis felt its way closer

towards the psychological ego, which it had first come to know only as

a  repressive,  censoring  agency,  capable  of  erecting  protective

structures and reactive formations. Critical and far-seeing minds had,

it is true, long since objected to the concept of libido being restricted to

the energy of the sexual instincts directed towards an object. But they

failed to explain how they had arrived at their better knowledge or to

derive from it anything of which analysis could make use. Advancing

more cautiously, psycho-analysis observed the regularity with which

libido is withdrawn from the object and directed on to the ego (the

process of introversion); and, by studying the libidinal development of

children in its earliest phases, came to the conclusion that the ego is

the true and original reservoir of libido, and that it is only from that

reservoir that libido is extended on to objects. The ego now found its

position among sexual objects and was at once given the foremost

place among them. Libido which was in this way lodged in the ego

was described as ‘narcissistic’.¹ This narcissistic libido was of course

also a manifestation of the force of the sexual instinct in the analytical

sense of those words, and it had necessarily to be identified with the

‘self-preservative  instincts’  whose  existence  had  been  recognized

from the first. Thus the original opposition between the ego-instincts

and the sexual instincts proved to be inadequate. A portion of the ego-instincts was seen to be libidinal; sexual instincts - probably alongside

others - operated in the ego. Nevertheless we are justified in saying

that the old formula which lays it down that psychoneuroses are based

on  a  conflict  between  ego-instincts  and  sexual  instincts  contains

nothing  that  we  need  reject  to-day.  It  is  merely  that  the  distinction

between the two kinds of instinct, which was originally regarded as in

some sort of way qualitative, must now be characterized differently -

namely as being topographical. And in particular it is still true that the

transference neuroses, the essential subject of psycho-analytic study,

are the result of a conflict between the ego and the libidinal cathexis of

objects.

   But it is all the more necessary for us to lay stress upon the libidinal

character of the self-preservative instincts now that we are venturing

upon the further step of recognizing the sexual instinct as Eros, the

preserver of all things, and of deriving the narcissistic libido of the ego

from the stores of libido by means of which the cells of the soma are

attached to one another. But we now find ourselves suddenly faced by

another question. If the self-preservative instincts too are of a libidinal

nature, are there perhaps no other instincts whatever but the libidinal

ones? At all events there are none other visible. But in that case we

shall after all be driven to agree with the critics who suspected from

the first that psycho-analysis explains everything by sexuality, or with

innovators like Jung who, making a hasty judgement, have used the

word ‘libido’ to mean instinctual force in general. Must not this be so?

 

   ¹See my paper on narcissism (1914c).

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3754

 

   It was not our intention at all events to produce such a result. Our

argument had as its point of departure a sharp distinction between

ego-instincts,  which  we  equated  with  death  instincts,  and  sexual

instincts, which we equated with life instincts. (We were prepared at

one stage to include the so-called self-preservative instincts of the ego

among the death instincts; but we subsequently corrected ourselves

on this point and withdrew it.) Our views have from the very first beendualistic,  and  to-day  they  are  even  more  definitely  dualistic  than

before - now that we describe the opposition as being, not between

ego-instincts and sexual instincts but between life instincts and death

instincts. Jung’s libido theory is on the contrary monistic; the fact that

he  has  called  his  one  instinctual  force  ‘libido’  is  bound  to  cause

confusion, but need not affect us otherwise. We suspect that instincts

other than those of self-preservation operate in the ego, and it ought

to  be  possible  for  us  to  point  to  them.  Unfortunately,  however,  the

analysis of the ego has made so little headway that it is very difficult

for us to do so. It is possible, indeed, that the libidinal instincts in the

ego may be linked in a peculiar manner with these other ego-instincts

which  are  still  strange  to  us.  Even  before  we  had  any  clear

understanding of narcissism, psycho-analysts had a suspicion that the

‘ego-instincts’ had libidinal components attached to them. But these

are very uncertain possibilities, to which our opponents will pay very

little  attention.  The  difficulty  remains  that  psycho-analysis  has  not

enabled us hitherto to point to any instincts other than the libidinal

ones. That, however, is no reason for our falling in with the conclusion

that no others in fact exist.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3755

 

   In the obscurity that reigns at present in the theory of the instincts, it

would be unwise to reject any idea that promises to throw light on it.

We started out from the great opposition between the life and death

instincts. Now object-love itself presents us with a second example of

a similar polarity - that between love (or other affection) and hate (or

aggressiveness).  If  only  we  could  succeed  in  relating  these  two

polarities to each other and in deriving one from the other! From the

very first we recognized the presence of a sadistic component in the

sexual instinct.¹ As we know, it can make itself independent and can,

in  the  form  of  a  perversion,  dominate  an  individual’s  entire  sexual

activity. It also emerges as a predominant component instinct in one of

the ‘pregenital organizations’, as I have named them. But how can the

sadistic instinct, whose aim it is to injure the object, be derived fromEros,  the  preserver  of  life?  Is  it  not  plausible  to  suppose  that  this

sadism is in fact a death instinct which, under the influence of the

narcissistic  libido,  has  been  forced  away  from  the  ego  and  has

consequently only emerged in relation to the object? It now enters the

service of the sexual function. During the oral stage of organization of

the libido, the act of obtaining erotic mastery over an object coincides

with that object’s destruction; later, the sadistic instinct separates off,

and  finally,  at  the  stage  of  genital  primacy,  it  takes  on,  for  the

purposes  of  reproduction,  the  function  of  overpowering  the  sexual

object to the extent necessary for carrying out the sexual act. It might

indeed be said that the sadism which has been forced out of the ego

has pointed the way for the libidinal components of the sexual instinct,

and  that  these  follow  after  it  to  the  object.  Wherever  the  original

sadism  has  undergone  no  mitigation  or  intermixture,  we  find  the

familiar ambivalence of love and hate in erotic life.

   If such an assumption as this is permissible, then we have met the

demand  that  we  should  produce  an  example  of  a  death  instinct  -

though, it is true, a displaced one. But this way of looking at things is

very far from being easy to grasp and creates a positively mystical

impression. It looks suspiciously as though we were trying to find a

way  out  of  a  highly  embarrassing  situation  at  any  price.  We  may

recall,  however,  that  there  is  nothing  new  in  an  assumption  of  this

kind. We put one forward on an earlier occasion, before there was any

question of an embarrassing situation. Clinical observations led us at

that time to the view that masochism, the component instinct which is

complementary to sadism, must be regarded as sadism that has been

turned round upon the subject’s own ego.² But there is no difference in

principle between an instinct turning from an object to the ego and its

turning from the ego to an object - which is the new point now under

discussion.  Masochism,  the  turning  round  of  the  instinct  upon  the

subject’s own ego, would in that case be a return to an earlier phase

of the instinct’s history, a regression. The account that was formerly

given of masochism requires emendation as being too sweeping in

one respect: there might be such a thing as primary masochism - a

possibility which I had contested at that time.³

 

   ¹ This was already so in the first edition of Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality in 1905.   ² See my Three Essays (1905d) and ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes’ (1915c).

   ³ A considerable portion of these speculations have been anticipated by Sabina Spielrein

(1912) in an instructive and interesting paper which, however, is unfortunately not entirely
clear  to  me.  She  there  describes  the  sadistic  components  of  the  sexual  instinct  as
‘destructive’. A. Stärke (1914), again, has attempted to identify the concept of libido itself with
the biological concept (assumed on theoretical grounds) of an impetus towards death. See
also Rank (1907). All these discussions, like that in the text, give evidence of the demand for
a clarification of the theory of the instincts such as has not yet been achieved.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3756

 

   Let us, however, return to the self-preservative sexual instincts. The

experiments upon protista have already shown us that conjugation -

that  is,  the  coalescence  of  two  individuals  which  separate  soon

afterwards  without  any  subsequent  cell-division  occurring  -  has  a

strengthening  and  rejuvenating  effect  upon  both  of  them.1  In  later

generations they show no signs of degenerating and seem able to put

up a longer resistance to the injurious effects of their own metabolism.

This single observation may, I think, be taken as typical of the effect

produced by sexual union as well. But how is it that the coalescence

of two only slightly different cells can bring about this renewal of life?

The  experiment  which  replaces  the  conjugation  of  protozoa  by  the

application of chemical or even of mechanical stimuli (cf. Lipschütz,

1914) enables us to give what is no doubt a conclusive reply to this

question. The result is brought about by the influx of fresh amounts of

stimulus. This tallies well with the hypothesis that the life process of

the individual leads for internal reasons to an abolition of chemical

tensions,  that  is  to  say,  to  death,  whereas  union  with  the  living

substance  of  a  different  individual  increases  those  tensions,

introducing what may be described as fresh ‘vital differences’ which

must  then  be  lived  off.  As  regards  this  dissimilarity  there  must  of

course be one or more optima. The dominating tendency of mental

life, and perhaps of nervous life in general, is the effort to reduce, to

keep  constant  or  to  remove  internal  tension  due  to  stimuli  (the

‘Nirvana principle’, to borrow a term from Barbara Low) - a tendency

which finds expression in the pleasure principle; and our recognition of

that fact is one of our strongest reasons for believing in the existenceof death instincts.

 

   ¹ See the account quoted above p. 3748 from Lipschütz (1914).

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3757

 

   But we still feel our line of thought appreciably hampered by the fact

that we cannot ascribe to the sexual instinct the characteristic of a

compulsion  to  repeat  which  first  put  us  on  the  track  of  the  death

instincts.  The  sphere  of  embryonic  developmental  processes  is  no

doubt extremely rich in such phenomena of repetition; the two germ-

cells that are involved in sexual reproduction and their life history are

themselves only repetitions of the beginnings of organic life. But the

essence  of  the  processes  to  which  sexual  life  is  directed  is  the

coalescence  of  two  cell-bodies.  That  alone  is  what  guarantees  the

immortality of the living substance in the higher organisms.

   In other words, we need more information on the origin of sexual

reproduction and of the sexual instincts in general. This is a problem

which  is  calculated  to  daunt  an  outsider  and  which  the  specialists

themselves have not yet been able to solve. We shall therefore give

only the briefest summary of whatever seems relevant to our line of

thought from among the many discordant assertions and opinions.

      One  of  these  views  deprives  the  problem  of  reproduction  of  its

mysterious  fascination  by  representing  it  as  a  part  manifestation  of

growth.  (Cf.  multiplication  by  fission,  sprouting  or  gemmation.)  The

origin of reproduction by sexually differentiated germ-cells might be

pictured along sober Darwinian lines by supposing that the advantage

of amphimixis, arrived at on some occasion by the chance conjugation

of  two  protista,  was  retained  and  further  exploited  in  later

development.¹ On this view ‘sex’ would not be anything very ancient;

and the extra ordinarily violent instincts whose aim it is to bring about

sexual union would be repeating something that had once occurred by

chance and had since become established as being advantageous.

   The question arises here, as in the case of death, whether we do

right  in  ascribing  to  protista  those  characteristics  alone  which  they

actually exhibit, and whether it is correct to assume that forces andprocesses  which  become  visible  only  in  the  higher  organisms

originated in those organisms for the first time. The view of sexuality

we have just mentioned is of little help for our purposes. The objection

may be raised against it that it postulates the existence of life instincts

already  operating  in  the  simplest  organisms;  for  otherwise

conjugation, which works counter to the course of life and makes the

task  of  ceasing  to  live  more  difficult,  would  not  be  retained  and

elaborated but would be avoided. If, therefore, we are not to abandon

the  hypothesis  of  death  instincts,  we  must  suppose  them  to  be

associated from the very first with life instincts. But it must be admitted

that  in  that  case  we  shall  be  working  upon  an  equation  with  two

unknown quantities.

 

   ¹ Though Weismann (1892) denies this advantage as well: ‘In no case does fertilization

correspond to a rejuvenescence or renewal of life, nor is its occurrence necessary in order
that life may endure: it is merely an arrangement which renders possible the intermingling of
two different hereditary tendencies.’ He nevertheless believes that an intermingling of this kind
leads to an increase in the variability of the organism concerned.
 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3758

 

   Apart from this, science has so little to tell us about the origin of

sexuality that we can liken the problem to a darkness into which not so

much as a ray of a hypothesis has penetrated. In quite a different

region, it is true, we do meet with such a hypothesis; but it is of so

fantastic a kind - a myth rather than a scientific explanation - that I

should not venture to produce it here, were it not that it fulfils precisely

the one condition whose fulfilment we desire. For it traces the origin of

an instinct to a need to restore an earlier state of things.

   What I have in mind is, of course, the theory which Plato put into the

mouth of Aristophanes in the Symposium, and which deals not only

with the origin of the sexual instinct but also with the most important of

its variations in relation to its object. ‘The original human nature was

not like the present, but different. In the first place, the sexes were

originally three in number, not two as they are now; there was man,

woman,  and  the  union  of  the  two.  .  .  .’  Everything  about  these

primaeval men was double: they had four hands and four feet, twofaces,  two  privy  parts,  and  so  on.  Eventually  Zeus  decided  to  cut

these men in two, ‘like a sorb-apple which is halved for pickling’. After

the division had been made, ‘the two parts of man, each desiring his

other  half,  came  together,  and  threw  their  arms  about  one  another

eager to grow into one’.¹

 

   ¹I have to thank Professor Heinrich Gomperz, of Vienna, for the following discussion on the

origin of the Platonic myth, which I give partly in his own words. It is to be remarked that what
is essentially the same theory is already to be found in the Upanishads. For we find the
following passage in the Brihadâranyaka-upanishad, 1, 4, 3, where the origin of the world from
the Atman (the Self or Ego) is described: ‘But he felt no delight. Therefore a man who is lonely
feels no delight. He wished for a second. He was so large as man and wife together. He then
made this his Self to fall in two, and then arose husband and wife Therefore Yagnavalkya
said: "We two are thus (each of us) like half a shell." Therefore the void which was there, is
filled by the wife.’
   The Brihadâranyaka-upanishad is the most ancient of all the Upanishads and no competent
authority dates it later than about the year 800 B.C. In contradiction to the prevailing opinion, I
should hesitate to give an unqualified denial to the possibility of Plato’s myth being derived,
even if it were only indirectly, from the Indian source, since a similar possibility cannot be
excluded in the case of the doctrine of transmigration. But even if a derivation of this kind
(through  the  Pythagoreans  in  the  first  instance)  were  established,  the  significance  of  the
coincidence between the two trains of thought would scarcely be diminished. For Plato would
not have adopted a story of this kind which had somehow reached him through some oriental
tradition  -  to  say  nothing  of  giving  it  so  important  a  place  -  unless  it  had  struck  him  as
containing an element of truth.
   In a paper devoted to a systematic examination of this line of thought before the time of
Plato, Ziegler (1913) traces it back to Babylonian origins.
 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3759

 

      Shall  we  follow  the  hint  given  us  by  the  poet-philosopher,  and

venture upon the hypothesis that living substance at the time of its

coming  to  life  was  torn  apart  into  small  particles,  which  have  ever

since endeavoured to reunite through the sexual instincts? that these

instincts, in which the chemical affinity of inanimate matter persisted,

gradually succeeded, as they developed through the kingdom of the

protista, in overcoming the difficulties put in the way of that endeavour

by  an  environment  charged  with  dangerous  stimuli  -  stimuli  which

compelled  them  to  form  a  protective  cortical  layer?  that  these

splintered  fragments  of  living  substance  in  this  way  attained  a

multicellular condition and finally transferred the instinct for reuniting,in the most highly concentrated form, to the germ-cells? - But here, I

think, the moment has come for breaking off.

      Not,  however,  without  the  addition  of  a  few  words  of  critical

reflection. It may be asked whether and how far I am myself convinced

of the truth of the hypotheses that have been set out in these pages.

My answer would be that I am not convinced myself and that I do not

seek to persuade other people to believe in them. Or, more precisely,

that I do not know how far I believe in them. There is no reason, as it

seems to me, why the emotional factor of conviction should enter into

this question at all. It is surely possible to throw oneself into a line of

thought  and  to  follow  it  wherever  it  leads  out  of  simple  scientific

curiosity, or, if the reader prefers, as an advocatus diaboli, who is not

on that account himself sold to the devil. I do not dispute the fact that

the third step in the theory of the instincts, which I have taken here,

cannot lay claim to the same degree of certainty as the two earlier

ones - the extension of the concept of sexuality and the hypothesis of

narcissism.  These  two  innovations  were  a  direct  translation  of

observation into theory and were no more open to sources of error

than is inevitable in all such cases. It is true that my assertion of the

regressive character of instincts also rests upon observed material -

namely on the facts of the compulsion to repeat. It may be, however,

that  I  have  overestimated  their  significance.  And  in  any  case  it  is

impossible  to  pursue  an  idea  of  this  kind  except  by  repeatedly

combining factual material with what is purely speculative and thus

diverging widely from empirical observation. The more frequently this

is done in the course of constructing a theory, the more untrustworthy,

as we know, must be the final result. But the degree of uncertainty is

not  assignable.  One  may  have  made  a  lucky  hit  or  one  may  have

gone shamefully astray. I do not think a large part is played by what is

called ‘intuition’ in work of this kind. From what I have seen of intuition,

it seems to me to be the product of a kind of intellectual impartiality.

Unfortunately, however, people are seldom impartial where ultimate

things, the great problems of science and life, are concerned. Each of

us is governed in such cases by deep-rooted internal prejudices, into

whose hands our speculation unwittingly plays. Since we have such

good grounds for being distrustful, our attitude towards the results of

our  own  deliberations  cannot  well  be  other  than  one  of  coolbenevolence. I hasten to add, however, that self-criticism such as this

is far from binding one to any special tolerance towards dissentient

opinions.  It  is  perfectly  legitimate  to  reject  remorselessly  theories

which  are  contradicted  by  the  very  first  steps  in  the  analysis  of

observed  facts,  while  yet  being  aware  at  the  same  time  that  the

validity of one’s own theory is only a provisional one.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3760

 

   We need not feel greatly disturbed in judging our speculation upon

the life and death instincts by the fact that so many bewildering and

obscure processes occur in it - such as one instinct being driven out

by another or an instinct turning from the ego to an object, and so on.

This is merely due to our being obliged to operate with the scientific

terms,  that  is  to  say  with  the  figurative  language,  peculiar  to

psychology (or, more precisely, to depth psychology). We could not

otherwise describe the processes in question at all, and indeed we

could  not  have  become  aware  of  them.  The  deficiencies  in  our

description would probably vanish if we were already in a position to

replace the psychological terms by physiological or chemical ones. It

is true that they too are only part of a figurative language; but it is one

with which we have long been familiar and which is perhaps a simpler

one as well.

   On the other hand it should be made quite clear that the uncertainty

of  our  speculation  has  been  greatly  increased  by  the  necessity  for

borrowing  from  the  science  of  biology.  Biology  is  truly  a  land  of

unlimited possibilities. We may expect it to give us the most surprising

information and we cannot guess what answers it will return in a few

dozen years to the questions we have put to it. They may be of a kind

which will blow away the whole of our artificial structure of hypotheses.

If  so,  it  may  be  asked  why  I  have  embarked  upon  such  a  line  of

thought as the present one, and in particular why I have decided to

make  it  public.  Well  -  I  cannot  deny  that  some  of  the  analogies,

correlations  and  connections  which  it  contains  seemed  to  me  to

deserve consideration.¹ 

   ¹I will add a few words to clarify our terminology, which has undergone some development

in the course of the present work. We came to know what the ‘sexual instincts’ were from their
relation to the sexes and to the reproductive function. We retained this name after we had
been  obliged  by  the  findings  of  psycho-analysis  to  connect  them  less  closely  with
reproduction. With the hypothesis of narcissistic libido and the extension of the concept of
libido to the individual cells, the sexual instinct was transformed for us into Eros, which seeks
to  force  together  and  hold  together  the  portions  of  living  substance.  What  are  commonly
called the sexual instincts are looked upon by us as the part of Eros which is directed towards
objects. Our speculations have suggested that Eros operates from the beginning of life and
appears as a ‘life instinct’ in opposition to the ‘death instinct’ which was brought into being by
the coming to life of inorganic substance. These speculations seek to solve the riddle of life by
supposing that these two instincts were struggling with each other from the very first. It is not
so easy, perhaps, to follow the transformations though which the concept of the ‘ego-instincts’
has passed. To begin with we applied that name to all the instinctual trends (of which we had
no closer knowledge) which could be distinguished from the sexual instincts directed towards
an object; and we opposed the ego-instincts to the sexual instincts of which the libido is the
manifestation.  Subsequently  we  came  to  closer  grips  with  the  analysis  of  the  ego  and
recognized that a portion of the ‘ego-instincts’ is also of a libidinal character and has taken the
subject’s  own  ego  as  its  object.  These  narcissistic  self-preservative  instincts  had
thenceforward to be counted among the libidinal sexual instincts. The opposition between the
ego-instincts and the sexual instincts was transformed into one between the ego-instincts and
the object-instincts, both of a libidinal nature. But in its place a fresh opposition appeared
between the libidinal (ego- and object-) instincts and others, which must be presumed to be
present in the ego and which may perhaps actually be observed in the destructive instincts.
Our speculations have transformed this opposition into one between the life instincts (Eros)
and the death instincts.
 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3761

 

                                          VII

 

If it is really the case that seeking to restore an earlier state of things is

such a universal characteristic of instincts, we need not be surprised

that so many processes take place in mental life independently of the

pleasure  principle.  This  characteristic  would  be  shared  by  all  the

component  instincts  and  in  their  case  would  aim  at  returning  once

more to a particular stage in the course of development. These are

matters over which the pleasure principle has as yet no control; but it

does not follow that any of them are necessarily opposed to it, and we

have  still  to  solve  the  problem  of  the  relation  of  the  instinctual

processes of repetition to the dominance of the pleasure principle.   We have found that one of the earliest and most important functions

of  the  mental  apparatus  is  to  bind  the  instinctual  impulses  which

impinge on it, to replace the primary process prevailing in them by the

secondary process and convert their freely mobile cathectic energy

into a mainly quiescent (tonic) cathexis. While this transformation is

taking  place  no  attention  can  be  paid  to  the  development  of

unpleasure; but this does not imply the suspension of the pleasure

principle. On the contrary, the transformation occurs on behalf of the

pleasure principle; the binding is a preparatory act which introduces

and assures the dominance of the pleasure principle.

      Let  us  make  a  sharper  distinction  than  we  have  hitherto  made

between  function  and  tendency.  The  pleasure  principle,  then,  is  a

tendency operating in the service of a function whose business it is to

free  the  mental  apparatus  entirely  from  excitation  or  to  keep  the

amount of excitation in it constant or to keep it as low as possible. We

cannot  yet  decide  with  certainty  in  favour  of  any  of  these  ways  of

putting  it;  but  it  is  clear  that  the  function  thus  described  would  be

concerned with the most universal endeavour of all living substance -

namely to return to the quiescence of the inorganic world. We have all

experienced how the greatest pleasure attainable by us, that of the

sexual  act,  is  associated  with  a  momentary  extinction  of  a  highly

intensified excitation. The binding of an instinctual impulse would be a

preliminary  function  designed  to  prepare  the  excitation  for  its  final

elimination in the pleasure of discharge.

 


                            Beyond The Pleasure Principle

                                                                                      3762

 

      This  raises  the  question  of  whether  feelings  of  pleasure  and

unpleasure can be produced equally from bound and from unbound

excitatory processes. And there seems to be no doubt whatever that

the  unbound  or  primary  processes  give  rise  to  far  more  intense

feelings  in  both  directions  than  the  bound  or  secondary  ones.

Moreover  the  primary  processes  are  the  earlier  in  time;  at  the

beginning of mental life there are no others, and we may infer that if

the pleasure principle had not already been operative in them it couldnever have been established for the later ones. We thus reach what is

at bottom no very simple conclusion, namely that at the beginning of

mental life the struggle for pleasure was far more intense than later

but not so unrestricted: it had to submit to frequent interruptions. In

later times the dominance of the pleasure principle is very much more

secure, but it itself has no more escaped the process of taming than

the other instincts in general. In any case, whatever it is that causes

the appearance of feelings of pleasure and unpleasure in processes of

excitation must be present in the secondary process just as it is in the

primary one.

      Here  might  be  the  starting-point  for  fresh  investigations.  Our

consciousness communicates to us feelings from within not only of

pleasure and unpleasure but also of a peculiar tension which in its turn

can  be  either  pleasurable  or  unpleasurable.  Should  the  difference

between these feelings enable us to distinguish between bound and

unbound  processes  of  energy?  or  is  the  feeling  of  tension  to  be

related  to  the  absolute  magnitude,  or  perhaps  to  the  level,  of  the

cathexis, while the pleasure and unpleasure series indicates a change

in  magnitude  of  the  cathexis within  a  given  unit  of  time?  Another

striking fact is that the life instincts have so much more contact with

our  internal  perception  -  emerging  as  breakers  of  the  peace  and

constantly producing tensions whose release is felt as pleasure - while

the death instincts seem to do their work unobtrusively. The pleasure

principle seems actually to serve the death instincts. It is true that it

keeps  watch  upon  stimuli  from  without,  which  are  regarded  as

dangers by both kinds of instincts; but it is more especially on guard

against increases of stimulation from within, which would make the

task of living more difficult. This in turn raises a host of other questions

to which we can at present find no answer. We must be patient and

await fresh methods and occasions of research. We must be ready,

too, to abandon a path that we have followed for a time, if it seems to

be leading to no good end. Only believers, who demand that science

shall be a substitute for the catechism they have given up, will blame

an investigator for developing or even transforming his views. We may

take comfort, too, for the slow advances of our scientific knowledge in

the words of the poet:

                                                 Was man nicht erfliegen kann, muss man erhinken.
                                                                                                .  .  .  .  .
                                                Die Schrift sagt, es ist keine Sünde zu hinken.

                                                                                       3763

 

      GROUP PSYCHOLOGY AND THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO

                                        (1921)

 


                                                                                      3764

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3765

 

 

      GROUP PSYCHOLOGY AND THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO

 

                                            I

 

                                    INTRODUCTION

 

The  contrast  between  individual  psychology  and  social  or  group

psychology, which at a first glance may seem to be full of significance,

loses a great deal of its sharpness when it is examined more closely.

It is true that individual psychology is concerned with the individual

man and explores the paths by which he seeks to find satisfaction for

his instinctual impulses; but only rarely and under certain exceptional

conditions  is  individual  psychology  in  a  position  to  disregard  the

relations  of  this  individual  to  others.  In  the  individual’s  mental  life

someone else is invariably involved, as a model, as an object, as a

helper,  as  an  opponent;  and  so  from  the  very  first  individual

psychology, in is extended but entirely justifiable sense of the words,

is at the same time social psychology as well.

   The relations of an individual to his parents and to his brothers and

sisters, to the object of his love, and to his physician - in fact all the

relations which have hitherto been the chief subject of psycho-analytic

research - may claim to be considered as social phenomena; and in

this  respect  they  may  be  contrasted  with  certain  other  processes,described  by  us  as  ‘narcissistic’,  in  which  the  satisfaction  of  the

instincts  is  partially  or  totally  withdrawn  from  the  influence  of  other

people. The contrast between social and narcissistic - Bleuler would

perhaps call them ‘autistic’ - mental acts therefore falls wholly within

the  domain  of  individual  psychology,  and  is  not  well  calculated  to

differentiate it from a social or group psychology.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3766

 

   The individual in the relations which have already been mentioned -

to his parents and to his brothers and sisters, to the person he is in

love  with,  to  his  friend,  and  to  his  physician  -  comes  under  the

influence  of  only  a  single  person,  or  of  a  very  small  number  of

persons, each one of whom has become enormously important to him.

Now in speaking of social or group psychology it has become usual to

leave  these  relations  on  one  side  and  to  isolate  as  the  subject  of

inquiry the influencing of an individual by a large number of people

simultaneously,  people  with  whom  he  is  connected  by  something,

though  otherwise  they  may  in  many  respects  be  strangers  to  him.

Group psychology is therefore concerned with the individual man as a

member  of  a  race,  of  a  nation,  of  a  caste,  of  a  profession,  of  an

institution, or as a component part of a crowd of people who have

been organized into a group at some particular time for some definite

purpose. When once natural continuity has been severed in this way,

if  a  breach  is  thus  made  between  things  which  are  by  nature

interconnected, it is easy to regard the phenomena that appear under

these special conditions as being expressions of a special instinct that

is  not  further  reducible  -  the  social  instinct  (‘herd  instinct’,  ‘group

mind’), which does not come to light in any other situations. But we

may perhaps venture to object that it seems difficult to attribute to the

factor of number a significance so great as to make it capable by itself

of  arousing  in  our  mental  life  a  new  instinct  that  is  otherwise  not

brought into play. Our expectation is therefore directed towards two

other possibilities: that the social instinct may not be a primitive one

and insusceptible of dissection, and that it may be possible to discoverthe beginnings of its development in a narrower circle, such as that of

the family.

   Although group psychology is only in its infancy, it embraces an

immense  number  of  separate  issues  and  offers  to  investigators

countless  problems  which  have  hitherto  not  even  been  properly

distinguished from one another. The mere classification of the different

forms  of  group  formation  and  the  description  of  the  mental

phenomena  produced  by  them  require  a  great  expenditure  of

observation and exposition, and have already given rise to a copious

literature. Anyone who compares the narrow dimensions of this little

book with the wide extent of group psychology will at once be able to

guess that only a few points chosen from the whole material are to be

dealt  with  here.  And  they  will  in  fact  only  be  a  few  questions  with

which the depth-psychology of psycho-analysis is specially concerned.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3767

 

                                            II

 

            LE BON’S DESCRIPTION OF THE GROUP MIND

 

Instead of starting from a definition, it seems more useful to begin with

some indication of the range of the phenomena under review, and to

select  from  among  them  a  few  specially  striking  and  characteristic

facts to which our enquiry can be attached. We can achieve both of

these aims by means of quotation from Le Bon’s deservedly famous

work Psychologie des foules.

   Let us make the matter clear once again. If a psychology, concerned

with  exploring  the  predispositions,  the  instinctual  impulses,  the

motives and the aims of an individual man down to his actions and his

relations with those who are nearest to him, had completely achieved

its  task,  and  had  cleared  up  the  whole  of  these  matters  with  their

interconnections,  it  would  then  suddenly  find  itself  confronted  by  a

new task which would lie before it unachieved. It would be obliged to

explain the surprising fact that under a certain condition this individual,whom it had come to understand, thought, felt and acted in quite a

different way from what would have been expected. And this condition

is  his  insertion  into  a  collection  of  people  which  has  acquired  the

characteristic of a ‘psychological group’. What, then, is a ‘group’? How

does it acquire the capacity for exercising such a decisive influence

over the mental life of the individual? And what is the nature of the

mental change which it forces upon the individual?

   It is the task of a theoretical group psychology to answer these three

questions. The best way of approaching them is evidently to start with

the third. Observation of the changes in the individual’s reactions is

what provides group psychology with its material; for every attempt at

an explanation must be preceded by a description of the thing that is

to be explained.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3768

 

   I will now let Le Bon speak for himself. He says: ‘The most striking

peculiarity  presented  by  a  psychological  group  is  the  following.

Whoever be the individuals that compose it, however like or unlike be

their  mode  of  life,  their  occupations,  their  character,  or  their

intelligence,  the  fact  that  they  have  been  transformed  into  a  group

puts them in possession of a sort of collective mind which makes them

feel, think, and act in a manner quite different from that in which each

individual  of  them  would  feel,  think,  and  act  were  he  in  a  state  of

isolation. There are certain ideas and feelings which do not come into

being, or do not transform themselves into acts except in the case of

individuals forming a group. The psychological group is a provisional

being  formed  of  heterogeneous  elements,  which  for  a  moment  are

combined, exactly as the cells which constitute a living body form by

their reunion a new being which displays characteristics very different

from those possessed by each of the cells singly.’ (Trans. 1920, 29.)

   We shall take the liberty of interrupting Le Bon’s exposition with

glosses of our own, and shall accordingly insert an observation at this

point. If the individuals in the group are combined into a unity, there

must  surely  be  something  to  unite  them,  and  this  bond  might  beprecisely the thing that is characteristic of a group. But Le Bon does

not answer this question; he goes on to consider the alteration which

the individual undergoes when in a group and describes it in terms

which  harmonize  well  with  the  fundamental  postulates  of  our  own

depth-psychology.

   ‘It is easy to prove how much the individual forming part of a group

differs from the isolated individual, but it is less easy to discover the

causes of this difference.

   ‘To obtain at any rate a glimpse of them it is necessary in the first

place to call to mind the truth established by modern psychology, that

unconscious phenomena play an altogether preponderating part not

only in organic life, but also in the operations of the intelligence. The

conscious life of the mind is of small importance in comparison with its

unconscious life. The most subtle analyst, the most acute observer, is

scarcely successful in discovering more than a very small number of

the conscious motives that determine his conduct. Our conscious acts

are the outcome of an unconscious substratum created in the mind

mainly  by  hereditary  influences.  This  substratum  consists  of  the

innumerable common characteristics handed down from generation to

generation, which constitute the genius of a race. Behind the avowed

causes of our acts there undoubtedly lie secret causes that we do not

avow, but behind these secret causes there are many others more

secret still, of which we ourselves are ignorant. The greater part of our

daily  actions  are  the  result  of  hidden  motives  which  escape  our

observation.’ (Ibid., 30.)

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3769

 

   Le Bon thinks that the particular acquirements of individuals become

obliterated  in  a  group,  and  that  in  this  way  their  distinctiveness

vanishes. The racial unconscious emerges; what is heterogeneous is

submerged in what is homogeneous. As we should say, the mental

superstructure, the development of which in individuals shows such

dissimilarities,  is  removed,  and  the  unconscious  foundations,  which

are similar in everyone, stand exposed to view.   In this way individuals in a group would come to show an average

character.  But  Le  Bon  believes  that  they  also  display  new

characteristics  which  they  have  not  previously  possessed,  and  he

seeks the reason for this in three different factors.

   ‘The first is that the individual forming part of a group acquires,

solely from numerical considerations, a sentiment of invincible power

which allows him to yield to instincts which, had he been alone, he

would perforce have kept under restraint. He will be the less disposed

to  check  himself,  from  the  consideration  that,  a  group  being

anonymous  and  in  consequence  irresponsible,  the  sentiment  of

responsibility  which  always  controls  individuals  disappears  entirely.’

(Ibid., 33.)

   From our point of view we need not attribute so much importance to

the appearance of new characteristics. For us it would be enough to

say that in a group the individual is brought under conditions which

allow him to throw off the repressions of his unconscious instinctual

impulses. The apparently new characteristics which he then displays

are in fact the manifestations of this unconscious, in which all that is

evil in the human mind is contained as a predisposition. We can find

no difficulty in understanding the disappearance of conscience or of a

sense of responsibility in these circumstances. It has long been our

contention  that  ‘social  anxiety’  is  the  essence  of  what  is  called

conscience.¹

 

   ¹ There is some difference between Le Bon’s view and ours owing to his concept of the

unconscious  not  quite  coinciding  with  the  one  adopted  by  psycho-analysis.  Le  Bon’s
unconscious more especially contains the most deeply buried features of the racial mind,
which  as  a  matter  of  fact  lies  outside  the  scope  of  psycho-analysis.  We  do  not  fail  to
recognize,  indeed,  that  the  ego’s  nucleus,  which  comprises  the  ‘archaic  heritage’  of  the
human  mind,  is  unconscious;  but  in  addition  to  this  we  distinguish  the  ‘unconscious
repressed’, which arose from a portion of that heritage. This concept of the repressed is not to
be found in Le Bon.
 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3770

 

   ‘The second cause, which is contagion, also intervenes to determine

the manifestation in groups of their special characteristics, and at thesame time the trend they are to take. Contagion is a phenomenon of

which it is easy to establish the presence, but which it is not easy to

explain. It must be classed among those phenomena of a hypnotic

order, which we shall shortly study. In a group every sentiment and act

is  contagious,  and  contagious  to  such  a  degree  that  an  individual

readily sacrifices his personal interest to the collective interest. This is

an aptitude very contrary to his nature, and of which a man is scarcely

capable, except when he makes part of a group.’ (Ibid., 33.)

      We  shall  later  on  base  an  important  conjecture  upon  this  last

statement.

   ‘A third cause, and by far the most important, determines in the

individuals of a group special characteristics which are quite contrary

at times to those presented by the isolated individual. I allude to that

suggestibility of which, moreover, the contagion mentioned above is

only an effect.

   ‘To understand this phenomenon it is necessary to bear in mind

certain  recent  physiological  discoveries.  We  know  to-day  that  by

various processes an individual may be brought into such a condition

that, having entirely lost his conscious personality, he obeys all the

suggestions of the operator who has deprived him of it, and commits

acts  in  utter  contradiction  with  his  character  and  habits.  The  most

careful investigations seem to prove that an individual immersed for

some length of time in a group in action soon finds himself - either in

consequence  of  the  magnetic  influence  given  out  by  the  group,  or

from some other cause of which we are ignorant - in a special state,

which  much  resembles  the  state  of  "fascination"  in  which  the

hypnotized individual finds himself in the hands of the hypnotizer. . . .

The conscious personality has entirely vanished; will and discernment

are lost. All feelings and thoughts are bent in the direction determined

by the hypnotizer.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3771

 

   ‘Such also is approximately the state of the individual forming part of

a psychological group. He is no longer conscious of his acts. In hiscase, as in the case of the hypnotized subject, at the same time that

certain  faculties  are  destroyed,  others  may  be  brought  to  a  high

degree  of  exaltation.  Under  the  influence  of  a  suggestion,  he  will

undertake  the  accomplishment  of  certain  acts  with  irresistible

impetuosity.  This  impetuosity  is  the  more  irresistible  in  the  case  of

groups than in that of the hypnotized subject, from the fact that, the

suggestion being the same for all the individuals in the group, it gains

in strength by reciprocity.’ (Ibid., 34.)

   ‘We see, then, that the disappearance of the conscious personality,

the  predominance  of  the  unconscious  personality,  the  turning  by

means  of  suggestion  and  contagion  of  feelings  and  ideas  in  an

identical  direction,  the  tendency  to  immediately  transform  the

suggested  ideas  into  acts;  these,  we  see,  are  the  principal

characteristics  of  the  individual  forming  part  of  a  group.  He  is  no

longer himself, but has become an automaton who has ceased to be

guided by his will.’ (Ibid., 35.)

   I have quoted this passage so fully in order to make it quite clear

that Le Bon explains the condition of an individual in a group as being

actually hypnotic, and does not merely make a comparison between

the two states. We have no intention of raising any objection at this

point, but wish only to emphasize the fact that the two last causes of

an  individual  becoming  altered  in  a  group  (the  contagion  and  the

heightened  suggestibility)  are  evidently  not  on  a  par,  since  the

contagion seems actually to be a manifestation of the suggestibility.

Moreover the effects of the two factors do not seem to be sharply

differentiated in the text of Le Bon’s remarks. We may perhaps best

interpret his statement if we connect the contagion with the effects of

the individual members of the group on one another, while we point to

another  source  for  those  manifestations  of  suggestion  in  the  group

which he regards as similar to the phenomena of hypnotic influence.

But to what source? We cannot avoid being struck with a sense of

deficiency  when  we  notice  that  one  of  the  chief  elements  of  the

comparison, namely the person who is to replace the hypnotist in the

case of the group, is not mentioned in Le Bon’s exposition. But he

nevertheless  distinguishes  between  this  influence  of  ‘fascination’

which remains plunged in obscurity and the contagious effect which

the individuals exercise upon one another and by which the originalsuggestion is strengthened.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3772

 

      Here  is  yet  another  important  consideration  for  helping  us  to

understand the individual in a group: ‘Moreover, by the mere fact that

he forms part of an organized group, a man descends several rungs in

the ladder of civilization. Isolated, he may be a cultivated individual; in

a crowd, he is a barbarian - that is, a creature acting by instinct. He

possesses  the  spontaneity,  the  violence,  the  ferocity,  and  also  the

enthusiasm and heroism of primitive beings.’ (Ibid., 36.) Le Bon then

dwells  especially  upon  the  lowering  in  intellectual  ability  which  an

individual experiences when he becomes merged in a group.¹

   Let us now leave the individual, and turn to the group mind, as it has

been  outlined  by  Le  Bon.  It  shows  not  a  single  feature  which  a

psycho-analyst would find any difficulty in placing or in deriving from

its  source.  Le  Bon  himself  shows  us  the  way  by  pointing  to  its

similarity with the mental life of primitive people and of children (ibid.,

40).

      A  group  is  impulsive,  changeable  and  irritable.  It  is  led  almost

exclusively by the unconscious.² The impulses which a group obeys

may  according  to  circumstances  be  generous  or  cruel,  heroic  or

cowardly, but they are always so imperious that no personal interest,

not  even  that  of  self-preservation,  can  make  itself  felt  (ibid.,  41).

Nothing  about  it  is  premeditated.  Though  it  may  desire  things

passionately,  yet  this  is  never  so  for  long,  for  it  is  incapable  of

perseverance. It cannot tolerate any delay between its desire and the

fulfilment of what it desires. It has a sense of omnipotence; the notion

of impossibility disappears for the individual in a group.³

 

   ¹ Compare Schiller’s couplet:

Jeder, sieht man ihn einzeln, ist leidlich klug und verständig;
       Sind sie in corpore, gleich wird euch ein Dummkopf daraus.

   ² ‘Unconscious’ is used here correctly by Le Bon in the descriptive sense, where it does not

mean only the ‘repressed’.

   ³ Compare the third essay in my Totem and Taboo (1912-13). 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3773

 

   A group is extraordinarily credulous and open to influence, it has no

critical faculty, and the improbable does not exist for it. It thinks in

images, which call one another up by association (just as they arise

with individuals in states of free imagination), and whose agreement

with reality is never checked by any reasonable agency. The feelings

of a group are always very simple and very exaggerated. So that a

group knows neither doubt nor uncertainty.¹

   It goes directly to extremes; if a suspicion is expressed, it is instantly

changed  into  an  incontrovertible  certainty;  a  trace  of  antipathy  is

turned into furious hatred (ibid., 56).²

   Inclined as it itself is to all extremes, a group can only be excited by

an excessive stimulus. Anyone who wishes to produce an effect upon

it needs no logical adjustment in his arguments; he must paint in the

most forcible colours, he must exaggerate, and he must repeat the

same thing again and again.

   Since a group is in no doubt as to what constitutes truth or error, and

is conscious, moreover, of its own great strength, it is as intolerant as

it is obedient to authority. It respects force and can only be slightly

influenced  by  kindness,  which  it  regards  merely  as  a  form  of

weakness.  What  it  demands  of  its  heroes  is  strength,  or  even

violence. It wants to be ruled and oppressed and to fear its masters.

Fundamentally it is entirely conservative and it has a deep aversion to

all innovations and advances and an unbounded respect for tradition

(ibid., 62).

 

    ¹ In  the  interpretation  of  dreams,  to  which,  indeed,  we  owe  our  best  knowledge  of

unconscious mental life, we follow a technical rule of disregarding doubt and uncertainty in the
narrative of the dream, and of treating every element of the manifest dream as being quite
certain. We attribute doubt and uncertainty to the influence of the censorship to which the
dream-work is subjected, and we assume that the primary dream-thoughts are not acquainted
with doubt and uncertainty as critical processes. They may of course be present, like anything
else, as part of the content of the day’s residues which lead to the dream.

   ² The same extreme and unmeasured intensification of every emotion is also a feature of

the affective life of children, and it is present as well in dream life. Thanks to the isolation of
the single emotions in the unconscious, a slight annoyance during the day will express itself ina dream as a wish for the offending person’s death, or a breath of temptation may give the
impetus  to  the  portrayal  in  the  dream  of  a  criminal  action.  Hanns  Sachs  has  made  an
appropriate remark on this point: ‘If we look in our consciousness at something that has been
told us by a dream about a contemporary (real) situation, we ought not to be surprised to find
that the monster which we saw under the magnifying glass of analysis turns out to be a tiny
infusorian.’
 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3774

 

   In order to make a correct judgement upon the morals of groups,

one must take into consideration the fact that when individuals come

together in a group all their individual inhibitions fall away and all the

cruel, brutal and destructive instincts, which lie dormant in individuals

as relics of a primitive epoch, are stirred up to find free gratification.

But under the influence of suggestion groups are also capable of high

achievements in the shape of abnegation, unselfishness, and devotion

to an ideal. While with isolated individuals personal interest is almost

the  only  motive  force,  with  groups  it  is  very  rarely  prominent.  It  is

possible to speak of an individual having his moral standards raised

by a group (ibid., 65). Whereas the intellectual capacity of a group is

always far below that of an individual, its ethical conduct may rise as

high above his as it may sink deep below it.

   Some other features in Le Bon’s description show in a clear light

how well justified is the identification of the group mind with the mind

of primitive people. In groups the most contradictory ideas can exist

side by side and tolerate each other, without any conflict arising from

the logical contradiction between them. But this is also the case in the

unconscious mental life of individuals, of children and of neurotics, as

psycho-analysis has long pointed out.¹

 

   ¹ In young children, for instance, ambivalent emotional attitudes towards those who are

nearest to them exist side by side for a long time, without either of them interfering with the
expression of the other and opposite one. If eventually a conflict breaks out between the two,
it is often settled by the child making a change of object and displacing one of the ambivalent
emotions on to a substitute. The history of the development of a neurosis in an adult will also
show that a suppressed emotion may frequently persist for a long time in unconscious or even
in  conscious  phantasies,  the  content  of  which  naturally  runs  directly  counter  to  some
predominant tendency, and yet that this opposition does not result in any proceedings on the
part of the ego against what it has repudiated. The phantasy is tolerated for quite a long time,until suddenly one day, usually as a result of an increase in the affective cathexis of the
phantasy, a conflict breaks out between it and the ego with all the usual consequences. In the
process of a child’s development into a mature adult there is a more and more extensive
integration  of  his  personality,  a  co-ordination  of  the  separate  instinctual  impulses  and
purposive trends which have grown up in him independently of one another. The analogous
process in the domain of sexual life has long been known to us as the co-ordination of all the
sexual  instincts  into  a  definitive  genital  organization.  (Three  Essays  on  the  Theory  of
Sexuality, 1905d.) Moreover, that the unification of the ego is liable to the same interferences
as that of the libido is shown by numerous familiar instances, such as that of men of science
who have preserved their faith in the Bible, and other similar cases. - The various possible
ways in which the ego can later disintegrate form a special chapter in psychopathology.
 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3775

 

   A group, further, is subject to the truly magical power of words; they

can evoke the most formidable tempests in the group mind, and are

also capable of stilling them (ibid., 117). ‘Reason and arguments are

incapable of combating certain words and formulas. They are uttered

with solemnity in the presence of groups, and as soon as they have

been  pronounced  an  expression  of  respect  is  visible  on  every

countenance, and all heads are bowed. By many they are considered

as natural forces or as supernatural powers.’ (Ibid., 117). It is only

necessary  in  this  connection  to  remember  the  taboo  upon  names

among primitive people and the magical powers which they ascribe to

names and words.¹

   And, finally, groups have never thirsted after truth. They demand

illusions, and cannot do without them. They constantly give what is

unreal  precedence  over  what  is  real;  they  are  almost  as  strongly

influenced by what is untrue as by what is true. They have an evident

tendency not to distinguish between the two (ibid., 77).

   We have pointed out that this predominance of the life of phantasy

and of the illusion born of an unfulfilled wish is the ruling factor in the

psychology  of  neuroses.  We  have  found  that  what  neurotics  are

guided by is not ordinary objective reality but psychological reality. A

hysterical  symptom  is  based  upon  phantasy  instead  of  upon  the

repetition of real experience, and the sense of guilt in an obsessional

neurosis is based upon the fact of an evil intention which was never

carried out. Indeed, just as in dreams and in hypnosis, in the mentaloperations of a group the function for testing the reality of things falls

into  the  background  in  comparison  with  the  strength  of  wishful

impulses with their affective cathexis.

 

   ¹ See Totem and Taboo (1912-13).

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3776

 

      What  Le  Bon  says  on  the  subject  of  leaders  of  groups  is  less

exhaustive,  and  does  not  enable  us  to  make  out  an  underlying

principle  so  clearly.  He  thinks  that  as  soon  as  living  beings  are

gathered together in certain numbers, no matter whether they are a

herd  of  animals  or  a  collection  of  human  beings,  they  place

themselves instinctively under the authority of a chief (ibid., 134). A

group is an obedient herd, which could never live without a master. It

has such a thirst for obedience that it submits instinctively to anyone

who appoints himself its master.

   Although in this way the needs of a group carry it half-way to meet

the leader, yet he too must fit in with it in his personal qualities. He

must himself be held in fascination by a strong faith (in an idea) in

order  to  awaken  the  group’s  faith;  he  must  possess  a  strong  and

imposing  will,  which  the  group,  which  has  no  will  of  its  own,  can

accept from him. Le Bon then discusses the different kinds of leaders,

and the means by which they work upon the group. On the whole he

believes that the leaders make themselves felt by means of the ideas

in which they themselves are fanatical believers.

      Moreover,  he  ascribes  both  to  the  ideas  and  to  the  leaders  a

mysterious and irresistible power, which he calls ‘prestige’. Prestige is

a sort of domination exercised over us by an individual, a work or an

idea.  It  entirely  paralyses  our  critical  faculty,  and  fills  us  with

wonderment and respect. It would seem to arouse a feeling like that of

‘fascination’  in  hypnosis  (ibid.,  148).  He  distinguishes  between

acquired or artificial and personal prestige. The former is attached to

persons  in  virtue  of  their  name,  fortune  and  reputation,  and  to

opinions, works of art, etc., in virtue of tradition. Since in every case it

harks  back  to  the  past,  it  cannot  be  of  much  help  to  us  inunderstanding this puzzling influence. Personal prestige is attached to

a  few  people,  who  become  leaders  by  means  of  it,  and  it  has  the

effect of making everyone obey them as though by the operation of

some magnetic magic. All prestige, however, is also dependent upon

success, and is lost in the event of failure (ibid., 159).

      Le  Bon  does  not  give  the  impression  of  having  succeeded  in

bringing  the  function  of  the  leader  and  the  importance  of  prestige

completely  into  harmony  with  his  brilliantly  executed  picture  of  the

group mind.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3777

 

                                            III

 

        OTHER ACCOUNTS OF COLLECTIVE MENTAL LIFE

 

We have made use of Le Bon’s description by way of introduction,

because it fits in so well with our own psychology in the emphasis

which it lays upon unconscious mental life. But we must now add that

as  a  matter  of  fact  none  of  that  author’s  statements  bring  forward

anything  new.  Everything  that  he  says  to  the  detriment  and

depreciation of the manifestations of the group mind had already been

said by others before him with equal distinctness and equal hostility,

and has been repeated in unison by thinkers, statesmen and writers

since the earliest periods of literature.¹ The two theses which comprise

the  most  important  of  Le  Bon’s  opinions,  those  touching  upon  the

collective inhibition of intellectual functioning and the heightening of

affectivity in groups, had been formulated shortly before by Sighele.²

At bottom, all that is left over as being peculiar to Le Bon are the two

notions of the unconscious and of the comparison with the mental life

of primitive people, and even these had naturally often been alluded to

before him.

   But, what is more, the description and estimate of the group mind as

they have been given by Le Bon and the rest have not by any means

been left undisputed. There is no doubt that all the phenomena of thegroup  mind  which  have  just  been  mentioned  have  been  correctly

observed, but it is also possible to distinguish other manifestations of

group  formation,  which  operate  in  a  precisely  opposite  sense,  and

from which a much higher opinion of the group mind must necessarily

follow.

   Le Bon himself was prepared to admit that in certain circumstances

the morals of a group can be higher than those of the individuals that

compose it, and that only collectivities are capable of a high degree of

unselfishness and devotion. ‘While with isolated individuals personal

interest is almost the only motive force, with groups it is very rarely

prominent.’ (Le Bon, trans. 1920, 65.) Other writers adduce the fact

that it is only society which prescribes any ethical standards at all for

the individual, while he as a rule fails in one way or another to come

up  to  its  high  demands.  Or  they  point  out  that  in  exceptional

circumstances  there  may  arise  in  communities  the  phenomenon  of

enthusiasm, which has made the most splendid group achievements

possible.

 

   ¹ See Kraskovic (1915), particularly the bibliography.

   ² See Moede (1915).

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3778

 

   As regards intellectual work it remains a fact, indeed, that great

decisions  in  the  realm  of  thought  and  momentous  discoveries  and

solutions  of  problems  are  only  possible  to  an  individual  working  in

solitude. But even the group mind is capable of creative genius in the

field of intelligence, as is shown above all by language itself, as well

as by folk-song, folklore and the like. It remains an open question,

moreover,  how  much  the  individual  thinker  or  writer  owes  to  the

stimulation of the group in which he lives, and whether he does more

than  perfect  a  mental  work  in  which  the  others  have  had  a

simultaneous share.

      In  face  of  these  completely  contradictory  accounts,  it  looks  as

though  the  work  of  group  psychology  were  bound  to  come  to  an

ineffectual end. But it is easy to find a more hopeful escape from thedilemma. A number of very different structures have probably been

merged under the term ‘group’ and may require to be distinguished.

The assertions of Sighele, Le Bon and the rest relate to groups of a

short-lived  character,  which  some  passing  interest  has  hastily

agglomerated out of various sorts of individuals. The characteristics of

revolutionary  groups,  and  especially  those  of  the  great  French

Revolution,  have  unmistakably  influenced  their  descriptions.  The

opposite opinions owe their origin to the consideration of those stable

groups or associations in which mankind pass their lives, and which

are  embodied  in  the  institutions  of  society.  Groups  of  the  first  kind

stand in the same sort of relation to those of the second as a high but

choppy sea to a ground swell.

   McDougall, in his book on The Group Mind (1920a), starts out from

the  same  contradiction  that  has  just  been  mentioned,  and  finds  a

solution for it in the factor of organization. In the simplest case, he

says,  the  ‘group’  possesses  no  organization  at  all  or  one  scarcely

deserving the name. He describes a group of this kind as a ‘crowd’.

But he admits that a crowd of human beings can hardly come together

without possessing at all events the rudiments of an organization, and

that  precisely  in  these  simple  groups  some  fundamental  facts  of

collective psychology can be observed with special ease (McDougall,

1920a, 22). Before the members of a random crowd of people can

constitute  something  like  a  group  in  the  psychological  sense,  a

condition has to be fulfilled: these individuals must have something in

common with one another, a common interest in an object, a similar

emotional bias in some situation or other, and (‘consequently’, I should

like to interpolate) ‘some degree of reciprocal influence’ (ibid., 23). The

higher the degree of ‘this mental homogeneity’, the more readily do

the individuals form a psychological group, and the more striking are

the manifestations of a group mind.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3779

 

      The  most  remarkable  and  also  the  most  important  result  of  the

formation  of  a  group  is  the  ‘exaltation  or  intensification  of  emotion’produced  in  every  member  of  it  (ibid.,  24).  In  McDougall’s  opinion

men’s emotions are stirred in a group to a pitch that they seldom or

never attain under other conditions; and it is a pleasurable experience

for  those  who  are  concerned,  to  surrender  themselves  so

unreservedly  to  their  passions  and  thus  to  become  merged  in  the

group  and  to  lose  the  sense  of  the  limits  of  their  individuality.  The

manner  in  which  individuals  are  thus  carried  away  by  a  common

impulse  is  explained  by  McDougall  by  means  of  what  he  calls  the

‘principle  of  direct  induction  of  emotion  by  way  of  the  primitive

sympathetic response’ (ibid., 25), that is, by means of the emotional

contagion  with  which  we  are  already  familiar.  The  fact  is  that  the

perception of the signs of an affective state is calculated automatically

to  arouse  the  same  affect  in  the  person  who  perceives  them.  The

greater  the  number  of  people  in  whom  the  same  affect  can  be

simultaneously observed, the stronger does this automatic compulsion

grow. The individual loses his power of criticism, and lets himself slip

into the same affect. But in so doing he increases the excitement of

the other people, who had produced this result in him, and thus the

affective  charge  of  the  individuals  becomes  intensified  by  mutual

interaction.  Something  is  unmistakably  at  work  in  the  nature  of  a

compulsion to do the same as the others, to remain in harmony with

the many. The cruder and simpler emotional impulses are the more

apt to spread through a group in this way (ibid., 39).

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3780

 

   This mechanism for the intensification of affect is favoured by some

other influences which emanate from groups. A group impresses the

individual as being an unlimited power and an insurmountable peril.

For the moment it replaces the whole of human society, which is the

wielder of authority, whose punishments the individual fears, and for

whose  sake  he  has  submitted  to  so  many  inhibitions.  It  is  clearly

perilous for him to put himself in opposition to it, and it will be safer to

follow the example of those around him and perhaps even ‘hunt with

the pack’. In obedience to the new authority he may put his former‘conscience’ out of action, and so surrender to the attraction of the

increased  pleasure  that  is  certainly  obtained  from  the  removal  of

inhibitions. On the whole, therefore, it is not so remarkable that we

should see an individual in a group doing or approving things which he

would have avoided in the normal conditions of life; and in this way we

may even hope to clear up a little of the obscurity which is so often

covered by the enigmatic word ‘suggestion’.

   McDougall does not dispute the thesis as to the collective inhibition

of intelligence in groups (ibid., 41). He says that the minds of lower

intelligence bring down those of a higher order to their own level. The

latter  are  obstructed  in  their  activity,  because  in  general  an

intensification  of  affect  creates  unfavourable  conditions  for  sound

intellectual work, and further because the individuals are intimidated

by the group and their mental activity is not free, and because there is

a lowering in each individual of his sense of responsibility for his own

performances.

   The judgement with which McDougall sums up the psychological

behaviour of a simple ‘unorganized’ group is no more friendly than that

of Le Bon. Such a group ‘is excessively emotional, impulsive, violent,

fickle, inconsistent, irresolute and extreme in action, displaying only

the  coarser  emotions  and  the  less  refined  sentiments;  extremely

suggestible, careless in deliberation, hasty in judgement, incapable of

any but the simpler and imperfect forms of reasoning; easily swayed

and led, lacking in self-consciousness, devoid of self-respect and of

sense  of  responsibility,  and  apt  to  be  carried  away  by  the

consciousness  of  its  own  force,  so  that  it  tends  to  produce  all  the

manifestations  we  have  learnt  to  expect  of  any  irresponsible  and

absolute power. Hence its behaviour is like that of an unruly child or

an untutored passionate savage in a strange situation, rather than like

that of its average member; and in the worst cases it is like that of a

wild beast, rather than like that of human beings.’ (ibid., 45.)

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3781

 

      Since  McDougall  contrasts  the  behaviour  of  a  highly  organizedgroup  with  what  has  just  been  described,  we  shall  be  particularly

interested  to  learn  in  what  this  organization  consists,  and  by  what

factors  it  is  produced.  The  author  enumerates  five  ‘principal

conditions’ for raising collective mental life to a higher level.

   The first and fundamental condition is that there should be some

degree  of  continuity  of  existence  in  the  group.  This  may  be  either

material or formal: material, if the same individuals persist in the group

for some time; and formal, if there is developed within the group a

system  of  fixed  positions  which  are  occupied  by  a  succession  of

individuals.

   The second condition is that in the individual member of the group

some  definite  idea  should  be  formed  of  the  nature,  composition,

functions  and  capacities  of  the  group,  so  that  from  this  he  may

develop an emotional relation to the group as a whole.

      The  third  is  that  the  group  should  be  brought  into  interaction

(perhaps  in  the  form  of  rivalry)  with  other  groups  similar  to  it  but

differing from it in many respects.

   The fourth is that the group should possess traditions, customs and

habits, and especially such as determine the relations of its members

to one another.

      The  fifth  is  that  the  group  should  have  a  definite  structure,

expressed in the specialization and differentiation of the functions of

its constituents.

      According  to  McDougall,  if  these  conditions  are  fulfilled,  the

psychological disadvantages of group formations are removed. The

collective lowering of intellectual ability is avoided by withdrawing the

performance of intellectual tasks from the group and reserving them

for individual members of it.

   It seems to us that the condition which McDougall designates as the

‘organization’ of a group can with more justification be described in

another way. The problem consists in how to procure for the group

precisely those features which were characteristic of the individual and

which are extinguished in him by the formation of the group. For the

individual, outside the primitive group, possessed his own continuity,

his self-consciousness, his traditions and customs, his own particular

functions and position, and he kept apart from his rivals. Owing to his

entry into an ‘unorganized’ group he had lost this distinctiveness for atime. If we thus recognize that the aim is to equip the group with the

attributes of the individual, we shall be reminded of a valuable remark

of Trotter’s,¹ to the effect that the tendency towards the formation of

groups is biologically a continuation of the multicellular character of all

the higher organisms.²

 

   ¹ Instincts of the Herd in Peace and War (1916)

   ² I differ from what is in other respects an understanding and shrewd criticism by Hans

Kelsen (1922) when he says that to provide the ‘group mind’ with an organization of this kind
signifies a hypostasis of it - that is to say, implies an attribution to it of independence of the
mental processes in the individual.
 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3782

 

                                            IV

 

                            SUGGESTION AND LIBIDO

 

We started from the fundamental fact that an individual in a group is

subjected through its influence to what is often a profound alteration in

his  mental  activity.  His  liability  to  affect  becomes  extraordinarily

intensified,  while  his  intellectual  ability  is  markedly  reduced,  both

processes being evidently in the direction of an approximation to the

other individuals in the group; and this result can only be reached by

the removal of those inhibitions upon his instincts which are peculiar to

each  individual,  and  by  his  resigning  those  expressions  of  his

inclinations which are especially his own. We have heard that these

often unwelcome consequences are to some extent at least prevented

by a higher ‘organization’ of the group; but this does not contradict the

fundamental  fact  of  group  psychology  -  the  two  theses  as  to  the

intensification  of  the  affects  and  the  inhibition  of  the  intellect  in

primitive  groups.  Our  interest  is  now  directed  to  discovering  the

psychological explanation of this mental change which is experienced

by the individual in a group.

      It  is  clear  that  rational  factors  (such  as  the  intimidation  of  the

individual which has already been mentioned, that is, the action of hisinstinct of self-preservation) do not cover the observable phenomena.

Beyond this what we are offered as an explanation by authorities on

sociology and group psychology is always the same, even though it is

given various names, and that is the magic word ‘suggestion’. Tarde

calls  it  ‘imitation’;  but  we  cannot  help  agreeing  with  a  writer  who

protests that imitation comes under the concept of suggestion, and is

in fact one of its results (Brugeilles, 1913). Le Bon traces back all the

puzzling  features  of  social  phenomena  to  two  factors:  the  mutual

suggestion  of  individuals  and  the  prestige  of  leaders.  But  prestige,

again,  is  only  recognizable  by  its  capacity  for  evoking  suggestion.

McDougall for a moment gives us an impression that his principle of

‘primitive  induction  of  emotion’  might  enable  us  to  do  without  the

assumption of suggestion. But on further consideration we are forced

to  perceive  that  this  principle  makes  no  more  than  the  familiar

assertions about ‘imitation’ or ‘contagion’, except for a decided stress

upon the emotional factor. There is no doubt that something exists in

us which, when we become aware of signs of an emotion in someone

else, tends to make us fall into the same emotion; but how often do we

not successfully oppose it, resist the emotion, and react in quite an

opposite  way?  Why,  therefore,  do  we  invariably  give  way  to  this

contagion when we are in a group? Once more we should have to say

that  what  compels  us  to  obey  this  tendency  is  imitation,  and  what

induces  the  emotion  in  us  is  the  group’s  suggestive  influence.

Moreover,  quite  apart  from  this,  McDougall  does  not  enable  us  to

evade suggestion; we hear from him as well as from other writers that

groups are distinguished by their special suggestibility.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3783

 

   We shall therefore be prepared for the statement that suggestion (or

more  correctly  suggestibility)  is  actually  an  irreducible,  primitive

phenomenon, a fundamental fact in the mental life of man. Such, too,

was  the  opinion  of  Bernheim,  of  whose  astonishing  arts  I  was  a

witness in the year 1889. But I can remember even then feeling a

muffled  hostility  to  this  tyranny  of  suggestion.  When  a  patient  whoshowed himself unamenable was met with the shout: ‘What are you

doing? Vous vous contre-suggestionnez!’,  I  said  to  myself  that  this

was an evident injustice and an act of violence. For the man certainly

had a right to counter-suggestions if people were trying to subdue him

with  suggestions.  Later  on  my  resistance  took  the  direction  of

protesting  against  the  view  that  suggestion,  which  explained

everything, was itself to be exempt from explanation. Thinking of it, I

repeated the old conundrum:¹

 

                                                                Christoph trug Christum,
                                                                Christus trug die ganze Welt,
                                                                Sag’ wo hat Christoph
                                                                Damals hin den Fuss gestellt?

 

                                                Christophorus Christum, sed Christus sustulit orbem:
                                                Constiterit pedibus dic ubi Christophorus?

 

   ¹ Konrad Richter, ‘Der deutsche S. Christoph.’

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3784

 

   Now that I once more approach the riddle of suggestion after having

kept away from it for some thirty years, I find there is no change in the

situation. (There is one exception to be made to this statement, and

one  which  bears  witness  precisely  to  the  influence  of  psycho-

analysis.) I notice that particular efforts are being made to formulate

the concept of suggestion correctly, that is, to fix the conventional use

of  the  name  (e.g.  McDougall,  1920b).  And  this  is  by  no  means

superfluous, for the word is acquiring a more and more extended use

and a looser and looser meaning, and will soon come to designate

any sort of influence whatever, just as it does in English, where ‘to

suggest’ and ‘suggestion’ correspond to our nahelegen and Anregung.

But there has been no explanation of the nature of suggestion, that is,

of  the  conditions  under  which  influence  without  adequate  logical

foundation takes place. I should not avoid the task of supporting this

statement by an analysis of the literature of the last thirty years, if I

were not aware that an exhaustive enquiry is being undertaken closeat hand which has in view the fulfilment of this very task.¹

   Instead of this I shall make an attempt at using the concept of libido

for the purpose of throwing light upon group psychology, a concept

which has done us such good service in the study of psychoneuroses.

   Libido is an expression taken from the theory of the emotions. We

call by that name the energy, regarded as a quantitative magnitude

(though not at present actually measurable), of those instincts which

have to do with all that may be comprised under the word ‘love’. The

nucleus of what we mean by love naturally consists (and this is what is

commonly called love, and what the poets sing of) in sexual love with

sexual union as its aim. But we do not separate from this - what in any

case has a share in the name ‘love’ - on the one hand, self-love, and

on  the  other,  love  for  parents  and  children,  friendship  and  love  for

humanity  in  general,  and  also  devotion  to  concrete  objects  and  to

abstract  ideas.  Our  justification  lies  in  the  fact  that  psycho-analytic

research has taught us that all these tendencies are an expression of

the same instinctual impulses; in relations between the sexes these

impulses  force  their  way  towards  sexual  union,  but  in  other

circumstances they are diverted from this aim or are prevented from

reaching it, though always preserving enough of their original nature to

keep their identity recognizable (as in such features as the longing for

proximity, and self-sacrifice).

 

   ¹ This work has unfortunately not materialized.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3785

 

   We are of opinion, then, that language has carried out an entirely

justifiable  piece  of  unification  in  creating  the  word  ‘love’  with  its

numerous uses, and that we cannot do better than take it as the basis

of our scientific discussions and expositions as well. By coming to this

decision,  psycho-analysis  has  let  loose  a  storm  of  indignation,  as

though it had been guilty of an act of outrageous innovation. Yet it has

done nothing original in taking love in this ‘wider’ sense. In its origin,

function, and relation to sexual love, the ‘Eros’ of the philosopher Plato

coincides exactly with the love-force, the libido of psycho-analysis, ashas been shown in detail by Nachansohn (1915) and Pfister (1921);

and when the apostle Paul, in his famous epistle to the Corinthians,

praises love above all else, he certainly understands it in the same

‘wider’ sense.¹ But this only shows that men do not always take their

great thinkers seriously, even when they profess most to admire them.

   Psycho-analysis, then, gives these love instincts the name of sexual

instincts, a  potiori  and  by  reason  of  their  origin.  The  majority  of

‘educated’ people have regarded this nomenclature as an insult, and

have taken their revenge by retorting upon psycho-analysis with the

reproach of ‘pan-sexualism’. Anyone who considers sex as something

mortifying and humiliating to human nature is at liberty to make use of

the more genteel expressions ‘Eros’ and ‘erotic’. I might have done so

myself from the first and thus have spared myself much opposition.

But  I  did  not  want  to,  for  I  like  to  avoid  concessions  to

faintheartedness. One can never tell where that road may lead one;

one gives way first in words, and then little by little in substance too. I

cannot see any merit in being ashamed of sex; the Greek word ‘Eros’,

which  is  to  soften  the  affront,  is  in  the  end  nothing  more  than  a

translation of our German word Liebe; and finally, he who knows how

to wait need make no concessions.

 

   ¹ ‘Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am

become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.’
 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3786

 

      We  will  try  our  fortune,  then,  with  the  supposition  that  love

relationships  (or,  to  use  a  more  neutral  expression,  emotional  ties)

also constitute the essence of the group mind. Let us remember that

the authorities make no mention of any such relations. What would

correspond  to  them  is  evidently  concealed  behind  the  shelter,  the

screen,  of  suggestion.  Our  hypothesis  finds  support  in  the  first

instance from two passing thoughts. First, that a group is clearly held

together by a power of some kind: and to what power could this feat

be better ascribed than to Eros, which holds together everything in the

world? Secondly, that if an individual gives up his distinctiveness in agroup and lets its other members influence him by suggestion, it gives

one the impression that he does it because he feels the need of being

in  harmony  with  them  rather  than  in  opposition  to  them  -  so  that

perhaps after all he does it ‘ihnen zu Liebe’.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3787

 

                                            V

 

    TWO ARTIFICIAL GROUPS: THE CHURCH AND THE ARMY

 

We may recall from what we know of the morphology of groups that it

is possible to distinguish very different kinds of groups and opposing

lines  in  their  development.  There  are  very  fleeting  groups  and

extremely  lasting  ones;  homogeneous  ones,  made  up  of  the  same

sorts of individuals, and unhomogeneous ones; natural groups, and

artificial  ones,  requiring  an  external  force  to  keep  them  together;

primitive groups, and highly organized ones with a definite structure.

But for reasons which remain to be explained we should like to lay

particular  stress  upon  a  distinction  to  which  writers  on  the  subject

have been inclined to give too little attention; I refer to that between

leaderless groups and those with leaders. And, in complete opposition

to the usual practice, we shall not choose a relatively simple group

formation  as  our  point  of  departure,  but  shall  begin  with  highly

organized, lasting and artificial groups. The most interesting example

of  such  structures  are  Churches  -  communities  of  believers  -  and

armies.

      A  Church  and  an  army  are  artificial  groups  -  that  is,  a  certain

external force is employed to prevent them from disintegrating¹ and to

check alterations in their structure. As a rule a person is not consulted,

or is given no choice, as to whether he wants to enter such a group;

any attempt at leaving it is usually met with persecution or with severe

punishment, or has quite definite conditions attached to it. It is quite

outside our present interest to enquire why these associations need

such special safeguards. We are only attracted by one circumstance,namely  that  certain  facts,  which  are  far  more  concealed  in  other

cases, can be observed very clearly in those highly organized groups

which  are  protected  from  dissolution  in  the  manner  that  has  been

mentioned.

 

   ¹ In groups, the attributes ‘stable’ and ‘artificial’ seem to coincide or at least to be intimately

connected.
 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3788

 

   In a Church (and we may with advantage take the Catholic Church

as a type) as well as in an army, however different the two may be in

other respects, the same illusion holds good of there being a head - in

the Catholic Church Christ, in an army its Commander-in-Chief - who

loves all the individuals in the group with an equal love. Everything

depends upon this illusion; if it were to be dropped, then both Church

and army would dissolve, so far as the external force permitted them

to. This equal love was expressly enunciated by Christ: ‘Inasmuch as

ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have

done it unto me.’ He stands to the individual members of the group of

believers in the relation of a kind elder brother; he is their substitute

father. All the demands that are made upon the individual are derived

from this love of Christ’s. A democratic strain runs through the Church,

for  the  very  reason  that  before  Christ  everyone  is  equal,  and  that

everyone  has  an  equal  share  in  his  love.  It  is  not  without  a  deep

reason  that  the  similarity  between  the  Christian  community  and  a

family is invoked, and that believers call themselves brothers in Christ,

that is, brothers through the love which Christ has for them. There is

no doubt that the tie which unites each individual with Christ is also

the cause of the tie which unites them with one another. The like holds

good of an army. The Commander-in-Chief is a father who loves all

soldiers  equally,  and  for  that  reason  they  are  comrades  among

themselves.  The  army  differs  structurally  from  the  Church  in  being

built up of a series of such groups. Every captain is, as it were, the

Commander-in-Chief and the father of his company, and so is every

non-commissioned  officer  of  his  section.  It  is  true  that  a  similarhierarchy has been constructed in the Church, but it does not play the

same  part  in  it  economically;  for  more  knowledge  and  care  about

individuals may be attributed to Christ than to a human Commander-

in-Chief.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3789

 

      An  objection  will  justly  be  raised  against  this  conception  of  the

libidinal structure of an army on the ground that no place has been

found in it for such ideas as those of one’s country, of national glory,

etc., which are of such importance in holding an army together. The

answer is that that is a different instance of a group tie, and no longer

such a simple one; for the examples of great generals, like Caesar,

Wallenstein, or Napoleon, show that such ideas are not indispensable

to  the  existence  of  an  army.  We  shall  presently  touch  upon  the

possibility of a leading idea being substituted for a leader and upon

the relations between the two. The neglect of this libidinal factor in an

army, even when it is not the only factor operative, seems to be not

merely a theoretical omission but also a practical danger. Prussian

militarism,  which  was  just  as  unpsychological  as  German  science,

may have had to suffer the consequences of this in the World War.

We  know  that  the  war  neuroses  which  ravaged  the  German  army

have been recognized as being a protest of the individual against the

part  he  was  expected  to  play  in  the  army;  and  according  to  the

communication of Simmel (1918), the hard treatment of the men by

their  superiors  may  be  considered  as  foremost  among  the  motive

forces of the disease. If the importance of the libido’s claims on this

score  had  been  better  appreciated,  the  fantastic  promises  of  the

American President’s Fourteen Points would probably not have been

believed so easily, and the splendid instrument would not have broken

in the hands of the German leaders.

   It is to be noticed that in these two artificial groups each individual is

bound  by  libidinal  ties  on  the  one  hand  to  the  leader  (Christ,  the

Commander-in-Chief) and on the other hand to the other members of

the group. How these two ties are related to each other, whether theyare of the same kind and the same value, and how they are to be

described  psychologically  -  these  questions  must  be  reserved  for

subsequent  enquiry.  But  we  shall  venture  even  now  upon  a  mild

reproach against earlier writers for not having sufficiently appreciated

the importance of the leader in the psychology of the group, while our

own choice of this as a first subject for investigation has brought us

into a more favourable position. It would appear as though we were on

the right road towards an explanation of the principal phenomenon of

group psychology - the individual’s lack of freedom in a group. If each

individual is bound in two directions by such an intense emotional tie,

we  shall  find  no  difficulty  in  attributing  to  that  circumstance  the

alteration and limitation which have been observed in his personality.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3790

 

   A hint to the same effect, that the essence of a group lies in the

libidinal ties existing in it, is also to be found in the phenomenon of

panic,  which  is  best  studied  in  military  groups.  A  panic  arises  if  a

group of that kind becomes disintegrated. Its characteristics are that

none of the orders given by superiors are any longer listened to, and

that each individual is only solicitous on his own account, and without

any consideration for the rest. The mutual ties have ceased to exist,

and a gigantic and senseless fear is set free. At this point, again, the

objection will naturally be made that it is rather the other way round;

and that the fear has grown so great as to be able to disregard all ties

and all feelings of consideration for others. McDougall (1920a, 24) has

even made use of panic (though not of military panic) as a typical

instance  of  that  intensification  of  emotion  by  contagion  (‘primary

induction’) on which he lays so much emphasis. But nevertheless this

rational  method  of  explanation  is  here  quite  inadequate.  The  very

question  that  needs  explanation  is  why  the  fear  has  become  so

gigantic. The greatness of the danger cannot be responsible, for the

same  army  which  now  falls  a  victim  to  panic  may  previously  have

faced equally great or greater danger with complete success; it is of

the very essence of panic that it bears no relation to the danger thatthreatens, and often breaks out on the most trivial occasions. If an

individual  in  panic  fear  begins  to  be  solicitous  only  on  his  own

account, he bears witness in so doing to the fact that the emotional

ties, which have hitherto made the danger seem small to him, have

ceased to exist. Now that he is by himself in facing the danger, he

may  surely  think  it  greater.  The  fact  is,  therefore,  that  panic  fear

presupposes a relaxation in the libidinal structure of the group and

reacts to that relaxation in a justifiable manner, and the contrary view -

that the libidinal ties of the group are destroyed owing to fear in the

face of the danger - can be refuted.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3791

 

      The  contention  that  fear  in  a  group  is  increased  to  enormous

proportions  through  induction  (contagion)  is  not  in  the  least

contradicted  by  these  remarks.  McDougall’s  view  meets  the  case

entirely when the danger is a really great one and when the group has

no strong emotional ties - conditions which are fulfilled, for instance,

when a fire breaks out in a theatre or a place of amusement. But the

truly instructive case and the one which can be best employed for our

purposes is that mentioned above, in which a body of troops breaks

into a panic although the danger has not increased beyond a degree

that  is  usual  and  has  often  been  previously  faced.  It  is  not  to  be

expected  that  the  usage  of  the  word  ‘panic’  should  be  clearly  and

unambiguously  determined.  Sometimes  it  is  used  to  describe  any

collective fear, sometimes even fear in an individual when it exceeds

all bounds, and often the name seems to be reserved for cases in

which the outbreak of fear is not warranted by the occasion. If we take

the word ‘panic’ in the sense of collective fear, we can establish a far-

reaching  analogy.  Fear  in  an  individual  is  provoked  either  by  the

greatness of a danger or by the cessation of emotional ties (libidinal

cathexes); the latter is the case of neurotic fear or anxiety.¹ In just the

same way panic arises either owing to an increase of the common

danger or owing to the disappearance of the emotional ties which hold

the group together; and the latter case is analogous to that of neuroticanxiety.²

   Anyone who, like McDougall (1920a), describes a panic as one of

the plainest functions of the ‘group mind’, arrives at the paradoxical

position that this group mind does away with itself in one of its most

striking manifestations. It is impossible to doubt that panic means the

disintegration of a group; it involves the cessation of all the feelings of

consideration which the members of the group otherwise show one

another.

   The typical occasion of the outbreak of a panic is very much as it is

represented  in  Nestroy’s  parody  of  Hebbel’s  play  about  Judith  and

Holofernes. A soldier cries out: ‘The general has lost his head!’ and

thereupon all the Assyrians take to flight. The loss of the leader in

some sense or other, the birth of misgivings about him, brings on the

outbreak of panic, though the danger remains the same; the mutual

ties between the members of the group disappear, as a rule, at the

same time as the tie with their leader. The group vanishes in dust, like

a Prince Rupert’s drop when its tail is broken off.

 

   ¹ See Lecture XXV of my Introductory Lectures (1916-17)

   ² Compare  Béla  von  Felszeghy’s  interesting  though  somewhat  over-imaginative  paper

‘Panik und Pankomplex’ (1920).
 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3792

 

   The dissolution of a religious group is not so easy to observe. A

short time ago there came into my hands an English novel of Catholic

origin, recommended by the Bishop of London, with the title When It

Was Dark.  It  gave  a  clever  and,  as  it  seems  to  me,  a  convincing

picture of such a possibility and its consequences. The novel, which is

supposed  to  relate  to  the  present  day,  tells  how  a  conspiracy  of

enemies of the person of Christ and of the Christian faith succeed in

arranging  for  a  sepulchre  to  be  discovered  in  Jerusalem.  In  this

sepulchre is an inscription, in which Joseph of Arimathaea confesses

that for reasons of piety he secretly removed the body of Christ from

its grave on the third day after its entombment and buried it in this

spot.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  and  his  divine  nature  are  by  thismeans disproved, and the result of this archaeological discovery is a

convulsion in European civilization and an extraordinary increase in all

crimes and acts of violence, which only ceases when the forgers’ plot

has been revealed.

   The phenomenon which accompanies the dissolution that is here

supposed  to  overtake  a  religious  group  is  not  fear,  for  which  the

occasion  is  wanting.  Instead  of  it  ruthless  and  hostile  impulses

towards  other  people  make  their  appearance,  which,  owing  to  the

equal love of Christ, they had previously been unable to do.¹  But even

during the kingdom of Christ those people who do not belong to the

community of believers, who do not love him, and whom he does not

love, stand outside this tie. Therefore a religion, even if it calls itself

the religion of love, must be hard and unloving to those who do not

belong to it. Fundamentally indeed every religion is in this same way a

religion  of  love  for  all  those  whom  it  embraces;  while  cruelty  and

intolerance towards those who do not belong to it are natural to every

religion. However difficult we may find it personally, we ought not to

reproach  believers  too  severely  on  this  account;  people  who  are

unbelieving or indifferent are much better off psychologically in this

matter. If to-day that intolerance no longer shows itself so violent and

cruel as in former centuries, we can scarcely conclude that there has

been a softening in human manners. The cause is rather to be found

in the undeniable weakening of religious feelings and the libidinal ties

which depend upon them. If another group tie takes the place of the

religious one - and the socialistic tie seems to be succeeding in doing

so - then there will be the same intolerance towards outsiders as in

the age of the Wars of Religion; and if differences between scientific

opinions could ever attain a similar significance for groups, the same

result would again be repeated with this new motivation.

 

   ¹ Compare the explanation of similar phenomena after the abolition of the paternal authority

of the sovereign given in Federn’s Die vaterlose Gesellschaft (1919).
 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3793

 

                                            VI 

              FURTHER PROBLEMS AND LINES OF WORK

 

We have hitherto considered two artificial groups and have found that

both are dominated by emotional ties of two kinds. One of these, the

tie with the leader, seems (at all events for these cases) to be more of

a ruling factor than the other, which holds between the members of

the group.

      Now  much  else  remains  to  be  examined  and  described  in  the

morphology of groups. We should have to start from the ascertained

fact that a mere collection of people is not a group, so long as these

ties have not been established in it; but we should have to admit that

in any collection of people the tendency to form a psychological group

may very easily come to the fore. We should have to give our attention

to  the  different  kinds  of  groups,  more  or  less  stable,  that  arise

spontaneously, and to study the conditions of their origin and of their

dissolution.  We  should  above  all  be  concerned  with  the  distinction

between  groups  which  have  a  leader  and  leaderless  groups.  We

should consider whether groups with leaders may not be the more

primitive and complete, whether in the others an idea, an abstraction,

may  not  take  the  place  of  the  leader  (a  state  of  things  to  which

religious groups, with their invisible head, form a transitional stage),

and whether a common tendency, a wish in which a number of people

can have a share, may not in the same way serve as a substitute. This

abstraction, again, might be more or less completely embodied in the

figure  of  what  we  might  call  a  secondary  leader,  and  interesting

varieties  would  arise  from  the  relation  between  the  idea  and  the

leader. The leader or the leading idea might also, so to speak, be

negative;  hatred  against  a  particular  person  or  institution  might

operate in just the same unifying way, and might call up the same kind

of emotional ties as positive attachment. Then the question would also

arise  whether  a  leader  is  really  indispensable  to  the  essence  of  a

groups - and other questions besides.

   But all these questions, which may, moreover, have been dealt with

in  part  in  the  literature  of  group  psychology,  will  not  succeed  in

diverting  our  interest  from  the  fundamental  psychological  problems

that confront us in the structure of a group. And our attention will firstbe attracted by a consideration which promises to bring us in the most

direct way to a proof that libidinal ties are what characterize a group.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3794

 

   Let us keep before our eyes the nature of the emotional relations

which  hold  between  men  in  general.  According  to  Schopenhauer’s

famous simile of the freezing porcupines no one can tolerate a too

intimate approach to his neighbour.¹

   The evidence of psycho-analysis shows that almost every intimate

emotional  relation  between  two  people  which  lasts  for  some  time  -

marriage,  friendship,  the  relations  between  parents  and  children²  -

contains a sediment of feelings of aversion and hostility, which only

escapes perception as a result of repression. This is less disguised in

the common wrangles between business partners or in the grumbles

of a subordinate at his superior. The same thing happens when men

come  together  in  larger  units.  Every  time  two  families  become

connected by a marriage, each of them thinks itself superior to or of

better  birth  than  the  other.  Of  two  neighbouring  towns  each  is  the

other’s  most  jealous  rival;  every  little  canton  looks  down  upon  the

others with contempt. Closely related races keep one another at arm’s

length;  the  South  German  cannot  endure  the  North  German,  the

Englishman casts every kind of aspersion upon the Scot, the Spaniard

despises the Portuguese. We are no longer astonished that greater

differences should lead to an almost insuperable repugnance, such as

the Gallic people feel for the German, the Aryan for the Semite, and

the white races for the coloured.

 

   ¹ ‘A company of porcupines crowded themselves very close together one cold winter’s day

so as to profit by one another’s warmth and so save themselves from being frozen to death.
But soon they felt one another’s quills, which induced them to separate again. And now, when
the need for warmth brought them nearer together again, the second evil arose once more.
So that they were driven backwards and forwards from one trouble to the other, until they had
discovered  a  mean  distance  at  which  they  could  most  tolerably  exist.’  (Parerga  und
Paralipomena, Part II, 31, ‘Gleichnisse und Parabeln’.)

   ² Perhaps with the solitary exception of the relation of a mother to her son, which is based

on  narcissism,  is  not  disturbed  by  subsequent  rivalry,  and  is  reinforced  by  a  rudimentaryattempt at sexual object-choice.
 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3795

 

   When this hostility is directed against people who are otherwise

loved we describe it as ambivalence of feeling; and we explain the

fact, in what is probably far too rational a manner, by means of the

numerous occasions for conflicts of interest which arise precisely in

such intimate relations. In the undisguised antipathies and aversions

which people feel towards strangers with whom they have to do we

may recognize the expression of self-love - of narcissism. This self-

love  works  for  the  preservation  of  the  individual,  and  behaves  as

though the occurrence of any divergence from his own particular lines

of development involved a criticism of them and a demand for their

alteration. We do not know why such sensitiveness should have been

directed to just these details of differentiation; but it is unmistakable

that in this whole connection men give evidence of a readiness for

hatred, an aggressiveness, the source of which is unknown, and to

which one is tempted to ascribe an elementary character.¹

   But when a group is formed the whole of this intolerance vanishes,

temporarily  or  permanently,  within  the  group.  So  long  as  a  group

formation  persists  or  so  far  as  it  extends,  individuals  in  the  group

behave as though they were uniform, tolerate the peculiarities of its

other members, equate themselves with them, and have no feeling of

aversion towards them. Such a limitation of narcissism can, according

to our theoretical views, only be produced by one factor, a libidinal tie

with other people. Love for oneself knows only one barrier - love for

others, love for objects.² The question will at once be raised whether

community of interest in itself, without any addition of libido, must not

necessarily  lead  to  the  toleration  of  other  people  and  to

considerateness for them. This objection may be met by the reply that

nevertheless no lasting limitation of narcissism is effected in this way,

since  this  tolerance  does  not  persist  longer  than  the  immediate

advantage  gained  from  the  other  people’s  collaboration.  But  the

practical importance of this discussion is less than might be supposed,

for experience has shown that in cases of collaboration libidinal tiesare regularly formed between the fellow-workers which prolong and

solidify the relation between them to a point beyond what is merely

profitable.  The  same  thing  occurs  in  men’s  social  relations  as  has

become  familiar  to  psycho-analytic  research  in  the  course  of  the

development of the individual libido. The libido attaches itself to the

satisfaction of the great vital needs, and chooses as its first objects

the people who have a share in that process. And in the development

of mankind as a whole, just as in individuals, love alone acts as the

civilizing factor in the sense that it brings a change from egoism to

altruism. And this is true both of sexual love for women, with all the

obligations which it involves of not harming the things that are dear to

women,  and  also  of  desexualized,  sublimated  homosexual  love  for

other men, which springs from work in common.

 

   ¹ In a recently published study, Beyond the Pleasure Principle, I have attempted to connect

the polarity of love and hatred with a hypothetical opposition between instincts of life and
death, and to establish the sexual instincts as the purest examples of the former, the instincts
of life.

   ² See my paper on narcissism (1914c).

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3796

 

   If therefore in groups narcissistic self-love is subject to limitations

which do not operate outside them, that is cogent evidence that the

essence of a group formation consists in new kinds of libidinal ties

among the members of the group.

   Our interest now leads us on to the pressing question as to what

may be the nature of these ties which exist in groups. In the psycho-

analytic  study  of  neuroses  we  have  hitherto  been  occupied  almost

exclusively  with  ties  with  objects  made  by  love  instincts  which  still

pursue  directly  sexual  aims.  In  groups  there  can  evidently  be  no

question of sexual aims of that kind. We are concerned here with love

instincts  which  have  been  diverted  from  their  original  aims,  though

they do not operate with less energy on that account. Now, within the

range of the usual sexual object-cathexis, we have already observed

phenomena which represent a diversion of the instinct from its sexualaim. We have described them as degrees of being in love, and have

recognized that they involve a certain encroachment upon the ego.

We shall now turn our attention more closely to these phenomena of

being  in  love,  in  the  firm  expectation  of  finding  in  them  conditions

which can be transferred to the ties that exist in groups. But we should

also like to know whether this kind of object-cathexis, as we know it in

sexual  life,  represents  the  only  manner  of  emotional  tie  with  other

people, or whether we must take other mechanisms of the sort into

account. As a matter of fact we learn from psycho-analysis that there

do  exist  other  mechanisms  for  emotional  ties,  the  so-called

identifications,  insufficiently-known  processes  and  hard  to  describe,

the investigation of which will for some time keep us away from the

subject of group psychology.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3797

 

                                          VII

 

                                    IDENTIFICATION

 

Identification is known to psycho-analysis as the earliest expression of

an emotional tie with another person. It plays a part in the early history

of the Oedipus complex. A little boy will exhibit a special interest in his

father; he would like to grow like him and be like him, and take his

place everywhere. We may say simply that he takes his father as his

ideal.  This  behaviour  has  nothing  to  do  with  a  passive  or  feminine

attitude towards his father (and towards males in general); it is on the

contrary  typically  masculine.  It  fits  in  very  well  with  the  Oedipus

complex, for which it helps to prepare the way.

   At the same time as this identification with his father, or a little later,

the  boy  has  begun  to  develop  a  true  object-cathexis  towards  his

mother according to the attachment type. He then exhibits, therefore,

two  psychologically  distinct  ties:  a  straightforward  sexual  object-

cathexis towards his mother and an identification with his father which

takes him as his model. The two subsist side by side for a time withoutany mutual influence or interference. In consequence of the irresistible

advance towards a unification of mental life, they come together at

last;  and  the  normal  Oedipus  complex  originates  from  their

confluence. The little boy notices that his father stands in his way with

his mother. His identification with his father then takes on a hostile

colouring and becomes identical with the wish to replace his father in

regard to his mother as well. Identification, in fact, is ambivalent from

the very first; it can turn into an expression of tenderness as easily as

into a wish for someone’s removal. It behaves like a derivative of the

first, oral phase of the organization of the libido, in which the object

that we long for and prize is assimilated by eating and is in that way

annihilated as such. The cannibal, as we know, has remained at this

standpoint;  he  has  a  devouring  affection  for  his  enemies  and  only

devours people of whom he is fond.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3798

 

      The  subsequent  history  of  this  identification  with  the  father  may

easily  be  lost  sight  of.  It  may  happen  that  the  Oedipus  complex

becomes  inverted,  and  that  the  father  is  taken  as  the  object  of  a

feminine  attitude,  an  object  from  which  the  directly  sexual  instincts

look for satisfaction; in that event the identification with the father has

become the precursor of an object-tie with the father. The same holds

good, with the necessary substitutions, of the baby daughter as well.

      It  is  easy  to  state  in  a  formula  the  distinction  between  an

identification with the father and the choice of the father as an object.

In the first case one’s father is what one would like to be and in the

second  he  is  what  one  would  like  to have.  The  distinction,  that  is,

depends upon whether the tie attaches to the subject or to the object

of the ego. The former kind of tie is therefore already possible before

any sexual object-choice has been made. It is much more difficult to

give a clear metapsychological representation of the distinction. We

can only see that identification endeavours to mould a person’s own

ego after the fashion of the one that has been taken as a model.

   Let us disentangle identification as it occurs in the structure of aneurotic symptom from its rather complicated connections. Supposing

that a little girl (and we will keep to her for the present) develops the

same  painful  symptom  as  her  mother  -  for  instance,  the  same

tormenting  cough.  This  may  come  about  in  various  ways.  The

identification  may  come  from  the  Oedipus  complex;  in  that  case  it

signifies a hostile desire on the girl’s part to take her mother’s place,

and the symptom expresses her object-love towards her father, and

brings about a realization, under the influence of a sense of guilt, of

her desire to take her mother’s place: ‘You wanted to be your mother,

and now you are - anyhow so far as your sufferings are concerned.’

This  is  the  complete  mechanism  of  the  structure  of  a  hysterical

symptom. Or, on the other hand, the symptom may be the same as

that of the person who is loved; so, for instance, Dora¹ imitated her

father’s cough. In that case we can only describe the state of things by

saying that identification has appeared instead of object-choice, and

that object-choice has regressed to identification. We have heard that

identification is the earliest and original form of emotional tie; it often

happens  that  under  the  conditions  in  which  symptoms  are

constructed,  that  is,  where  there  is  repression  and  where  the

mechanisms of the unconscious are dominant, object-choice is turned

back into identification - the ego assumes the characteristics of the

object. It is noticeable that in these identifications the ego sometimes

copies the person who is not loved and sometimes the one who is

loved. It must also strike us that in both cases the identification is a

partial and extremely limited one and only borrows a single trait from

the person who is its object.

 

   ¹ In my ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’ (1905e).

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3799

 

   There is a third particularly frequent and important case of symptom

formation, in which the identification leaves entirely out of account any

object-relation  to  the  person  who  is  being  copied.  Supposing,  for

instance, that one of the girls in a boarding school has had a letterfrom someone with whom she is secretly in love which arouses her

jealousy, and that she reacts to it with a fit of hysterics; then some of

her friends who know about it will catch the fit, as we say, by mental

infection.  The  mechanism  is  that  of  identification  based  upon  the

possibility or desire of putting oneself in the same situation. The other

girls would like to have a secret love affair too, and under the influence

of a sense of guilt they also accept the suffering involved in it. It would

be wrong to suppose that they take on the symptom out of sympathy.

On the contrary, the sympathy only arises out of the identification, and

this is proved by the fact that infection or imitation of this kind takes

place in circumstances where even less pre-existing sympathy is to be

assumed than usually exists between friends in a girls’ school. One

ego has perceived a significant analogy with another upon one point -

in our example upon openness to a similar emotion; an identification is

thereupon constructed on this point, and, under the influence of the

pathogenic situation, is displaced on to the symptom which the one

ego has produced. The identification by means of the symptom has

thus become the mark of a point of coincidence between the two egos

which has to be kept repressed.

      What  we  have  learned  from  these  three  sources  may  be

summarized  as  follows.  First,  identification  is  the  original  form  of

emotional tie with an object; secondly, in a regressive way it becomes

a substitute for a libidinal object-tie, as it were by means of introjection

of  the  object  into  the  ego;  and  thirdly,  it  may  arise  with  any  new

perception of a common quality shared with some other person who is

not an object of the sexual instinct. The more important this common

quality is, the more successful may this partial identification become,

and it may thus represent the beginning of a new tie.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3800

 

   We already begin to divine that the mutual tie between members of

a group is in the nature of an identification of this kind, based upon an

important emotional common quality; and we may suspect that this

common quality lies in the nature of the tie with the leader. Anothersuspicion  may  tell  us  that  we  are  far  from  having  exhausted  the

problem of identification, and that we are faced by the process which

psychology  calls  ‘empathy’  and  which  plays  the  largest  part  in  our

understanding of what is inherently foreign to our ego in other people.

But we shall here limit ourselves to the immediate emotional effects of

identification,  and  shall  leave  on  one  side  its  significance  for  our

intellectual life.

   Psycho-analytic research, which has already occasionally attacked

the more difficult problems of the psychoses, has also been able to

exhibit  identification  to  us  in  some  other  cases  which  are  not

immediately comprehensible. I shall treat two of these cases in detail

as material for our further consideration.

   The genesis of male homosexuality in a large class of cases is as

follows. A young man has been unusually long and intensely fixated

upon his mother in the sense of the Oedipus complex. But at last, after

the  end  of  puberty,  the  time  comes  for  exchanging  his  mother  for

some other sexual object. Things take a sudden turn: the young man

does  not  abandon  his  mother,  but  identifies  himself  with  her;  he

transforms himself into her, and now looks about for objects which can

replace his ego for him, and on which he can bestow such love and

care  as  he  has  experienced  from  his  mother.  This  is  a  frequent

process, which can be confirmed as often as one likes, and which is

naturally quite independent of any hypothesis that may be made as to

the  organic  driving  force  and  the  motives  of  the  sudden

transformation.  A  striking  thing  about  this  identification  is  its  ample

scale;  it  remoulds  the  ego  in  one  of  its  important  features  -  in  its

sexual  character  -  upon  the  model  of  what  has  hitherto  been  the

object. In this process the object itself is renounced - whether entirely

or  in  the  sense  of  being  preserved  only  in  the  unconscious  is  a

question outside the present discussion. Identification with an object

that is renounced or lost, as a substitute for that object - introjection of

it into the ego - is indeed no longer a novelty to us. A process of the

kind may sometimes be directly observed in small children. A short

time  ago  an  observation  of  this  sort  was  published  in  the

Internationale Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse. A child who was unhappy

over the loss of a kitten declared straight out that now he himself was

the kitten, and accordingly crawled about on all fours, would not eat attable, etc.¹

 

   ¹ Marcuszewicz (1920).

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3801

 

   Another such instance of introjection of the object has been provided

by the analysis of melancholia, an affection which counts among the

most  notable  of  its  exciting  causes  the  real  or  emotional  loss  of  a

loved object. A leading characteristic of these cases is a cruel self-

depreciation  of  the  ego  combined  with  relentless  self-criticism  and

bitter self-reproaches. Analyses have shown that this disparagement

and these reproaches apply at bottom to the object and represent the

ego’s revenge upon it. The shadow of the object has fallen upon the

ego, as I have said elsewhere.¹ The introjection of the object is here

unmistakably clear.

   But these melancholias also show us something else, which may be

of importance for our later discussions. They show us the ego divided,

fallen apart into two pieces, one of which rages against the second.

This second piece is the one which has been altered by introjection

and which contains the lost object. But the piece which behaves so

cruelly is not unknown to us either. It comprises the conscience, a

critical agency within the ego, which even in normal times takes up a

critical attitude towards the ego, though never so relentlessly and so

unjustifiably.  On  previous  occasions²  we  have  been  driven  to  the

hypothesis that some such agency develops in our ego which may cut

itself off from the rest of the ego and come into conflict with it. We

have  called  it  the  ‘ego  ideal’,  and  by  way  of  functions  we  have

ascribed to it self-observation, the moral conscience, the censorship of

dreams, and the chief influence in repression. We have said that it is

the heir to the original narcissism in which the childish ego enjoyed

self-sufficiency;  it  gradually  gathers  up  from  the  influences  of  the

environment  the  demands  which  that  environment  makes  upon  the

ego and which the ego cannot always rise to; so that a man, when he

cannot be satisfied with his ego itself, may nevertheless be able to findsatisfaction in the ego ideal which has been differentiated out of the

ego.  In  delusions  of  observation,  as  we  have  further  shown,  the

disintegration  of  this  agency  has  become  patent,  and  has  thus

revealed its origin in the influence of superior powers, and above all of

parents.³ But we have not forgotten to add that the amount of distance

between  this  ego  ideal  and  the  real  ego  is  very  variable  from  one

individual  to  another,  and  that  with  many  people  this  differentiation

within the ego does not go further than with children.

 

   ¹ See ‘Mourning and Melancholia’ (1917e).

   ² In my paper on narcissism (1914c).

   ³ Section III of my paper on narcissism.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3802

 

      But  before  we  can  employ  this  material  for  understanding  the

libidinal organization of groups, we must take into account some other

examples of the mutual relations between the object and the ego.¹

 

   ¹ We are very well aware that we have not exhausted the nature of identification with these

examples taken from pathology, and that we have consequently left part of the riddle of group
formations untouched. A far more fundamental and comprehensive psychological analysis
would have to intervene at this point. A path leads from identification by way of imitation to
empathy, that is, to the comprehension of the mechanism by means of which we are enabled
to take up any attitude at all towards another mental life. Moreover there is still much to be
explained in the manifestations of existing identifications. These result among other things in a
person limiting his aggressiveness towards those with whom he has identified himself, and in
his  sparing  them  and  giving  them  help.  The  study  of  such  identifications,  like  those,  for
instance which lie at the root of clan feeling, led Robertson Smith (Kinship and Marriage,
1885) to the surprising discovery that they rest upon the acknowledgement of the possession
of a common substance, and may even therefore be created by a meal eaten in common.
This feature makes it possible to connect this kind of identification with the early history of the
human family which I constructed in Totem and Taboo.
 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3803

 

                                          VIII 

                      BEING IN LOVE AND HYPNOSIS

 

Even in its caprices the usage of language remains true to some kind

of reality. Thus it gives the name of ‘love’ to a great many kinds of

emotional  relationship  which  we  too  group  together  theoretically  as

love; but then again it feels a doubt whether this love is real, true,

actual love, and so hints at a whole scale of possibilities within the

range of the phenomena of love. We shall have no difficulty in making

the same discovery from our own observations.

   In one class of cases being in love is nothing more than object

cathexis  on  the  part  of  the  sexual  instincts  with  a  view  to  directly

sexual satisfaction, a cathexis which expires, moreover, when this aim

has been reached; this is what is called common, sensual love. But,

as we know, the libidinal situation rarely remains so simple. It was

possible to calculate with certainty upon the revival of the need which

had just expired; and this must no doubt have been the first motive for

directing a lasting cathexis upon the sexual object and for ‘loving’ it in

the passionless intervals as well.

      To  this  must  be  added  another  factor  derived  from  the  very

remarkable course of development which is pursued by the erotic life

of man. In its first phase, which has usually come to an end by the

time a child is five years old, he has found the first object for his love

in one or other of his parents, and all of his sexual instincts with their

demand  for  satisfaction  have  been  united  upon  this  object.  The

repression which then sets in compels him to renounce the greater

number of these infantile sexual aims, and leaves behind a profound

modification in his relation to his parents. The child still remains tied to

his  parents,  but  by  instincts  which  must  be  described  as  being

‘inhibited  in  their  aim’.  The  emotions  which  he  feels  henceforward

towards these objects of his love are characterized as ‘affectionate’. It

is well known that the earlier ‘sensual’ tendencies remain more of less

strongly preserved in the unconscious, so that in a certain sense the

whole of the original current continues to exist.¹

 

   ¹ See my Three Essays (1905d).

               Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3804

 

   At puberty, as we know, there set in new and very strong impulsions

towards  directly  sexual  aims.  In  unfavourable  cases  they  remain

separate,  in  the  form  of  a  sensual  current,  from  the  ‘affectionate’

trends  of  feeling  which  persist.  We  then  have  before  us  a  picture

whose two aspects are typified with such delight by certain schools of

literature. A man will show a sentimental enthusiasm for women whom

he deeply respects but who do not excite him to sexual activities, and

he will only be potent with other women whom he does not ‘love’ and

thinks little of or even despises.¹ More often, however, the adolescent

succeeds in bringing about a certain degree of synthesis between the

unsensual,  heavenly  love  and  the  sensual,  earthly  love,  and  his

relation  to  his  sexual  object  is  characterized  by  the  interaction  of

uninhibited instincts and of instincts inhibited in their aim. The depth to

which anyone is in love, as contrasted with his purely sensual desire,

may be measured by the size of the share taken by the aim-inhibited

instincts of affection.

   In connection with this question of being in love we have always

been struck by the phenomenon of sexual overvaluation - the fact that

the loved object enjoys a certain amount of freedom from criticism,

and that all its characteristics are valued more highly than those of

people who are not loved, or than its own were at a time when it itself

was not loved. If the sensual impulsions are more or less effectively

repressed or set aside, the illusion is produced that the object has

come to be sensually loved on account of its spiritual merits, whereas

on the contrary these merits may really only have been lent to it by its

sensual charm.

   The tendency which falsifies judgement in this respect is that of

idealization. But now it is easier for us to find our bearings. We see

that the object is being treated in the same way as our own ego, so

that when we are in love a considerable amount of narcissistic libido

overflows on to the object. It is even obvious, in many forms of love-

choice, that the object serves as a substitute for some unattained ego

ideal of our own. We love it on account of the perfections which we

have striven to reach for our own ego, and which we should now liketo  procure  in  this  roundabout  way  as  a  means  of  satisfying  our

narcissism.

 

   ¹ ‘On the Universal Tendency to Debasement in the Sphere of Love’ (1912d).

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3805

 

      If  the  sexual  overvaluation  and  the  being  in  love  increase  even

further,  then  the  interpretation  of  the  picture  becomes  still  more

unmistakable. The impulsions whose trend is towards directly sexual

satisfaction  may  now  be  pushed  into  the  background  entirely,  as

regularly  happens,  for  instance,  with  a  young  man’s  sentimental

passion; the ego becomes more and more unassuming and modest,

and the object more and more sublime and precious, until at last it

gets possession of the entire self-love of the ego, whose self-sacrifice

thus follows as a natural consequence. The object has, so to speak,

consumed the ego. Traits of humility, of the limitation of narcissism,

and of self-injury occur in every case of being in love; in the extreme

case they are merely intensified, and as a result of the withdrawal of

the sensual claims they remain in solitary supremacy.

   This happens especially easily with love that is unhappy and cannot

be satisfied; for in spite of everything each sexual satisfaction always

involves a reduction in sexual overvaluation. Contemporaneously with

this  ‘devotion’  of  the  ego  to  the  object,  which  is  no  longer  to  be

distinguished  from  a  sublimated  devotion  to  an  abstract  idea,  the

functions  allotted  to  the  ego  ideal  entirely  cease  to  operate.  The

criticism exercised by that agency is silent; everything that the object

does  and  asks  for  is  right  and  blameless.  Conscience  has  no

application to anything that is done for the sake of the object; in the

blindness of love remorselessness is carried to the pitch of crime. The

whole  situation  can  be  completely  summarized  in  a  formula: The

object has been put in the place of the ego ideal.

   It is now easy to define the difference between identification and

such extreme developments of being in love as may be described as

‘fascination’ or ‘bondage’. In the former case the ego has enricheditself with the properties of the object, it has ‘introjected’ the object into

itself, as Ferenczi expresses it. In the second case it is impoverished,

it has surrendered itself to the object, it has substituted the object for

its own most important constituent. Closer consideration soon makes

it  plain,  however,  that  this  kind  of  account  creates  an  illusion  of

contradistinctions that have no real existence. Economically there is

no question of impoverishment or enrichment; it is even possible to

describe an extreme case of being in love as a state in which the ego

has  introjected  the  object  into  itself.  Another  distinction  is  perhaps

better calculated to meet the essence of the matter. In the case of

identification the object has been lost or given up; it is then set up

again inside the ego, and the ego makes a partial alteration in itself

after  the  model  of  the  lost  object.  In  the  other  case  the  object  is

retained, and there is a hypercathexis of it by the ego and at the ego’s

expense. But here again a difficulty presents itself. Is it quite certain

that  identification  presupposes  that  object-cathexis  has  been  given

up? Can there be no identification while the object is retained? And

before  we  embark  upon  a  discussion  of  this  delicate  question,  the

perception may already be beginning to dawn on us that yet another

alternative embraces the real essence of the matter, namely, whether

the object is put in the place of the ego or of the ego ideal.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3806

 

   From being in love to hypnosis is evidently only a short step. The

respects  in  which  the  two  agree  are  obvious.  There  is  the  same

humble  subjection,  the  same  compliance,  the  same  absence  of

criticism, towards the hypnotist as towards the loved object. There is

the same sapping of the subject’s own initiative; no one can doubt that

the hypnotist has stepped into the place of the ego ideal. It is only that

everything is even clearer and more intense in hypnosis, so that it

would  be  more  to  the  point  to  explain  being  in  love  by  means  of

hypnosis than the other way round. The hypnotist is the sole object,

and  no  attention  is  paid  to  any  but  him.  The  fact  that  the  ego

experiences in a dreamlike way whatever he may request or assertreminds us that we omitted to mention among the functions of the ego

ideal the business of testing the reality of things.¹ No wonder that the

ego  takes  a  perception  for  real  if  its  reality  is  vouched  for  by  the

mental  agency  which  ordinarily  discharges  the  duty  of  testing  the

reality  of  things.  The  complete  absence  of  impulsions  which  are

uninhibited  in  their  sexual  aims  contributes  further  towards  the

extreme  purity  of  the  phenomena.  The  hypnotic  relation  is  the

unlimited  devotion  of  someone  in  love,  but  with  sexual  satisfaction

excluded;  whereas  in  the  actual  case  of  being  in  love  this  kind  of

satisfaction  is  only  temporarily  kept  back,  and  remains  in  the

background as a possible aim at some later time.

 

   ¹ Cf. Freud (1917d). - There seems, however, to be some doubt whether the attribution of

this function to the ego ideal is justified. The point requires thorough discussion.
 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3807

 

   But on the other hand we may also say that the hypnotic relation is

(if the expression is permissible) a group formation with two members.

Hypnosis is not a good object for comparison with a group formation,

because  it  is  truer  to  say  that  it  is  identical  with  it.  Out  of  the

complicated fabric of the group it isolates one element for us - the

behaviour  of  the  individual  to  the  leader.  Hypnosis  is  distinguished

from  a  group  formation  by  this  limitation  of  number,  just  as  it  is

distinguished  from  being  in  love  by  the  absence  of  directly  sexual

trends. In this respect it occupies a middle position between the two.

   It is interesting to see that it is precisely those sexual impulsions that

are  inhibited  in  their  aims  which  achieve  such  lasting  ties  between

people. But this can easily be understood from the fact that they are

not capable of complete satisfaction, while sexual impulsions which

are uninhibited in their aims suffer an extraordinary reduction through

the discharge of energy every time the sexual aim is attained. It is the

fate of sensual love to become extinguished when it is satisfied; for it

to be able to last, it must from the beginning be mixed with purely

affectionate components - with such, that is, as are inhibited in their

aims - or it must itself undergo a transformation of this kind.   Hypnosis would solve the riddle of the libidinal constitution of groups

for us straight away, if it were not that it itself exhibits some features

which are not met by the rational explanation we have hitherto given

of it as a state of being in love with the directly sexual trends excluded.

There is still a great deal in it which we must recognize as unexplained

and mysterious. It contains an additional element of paralysis derived

from the relation between someone with superior power and someone

who is without power and helpless - which may afford a transition to

the hypnosis of fright which occurs in animals. The manner in which it

is  produced  and  its  relationship  to  sleep  are  not  clear;  and  the

puzzling  way  in  which  some  people  are  subject  to  it,  while  others

resist  it  completely,  points  to  some  factor  still  unknown  which  is

realized in it and which perhaps alone makes possible the purity of the

attitudes of the libido which it exhibits. It is noticeable that, even when

there is complete suggestive compliance in other respects, the moral

conscience of the person hypnotized may show resistance. But this

may be due to the fact that in hypnosis as it is usually practised some

knowledge may be retained that what is happening is only a game, an

untrue reproduction of another situation of far more importance to life.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3808

 

   But after the preceding discussions we are quite in a position to give

the formula for the libidinal constitution of groups, or at least of such

groups as we have hitherto considered - namely, those that have a

leader and have not been able by means of too much ‘organization’ to

acquire  secondarily  the  characteristics  of  an  individual. A  primary

group of this kind is a number of individuals who have put one and the

same object in the place of their ego ideal and have consequently

identified  themselves  with  one  another  in  their  ego.  This  condition

admits of graphic representation:

  


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3809

 

                                            IX

 

                              THE HERD INSTINCT

 

We cannot for long enjoy the illusion that we have solved the riddle of

the group with this formula. It is impossible to escape the immediate

and disturbing recollection that all we have really done has been to

shift the question on to the riddle of hypnosis, about which so many

points have yet to be cleared up. And now another objection shows us

our further path.

   It might be said that the intense emotional ties which we observe in

groups are quite sufficient to explain one of their characteristics - the

lack of independence and initiative in their members, the similarity in

the reactions of all of them, their reduction, so to speak, to the level of

group individuals. But if we look at it as a whole, a group shows us

more  than  this.  Some  of  its  features  -  the  weakness  of  intellectual

ability, the lack of emotional restraint, the incapacity for moderation

and delay, the inclination to exceed every limit in the expression of

emotion and to work it off completely in the form of action - these and

similar features, which we find so impressively described in Le Bon,

show an unmistakable picture of a regression of mental activity to an

earlier stage such as we are not surprised to find among savages or

children.  A  regression  of  this  sort  is  in  particular  an  essential

characteristic  of  common  groups,  while,  as  we  have  heard,  in

organized and artificial groups it can to a large extent be checked.      We  thus  have  an  impression  of  a  state  in  which  an  individual’s

private emotional impulses and intellectual acts are too weak to come

to anything by themselves and are entirely dependent for this on being

reinforced by being repeated in a similar way in the other members of

the  group.  We  are  reminded  of  how  many  of  these  phenomena  of

dependence are part of the normal constitution of human society, of

how little originality and personal courage are to be found in it, of how

much every individual is ruled by those attitudes of the group mind

which exhibit themselves in such forms as racial characteristics, class

prejudices, public opinion, etc. The influence of suggestion becomes a

greater riddle for us when we admit that it is not exercised only by the

leader, but by every individual upon every other individual; and we

must reproach ourselves with having unfairly emphasized the relation

to  the  leader  and  with  having  kept  the  other  factor  of  mutual

suggestion too much in the background.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3810

 

   After this encouragement to modesty, we shall be inclined to listen

to  another  voice,  which  promises  us  an  explanation  based  upon

simpler grounds. Such a one is to be found in Trotter’s thoughtful book

on the herd instinct (1916), concerning which my only regret is that it

does not entirely escape the antipathies that were set loose by the

recent great war.

      Trotter  derives  the  mental  phenomena  that  are  described  as

occurring in groups from a herd instinct (‘gregariousness’), which is

innate  in  human  beings  just  as  in  other  species  of  animals.

Biologically,  he  says,  this  gregariousness  is  an  analogy  to

multicellularity and as it were a continuation of it. (In terms of the libido

theory  it  is  a  further  manifestation  of  the  tendency  which  proceeds

from the libido and which is felt by all living beings of the same kind, to

combine in more and more comprehensive units.¹) The individual feels

incomplete  if  he  is  alone.  The  fear  shown  by  small  children  would

seem already to be an expression of this herd instinct. Opposition to

the herd is as good as separation from it, and is therefore anxiouslyavoided.  But  the  herd  turns  away  from  anything  that  is  new  or

unusual.  The  herd  instinct  would  appear  to  be  something  primary,

something which cannot be split up.

   Trotter gives as the list of instincts which he considers as primary

those of self-preservation, of nutrition, of sex, and of the herd. The last

often comes into opposition with the others. The feelings of guilt and

of duty are the peculiar possessions of a gregarious animal. Trotter

also derives from the herd instinct the repressive forces which psycho-

analysis has shown to exist in the ego, and from the same source

accordingly the resistances which the physician comes up against in

psycho-analytic treatment. Speech owes its importance to its aptitude

for mutual understanding in the herd, and upon it the identification of

the individuals with one another largely rests.

 

¹ See Beyond the Pleasure Principle.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3811

 

   While Le Bon is principally concerned with typical transient group

formations,  and  McDougall  with  stable  associations,  Trotter  has

chosen  as  the  centre  of  his  interest  the  most  generalized  form  of

assemblage in which man, that xvon politicsn, passes his life, and

he gives us its psychological basis. But Trotter is under no necessity

of tracing back the herd instinct, for he characterizes it as primary and

not  further  reducible.  Boris  Sidis’s  attempt,  to  which  he  refers,  at

tracing  the  herd  instinct  back  to  suggestibility  is  fortunately

superfluous as far as he is concerned; it is an explanation of a familiar

and  unsatisfactory  type,  and  the  converse  proposition  -  that

suggestibility is a derivative of the herd instinct - would seem to me to

throw far more light on the subject.

   But Trotter’s exposition is open, with even more justice than the

others, to the objection that it takes too little account of the leader’s

part in a group, while we incline rather to the opposite judgement, that

it  is  impossible  to  grasp  the  nature  of  a  group  if  the  leader  is

disregarded. The herd instinct leaves no room at all for the leader; heis merely thrown in along with the herd, almost by chance; it follows,

too, that no path leads from this instinct to the need for a God; the

herd is without a herdsman. But besides this, Trotter’s exposition can

be undermined psychologically; that is to say, it can be made at all

events probable that the herd instinct is not irreducible, that it is not

primary in the same sense as the instinct of self-preservation and the

sexual instinct.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3812

 

   It is naturally no easy matter to trace the ontogenesis of the herd

instinct. The fear which is shown by small children when they are left

alone, and which Trotter claims as being already a manifestation of

the instinct, nevertheless suggests more readily another interpretation.

The  fear  relates  to  the  child’s  mother,  and  later  to  other  familiar

people, and it is the expression of an unfulfilled desire, which the child

does not yet know how to deal with in any way except by turning it into

anxiety.¹ Nor is the child’s fear when it is alone pacified by the sight of

any haphazard ‘member of the herd’, but on the contrary it is brought

into existence by the approach of a ‘stranger’ of this sort. Then for a

long time nothing in the nature of herd instinct or group feeling is to be

observed  in  children.  Something  like  it  first  grows  up,  in  a  nursery

containing many children, out of the children’s relation to their parents,

and it does so as a reaction to the initial envy with which the elder

child receives the younger one. The elder child would certainly like to

put his successor jealously aside, to keep it away from the parents,

and to rob it of all its privileges; but in the face of the fact that this

younger child (like all that come later) is loved by the parents as much

as  he  himself  is,  and  in  consequence  of  the  impossibility  of  his

maintaining his hostile attitude without damaging himself, he is forced

into identifying himself with the other children. So there grows up in

the  troop  of  children  a  communal  or  group  feeling,  which  is  then

further developed at school. The first demand made by this reaction-

formation is for justice, for equal treatment for all. We all know how

loudly and implacably this claim is put forward at school. If one cannotbe  the  favourite  oneself,  at  all  events  nobody  else  shall  be  the

favourite. This transformation - the replacing of jealousy by a group

feeling  in  the  nursery  and  classroom  -  might  be  considered

improbable, if the same process could not later on be observed again

in other circumstances. We have only to think of the troop of women

and girls, all of them in love in an enthusiastically sentimental way,

who crowd round a singer or pianist after his performance. It would

certainly be easy for each of them to be jealous of the rest; but, in the

face  of  their  numbers  and  the  consequent  impossibility  of  their

reaching the aim of their love, they renounce it, and, instead of pulling

out one another’s hair, they act as a united group, do homage to the

hero of the occasion with their common actions, and would probably

be glad to have a share of his flowing locks. Originally rivals, they

have succeeded in identifying themselves with one another by means

of a similar love for the same object. When, as is usual, an instinctual

situation is capable of various outcomes, we shall not be surprised

that the actual outcome is one which brings with it the possibility of a

certain amount of satisfaction, whereas some other outcome, in itself

more  obvious,  is  passed  over  because  the  circumstances  of  life

prevent its leading to any such satisfaction.

 

   ¹ See the remarks upon anxiety in my Introductory Lectures (1916-17), Lecture XXV.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3813

 

   What appears later on in society in the shape of Gemeingeist, esprit

de corps, ‘group spirit’, etc., does not belie its derivation from what

was originally envy. No one must want to put himself forward, every

one must be the same and have the same. Social justice means that

we deny ourselves many things so that others may have to do without

them as well, or, what is the same thing, may not be able to ask for

them. This demand for equality is the root of social conscience and

the sense of duty. It reveals itself unexpectedly in the syphilitic’s dread

of  infecting  other  people,  which  psycho-analysis  has  taught  us  to

understand. The dread exhibited by these poor wretches correspondsto their violent struggles against the unconscious wish to spread their

infection on to other people; for why should they alone be infected and

cut off from so much? why not other people as well? And the same

germ is to be found in the apt story of the judgement of Solomon. If

one woman’s child is dead, the other shall not have a live one either.

The bereaved woman is recognized by this wish.

   Thus social feeling is based upon the reversal of what was first a

hostile  feeling  into  a  positively-toned  tie  in  the  nature  of  an

identification.  So  far  as  we  have  hitherto  been  able  to  follow  the

course of events, this reversal seems to occur under the influence of a

common affectionate tie with a person outside the group. We do not

ourselves regard our analysis of identification as exhaustive, but it is

enough  for  our  present  purpose  that  we  should  revert  to  this  one

feature  -  its  demand  that  equalization  shall  be  consistently  carried

through. We have already heard in the discussion of the two artificial

groups, Church and army, that their necessary precondition is that all

their members should be loved in the same way by one person, the

leader. Do not let us forget, however, that the demand for equality in a

group  applies  only  to  its  members  and  not  to  the  leader.  All  the

members must be equal to one another, but they all want to be ruled

by one person. Many equals, who can identify themselves with one

another, and a single person superior to them all - that is the situation

that we find realized in groups which are capable of subsisting. Let us

venture, then, to correct Trotter’s pronouncement that man is a herd

animal  and  assert  that  he  is  rather  a  horde  animal,  an  individual

creature in a horde led by a chief.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3814

 

                                            X

 

                  THE GROUP AND THE PRIMAL HORDE

 

In  1912  I  took  up  a  conjecture  of  Darwin’s  to  the  effect  that  the

primitive  form  of  human  society  was  that  of  a  horde  ruled  overdespotically by a powerful male. I attempted to show that the fortunes

of this horde have left indestructible traces upon the history of human

descent;  and,  especially,  that  the  development  of  totemism,  which

comprises  in  itself  the  beginnings  of  religion,  morality,  and  social

organization, is connected with the killing of the chief by violence and

the transformation of the paternal horde into a community of brothers.¹

To be sure, this is only a hypothesis, like so many others with which

archaeologists endeavour to lighten the darkness of prehistoric times -

a ‘Just-So Story’, as it was amusingly called by a not unkind English

critic; but I think it is creditable to such a hypothesis if it proves able to

bring coherence and understanding into more and more new regions.

   Human groups exhibit once again the familiar picture of an individual

of superior strength among a troop of equal companions, a picture

which  is  also  contained  in  our  idea  of  the  primal  horde.  The

psychology of such a group, as we know it from the descriptions to

which  we  have  so  often  referred  -  the  dwindling  of  the  conscious

individual  personality,  the  focusing  of  thoughts  and  feelings  into  a

common direction, the predominance of the affective side of the mind

and  of  unconscious  psychical  life,  the  tendency  to  the  immediate

carrying out of intentions as they emerge - all this corresponds to a

state of regression to a primitive mental activity, of just such a sort as

we should be inclined to ascribe to the primal horde.²

 

   ¹ Totem and Taboo (1912-13)

   ² What we have just described in our general characterization of mankind must apply

especially to the primal horde. The will of the individual was too weak; he did not venture upon
action. No impulses whatever came into existence except collective ones; there was only a
common will, there were no single ones. An idea did not dare to turn itself into an act of will
unless it felt itself reinforced by a perception of its general diffusion. This weakness of the idea
is to be explained by the strength of the emotional tie which is shared by all the members of
the horde; but the similarity in the circumstances of their life and the absence of any private
property  assist  in  determining  the  uniformity  of  their  individual  mental  acts.  As  we  may
observe with children and soldiers, common activity is not excluded even in the excretory
functions. The one great exception is provided by the sexual act, in which a third person is at
best superfluous and in the extreme case is condemned to a state of painful expectancy. As
to the reaction of the sexual need (for genital satisfaction) towards gregariousness, see below.
 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3815 

   Thus the group appears to us as a revival of the primal horde. Just

as primitive man survives potentially in every individual, so the primal

horde may arise once more out of any random collection; in so far

men are habitually under the sway of group formation we recognize in

it  the  survival  of  the  primal  horde.  We  must  conclude  that  the

psychology of groups is the oldest human psychology; what we have

isolated as individual psychology, by neglecting all traces of the group,

has only since come into prominence out of the old group psychology,

by  a  gradual  process  which  may  still,  perhaps,  be  described  as

incomplete. We shall later venture upon an attempt at specifying the

point of departure of this development.

      Further  reflection  will  show  us  in  what  respect  this  statement

requires correction. Individual psychology must, on the contrary, be

just as old as group psychology, for from the first there were two kinds

of psychologies, that of the individual members of the group and that

of the father, chief, or leader. The members of the group were subject

to ties just as we see them to-day, but the father of the primal horde

was free. His intellectual acts were strong and independent even in

isolation,  and  his  will  needed  no  reinforcement  from  others.

Consistency leads us to assume that his ego had few libidinal ties; he

loved no one but himself, or other people only in so far as they served

his needs. To objects his ego gave away no more than was barely

necessary.

      He,  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  history  of  mankind,  was  the

‘superman’ whom Nietzsche only expected from the future. Even to-

day the members of a group stand in need of the illusion that they are

equally and justly loved by their leader; but the leader himself need

love  no  one  else,  he  may  be  of  a  masterful  nature,  absolutely

narcissistic, self-confident and independent. We know that love puts a

check  upon  narcissism,  and  it  would  be  possible  to  show  how,  by

operating in this way, it became a factor of civilization.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3816

    The primal father of the horde was not yet immortal, as he later

became by deification. If he died, he had to be replaced; his place was

probably  taken  by  a  youngest  son,  who  had  up  to  then  been  a

member  of  the  group  like  any  other.  There  must  therefore  be  a

possibility  of  transforming  group  psychology  into  individual

psychology;  a  condition  must  be  discovered  under  which  such  a

transformation is easily accomplished, just as it is possible for bees in

case of necessity to turn a larva into a queen instead of into a worker.

One can imagine only one possibility: the primal father had prevented

his  sons  from  satisfying  their  directly  sexual  impulsions;  he  forced

them into abstinence and consequently into the emotional ties with

him  and  with  one  another  which  could  arise  out  of  those  of  their

impulsions that were inhibited in their sexual aim. He forced them, so

to speak, into group psychology. His sexual jealousy and intolerance

became in the last resort the causes of group psychology.1

   Whoever became his successor was also given the possibility of

sexual satisfaction, and was by that means offered a way out of the

conditions of group psychology. The fixation of the libido to woman

and  the  possibility  of  satisfaction  without  any  need  for  delay  or

accumulation made an end of the importance of those of his sexual

impulsions that were inhibited in their aim, and allowed his narcissism

always to rise to its full height. We shall return in a postscript to this

connection between love and character formation.

      We  may  further  emphasize,  as  being  specially  instructive,  the

relation  that  holds  between  the  contrivance  by  means  of  which  an

artificial group is held together and the constitution of the primal horde.

We have seen that with an army and a Church this contrivance is the

illusion that the leader loves all of the individuals equally and justly.

But this is simply an idealistic remodelling of the state of affairs in the

primal  horde,  where  all  of  the  sons  knew  that  they  were  equally

persecuted by the primal father, and feared him equally. This same

recasting  upon  which  all  social  duties  are  built  up  is  already

presupposed by the next form of human society, the totemic clan. The

indestructible strength of the family as a natural group formation rests

upon the fact that this necessary presupposition of the father’s equal

love can have a real application in the family.

    ¹ It may perhaps also be assumed that the sons, when they were driven out and separated

from their father, advanced from identification with one another to homosexual object-love,
and in this way won freedom to kill their father.
 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3817

 

   But we expect even more of this derivation of the group from the

primal  horde.  It  ought  also  to  help  us  to  understand  what  is  still

incomprehensible  and  mysterious  in  group  formations  -  all  that  lies

hidden behind the enigmatic words ‘hypnosis’ and ‘suggestion’. And I

think  it  can  succeed  in  this  too.  Let  us  recall  that  hypnosis  has

something  positively  uncanny  about  it;  but  the  characteristic  of

uncanniness suggests something old and familiar that has undergone

repression.¹ Let us consider how hypnosis is induced. The hypnotist

asserts that he is in possession of a mysterious power that robs the

subject of his own will; or, which is the same thing, the subject believe

it of him. This mysterious power (which is even now often described

popularly  as  ‘animal  magnetism’)  must  be  the  same  power  that  is

looked upon by primitive people as the source of taboo, the same that

emanates  from  kings  and  chieftains  and  makes  it  dangerous  to

approach  them  (mana).  The  hypnotist,  then,  is  supposed  to  be  in

possession of this power; and how does he manifest it? By telling the

subject to look him in the eyes; his most typical method of hypnotizing

is  by  his  look.  But  it  is  precisely  the sight  of  the  chieftain  that  is

dangerous and unbearable for primitive people, just as later that of the

Godhead is for mortals. Even Moses had to act as an intermediary

between his people and Jehovah, since the people could not support

the sight of God; and when he returned from the presence of God his

face shone - some of the mana had been transferred on to him, just as

happens with the intermediary among primitive people.²

 

   ¹ Cf. ‘The "Uncanny”’ (1919h).

   ² See Totem and Taboo and the sources there quoted.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3818 

      It  is  true  that  hypnosis  can  also  be  evoked  in  other  ways,  for

instance by fixing the eyes upon a bright object or by listening to a

monotonous  sound.  This  is  misleading  and  has  given  occasion  to

inadequate physiological theories. In point of fact these procedures

merely serve to divert conscious attention and to hold it riveted. The

situation is the same as if the hypnotist had said to the subject: ‘Now

concern yourself exclusively with my person; the rest of the world is

quite uninteresting.’ It would of course be technically inexpedient for a

hypnotist to make such a speech; it would tear the subject away from

his unconscious attitude and stimulate him to conscious opposition.

The  hypnotist  avoids  directing  the  subject’s  conscious  thoughts

towards his own intentions, and makes the person upon whom he is

experimenting sink into an activity in which the world is bound to seem

uninteresting  to  him;  but  at  the  same  time  the  subject  is  in  reality

unconsciously concentrating his whole attention upon the hypnotist,

and is getting into an attitude of rapport, of transference on to him.

Thus the indirect methods of hypnotizing, like many of the technical

procedures used in making jokes, have the effect of checking certain

distributions of mental energy which would interfere with the course of

events in the unconscious, and they lead eventually to the same result

as the direct methods of influence by means of staring or stroking.¹

 

    ¹ This  situation,  in  which  the  subject’s  attitude  is  unconsciously  directed  towards  the

hypnotist, while he is consciously occupied with monotonous and uninteresting perceptions,
finds  a  parallel  among  the  events  of  psycho-analytic  treatment,  which  deserves  to  be
mentioned here. At least once in the course of every analysis a moment comes when the
patient obstinately maintains that just now positively nothing whatever occurs to his mind. His
free associations come to a stop and the usual incentives for putting them in motion fail in
their effect. If the analyst insists, the patient is at last induced to admit that he is thinking of the
view from the consulting-room window, of the wall-paper that he sees before him, or of the
gas-lamp hanging from the ceiling. Then one knows at once that he has gone off into the
transference and that he is engaged upon what are still unconscious thoughts relating to the
physician; and one sees the stoppage in the patient’s associations disappear, as soon as he
has been given this explanation.
 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3819

    Ferenczi has made the true discovery that when a hypnotist gives

the  command  to  sleep,  which  is  often  done  at  the  beginning  of

hypnosis, he is putting himself in the place of the subject’s parents. He

thinks that two sorts of hypnotism are to be distinguished: one coaxing

and  soothing,  which  he  considers  is  modelled  on  the  mother,  and

another  threatening,  which  is  derived  from  the  father.  Now  the

command to sleep in hypnosis means nothing more nor less than an

order to with draw all interest from the world and to concentrate it on

the person of the hypnotist. And it is so understood by the subject; for

in  this  withdrawal  of  interest  from  the  external  world  lies  the

psychological characteristic of sleep, and the kinship between sleep

and the state of hypnosis is based on it.

   By the measures that he takes, then, the hypnotist awakens in the

subject  a  portion  of  his  archaic  heritage  which  had  also  made  him

compliant  towards  his  parents  and  which  had  experienced  an

individual  re-animation  in  his  relation  to  his  father;  what  is  thus

awakened  is  the  idea  of  a  paramount  and  dangerous  personality,

towards  whom  only  a  passive-masochistic  attitude  is  possible,  to

whom one’s will has to be surrendered, - while to be alone with him,

‘to look him in the face’, appears a hazardous enterprise. It is only in

some such way as this that we can picture the relation of the individual

member of the primal horde to the primal father. As we know from

other  reactions,  individuals  have  preserved  a  variable  degree  of

personal  aptitude  for  reviving  old  situations  of  this  kind.  Some

knowledge  that  in  spite  of  everything  hypnosis  is  only  a  game,  a

deceptive  renewal  of  these  old  impressions,  may,  however,  remain

behind and take care that there is a resistance against any too serious

consequences of the suspension of the will in hypnosis.

      The  uncanny  and  coercive  characteristics  of  group  formations,

which  are  shown  in  the  phenomena  of  suggestion  that  accompany

them, may therefore with justice be traced back to the fact of their

origin  from  the  primal  horde.  The  leader  of  the  group  is  still  the

dreaded  primal  father;  the  group  still  wishes  to  be  governed  by

unrestricted force; it has an extreme passion for authority; in Le Bon’s

phrase, it has a thirst for obedience. The primal father is the group

ideal, which governs the ego in the place of the ego ideal. Hypnosis

has a good claim to being described as a group of two. There remainsas a definition for suggestion: a conviction which is not based upon

perception and reasoning but upon an erotic tie.¹

 

   ¹ It seems to me worth emphasizing the fact that the discussions in this section have

induced us to give up Bernheim’s conception of hypnosis and go back to the naïf earlier one.
According to Bernheim all hypnotic phenomena are to be traced to the factor of suggestion,
which  is  not  itself  capable  of  further  explanation.  We  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that
suggestion is a partial manifestation of the state of hypnosis, and that hypnosis is solidly
founded upon a predisposition which has survived in the unconscious from the early history of
the human family.
 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3820

 

                                            XI

 

              A DIFFERENTIATING GRADE IN THE EGO

 

If we survey the life of an individual man of to-day, bearing in mind the

mutually complementary accounts of group psychology given by the

authorities, we may lose the courage, in face of the complications that

are revealed, to attempt a comprehensive exposition. Each individual

is  a  component  part  of  numerous  groups,  he  is  bound  by  ties  of

identification  in  many  directions,  and  he  has  built  up  his  ego  ideal

upon the most various models. Each individual therefore has a share

in numerous group minds - those of his race, of his class, of his creed,

of his nationality, etc. - and he can also raise himself above them to

the extent of having a scrap of independence and originality. Such

stable and lasting group formations, with their uniform and constant

effects, are less striking to an observer than the rapidly formed and

transient  groups  from  which  Le  Bon  has  made  his  brilliant

psychological  character  sketch  of  the  group  mind.  And  it  is  just  in

these  noisy  ephemeral  groups,  which  are  as  it  were  superimposed

upon the others, that we are met by the prodigy of the complete, even

though  only  temporary,  disappearance  of  exactly  what  we  have

recognized as individual acquirements.

      We  have  interpreted  this  prodigy  as  meaning  that  the  individual

gives  up  his  ego  ideal  and  substitutes  for  it  the  group  ideal  asembodied in the leader. And we must add by way of correction that

the prodigy is not equally great in every case. In many individuals the

separation  between  the  ego  and  the  ego  ideal  is  not  very  far

advanced; the two still coincide readily; the ego has often preserved

its earlier narcissistic self-complacency. The selection of the leader is

very  much  facilitated  by  this  circumstance.  He  need  often  only

possess  the  typical  qualities  of  the  individuals  concerned  in  a

particularly  clearly  marked  and  pure  form,  and  need  only  give  an

impression of greater force and of more freedom of libido; and in that

case  the  need  for  a  strong  chief  will  often  meet  him  half-way  and

invest him with a predominance to which he would otherwise perhaps

have had no claim. The other members of the group, whose ego ideal

would  not,  apart  from  this,  have  become  embodied  in  his  person

without  some  correction,  are  then  carried  away  with  the  rest  by

‘suggestion’, that is to say, by means of identification.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3821

 

   We are aware that what we have been able to contribute towards

the explanation of the libidinal structure of groups leads back to the

distinction between the ego and the ego ideal and to the double kind

of tie which this makes possible - identification, and putting the object

in  the  place  of  the  ego  ideal.  The  assumption  of  this  kind  of

differentiating grade in the ego as a first step in an analysis of the ego

must gradually establish its justification in the most various regions of

psychology.  In  my  paper  on  narcissism  I  have  put  together  all  the

pathological material that could at the moment be used in support of

this differentiation. But it may be expected that when we penetrate

deeper into the psychology of the psychoses its significance will be

discovered to be far greater. Let us reflect that the ego now enters into

the relation of an object to the ego ideal which has been developed

out of it, and that all the interplay between an external object and the

ego as a whole, with which our study of the neuroses has made us

acquainted, may possibly be repeated upon this new scene of action

within the ego.   In this place I shall only follow up one of the consequences which

seem possible from this point of view, thus resuming the discussion of

a problem which I was obliged to leave unsolved elsewhere.¹ Each of

the  mental  differentiations  that  we  have  become  acquainted  with

represents a fresh aggravation of the difficulties of mental functioning,

increases  its  instability,  and  may  become  the  starting-point  for  its

breakdown, that is, for the onset of a disease. Thus, by being born we

have made the step from an absolutely self-sufficient narcissism to the

perception  of  a  changing  external  world  and  the  beginnings  of  the

discovery  of  objects.  And  with  this  is  associated  the  fact  that  we

cannot endure the new state of things for long, that we periodically

revert  from  it,  in  our  sleep,  to  our  former  condition  of  absence  of

stimulation and avoidance of objects. It is true, however, that in this

we are following a hint from the external world, which, by means of the

periodical change of day and night, temporarily withdraws the greater

part of the stimuli that affect us. The second example of such a step,

pathologically more important, is subject to no such qualification. In

the  course  of  development  we  have  effected  a  separation  of  our

mental existence into a coherent ego and into an unconscious and

repressed portion which is left outside it; and we know that the stability

of this new acquisition is exposed to constant shocks. In dreams and

in neuroses what is thus excluded knocks for admission at the gates,

guarded though they are by resistances; and in our waking health we

make  use  of  special  artifices  for  allowing  what  is  repressed  to

circumvent the resistances and for receiving it temporarily into our ego

to  the  increase  of  our  pleasure.  Jokes  and  humour,  and  to  some

extent the comic in general, may be regarded in this light. Everyone

acquainted with the psychology of the neuroses will think of similar

examples of less importance; but I hasten on to the application I have

in view.

 

   ¹ ‘Mourning and Melancholia’ (1917e).

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3822

 

   It is quite conceivable that the separation of the ego ideal from theego  cannot  be  borne  for  long  either,  and  has  to  be  temporarily

undone. In all renunciations and limitations imposed upon the ego a

periodical  infringement  of  the  prohibition  is  the  rule;  this  indeed  is

shown by the institution of festivals, which in origin are nothing less

nor more than excesses provided by law and which owe their cheerful

character  to  the  release  which  they  bring.¹  The  Saturnalia  of  the

Romans and our modern carnival agree in this essential feature with

the festivals of primitive people, which usually end in debaucheries of

every kind and the transgression of what are at other times the most

sacred commandments. But the ego ideal comprises the sum of all the

limitations in which the ego has to acquiesce, and for that reason the

abrogation of the ideal would necessarily be a magnificent festival for

the ego, which might then once again feel satisfied with itself.²

   There is always a feeling of triumph when something in the ego

coincides with the ego ideal. And the sense of guilt (as well as the

sense  of  inferiority)  can  also  be  understood  as  an  expression  of

tension between the ego and the ego ideal.

 

   ¹ Totem and Taboo.

   ² Trotter traces repression back to the herd instinct. It is a translation of this into another

form of expression rather than a contradiction when I say in my paper on narcissism that ‘for
the ego the formation of an ideal would be the conditioning factor of repression’.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3823
 

   It is well known that there are people the general colour of whose

mood  oscillates  periodically  from  an  excessive  depression  through

some  kind  of  intermediate  state  to  an  exalted  sense  of  well-being.

These oscillations appear in very different degrees of amplitude, from

what is just noticeable to those extreme instances which, in the shape

of  melancholia  and  mania,  make  the  most  tormenting  or  disturbing

inroads upon the life of the person concerned. In typical cases of this

cyclical depression external precipitating causes do not seem to play

any  decisive  part;  as  regards  internal  motives,  nothing  more,  or

nothing else is to be found in these patients than in all others. It has

consequently  become  the  custom  to  consider  these  cases  as  notbeing  psychogenic.  We  shall  refer  presently  to  those  other  exactly

similar cases of cyclical depression which can easily be traced back to

mental traumas.

   Thus the foundation of these spontaneous oscillations of mood is

unknown;  we  are  without  insight  into  the  mechanism  of  the

displacement of a melancholia by a mania. So we are free to suppose

that these patients are people in whom our conjecture might find an

actual application - their ego ideal might be temporarily resolved into

their ego after having previously ruled it with especial strictness.

   Let us keep to what is clear: On the basis of our analysis of the ego

it cannot be doubted that in cases of mania the ego and the ego ideal

have fused together, so that the person, in a mood of triumph and self-

satisfaction, disturbed by no self-criticism, can enjoy the abolition of

his inhibitions, his feelings of consideration for others, and his self-

reproaches. It is not so obvious, but nevertheless very probable, that

the  misery  of  the  melancholic  is  the  expression  of  a  sharp  conflict

between the two agencies of his ego, a conflict in which the ideal, in

an excess of sensitiveness, relentlessly exhibits its condemnation of

the ego in delusions of inferiority and in self-depreciation. The only

question is whether we are to look for the causes of these altered

relations between the ego and the ego ideal in the periodic rebellions,

which  we  have  postulated  above,  against  the  new  institution,  or

whether we are to make other circumstances responsible for them.

      A  change  into  mania  is  not  an  indispensable  feature  of  the

symptomatology  of  melancholic  depression.  There  are  simple

melancholias,  some  in  single  and  some  in  recurrent  attacks,  which

never show this development.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3824

 

   On the other hand there are melancholias in which the precipitating

cause clearly plays an aetiological part. They are those which occur

after the loss of a loved object, whether by death or as the result of

circumstances which have necessitated the withdrawal of the libido

from the object. A psychogenic melancholia of this sort can end inmania, and this cycle can be repeated several times, just as easily as

in a case which appears to be spontaneous. Thus the state of things is

somewhat  obscure,  especially  as  only  a  few  forms  and  cases  of

melancholia have been submitted to psycho-analytic investigation.¹ So

far we only understand those cases in which the object is given up

because it has shown itself unworthy of love. It is then set up again

inside the ego, by means of identification, and severely condemned by

the ego ideal. The reproaches and attacks directed towards the object

come to light in the shape of melancholic self-reproaches.²

   A melancholia of this kind, too, may end in a change into mania; so

that  the  possibility  of  this  happening  represents  a  feature  which  is

independent of the other characteristics of the clinical picture.

      Nevertheless  I  see  no  difficulty  in  assigning  to  the  factor  of  the

periodic  rebellion  of  the  ego  against  the  ego  ideal  a  share  in  both

kinds of melancholia, the psychogenic as well as the spontaneous. In

the spontaneous kind it may be supposed that the ego ideal is inclined

to display a peculiar strictness, which then results automatically in its

temporary  suspension.  In  the  psychogenic  kind  the  ego  would  be

incited  to  rebellion  by  ill-treatment  on  the  part  of  its  ideal  -  an  ill-

treatment which it encounters when there has been identification with

a rejected object.

 

   ¹ Cf. Abraham (1912).

   ² To speak more accurately, they conceal themselves behind the reproaches directed

towards the subject’s own ego, and lend them the fixity, tenacity, and imperativeness which
characterize the self-reproaches of a melancholic.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3825

 

                                          XII

 

                                    POSTSCRIPT

 

In  the  course  of  the  enquiry  which  has  just  been  brought  to  a

provisional  end  we  came  across  a  number  of  side-paths  which  we

avoided pursuing in the first instance but in which there was much thatoffered us promises of insight. We propose now to take up a few of

the points that have been left on one side in this way.

 

   A. The distinction between identification of the ego with an object

and  replacement  of  the  ego  ideal  by  an  object  finds  an  interesting

illustration  in  the  two  great  artificial  groups  which  we  began  by

studying, the army and the Christian Church.

   It is obvious that a soldier takes his superior, that is, in fact, the

leader of the army, as his ideal, while he identifies himself with his

equals, and derives from this community of their egos the obligations

for giving mutual help and for sharing possessions which comradeship

implies. But he becomes ridiculous if he tries to identify himself with

the general. The soldier in Wallensteins Lager laughs at the sergeant

for this very reason:

 

                                                Wie er räuspert und wie er spuckt,
                                                Das habt ihr ihm glücklich abgeguckt!

 

   It is otherwise in the Catholic Church. Every Christian loves Christ

as his ideal and feels himself united with all other Christians by the tie

of identification. But the Church requires more of him. He has also to

identify himself with Christ and love all other Christians as Christ loved

them. At both points, therefore, the Church requires that the position

of  the  libido  which  is  given  by  group  formation  should  be

supplemented. Identification has to be added where object-choice has

taken place, and object-love where there is identification. This addition

evidently goes beyond the constitution of the group. One can be a

good  Christian  and  yet  be  far  from  the  idea  of  putting  oneself  in

Christ’s  place  and  of  having  like  him  an  all-embracing  love  for

mankind. One need not think oneself capable, weak mortal that one is,

of the Saviour’s largeness of soul and strength of love. But this further

development in the distribution of libido in the group is probably the

factor  upon  which  Christianity  bases  its  claim  to  have  reached  a

higher ethical level.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3826 

 

   B. We have said that it would be possible to specify the point in the

mental  development  of  mankind  at  which  the  advance  from  group

psychology  to  individual  psychology  was  achieved  also  by  the

individual members of the group.¹

   For this purpose we must return for a moment to the scientific myth

of  the  father  of  the  primal  horde.  He  was  later  on  exalted  into  the

creator of the world, and with justice, for he had produced all the sons

who composed the first group. He was the ideal of each one of them,

at  once  feared  and  honoured,  a  fact  which  led  later  to  the  idea  of

taboo.  These  many  individuals  eventually  banded  themselves

together, killed him and cut him in pieces. None of the group of victors

could take his place, or, if one of them did, the battles began afresh,

until  they  understood  that  they  must  all  renounce  their  father’s

heritage. They then formed the totemic community of brothers, all with

equal  rights  and  united  by  the  totem  prohibitions  which  were  to

preserve  and  to  expiate  the  memory  of  the  murder.  But  the

dissatisfaction  with  what  had  been  achieved  still  remained,  and  it

became  the  source  of  new  developments.  The  persons  who  were

united in this group of brothers gradually came towards a revival of the

old state of things at a new level. The male became once more the

chief  of  a  family,  and  broke  down  the  prerogatives  of  the

gynaecocracy  which  had  become  established  during  the  fatherless

period.  As  a  compensation  for  this  he  may  at  that  time  have

acknowledged  the  mother  deities,  whose  priests  were  castrated  for

the mother’s protection, after the example that had been given by the

father of the primal horde. And yet the new family was only a shadow

of  the  old  one;  there  were  numbers  of  fathers  and  each  one  was

limited by the rights of the others.

 

   ¹ What follows at this point was written under the influence of an exchange of ideas with

Otto Rank. See also Rank (1922).

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3827
    It was then, perhaps, that some individual, in the exigency of his

longing, may have been moved to free himself from the group and

take over the father’s part. He who did this was the first epic poet; and

the advance was achieved in his imagination. This poet disguised the

truth with lies in accordance with his longing. He invented the heroic

myth. The hero was a man who by himself had slain the father - the

father who still appeared in the myth as a totemic monster. Just as the

father had been the boy’s first ideal, so in the hero who aspires to the

father’s place the poet now created the first ego ideal. The transition to

the  hero  was  probably  afforded  by  the  youngest  son,  the  mother’s

favourite, whom she had protected from paternal jealousy, and who, in

the era of the primal horde, had been the father’s successor. In the

lying poetic fancies of prehistoric times the woman, who had been the

prize of battle and the temptation to murder, was probably turned into

the active seducer and instigator to the crime.

   The hero claims to have acted alone in accomplishing the deed,

which certainly only the horde as a whole would have ventured upon.

But, as Rank has observed, fairy tales have preserved clear traces of

the facts which were disavowed. For we often find in them that the

hero who has to carry out some difficult task (usually the youngest

son,  and  not  infrequently  one  who  has  represented  himself  to  the

father-substitute as being stupid, that is to say, harmless) - we often

find, then, that this hero can carry out his task only by the help of a

crowd of small animals, such as bees or ants. These would be the

brothers  in  the  primal  horde,  just  as  in  the  same  way  in  dream

symbolism  insects  or  vermin  signify  brothers  and  sisters

(contemptuously, considered as babies). Moreover every one of the

tasks in myths and fairy tales is easily recognizable as a substitute for

the heroic deed.

   The myth, then, is the step by which the individual emerges from

group psychology. The first myth was certainly the psychological, the

hero  myth;  the  explanatory  nature  myth  must  have  followed  much

later. The poet who had taken this step and had in this way set himself

free from the group in his imagination, is nevertheless able (as Rank

has further observed) to find his way back to it in reality. For he goes

and relates to the group his hero’s deeds which he has invented. At

bottom this hero is no one but himself. Thus he lowers himself to thelevel of reality, and raises his hearers to the level of imagination. But

his  hearers  understand  the  poet,  and,  in  virtue  of  their  having  the

same relation of longing towards the primal father, they can identify

themselves with the hero.¹

   The lie of the heroic myth culminates in the deification of the hero.

Perhaps the deified hero may have been earlier than the Father God

and may have been a precursor to the return of the primal father as a

deity.  The  series  of  gods,  then,  would  run  chronologically:  Mother

Goddess-Hero-Father  God.  But  it  is  only  with  the  elevation  of  the

never-forgotten primal father that the deity acquires the features that

we still recognize in him to-day.²

 

   ¹ Cf. Hanns Sachs (1920).

   ² In this brief exposition I have made no attempt to bring forward any of the material existing

in legends, myths, fairy tales, the history of manners, etc., in support of the construction.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3828
 

 

   C. A great deal has been said in this paper about directly sexual

instincts  and  those  that  are  inhibited  in  their  aims,  and  it  may  be

hoped that this distinction will not meet with too much resistance. But

a detailed discussion of the question will not be out of place, even if it

only repeats what has to a great extent already been said before.

   The development of the libido in children has made us acquainted

with the first but also the best example of sexual instincts which are

inhibited in their aims. All the feelings which a child has towards its

parents and those who look after it pass by an easy transition into the

wishes which give expression to the child’s sexual impulsions. The

child claims from these objects of its love all the signs of affection

which it knows of; it wants to kiss them, touch them, and look at them;

it  is  curious  to  see  their  genitals,  and  to  be  with  them  when  they

perform  their  intimate  excretory  functions;  it  promises  to  marry  its

mother  or  nurse  -  whatever  it  may  understand  by  marriage;  it

proposes to itself to bear its father a child, etc. Direct observation, as

well  as  the  subsequent  analytic  investigation  of  the  residues  ofchildhood,  leave  no  doubt  as  to  the  complete  fusion  of  tender  and

jealous  feelings  and  of  sexual  intentions,  and  show  us  in  what  a

fundamental way the child makes the person it loves into the object of

all its still not properly centred sexual trends.¹

 

   ¹ Cf. my Three Essays (1905d).

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3829
 

    This first configuration of the child’s love, which in typical cases

takes  the  shape  of  the  Oedipus  complex,  succumbs,  as  we  know,

from  the  beginning  of  the  period  of  latency  onwards  to  a  wave  of

repression.  Such  of  it  as  is  left  over  shows  itself  as  a  purely

affectionate emotional tie, relating to the same people, but no longer

to  be  described  as  ‘sexual’.  Psycho-analysis,  which  illuminates  the

depths of mental life, has no difficulty in showing that the sexual ties of

the  earliest  years  of  childhood  also  persist,  though  repressed  and

unconscious. It gives us courage to assert that wherever we come

across an affectionate feeling it is successor to a completely ‘sensual’

object-tie  with  the  person  in  question  or  rather  with  that  person’s

prototype (or imago). It cannot indeed disclose to us without a special

investigation  whether  in  a  given  case  this  former  complete  sexual

current still exists under repression or whether it has already been

exhausted. To speak still more precisely: it is quite certain that this

current  is  still  there  as  a  form  and  possibility,  and  can  always  be

cathected and put into activity again by means of regression; the only

question  is  (and  it  cannot  always  be  answered)  what  degree  of

cathexis and operative force it still has at the present moment. Equal

care must be taken in this connection to avoid two sources of error -

the  Scylla  of  underestimating  the  importance  of  the  repressed

unconscious, and the Charybdis of judging the normal entirely by the

standards of the pathological.

   A psychology which will not or cannot penetrate the depths of what

is  repressed  regards  affectionate  emotional  ties  as  being  invariably

the expression of impulsions which have no sexual aim, even though

they are derived from impulsions which have such an aim.¹ 

   ¹ Hostile feelings are doubtless a little more complicated in their construction.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3830

 

   We are justified in saying that they have been diverted from these

sexual  aims,  even  though  there  is  some  difficulty  in  giving  a

description  of  such  a  diversion  of  aim  which  will  conform  to  the

requirements of metapsychology. Moreover, those instincts which are

inhibited  in  their  aims  always  preserve  some  few  of  their  original

sexual  aims;  even  an  affectionate  devotee,  even  a  friend  or  an

admirer,  desires  the  physical  proximity  and  the  sight  of  the  person

who is now loved only in the ‘Pauline’ sense. If we choose, we may

recognize in this diversion of aim a beginning of the sublimation of the

sexual  instincts,  or  on  the  other  hand  we  may  fix  the  limits  of

sublimation at some more distant point. Those sexual instincts which

are  inhibited  in  their  aims  have  a  great  functional  advantage  over

those  which  are  uninhibited.  Since  they  are  not  capable  of  really

complete  satisfaction,  they  are  especially  adapted  to  create

permanent ties; while those instincts which are directly sexual incur a

loss  of  energy  each  time  they  are  satisfied,  and  must  wait  to  be

renewed by a fresh accumulation of sexual libido, so that meanwhile

the  object  may  have  been  changed.  The  inhibited  instincts  are

capable of any degree of admixture with the uninhibited; they can be

transformed back into them, just as they arose out of them. It is well

known how easily erotic wishes develop out of emotional relations of a

friendly character, based upon appreciation and admiration (compare

Molière’s ‘Kiss me for the love of Greek’), between a master and a

pupil, between a performer and a delighted listener, and especially in

the case of women. In fact the growth of emotional ties of this kind,

with  their  purposeless  beginnings,  provides  a  much  frequented

pathway  to  sexual  object-choice.  Pfister,  in  his Frömmigkeit  des

Grafen  von  Zinzendorf  (1910),  has  given  an  extremely  clear  and

certainly  not  an  isolated  example  of  how  easily  even  an  intense

religious tie can revert to ardent sexual excitement. On the other handit  is  also  very  usual  for  directly  sexual  impulsions,  short-lived  in

themselves, to be transformed into a lasting and purely affectionate

tie;  and  the  consolidation  of  a  passionate  love  marriage  rests  to  a

large extent upon this process.

      We  shall  naturally  not  be  surprised  to  hear  that  the  sexual

impulsions  that  are  inhibited  in  their  aims  arise  out  of  the  directly

sexual ones when internal or external obstacles make the sexual aims

unattainable. The repression during the period of latency is an internal

obstacle of this kind - or rather one which has become internal. We

have assumed that the father of the primal horde owing to his sexual

intolerance compelled all his sons to be abstinent, and thus forced

them into ties that were inhibited in their aims, while he reserved for

himself freedom of sexual enjoyment and in this way remained without

ties. All the ties upon which a group depends are of the character of

instincts that are inhibited in their aims. But here we have approached

the discussion of a new subject, which deals with the relation between

directly sexual instincts and the formation of groups.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3831

 

 

   D. The last two remarks will have prepared us for finding that directly

sexual impulsions are unfavourable to the formation of groups. In the

history of the development of the family there have also, it is true,

been group relations of sexual love (group marriages); but the more

important sexual love became for the ego, and the more it developed

the characteristics of being in love, the more urgently it required to be

limited to two people - una cum uno - as is prescribed by the nature of

the  genital  aim.  Polygamous  inclinations  had  to  be  content  to  find

satisfaction in a succession of changing objects.

   Two people coming together for the purpose of sexual satisfaction,

in so far as they seek for solitude, are making a demonstration against

the herd instinct, the group feeling. The more they are in love, the

more  completely  they  suffice  for  each  other.  Their  rejection  of  the

group’s  influence  is  expressed  in  the  shape  of  a  sense  of  shame.Feelings of jealousy of the most extreme violence are summoned up

in  order  to  protect  the  choice  of  a  sexual  object  from  being

encroached upon by a group tie. It is only when the affectionate, that

is, personal, factor of a love relation gives place entirely to the sensual

one, that it is possible for two people to have sexual intercourse in the

presence of others or for there to be simultaneous sexual acts in a

group, as occurs at an orgy. But at that point a regression has taken

place to an early stage in sexual relations, at which being in love as

yet played no part, and all sexual objects were judged to be of equal

value, somewhat in the sense of Bernard Shaw’s malicious aphorism

to  the  effect  that  being  in  love  means  greatly  exaggerating  the

difference between one woman and another.

   There are abundant indications that being in love only made its

appearance late on in the sexual relations between men and women;

so that the opposition between sexual love and group ties is also a

late development. Now it may seem as though this assumption were

incompatible with our myth of the primal family. For it was after all by

their love for their mothers and sisters that the mob of brothers was,

as we have supposed, driven to parricide; and it is difficult to imagine

this love as being anything but undivided and primitive - that is, as an

intimate  union  of  the  affectionate  and  sensual.  But  further

consideration resolves this objection to our theory into a confirmation

of it. One of the reactions to the parricide was after all the institution of

totemic  exogamy,  the  prohibition  of  any  sexual  relation  with  those

women of the family who had been tenderly loved since childhood. In

this way a wedge was driven in between a man’s affectionate and

sensual feelings, one still firmly fixed in his erotic life to-day.¹ As a

result of this exogamy the sensual needs of men had to be satisfied

with strange and unloved women.

 

   ¹ See Freud, (1912d).

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3832

 

   In the great artificial groups, the Church and the army, there is no

room for woman as a sexual object. The love relation between menand women remains outside these organizations. Even where groups

are  formed  which  are  composed  of  both  men  and  women  the

distinction  between  the  sexes  plays  no  part.  There  is  scarcely  any

sense in asking whether the libido which keeps groups together is of a

homosexual  or  of  a  heterosexual  nature,  for  it  is  not  differentiated

according to the sexes, and particularly shows a complete disregard

for the aims of the genital organization of the libido.

   Even in a person who has in other respects become absorbed in a

group, the directly sexual impulsions preserve a little of his individual

activity.  If  they  become  too  strong  they  disintegrate  every  group

formation.  The  Catholic  Church  had  the  best  of  motives  for

recommending  its  followers  to  remain  unmarried  and  for  imposing

celibacy  upon  its  priests;  but  falling  in  love  has  often  driven  even

priests to leave the Church. In the same way love for women breaks

through the group ties of race, of national divisions, and of the social

class  system,  and  it  thus  produces  important  effects  as  a  factor  in

civilization.  It  seems  certain  that  homosexual  love  is  far  more

compatible  with  group  ties,  even  when  it  takes  the  shape  of

uninhibited sexual impulsions - a remarkable fact, the explanation of

which might carry us far.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3833

 

   The psycho-analytic investigation of the psychoneuroses has taught

us  that  their  symptoms  are  to  be  traced  back  to  directly  sexual

impulsions  which  are  repressed  but  still  remain  active.  We  can

complete  this  formula  by  adding  -  ‘or,  to  aim-inhibited  impulsions,

whose inhibition has not been entirely successful or has made room

for a return to the repressed sexual aim’. It is in accordance with this

that a neurosis should make its victim asocial and should remove him

from the usual group formations. It may be said that a neurosis has

the same disintegrating effect upon a group as being in love. On the

other hand it appears that where a powerful impetus has been given

to  group  formation  neuroses  may  diminish  and,  at  all  events

temporarily, disappear. Justifiable attempts have also been made toturn  this  antagonism  between  neuroses  and  group  formation  to

therapeutic account. Even those who do not regret the disappearance

of religious illusions from the civilized world of to-day will admit that so

long as they were in force they offered those who were bound by them

the most powerful protection against the danger of neurosis. Nor is it

hard to discern that all the ties that bind people to mystico-religious or

philosophico-religious  sects  and  communities  are  expressions  of

crooked cures of all kinds of neuroses. All of this is correlated with the

contrast  between  directly  sexual  impulsions  and  those  which  are

inhibited in their aims.

   If he is left to himself, a neurotic is obliged to replace by his own

symptom  formations  the  great  group  formations  from  which  he  is

excluded. He creates his own world of imagination for himself, his own

religion,  his  own  system  of  delusions,  and  thus  recapitulates  the

institutions of humanity in a distorted way which is clear evidence of

the dominating part played by the directly sexual impulsions.¹

 

   ¹ See Totem and Taboo, towards the end of the second essay.

 


              Group Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego

                                                                                      3834

 

 

      E.  In  conclusion,  we  will  add  a  comparative  estimate,  from  the

standpoint of the libido theory, of the states with which we have been

concerned, of being in love, of hypnosis, of group formation, and of

neurosis.

   Being in love is based on the simultaneous presence of directly

sexual impulsions and of sexual impulsions that are inhibited in their

aims, while the object draws a part of the subject’s narcissistic ego-

libido to itself. It is a condition in which there is only room for the ego

and the object.

     Hypnosis  resembles  being  in  love  in  being  limited  to  these  two

persons, but it is based entirely on sexual impulsions that are inhibited

in their aims and puts the object in the place of the ego ideal.

   The group multiplies this process; it agrees with hypnosis in the

nature of the instincts which hold it together, and in the replacement ofthe ego ideal by the object; but to this it adds identification with other

individuals,  which  was  perhaps  originally  made  possible  by  their

having the same relation to the object.

   Both states, hypnosis and group formation, are an inherited deposit

from the phylogenesis of the human libido - hypnosis in the form of a

predisposition, and the group, besides this, as a direct survival. The

replacement  of  the  directly  sexual  impulsions  by  those  that  are

inhibited in their aims promotes in both states a separation between

the ego and the ego ideal, a separation with which a beginning has

already been made in the state of being in love.

     Neurosis  stands  outside  this  series.  It  also  is  based  upon  a

peculiarity in the development of the human libido - the twice repeated

start made by the directly sexual function, with an intervening period of

latency.¹ To this extent it resembles hypnosis and group formation in

having the character of a regression, which is absent from being in

love.  It  makes  its  appearance  wherever  the  advance  from  directly

sexual instincts to those that are inhibited in their aims has not been

wholly successful; and it represents a conflict between those portions

of the instincts which have been received into the ego after having

passed through this development and those portions of them which,

springing  from  the  repressed  unconscious,  strive  -  as  do  other,

completely  repressed,  instinctual  impulses  -  to  attain  direct

satisfaction.  Neuroses  are  extraordinarily  rich  in  content,  for  they

embrace all possible relations between the ego and the object - both

those  in  which  the  object  is  retained  and  others  in  which  it  is

abandoned or erected inside the ego itself - and also the conflicting

relations between the ego and its ego ideal.

 

   ¹ See my Three Essays (1905d).

                                                                                       3835

 

    THE PSYCHOGENESIS OF A CASE OF HOMOSEXUALITY IN A

                                        WOMAN

                                        (1920)

 


                                                                                      3836

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3837

 

 

    THE PSYCHOGENESIS OF A CASE OF HOMOSEXUALITY IN A

                                        WOMAN

 

                                            I

 

Homosexuality in women, which is certainly not less common than in

men, although much less glaring, has not only been ignored by the

law, but has also been neglected by psycho-analytic research. The

narration of a single case, not too pronounced in type, in which it was

possible to trace its origin and development in the mind with complete

certainty  and  almost  without  a  gap  may,  therefore,  have  a  certain

claim  to  attention.  If  this  presentation  of  it  furnishes  only  the  most

general  outlines  of  the  various  events  concerned  and  of  the

conclusions reached from a study of the case, while suppressing all

the characteristic details on which the interpretation is founded, this

limitation is easily to be explained by the medical discretion necessary

in discussing a recent case.

   A beautiful and clever girl of eighteen, belonging to a family of good

standing, had aroused displeasure and concern in her parents by the

devoted adoration with which she pursued a certain ‘society lady’ who

was about ten years older than herself. The parents asserted that, in

spite of her distinguished name, this lady was nothing but a cocotte. Itwas  well  known,  they  said,  that  she  lived  with  a  friend,  a  married

woman, and had intimate relations with her, while at the same time

she carried on promiscuous affairs with a number of men. The girl did

not  contradict  these  evil  reports,  but  neither  did  she  allow  them  to

interfere with her worship of the lady, although she herself was by no

means lacking in a sense of decency and propriety. No prohibitions

and no supervision hindered the girl from seizing every one of her rare

opportunities of being together with her beloved, of ascertaining all her

habits, of waiting for her for hours outside her door or at a tram-halt, of

sending her gifts of flowers, and so on. It was evident that this one

interest had swallowed up all others in the girl’s mind. She did not

trouble herself any further with educational studies, thought nothing of

social functions or girlish pleasures, and kept up relations only with a

few  girl  friends  who  could  help  her  in  the  matter  or  serve  as

confidantes. The parents could not say to what lengths their daughter

had gone in her relations with the questionable lady, whether the limits

of devoted admiration had already been exceeded or not. They had

never  remarked  in  their  daughter  any  interest  in  young  men,  nor

pleasure in their attentions, while, on the other hand, they were sure

that her present attachment to a woman was only a continuation, in a

more marked degree, of a feeling she had displayed of recent years

for  other  members  of  her  own  sex  which  had  already  aroused  her

father’s suspicion and anger.

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3838

 

   There were two details of her behaviour, in apparent contrast with

each other, that most especially vexed her parents. On the one hand,

she did not scruple to appear in the most frequented streets in the

company of her undesirable friend, being thus quite neglectful of her

own reputation; while, on the other hand, she disdained no means of

deception, no excuses and no lies that would make meetings with her

possible and cover them. She thus showed herself too open in one

respect and full of deceitfulness in the other. One day it happened,

indeed, as was sooner or later inevitable in the circumstances, that thefather met his daughter in the company of the lady, about whom he

had come to know. He passed them by with an angry glance which

boded no good. Immediately afterwards the girl rushed off and flung

herself  over  a  wall  down  the  side  of  a  cutting  on  to  the  suburban

railway line which ran close by. She paid for this undoubtedly serious

attempt at suicide with a considerable time on her back in bed, though

fortunately little permanent damage was done. After her recovery she

found it easier to get her own way than before. The parents did not

dare to oppose her with so much determination, and the lady, who up

till then had received her advances coldly, was moved by such an

unmistakable  proof  of  serious  passion  and  began  to  treat  her  in  a

more friendly manner.

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3839

 

      About  six  months  after  this  episode  the  parents  sought  medical

advice  and  entrusted  the  physician  with  the  task  of  bringing  their

daughter back to a normal state of mind. The girl’s attempted suicide

had evidently shown them that strong disciplinary measures at home

were  powerless  to  overcome  her  disorder.  Before  going  further,

however, it will be desirable to deal separately with the attitudes of her

father and of her mother to the matter. The father was an earnest,

worthy man, at bottom very tender-hearted, but he had to some extent

estranged his children by the sternness he had adopted towards them.

His  treatment  of  his  only  daughter  was  too  much  influenced  by

consideration  for  his  wife.  When  he  first  came  to  know  of  his

daughter’s homosexual tendencies he flew into a rage and tried to

suppress them by threats. At that time perhaps he hesitated between

different, though equally distressing, views - regarding her either as

vicious,  as  degenerate,  or  as  mentally  afflicted.  Even  after  the

attempted suicide he did not achieve the lofty resignation shown by

one of our medical colleagues who remarked of a similar irregularity in

his own family: ‘Well, it’s just a misfortune like any other.’ There was

something  about  his  daughter’s  homosexuality  that  aroused  the

deepest bitterness in him, and he was determined to combat it with allthe means in his power. The low estimation in which psycho-analysis

is so generally held in Vienna did not prevent him from turning to it for

help. If this way failed he still had in reserve his strongest counter-

measure: a speedy marriage was to awaken the natural instincts of

the girl and stifle her unnatural tendencies.

   The mother’s attitude towards the girl was not so easy to grasp. She

was still a youngish woman, who was evidently unwilling to give up

her own claims to attractiveness. All that was clear was that she did

not take her daughter’s infatuation so tragically as did the father, nor

was she so incensed at it. She had even for some time enjoyed her

daughter’s  confidence  concerning  her  passion.  Her  opposition  to  it

seemed to have been aroused mainly by the harmful publicity with

which  the  girl  displayed  her  feelings.  She  had  herself  suffered  for

some  years  from  neurotic  troubles  and  enjoyed  a  great  deal  of

consideration  from  her  husband;  she  treated  her  children  in  quite

different ways, being decidedly harsh towards her daughter and over-

indulgent to her three sons, the youngest of whom had been born after

a long interval and was then not yet three years old. It was not easy to

ascertain  anything  more  definite  about  her  character,  for,  owing  to

motives that will only later become intelligible, the patient was always

reserved in what she said about her mother, whereas in regard to her

father there was no question of this.

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3840

 

   To a physician who was to undertake psycho-analytic treatment of

the girl there were many grounds for misgiving. The situation he had

to deal with was not the one that analysis demands, in which alone it

can demonstrate its effectiveness. As is well known, the ideal situation

for  analysis  is  when  someone  who  is  otherwise  his  own  master  is

suffering from an inner conflict which he is unable to resolve alone, so

that he brings his trouble to the analyst and begs for his help. The

physician  then  works  hand  in  hand  with  one  portion  of  the

pathologically  divided  personality,  against  the  other  party  in  the

conflict. Any situation which differs from this is to a greater or lesserdegree unfavourable for psycho-analysis and adds fresh difficulties to

the internal ones already present. Situations like that of a prospective

house-owner who orders an architect to build him a villa to his own

tastes and requirements, or of a pious donor who commissions an

artist to paint a sacred picture in the corner of which is to be a portrait

of himself in adoration, are at bottom incompatible with the conditions

necessary  for  psycho-analysis.  Thus,  it  constantly  happens  that  a

husband  instructs  the  physician  as  follows:  ‘My  wife  suffers  from

nerves, and for that reason gets on badly with me; please cure her, so

that we may lead a happy married life again.’ But often enough it turns

out  that  such  a  request  is  impossible  to  fulfil  -  that  is  to  say,  the

physician cannot bring about the result for which the husband sought

the  treatment.  As  soon  as  the  wife  is  freed  from  her  neurotic

inhibitions she sets about getting a separation, for her neurosis was

the sole condition under which the marriage could be maintained. Or

else parents expect one to cure their nervous and unruly child. By a

healthy child they mean one who never causes his parents trouble,

and gives them nothing but pleasure. The physician may succeed in

curing  the  child,  but  after  that  it  goes  its  own  way  all  the  more

decidedly, and the parents are now far more dissatisfied than before.

In short, it is not a matter of indifference whether someone comes to

analysis of his own accord or because he is brought to it - whether it is

he himself who desires to be changed, or only his relatives, who love

him (or who might be expected to love him).

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3841

 

   Further unfavourable features in the present case were the facts that

the  girl  was  not  in  any  way  ill  (she  did  not  suffer  from  anything  in

herself, nor did she complain of her condition) and that the task to be

carried  out  did  not  consist  in  resolving  a  neurotic  conflict  but  in

converting one variety of the genital organization of sexuality into the

other.  Such  an  achievement  -  the  removal  of  genital  inversion  or

homosexuality - is in my experience never an easy matter. On the

contrary, I have found success possible only in specially favourablecircumstances,  and  even  then  the  success  essentially  consisted  in

making access to the opposite sex (which had hitherto been barred)

possible to a person restricted to homosexuality, thus restoring his full

bisexual  functions.  After  that  it  lay  with  him  to  choose  whether  he

wished to abandon the path that is banned by society, and in some

cases he has done so. One must remember that normal sexuality too

depends  upon  a  restriction  in  the  choice  of  object.  In  general,  to

undertake  to  convert  a  fully  developed  homosexual  into  a

heterosexual does not offer much more prospect of success than the

reverse,  except  that  for  good  practical  reasons  the  latter  is  never

attempted.

   The number of successes achieved by psycho-analytic treatment of

the various forms of homosexuality, which incidentally are manifold, is

indeed not very striking. As a rule the homosexual is not able to give

up  the  object  which  provides  him  with  pleasure,  and  one  cannot

convince him that if he made the change he would rediscover in the

other  object  the  pleasure  that  he  has  renounced,  and  such

components of the instinct of self-preservation prove themselves too

weak in the struggle against the sexual impulsions. One then soon

discovers his secret plan, namely, to obtain from the striking failure of

his  attempt  a  feeling  of  satisfaction  that  he  has  done  everything

possible against his abnormality, to which he can now resign himself

with  an  easy  conscience.  The  case  is  somewhat  different  when

consideration for beloved parents and relatives has been the motive

for his attempt to be cured. Here there really are libidinal impulsions

present  which  may  put  forth  energies  opposed  themselves  to  the

homosexual choice of object; but their strength is rarely sufficient. It is

only  where  the  homosexual  fixation  has  not  yet  become  strong

enough, or where there are considerable rudiments and vestiges of a

heterosexual choice of object, i.e. in a still oscillating or in a definitely

bisexual  organization,  that  one  may  make  a  more  favourable

prognosis for psycho-analytic therapy.

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3842

    For these reasons I refrained altogether from holding out to the

parents any prospect of their wish being fulfilled. I merely said I was

prepared to study the girl carefully for a few weeks or months, so as

then to be able to pronounce how far a continuation of the analysis

would be likely to influence her. In quite a number of cases, indeed, an

analysis falls into two clearly distinguishable phases. In the first, the

physician procures from the patient the necessary information, makes

him familiar with the premises and postulates of psycho-analysis, and

unfolds  to  him  the  reconstruction  of  the  genesis  of  his  disorder  as

deduced from the material brought up in the analysis. In the second

phase the patient himself gets hold of the material put before him; he

works  on  it,  recollects  what  he  can  of  the  apparently  repressed

memories, and tries to repeat the rest as if he were in some way living

it over again. In this way he can confirm, supplement, and correct the

inferences made by the physician. It is only during this work that he

experiences, through overcoming resistances, the inner change aimed

at,  and  acquires  for  himself  the  convictions  that  make  him

independent  of  the  physician’s  authority.  These  two  phases  in  the

course of the analytic treatment are not always sharply divided from

each other; this can only happen when the resistance obeys certain

conditions. But when this is so, one may bring up as an analogy the

two  stages  of  a  journey.  The  first  comprises  all  the  necessary

preparations, to-day so complicated and hard to effect, before, ticket

in hand, one can at last go on to the platform and secure a seat in the

train. One then has the right, and the possibility, of travelling into a

distant country; but after all these preliminary exertions one is not yet

there - indeed, one is not a single mile nearer to one’s goal. For this to

happen one has to make the journey itself from one station to the

other, and this part of the performance may well be compared with the

second phase of the analysis.

      The  course  of  the  present  patient’s  analysis  followed  this  two-

phased pattern, but it was not continued beyond the beginning of the

second  phase.  A  special  constellation  of  the  resistance  made  it

possible, nevertheless, to gain full confirmation of my constructions,

and to obtain an adequate insight on broad lines into the way in which

her inversion had developed. But before relating the findings of the

analysis I must deal with a few points which have either been touchedupon already by myself or which will have roused special interest in

the reader.

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3843

 

   I had made the prognosis partly dependent on how far the girl had

succeeded in satisfying her passion. The information I obtained during

the  analysis  seemed  favourable  in  this  respect.  With  none  of  the

objects of her adoration had the patient enjoyed anything beyond a

few kisses and embraces; her genital chastity, if one may use such a

phrase,  had  remained  intact.  As  for  the demi-mondaine  who  had

roused her most recent and by far her strongest emotions, she had

always been treated coldly by her and never been allowed any greater

favour than to kiss her hand. She was probably making a virtue of

necessity when she kept insisting on the purity of her love and her

physical  repulsion  against  the  idea  of  any  sexual  intercourse.  But

perhaps  she  was  not  altogether  wrong  when  she  boasted  of  her

wonderful beloved that, being of good birth as she was, and forced

into her present position only by adverse family circumstances, she

had preserved, in spite of her situation, much nobility of character. For

the lady used to recommend the girl every time they met to withdraw

her affection from herself and from women in general, and she had

persistently  rejected  the  girl’s  advances  up  to  the  time  of  the

attempted suicide.

   A second point, which I at once tried to investigate, concerned any

possible motives in the girl herself which might serve as a support for

psycho-analytic treatment. She did not try to deceive me by saying

that she felt any urgent need to be freed from her homosexuality. On

the  contrary,  she  said  she  could  not  conceive  of  any  other  way  of

being  in  love,  but  she  added  that  for  her  parents’  sake  she  would

honestly help in the therapeutic attempt, for it pained her very much to

be the cause of so much grief to them. To begin with, I could not but

take  this,  too,  as  a  propitious  sign;  for  I  could  not  guess  the

unconscious affective attitude that lay concealed behind it. What came

to light later in this connection decisively influenced the course takenby the analysis and determined its premature conclusion.

   Readers unversed in psycho-analysis will long have been awaiting

an  answer  to  two  other  questions.  Did  this  homosexual  girl  show

physical characteristics plainly belonging to the opposite sex, and did

the case prove to be one of congenital or acquired (later-developed)

homosexuality?

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3844

 

      I  am  aware  of  the  importance  attaching  to  the  first  of  these

questions.  But  one  should  not  exaggerate  it  and  allow  it  to

overshadow  the  fact  that  sporadic  secondary  characteristics  of  the

opposite  sex  are  very  often  present  in  normal  individuals,  and  that

well-marked physical characteristics of the opposite sex may be found

in persons whose choice of object has undergone no change in the

direction of inversion; in other words, that in both sexes the degree of

physical hermaphroditism is to a great extent independent of psychical

hermaphroditism. In modification of these statements it must be added

that this independence is more evident in men than women, where

bodily  and  mental  traits  belonging  to  the  opposite  sex  are  apt  to

coincide. Still I am not in a position to give a satisfactory answer to the

first  of  our  questions  about  my  patient.  The  psycho-analyst

customarily forgoes a thorough physical examination of his patients in

certain  cases.  Certainly  there  was  no  obvious  deviation  from  the

feminine physical type, nor any menstrual disturbance. The beautiful

and well-made girl had, it is true, her father’s tall figure, and her facial

features were sharp rather than soft and girlish, traits which might be

regarded as indicating a physical masculinity. Some of her intellectual

attributes also could be connected with masculinity: for instance, her

acuteness of comprehension and her lucid objectivity, in so far as she

was  not  dominated  by  her  passion.  But  these  distinctions  are

conventional  rather  than  scientific.  What  is  certainly  of  greater

importance is that in her behaviour towards her love-object she had

throughout assumed the masculine part: that is to say, she displayed

the  humility  and  the  sublime  overvaluation  of  the  sexual  object  socharacteristic  of  the  male  lover,  the  renunciation  of  all  narcissistic

satisfaction,  and  the  preference  for  being  the  lover  rather  than  the

beloved. She had thus not only chosen a feminine love-object, but had

also developed a masculine attitude towards that object.

      The  second  question,  whether  this  was  a  case  of  congenital  or

acquired homosexuality, will be answered by the whole history of the

patient’s abnormality and its development. The study of this will show

how far this question is a fruitless and inapposite one.

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3845

 

                                            II

 

   After this highly discursive introduction I am only able to present a

very  concise  summary  of  the  sexual  history  of  the  case  under

consideration.  In  childhood  the  girl  had  passed  through  the  normal

attitude characteristic of the feminine Oedipus complex¹ in a way that

was not at all remarkable, and had later also begun to substitute for

her father a brother slightly older than herself. She did not remember

any  sexual  traumas  in  early  life,  nor  were  any  discovered  by  the

analysis.  Comparison  of  her  brother’s  genital  organs  and  her  own,

which took place about the beginning of the latency period (at five

years old or perhaps a little earlier), left a strong impression on her

and had far-reaching after-effects. There were very few signs pointing

to infantile masturbation, or else the analysis did not go far enough to

throw light on this point. The birth of a second brother when she was

between five and six years old exercised no special influence upon

her  development.  During  the  pre-pubertal  years  at  school  she

gradually became acquainted with the facts of sex, and she received

this knowledge with mixed feelings of lasciviousness and frightened

aversion,  in  a  way  which  may  be  called  normal  and  was  not

exaggerated in degree. This amount of information about her seems

meagre enough, nor can I guarantee that it is complete. It may be that

the  history  of  her  youth  was  much  richer  in  experiences;  I  do  not

know. As I have already said, the analysis was broken off after a shorttime, and therefore yielded an anamnesis not much more reliable than

the other anamneses of homosexuals, which there is good cause to

question. Further, the girl had never been neurotic, and came to the

analysis without even one hysterical symptom, so that opportunities

for  investigating  the  history  of  her  childhood  did  not  present

themselves so readily as usual.

      At  the  age  of  thirteen  to  fourteen  she  displayed  a  tender  and,

according  to  general  opinion,  exaggeratedly  strong  affection  for  a

small boy, not quite three years old, whom she used to see regularly

in  a  children’s  playground.  She  took  to  the  child  so  warmly  that  in

consequence  a  lasting  friendship  grew  up  between  herself  and  his

parents. One may infer from this episode that at that time she was

possessed of a strong desire to be a mother herself and to have a

child. However, after a short time she grew indifferent to the boy, and

began  to  take  an  interest  in  mature,  but  still  youthful,  women.  The

manifestations  of  this  interest  soon  brought  upon  her  a  severe

chastisement at the hands of her father.

 

   ¹ I do not see any advance or gain in the introduction of the term ‘Electra complex’, and do

not advocate its use.
 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3846

 

      It  was  established  beyond  all  doubt  that  this  change  occurred

simultaneously  with  a  certain  event  in  the  family,  and  one  may

therefore look to this for some explanation of the change. Before it

happened, her libido was concentrated on a maternal attitude, while

afterwards  she  became  a  homosexual  attracted  to  mature  women,

and remained so ever since. The event which is so significant for our

understanding of the case was a new pregnancy of her mother’s, and

the birth of a third brother when she was about sixteen.

   The position of affairs which I shall now proceed to lay bare is not a

product  of  my  inventive  powers;  it  is  based  on  such  trustworthy

analytic  evidence  that  I  can  claim  objective  validity  for  it.  It  was  in

particular a series of dreams, interrelated and easy to interpret, that

decided me in favour of its reality.   The analysis revealed beyond all shadow of doubt that the lady-love

was a substitute for - her mother. It is true that the lady herself was not

a mother, but then she was not the girl’s first love. The first objects of

her  affection  after  the  birth  of  her  youngest  brother  were  really

mothers, women between thirty and thirty-five whom she had met with

their  children  during  summer  holidays  or  in  the  family  circle  of

acquaintances in town. Motherhood as a sine qua non in her love-

object was later on given up, because that precondition was difficult to

combine  in  real  life  with  another  one,  which  grew  more  and  more

important.  The  specially  intense  bond  with  her  latest  love  had  still

another  basis  which  the  girl  discovered  quite  easily  one  day.  Her

lady’s slender figure, severe beauty, and downright manner reminded

her of the brother who was a little older than herself. Her latest choice

corresponded,  therefore,  not  only  to  her  feminine  but  also  to  her

masculine ideal; it combined satisfaction of the homosexual tendency

with that of the heterosexual one. It is well known that analysis of male

homosexuals has in numerous cases revealed the same combination,

which  should  warn  us  not  to  form  too  simple  a  conception  of  the

nature and genesis of inversion, and to keep in mind the universal

bisexuality of human beings.¹

 

   ¹ Cf. Sadger (1914).

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3847

 

   But how are we to understand the fact that it was precisely the birth

of a child who came late in the family (at a time when the girl herself

was already mature and had strong wishes of her own) that moved

her to bestow her passionate tenderness upon the woman who gave

birth to this child, i. e. her own mother, and to express that feeling

towards a substitute for her mother? From all that we know we should

have expected just the opposite. In such circumstances mothers with

daughters of nearly a marriageable age usually feel embarrassed in

regard to them, while the daughters are apt to feel for their mothers a

mixture  of  compassion,  contempt  and  envy  which  does  nothing  to

increase their tenderness for them. The girl we are considering had inany case altogether little cause to feel affection for her mother. The

latter, still youthful herself, saw in her rapidly developing daughter an

inconvenient  competitor;  she  favoured  the  sons  at  her  expense,

limited her independence as much as possible, and kept an especially

strict watch against any close relation between the girl and her father.

A yearning from the beginning for a kinder mother would, therefore,

have been quite intelligible, but why it should have flared up just then,

and in the form of a consuming passion, is hard to understand.

      The  explanation  is  as  follows.  It  was  just  when  the  girl  was

experiencing the revival of her infantile Oedipus complex at puberty

that  she  suffered  her  great  disappointment.  She  became  keenly

conscious of the wish to have a child, and a male one; that what she

desired was her father’s child and an image of him, her consciousness

was not allowed to know. And what happened next? It was not she

who  bore  the  child,  but  her  unconsciously  hated  rival,  her  mother.

Furiously resentful and embittered, she turned away from her father

and from men altogether. After this first great reverse she forswore her

womanhood and sought another goal for her libido.

   In doing so she behaved just as many men do who after a first

distressing  experience  turn  their  backs  forever  upon  the  faithless

female sex and become woman-haters. It is related of one of the most

attractive and unfortunate princely figures of our time that he became

a homosexual because the lady he was engaged to marry betrayed

him with another man. I do not know whether this is true historically,

but an element of psychological truth lies behind the rumour. In all of

us, throughout life, the libido normally oscillates between male and

female  objects;  the  bachelor  gives  up  his  men  friends  when  he

marries, and returns to club-life when married life has lost its savour.

Naturally, when the swing-over is fundamental and final, we suspect

the presence of some special factor which definitely favours one side

or the other, and which perhaps has only waited for the appropriate

moment in order to turn the choice of object in its direction.

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3848

    After her disappointment, therefore, this girl had entirely repudiated

her wish for a child, her love of men, and the feminine role in general.

It is evident that at this point a number of very different things might

have happened. What actually happened was the most extreme case.

She changed into a man and took her mother in place of her father as

the object of her love.¹  Her relation to her mother had certainly been

ambivalent from the beginning, and it proved easy to revive her earlier

love  for  her  mother  and  with  its  help  to  bring  about  an

overcompensation  for  her  current  hostility  towards  her.  Since  there

was  little  to  be  done  with  the  real  mother,  there  arose  from  this

transformation of feeling the search for a substitute mother to whom

she could become passionately attached.²

 

    ¹ It  is  by  no  means  rare  for  a  love-relation  to  be  broken  off  through  a  process  of

identification on the part of the lover with the loved object, a process equivalent to a kind of
regression to narcissism. After this has been accomplished, it is easy in making a fresh choice
of object to direct the libido to a member of the sex opposite to that of the earlier choice.

   ² The displacements of the libido here described are doubtless familiar to every analyst

from investigation of the anamneses of neurotics. With the latter, however, they occur in early
childhood, at the time of the early efflorescence of erotic life; with our patient, who was in no
way neurotic, they took place in the first years following puberty, though, incidentally, they
were just as completely unconscious. Perhaps one day this temporal factor may turn out to be
of great importance.
 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3849

 

   There was, in addition, a practical motive for this change, derived

from her real relations with her mother, which served as a gain from

her  illness.  The  mother  herself  still  attached  great  value  to  the

attentions  and  the  admiration  of  men.  If,  then,  the  girl  became

homosexual  and  left  men  to  her  mother  (in  other  words,  ‘retired  in

favour  of’  her  mother),  she  would  remove  something  which  had

hitherto been partly responsible for her mother’s dislike.¹

      This  libidinal  position  of  the  girl’s,  thus  arrived  at,  was  greatly

reinforced  as  soon  as  she  perceived  how  much  it  displeased  her

father. After she had been punished for her over-affectionate attitude

to a woman she realized how she could wound her father and take

revenge on him. Henceforth she remained homosexual out of defianceagainst her father. Nor did she scruple to lie to him and to deceive him

in  every  way.  Towards  her  mother,  indeed,  she  was  only  so  far

deceitful as was necessary to prevent her father from knowing things.

I had the impression that her behaviour followed the principle of the

talion:  ‘Since  you  have  betrayed  me,  you  must  put  up  with  my

betraying  you.’  Nor  can  I  come  to  any  other  conclusion  about  the

striking lack of caution displayed by this otherwise exceedingly shrewd

girl. She wanted her father to know occasionally of her relations with

the lady, otherwise she would be deprived of the satisfaction of her

keenest  desire  -  namely,  revenge.  So  she  saw  to  this  by  showing

herself openly in the company of her adored one, by walking with her

in the streets near her father’s place of business, and the like. This

maladroitness,  moreover,  was  by  no  means  unintentional.  It  was

remarkable, too, that both parents behaved as if they understood their

daughter’s secret psychology. The mother was tolerant, as though she

appreciated her daughter’s ‘retirement’ as a favour to her; the father

was  furious,  as  though  he  realized  the  deliberate  revenge  directed

against himself.

   The girl’s inversion, however, received its final reinforcement when

she found in her ‘lady’ an object which promised to satisfy not only her

homosexual trends, but also that part of her heterosexual libido which

was still attached to her brother.

 

   ¹ As ‘retiring in favour of someone else’ has not previously been mentioned among the

causes of homosexuality, or in the mechanism of libidinal fixation in general, I will adduce
here another analytic observation of the same kind which has a special feature of interest. I
once knew two twin brothers, both of whom were endowed with strong libidinal impulses. One
of them was very successful with women, and had innumerable affairs with women and girls.
The other went the same way at first, but it became unpleasant for him to be trespassing on
his brother’s preserves, and, owing to the likeness between them, to be mistaken for him on
intimate occasions; so he got out of the difficulty by becoming homosexual. He left the women
to his brother, and thus retired in his favour. Another time I treated a youngish man, an artist,
unmistakably bisexual in disposition, in whom the homosexual trend had come to the fore
simultaneously with a disturbance in his work. He fled from both women and work together.
The analysis, which was able to bring him back to both, showed that fear of his father was the
most powerful psychical motive for both the disturbances, which were really renunciations. In
his  imagination  all  women  belonged  to  his  father,  and  he  sought  refuge  in  men  out  of
submission,  so  as  to  retire  from  the  conflict  with  his  father.  Such  a  motivation  of  the
homosexual object-choice must be by no means uncommon; in the primaeval ages of the
human race all women presumably belonged to the father and head of the primal horde.
   Among brothers and sisters who are not twins this ‘retiring’ plays a great part in other
spheres as well as in that of erotic choice. For example, an elder brother studies music and isadmired for it; the younger, far more gifted musically, soon gives up his own musical studies,
in spite of his fondness for it, and cannot be persuaded to touch an instrument again. This is
only one example of a very frequent occurrence, and investigation of the motives leading to
this ‘retirement’ rather than to open rivalry discloses very complicated conditions in the mind.
 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3850

 

                                            III

 

      Linear  presentation  is  not  a  very  adequate  means  of  describing

complicated mental processes going on in different layers of the mind.

I am therefore obliged to pause in the discussion of the case and treat

more fully and deeply some of the points brought forward above.

   I mentioned the fact that in her behaviour to her adored lady the girl

had adopted the characteristic masculine type of love. Her humility

and her tender lack of pretensions, ‘che poco spera e nulla chiede’,

her bliss when she was allowed to accompany the lady a little way and

to kiss her hand on parting, her joy when she heard her praised as

beautiful (while any recognition of her own beauty by another person

meant nothing at all to her), her pilgrimages to places once visited by

the loved one, the silence of all more sensual wishes - all these little

traits in her resembled the first passionate adoration of a youth for a

celebrated actress whom he regards as far above him, to whom he

scarcely  dares  lift  his  bashful  eyes.  The  correspondence  with  ‘a

special type of choice of object made by men’ that I have described

elsewhere (1910h), whose special features I traced to attachment to

the  mother,  held  good  even  to  the  smallest  details.  It  may  seem

remarkable that she was not in the least repelled by the bad reputation

of her beloved, although her own observations sufficiently confirmed

the truth of such rumours. She was after all a well-brought-up and

modest girl, who had avoided sexual adventures for herself, and who

regarded coarsely sensual satisfactions as unaesthetic. But already

her first passions had been for women who were not celebrated for

specially strict propriety. The first protest her father made against her

love-choice had been evoked by the pertinacity with which she sought

the company of a film actress at a summer resort. Moreover, in all

these affairs it had never been a question of women who had anyreputation for homosexuality, and who might, therefore, have offered

her some prospect of homosexual satisfaction; on the contrary, she

illogically courted women who were coquettes in the ordinary sense of

the  word,  and  she  rejected  without  hesitation  the  willing  advances

made  by  a  homosexual  friend  of  her  own  age.  For  her,  the  bad

reputation of her ‘lady’, however, was positively a ‘necessary condition

for  love’.  All  that  is  enigmatic  in  this  attitude  vanishes  when  we

remember that in the case too of the masculine type of object-choice

derived  from  the  mother  it  is  a  necessary  condition  that  the  loved

object  should  be  in  some  way  or  other  ‘of  bad  repute’  sexually  -

someone who really may be called a cocotte. When the girl learnt later

how far her adored lady deserved this description and that she lived

simply by giving her bodily favours, her reaction took the form of great

compassion and of phantasies and plans for ‘rescuing’ her beloved

from these ignoble circumstances. We were struck by the same urge

to  ‘rescue’  in  the  men  of  the  type  referred  to  above,  and  in  my

description of it I have tried to give the analytic derivation of this urge.

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3851

 

   We are led into quite another realm of explanation by the analysis of

the attempt at suicide, which I must regard as seriously intended, and

which, incidentally, considerably improved her position both with her

parents and with the lady she loved. She went for a walk with her one

day in a part of the town and at an hour at which she was not unlikely

to meet her father on his way from his office. So it turned out. Her

father passed them in the street and cast a furious look at her and her

companion, about whom he had by that time come to know. A few

moments  later  she  flung  herself  into  the  railway  cutting.  The

explanation  she  gave  of  the  immediate  reasons  determining  her

decision sounded quite plausible. She had confessed to the lady that

the man who had given them such an irate glance was her father, and

that  he  had  absolutely  forbidden  their  friendship.  The  lady  became

incensed at this and ordered the girl to leave her then and there, and

never again to wait for her or to address her - the affair must nowcome to an end. In her despair at having thus lost her loved one for

ever, she wanted to put an end to herself. The analysis, however, was

able to disclose another and deeper interpretation behind the one she

gave, which was confirmed by the evidence of her own dreams. The

attempted suicide was, as might have been expected, determined by

two other motives besides the one she gave: it was the fulfilment of a

punishment  (self-punishment),  and  the  fulfilment  of  a  wish.  As  the

latter it meant the attainment of the very wish which, when frustrated,

had driven her into homosexuality - namely, the wish to have a child

by her father, for now she ‘fell’ through her father’s fault.¹ The fact that

at that moment the lady had spoken in just the same terms as her

father, and had uttered the same prohibition, forms the connecting link

between this deep interpretation and the superficial one of which the

girl herself was conscious. From the point of view of self-punishment

the girl’s action shows us that she had developed in her unconscious

strong  death-wishes  against  one  or  other  of  her  parents  -  perhaps

against  her  father,  out  of  revenge  for  impeding  her  love,  but  more

probably against her mother too, when she was pregnant with the little

brother.  For  analysis  has  explained  the  enigma  of  suicide  in  the

following way: probably no one finds the mental energy required to kill

himself unless, in the first place, in doing so he is at the same time

killing  an  object  with  whom  he  has  identified  himself,  and,  in  the

second place, is turning against himself a death-wish which had been

directed  against  someone  else.  Nor  need  the  regular  discovery  of

these unconscious death-wishes in those who have attempted suicide

surprise us (any more than it ought to make us think that it confirms

our  deductions),  since  the  unconscious  of  all  human  beings  is  full

enough of such death-wishes, even against those they love.² Since

the girl identified herself with her mother, who should have died at the

birth of the child denied to herself, this punishment-fulfilment itself was

once again a wish-fulfilment. Finally, the discovery that several quite

different motives, all of great strength, must have co-operated to make

such  a  deed  possible  is  only  in  accordance  with  what  we  should

expect.

 

   ¹ That the various methods of suicide can represent sexual wish-fulfilments has long been

known to all analysts. (To poison oneself = to become pregnant; to drown - to bear a child; to
throw oneself from a height = to be delivered of a child.)   ² Cf. ‘Thoughts for the Times on War and Death’ (1915b).

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3852

 

   In the girl’s account of her conscious motives the father did not

figure at all; there was not even any mention of fear of his anger. In

the motives laid bare by the analysis, on the other hand, he played the

principal  part.  Her  relation  to  her  father  had  the  same  decisive

importance for the course and outcome of the analytic treatment, or

rather,  analytic  exploration.  Behind  her  pretended  consideration  for

her parents, for whose sake she had been willing to make the attempt

to be transformed, lay concealed her attitude of defiance and revenge

against her father which held her fast to her homosexuality. Secure

under  this  cover,  the  resistance  set  a  considerable  region  free  to

analytic investigation. The analysis went forward almost without any

signs of resistance, the patient participating actively with her intellect,

though absolutely tranquil emotionally. Once when I expounded to her

a specially important part of the theory, one touching her nearly, she

replied  in  an  inimitable  tone,  ‘How  very  interesting’,  as  though  she

were  a grande  dame  being  taken  over  a  museum  and  glancing

through her lorgnon at objects to which she was completely indifferent.

The  impression  one  had  of  her  analysis  was  not  unlike  that  of  a

hypnotic  treatment,  where  the  resistance  has  in  the  same  way

withdrawn to a certain boundary line, beyond which it proves to be

unconquerable.  The  resistance  very  often  pursues  similar  tactics  -

Russian  tactics,  as  they  might  be  called  -  in  cases  of  obsessional

neurosis.  For  a  time,  consequently,  these  cases  yield  the  clearest

results and permit a deep insight into the causation of the symptoms.

But  presently  one  begins  to  wonder  how  it  is  that  such  marked

progress in analytic understanding can be unaccompanied by even

the slightest change in the patient’s compulsions and inhibitions, until

at last one perceives that everything that has been accomplished is

subject  to  a  mental  reservation  of  doubt,  and  that  behind  this

protective barrier the neurosis can feel secure. ‘It would be all very

fine’, thinks the patient, often quite consciously, ‘if I were obliged tobelieve what the man says, but there is no question of that, and so

long as this is so I need change nothing.’ Then, when one comes to

close  quarters  with  the  motives  for  this  doubt,  the  fight  with  the

resistances breaks out in earnest.

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3853

 

   In the case of our patient, it was not doubt but the affective factor of

revenge against her father that made her cool reserve possible, that

divided the analysis into two distinct phases, and rendered the results

of the first phase so complete and perspicuous. It seemed, further, as

though nothing resembling a transference to the physician had been

effected. That, however, is of course absurd, or, at least, is a loose

way of expressing things. For some kind of relation to the analyst must

come into being, and this relation is almost always transferred from an

infantile one. In reality she transferred to me the sweeping repudiation

of men which had dominated her ever since the disappointment she

had suffered from her father. Bitterness against men is as a rule easy

to gratify upon the physician; it need not evoke any violent emotional

manifestations,  it  simply  expresses  itself  by  rendering  futile  all  his

endeavours and - by clinging to the illness. I know from experience

how difficult it is to make a patient understand just precisely this mute

kind of symptomatic behaviour and to make him aware of this latent,

and  often  exceedingly  strong,  hostility  without  endangering  the

treatment. As soon, therefore, as I recognized the girl’s attitude to her

father, I broke off the treatment and advised her parents that if they

set store by the therapeutic procedure it should be continued by a

woman doctor. The girl had in the meanwhile promised her father that

at any rate she would give up seeing the ‘lady’, and I do not know

whether  my  advice,  the  reasons  for  which  are  obvious,  will  be

followed.

   There was a single piece of material in the course of this analysis

which I could regard as a positive transference, as a greatly weakened

revival of the girl’s original passionate love for her father. Even this

manifestation was not quite free from other motives, but I mention itbecause it brings up, in another direction, an interesting problem of

analytic technique. At a certain period, not long after the treatment had

begun, the girl brought a series of dreams which, distorted according

to rule and couched in the usual dream-language, could nevertheless

be  easily  translated  with  certainty.  Their  content,  when  interpreted,

was, however, remarkable. They anticipated the cure of the inversion

through the treatment, expressed her joy over the prospects in life that

would then be opened before her, confessed her longing for a man’s

love  and  for  children,  and  so  might  have  been  welcomed  as  a

gratifying  preparation  for  the  desired  change.  The  contradiction

between them and the girl’s utterances in waking life at the time was

very great. She did not conceal from me that she meant to marry, but

only in order to escape from her father’s tyranny and to follow her true

inclinations  undisturbed.  As  for  the  husband,  she  remarked  rather

contemptuously,  she  would  easily  deal  with  him,  and  besides,  one

could have sexual relations with a man and a woman at one and the

same  time,  as  the  example  of  the  adored  lady  showed.  Warned

through some slight impression or other, I told her one day that I did

not believe these dreams, that I regarded them as false or hypocritical,

and that she intended to deceive me just as she habitually deceived

her father. I was right; after I had made this clear, this kind of dream

ceased. But I still believe that, beside the intention to mislead me, the

dreams partly expressed the wish to win my favour; they were also an

attempt to gain my interest and my good opinion - perhaps in order to

disappoint me all the more thoroughly later on.

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3854

 

   I can imagine that to point out the existence of lying dreams of this

kind,  ‘obliging’  dreams,  will  arouse  a  positive  storm  of  helpless

indignation  in  some  readers  who  call  themselves  analysts.  ‘What!’

they will exclaim, ‘the unconscious, the real centre of our mental life,

the  part  of  us  that  is  so  much  nearer  the  divine  than  our  poor

consciousness  -  it  too  can  lie!  Then  how  can  we  still  build  on  the

interpretations of analysis and the accuracy of our findings?’ To whichone must reply that the recognition of these lying dreams does not

constitute any shattering novelty. I know, indeed, that the craving of

mankind for mysticism is ineradicable, and that it makes ceaseless

efforts to win back for mysticism the territory it has been deprived of

by The  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  but  surely  in  the  case  under

consideration  everything  is  simple  enough.  A  dream  is  not  the

‘unconscious’;  it  is  the  form  into  which  a  thought  left  over  from

preconscious, or even from conscious, waking life, can, thanks to the

favouring state of sleep, be recast. In the state of sleep this thought

has been reinforced by unconscious wishful impulses and has thus

experienced distortion through the dream-work, which is determined

by the mechanisms prevailing in the unconscious. With our dreamer,

the  intention  to  mislead  me,  just  as  she  did  her  father,  certainly

emanated  from  the  preconscious,  and  may  indeed  have  been

conscious;  it  could  come  to  expression  by  entering  into  connection

with the unconscious wishful impulse to please her father (or father-

substitute),  and  in  this  way  it  created  a  lying  dream.  The  two

intentions, to betray and to please her father, originated in the same

complex; the former resulted from the repression of the latter, and the

later  one  was  brought  back  by  the  dream-work  to  the  earlier  one.

There  can  therefore  be  no  question  of  any  devaluation  of  the

unconscious, nor of a shattering of our confidence in the results of

analysis.

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3855

 

      I  cannot  neglect  this  opportunity  of  expressing  for  once  my

astonishment  that  human  beings  can  go  through  such  great  and

important  moments  of  their  erotic  life  without  noticing  them  much,

sometimes even, indeed, without having the faintest suspicion of their

existence, or else, having become aware of those moments, deceive

themselves so thoroughly in their judgement of them. This happens

not  only  under  neurotic  conditions,  where  we  are  familiar  with  the

phenomenon, but seems also to be common enough in ordinary life.

In  the  present  case,  for  example,  a  girl  develops  a  sentimentaladoration for women, which her parents at first find merely vexatious

and hardly take seriously; she herself knows quite well that she is very

much occupied with these relationships, but still she experiences few

of  the  sensations  of  intense  love  until  a  particular  frustration  is

followed  by  a  quite  excessive  reaction,  which  shows  everyone

concerned that they have to do with a consuming passion of elemental

strength.  Nor  had  the  girl  ever  perceived  anything  of  the  state  of

affairs  which  was  a  necessary  preliminary  to  the  outbreak  of  this

mental storm. In other cases, too, we come across girls or women in a

state of severe depression, who on being asked for a possible cause

of their condition tell us that they have, it is true, had a slight feeling for

a certain person, but that it was nothing deep and that they soon got

over it when they had to give it up. And yet it was this renunciation,

apparently so easily borne, that became the cause of serious mental

disturbance. Again, we come across men who have passed through

casual love-affairs and realize only from the subsequent effects that

they had been passionately in love with the person whom they had

apparently regarded lightly. One is also amazed at the unexpected

results that may follow an artificial abortion, the killing of an unborn

child,  which  had  been  decided  upon  without  remorse  and  without

hesitation. It must be admitted that poets are right in liking to portray

people who are in love without knowing it, or uncertain whether they

do love, or who think that they hate when in reality they love. It would

seem that the information received by our consciousness about our

erotic life is especially liable to be incomplete, full of gaps, or falsified.

Needless to say, in this discussion I have not omitted to allow for the

part played by subsequent forgetting.

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3856

 

                                            IV

 

   I now come back, after this digression, to the consideration of my

patient’s case. We have made a survey of the forces which led the

girl’s  libido  from  the  normal  Oedipus  attitude  into  that  ofhomosexuality,  and  of  the  psychical  paths  traversed  by  it  in  the

process. Most important in this respect was the impression made by

the birth of her little brother, and we might from this be inclined to

classify the case as one of late-acquired inversion.

   But at this point we become aware of a state of things which also

confronts us in many other instances in which light has been thrown

by  psycho-analysis  on  a  mental  process.  So  long  as  we  trace  the

development from its final outcome backwards, the chain of events

appears continuous, and we feel we have gained an insight which is

completely  satisfactory  or  even  exhaustive.  But  if  we  proceed  the

reverse way, if we start from the premises inferred from the analysis

and try to follow these up to the final result, then we no longer get the

impression of an inevitable sequence of events which could not have

been otherwise determined. We notice at once that there might have

been another result, and that we might have been just as well able to

understand  and  explain  the  latter.  The  synthesis  is  thus  not  so

satisfactory as the analysis; in other words, from a knowledge of the

premises we could not have foretold the nature of the result.

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3857

 

   It is very easy to account for this disturbing state of affairs. Even

supposing  that  we  have  a  complete  knowledge  of  the  aetiological

factors that decide a given result, nevertheless what we know about

them is only their quality, and not their relative strength. Some of them

are  suppressed  by  others  because  they  are  too  weak,  and  they

therefore do not affect the final result. But we never know beforehand

which of the determining factors will prove the weaker or the stronger.

We only say at the end that those which succeeded must have been

the stronger. Hence the chain of causation can always be recognized

with certainty if we follow the line of analysis, whereas to predict it

along the line of synthesis is impossible.

      We  do  not,  therefore,  mean  to  maintain  that  every  girl  who

experiences a disappointment such as this of the longing for love that

springs from the Oedipus attitude at puberty will necessarily on thataccount fall a victim to homosexuality. On the contrary, other kinds of

reaction to this trauma are undoubtedly commoner. If so, however,

there must have been present in this girl special factors that turned the

scale, factors outside the trauma, probably of an internal nature. Nor is

there any difficulty in pointing them out.

   It is well known that even in a normal person it takes a certain time

before the decision in regard to the sex of the love object is finally

made.  Homosexual  enthusiasms,  exaggeratedly  strong  friendships

tinged with sensuality, are common enough in both sexes during the

first years after puberty. This was also so with our patient, but in her

these tendencies undoubtedly showed themselves to be stronger, and

lasted longer, than with others. In addition, these presages of later

homosexuality  had  always  occupied  her conscious  life,  while  the

attitude arising from the Oedipus complex had remained unconscious

and had appeared only in such signs as her tender behaviour to the

little boy. As a school-girl she had been for a long time in love with a

strict  and  unapproachable  mistress,  obviously  a  substitute  mother.

She had taken a specially lively interest in a number of young mothers

long before her brother’s birth and therefore all the more certainly long

before  the  first  reprimand  from  her  father.  From  very  early  years,

therefore, her libido had flowed in two currents, the one on the surface

being one that we may unhesitatingly designate as homosexual. This

latter was probably a direct and unchanged continuation of an infantile

fixation on her mother. Possibly the analysis described here actually

revealed nothing more than the process by which, on an appropriate

occasion, the deeper heterosexual current of libido, too, was deflected

into the manifest homosexual one.

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3858

 

   The analysis showed, further, that the girl had brought along with

her  from  her  childhood  a  strongly  marked  ‘masculinity  complex’.  A

spirited girl, always ready for romping and fighting, she was not at all

prepared to be second to her slightly older brother; after inspecting his

genital organs she had developed a pronounced envy for the penis,and the thoughts derived from this envy still continued to fill her mind.

She was in fact a feminist; she felt it to be unjust that girls should not

enjoy  the  same  freedom  as  boys,  and  rebelled  against  the  lot  of

woman in general. At the time of the analysis the idea of pregnancy

and child-birth was disagreeable to her, partly, I surmise, on account

of the bodily disfigurement connected with them. Her girlish narcissism

had fallen back on this defence,¹ and ceased to express itself as pride

in her good looks. Various clues indicated that she must formerly have

had  strong  exhibitionist  and  scopophilic  tendencies.  Anyone  who  is

anxious that the claims of acquired as opposed to hereditary factors

should not be under-estimated in aetiology will call attention to the fact

that the girl’s behaviour, as described above, was exactly what would

follow  from  the  combined  effect  in  a  person  with  a  strong  mother-

fixation  of  the  two  influences  of  her  mother’s  neglect  and  her

comparison of her genital organs with her brother’s. It is possible here

to  attribute  to  the  impress  of  the  operation  of  external  influence  in

early  life  something  which  one  would  have  liked  to  regard  as  a

constitutional  peculiarity.  On  the  other  hand,  a  part  even  of  this

acquired disposition (if it was really acquired) has to be ascribed to

inborn constitution. So we see in practice a continual mingling and

blending of what in theory we should try to separate into a pair of

opposites - namely, inherited and acquired characters.

   If the analysis had come to an earlier, still more premature end, it

might  have  led  to  the  view  that  this  was  a  case  of  late  acquired

homosexuality, but as it is, a consideration of the material impels us to

conclude that it is rather a case of congenital homosexuality which, as

usual,  became  fixed  and  unmistakably  manifest  only  in  the  period

following puberty. Each of these classifications does justice only to

one  part  of  the  state  of  affairs  ascertainable  by  observation,  but

neglects the other. It would be best not to attach too much value to

this way of stating the problem.

 

¹ Cf. Kriemhilde’s admission in the Nibelungenlied.

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3859

    The literature of homosexuality usually fails to distinguish clearly

enough  between  the  questions  of  the  choice  of  object  on  the  one

hand,  and  of  the  sexual  characteristics  and  sexual  attitude  of  the

subject on the other, as though the answer to the former necessarily

involved the answers to the latter. Experience, however, proves the

contrary:  a  man  with  predominantly  male  characteristics  and  also

masculine in his erotic life may still be inverted in respect to his object,

loving  only  men  instead  of  women.  A  man  in  whose  character

feminine attributes obviously predominate, who may, indeed, behave

in love like a woman, might be expected, from this feminine attitude, to

choose  a  man  for  his  love-object;  but  he  may  nevertheless  be

heterosexual,  and  show  no  more  inversion  in  respect  to  his  object

than an average normal man. The same is true of women; here also

mental  sexual  character  and  object-choice  do  not  necessarily

coincide. The mystery of homosexuality is therefore by no means so

simple as it is commonly depicted in popular expositions - ‘a feminine

mind,  bound  therefore  to  love  a  man,  but  unhappily  attached  to  a

masculine  body;  a  masculine  mind,  irresistibly  attracted  by  women,

but, alas! imprisoned in a feminine body’. It is instead a question of

three sets of characteristics, namely -

 

                            Physical sexual characters

                                (physical hermaphroditism)

 

                            Mental sexual characters

                              (masculine or feminine attitude)

 

                                Kind of object-choice

 

which, up to a certain point, vary independently of one another, and

are  met  with  in  different  individuals  in  manifold  permutations.

Tendentious literature has obscured our view of this interrelationship

by putting into the foreground, for practical reasons, the third feature

(the  kind  of  object-choice),  which  is  the  only  one  that  strikes  the

layman,  and  in  addition  by  exaggerating  the  closeness  of  the

association between this and the first feature. Moreover, it blocks the

way  to  a  deeper  insight  into  all  that  is  uniformly  designated  as

homosexuality, by rejecting two fundamental facts which have beenrevealed  by  psycho-analytic  investigation.  The  first  of  these  is  that

homosexual men have experienced a specially strong fixation on their

mother; the second, that, in addition to their manifest heterosexuality,

a very considerable measure of latent or unconscious homosexuality

can be detected in all normal people. If these findings are taken into

account, then, clearly, the supposition that nature in a freakish mood

created a ‘third sex’ falls to the ground.

 


      The Psychogenesis Of A Case Of Homosexuality In A Woman

                                                                                      3860

 

   It is not for psycho-analysis to solve the problem of homosexuality. It

must  rest  content  with  disclosing  the  psychical  mechanisms  that

resulted in determining the object-choice, and with tracing back the

paths from them to the instinctual dispositions. There its work ends,

and  it  leaves  the  rest  to  biological  research,  which  has  recently

brought to light, through Steinach’s¹ experiments, such very important

results  concerning  the  influence  exerted  by  the  first  set  of

characteristics mentioned above upon the second and third. Psycho-

analysis has a common basis with biology, in that it presupposes an

original  bisexuality  in  human  beings  (as  in  animals).  But  psycho-

analysis cannot elucidate the intrinsic nature of what in conventional

or  in  biological  phraseology  is  termed  ‘masculine’  and  ‘feminine’:  it

simply takes over the two concepts and makes them the foundation of

its work. When we attempt to reduce them further, we find masculinity

vanishing into activity and femininity into passivity, and that does not

tell  us  enough.  I  have  already  tried  to  explain  how  far  we  may

reasonably expect, or how far experience has already proved, that the

work of elucidation which is part of the task of analysis furnishes us

with  the  means  of  effecting  a  modification  of  inversion.  When  one

compares the extent to which we can influence it with the remarkable

transformations  that  Steinach  has  effected  in  some  cases  by  his

operations, it does not make a very imposing impression. But it would

be premature, or a harmful exaggeration, if at this stage we were to

indulge in hopes of a ‘therapy’ of inversion that could be generally

applied. The cases of male homosexuality in which Steinach has beensuccessful fulfilled the condition, which is not always present, of a very

patent physical ‘hermaphroditism’. Any analogous treatment of female

homosexuality  is  at  present  quite  obscure.  If  it  were  to  consist  in

removing what are probably hermaphroditic ovaries, and in grafting

others, which are hoped to be of a single sex, there would be little

prospect of its being applied in practice. A woman who has felt herself

to be a man, and has loved in masculine fashion, will hardly let herself

be forced into playing the part of a woman, when she must pay for this

transformation,  which  is  not  in  every  way  advantageous,  by

renouncing all hope of motherhood.

 

   ¹ Cf. Lipschütz (1919).

                                                                                       3861

 

                      PSYCHO-ANALYSIS AND TELEPATHY

                                    (1941 [1921])

 


                                                                                      3862

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3863

 

                      PSYCHO-ANALYSIS AND TELEPATHY

 

                                  INTRODUCTORY

 

We are not destined, so it seems, to devote ourselves quietly to the

extension of our science. Scarcely have we triumphantly repulsed two

attacks - one of which sought to deny once more what we had brought

to light and only offered us in exchange the theme of disavowal, while

the other tried to persuade us that we had mistaken the nature of what

we had found and might with advantage take something else in its

place - scarcely, then, do we feel ourselves safe from these enemies,

when  another  peril  has  arisen.  And  this  time  it  is  something

tremendous, something elemental, which threatens not us alone but

our enemies, perhaps, still more.

   It no longer seems possible to keep away from the study of what are

known as ‘occult’ phenomena - of facts, that is, that profess to speak

in  favour  of  the  real  existence  of  psychical  forces  other  than  the

human and animal minds with which we are familiar, or that seem to

reveal  the  possession  by  those  minds  of  faculties  hitherto

unrecognized.  The  impetus  towards  such  an  investigation  seems

irresistibly strong. During this last brief vacation I have three times had

occasion to refuse to associate myself with newly founded periodicals

concerned with these studies. Nor is there much doubt as to the origin

of  this  trend.  It  is  a  part  expression  of  the  loss  of  value  by  whicheverything has been affected since the world catastrophe of the Great

War, a part of the tentative approach to the great revolution towards

which we are heading and of whose extent we can form no estimate;

but no doubt it is also an attempt at compensation, at making up in

another, a supermundane, sphere for the attractions which have been

lost by life on this earth. Some, indeed, of the proceedings of the exact

sciences themselves may have contributed to this development. The

discovery of radium has confused no less than it has advanced the

possibilities of explaining the physical world; and the knowledge that

has  been  so  very  recently  acquired  of  what  is  called  the  theory  of

relativity has had the effect upon many of those who admire without

comprehending  it  of  diminishing  their  belief  in  the  objective

trustworthiness  of  science.  You  will  remember  that  not  long  ago

Einstein  himself  took  occasion  to  protest  against  such

misunderstanding.

 


                            Psycho-Analysis And Telepathy

                                                                                      3864

 

   It does not follow as a matter of course that an intensified interest in

occultism must involve a danger to psycho-analysis. We should, on

the contrary, be prepared to find reciprocal sympathy between them.

They  have  both  experienced  the  same  contemptuous  and  arrogant

treatment by official science. To this day psycho-analysis is regarded

as savouring of mysticism, and its unconscious is looked upon as one

of the things between heaven and earth which philosophy refuses to

dream of. The numerous suggestions made to us by occultists that we

should co-operate with them show that they would like to treat us as

half belonging to them and that they count on our support against the

pressure  of  exact  authority.  Nor,  on  the  other  hand,  has  psycho-

analysis any interest in going out of its way to defend that authority, for

it  itself  stands  in  opposition  to  everything  that  is  conventionally

restricted,  well-established  and  generally  accepted.  Not  for  the  first

time  would  it  be  offering  its  help  to  the  obscure  but  indestructible

surmises of the common people against the obscurantism of educated

opinion.  Alliance  and  co-operation  between  analysts  and  occultistsmight thus appear both plausible and promising.

   But if we look closer, difficulties begin to emerge. The immense

majority of occultists are not driven by a desire for knowledge or by a

sense of shame that science has so long refused to take cognizance

of what are indisputable problems or by a desire to conquer this new

sphere of phenomena. They are, on the contrary, convinced believers

who  are  looking  for  confirmation  and  for  something  that  will  justify

them  in  openly  confessing  their  faith.  But  the  faith  which  they  first

adopt themselves and then seek to impose on other people is either

the old religious faith which has been pushed into the background by

science in the course of human development, or another one even

closer to the superseded convictions of primitive peoples. Analysts, on

the other hand, cannot repudiate their descent from exact science and

their community with its representatives. Moved by an extreme distrust

of the power of human wishes and of the temptations of the pleasure

principle, they are ready, for the sake of attaining some fragment of

objective certainty, to sacrifice everything - the dazzling brilliance of a

flawless  theory,  the  exalted  consciousness  of  having  achieved  a

comprehensive  view  of  the  universe,  and  the  mental  calm  brought

about  by  the  possession  of  extensive  grounds  for  expedient  and

ethical action. In place of all these, they are content with fragmentary

pieces of knowledge and with basic hypotheses lacking preciseness

and ever open to revision. Instead of waiting for the moment when

they will be able to escape from the constraint of the familiar laws of

physics  and  chemistry,  they  hope  for  the  emergence  of  more

extensive and deeper-reaching natural laws, to which they are ready

to  submit.  Analysts  are  at  bottom  incorrigible  mechanists  and

materialists,  even  though  they  seek  to  avoid  robbing  the  mind  and

spirit of their still unrecognized characteristics. So, too, they embark

on the investigation of occult phenomena only because they expect in

that way finally to exclude the wishes of mankind from material reality.

 


                            Psycho-Analysis And Telepathy

                                                                                      3865

 

   In view of this difference between their mental attitudes co-operationbetween  analysts  and  occultists  offers  small  prospect  of  gain.  The

analyst has his own province of work, which he must not abandon: the

unconscious element of mental life. If in the course of his work he

were to be on the watch for occult phenomena, he would be in danger

of overlooking everything that more nearly concerned him. He would

be  surrendering  the  impartiality,  the  lack  of  prejudices  and

prepossessions, which have formed an essential part of his analytic

armour and equipment. If occult phenomena force themselves on him

in the same way in which others do, he will evade them no more than

he  evades  the  others.  This  would  appear  to  be  the  only  plan  of

behaviour consistent with the activity of an analyst.

   By self-discipline the analyst can defend himself against one danger

- the subjective one of allowing his interest to be drawn away on to

occult phenomena. As regards the objective danger, the situation is

different.  There  is  little  doubt  that  if  attention  is  directed  to  occult

phenomena the outcome will very soon be that the occurrence of a

number of them will be confirmed; and it will probably be a very long

time  before  an  acceptable  theory  covering  these  new  facts  can  be

arrived at. But the eagerly attentive onlookers will not wait so long. At

the very first confirmation the occultists will proclaim the triumph of

their views. They will carry over an acceptance of one phenomenon

on to all the rest and will extend belief in the phenomena to belief in

whatever explanations are easiest and most to their taste. They will be

ready to employ the methods of scientific enquiry only as a ladder to

raise them over the head of science. Heaven help us if they climb to

such  a  height!  There  will  be  no  scepticism  from  the  surrounding

spectators to make them hesitate, there will be no popular outcry to

bring them to a halt. They will be hailed as liberators from the burden

of  intellectual  bondage,  they  will  be  joyfully  acclaimed  by  all  the

credulity lying ready to hand since the infancy of the human race and

the childhood of the individual. There may follow a fearful collapse of

critical thought, of determinist standards and of mechanistic science.

Will it be possible for scientific method, by a ruthless insistence on the

magnitude  of  the  forces,  the  masses  and  qualities  of  the  material

concerned, to prevent this collapse?

   It is a vain hope to suppose that analytic work, precisely because it

relates to the mysterious unconscious, will be able to escape such acollapse  in  values  as  this.  If  spiritual  beings  who  are  the  intimate

friends  of  human  enquirers  can  supply  ultimate  explanations  of

everything, no interest can be left over for the laborious approaches to

unknown  mental  forces  made  by  analytic  research.  So,  too,  the

methods of analytic technique will be abandoned if there is a hope of

getting into direct touch with the operative spirits by means of occult

procedures, just as habits of patient humdrum work are abandoned if

there  is  a  hope  of  growing  rich  at  a  single  blow  by  means  of  a

successful speculation. We have heard during the war of people who

stood half-way between two hostile nations, belonging to one by birth

and to the other by choice and domicile; it was their fate to be treated

as enemies first by one side and then, if they were lucky enough to

escape,  by  the  other.  Such  might  equally  be  the  fate  of  psycho-

analysis. However, one must put up with one’s fate whatever it may

be; and psycho-analysis will somehow or other come to terms with

hers.

 


                            Psycho-Analysis And Telepathy

                                                                                      3866

 

   Let us return to the present situation, to our immediate task. In the

course of the last few years I have made a few observations which I

shall not hold back - at all events from the circle that is closest to me.

A dislike of falling in with what is to-day a prevailing current, a dread of

distracting interest from psycho-analysis and the total absence of any

veil  of  discretion  over  what  I  have  to  say  -  all  these  combine  as

motives for withholding my remarks from a wider public. My material

can lay claim to two advantages which are rarely present. In the first

place it is exempt from the uncertainties and doubts to which most of

the observations of the occultists are prone; and in the second place it

only  develops  its  convincing  force  after  it  has  been  worked  over

analytically. It consists, I should mention, of only two cases of a similar

character;  a  third  case,  of  another  kind  and  open  to  a  different

assessment, is only added by way of appendix. The first two cases,

which I shall now report at length, are concerned with events of the

same sort - namely, with prophecies made by professional fortune-tellers which did not come true. In spite of this, these prophecies made

an  extraordinary  impression  on  the  people  to  whom  they  were

announced, so that their relation to the future cannot be their essential

point.  Anything  that  may  contribute  to  their  explanation,  as  well  as

anything that throws doubt on their evidential force, will be extremely

welcome  to  me.  My  personal  attitude  to  the  material  remains

unenthusiastic and ambivalent.

 

                                            I

 

   A few years before the war, a young man from Germany came to

me to be analysed. He complained of being unable to work, of having

forgotten his past life and of having lost all interest. He was a student

of philosophy at Munich and was preparing for his final examination.

Incidentally, he was a highly educated, rather sly young man, rascally

in a childish way, and the son of a financier, who, as emerged later,

had successfully remoulded a colossal amount of anal erotism. When

I  asked  him  whether  there  was  really  nothing  he  could  remember

about his life or his sphere of interest, he recalled the plot of a novel

he  had  sketched  out,  which  was  laid  in  Egypt  during  the  reign  of

Amenophis  IV  and  in  which  an  important  part  was  played  by  a

particular ring. We took this novel as a starting-point; the ring turned

out  to  be  a  symbol  of  marriage,  and  from  there  we  succeeded  in

reviving all his memories and interests. We found that his break-down

had been the result of a great act of mental self-discipline on his part.

He  had  an  only  sister  a  few  years  his  junior,  to  whom  he  was

wholeheartedly and quite undisguisedly devoted. ‘Why is it we can’t

get married?’ they had often asked each other. But their affection had

never  gone  beyond  the  point  permissible  between  brothers  and

sisters.

 


                            Psycho-Analysis And Telepathy

                                                                                      3867

 

   A young engineer had fallen in love with the sister. His love was

reciprocated by her but did not meet with the approval of her strictparents. In their trouble the two young lovers turned to the brother for

help. He gave their cause his support, made it possible for them to

correspond,  arranged  for  them  to  meet  while  he  was  at  home  on

vacation, and eventually persuaded the parents to give their consent

to an engagement and marriage. During the time of the engagement

there was a highly suspicious occurrence. The brother took his future

brother-in-law to climb the Zugspitze and himself acted as guide. They

lost their way on the mountain, ran into trouble and only with difficulty

avoided a fall. The patient offered little objection to my interpretation of

this  adventure  as  an  attempted  murder  and  suicide.  It  was  a  few

months after his sister’s marriage that the young man started analysis.

   After some six or nine months he had completely regained his ability

to work, and broke off the analysis in order to take his examination

and write his dissertation. A year or more later he returned - now a Ph.

D.- to resume his analysis, because, as he said, psycho-analysis had

an  interest  for  him  as  a  philosopher  which  extended  beyond

therapeutic success. I know it was in October that he started again,

and it was a few weeks later that, in some connection or other, he told

me the following story.

      There  lived  in  Munich  a  fortune-teller  who  enjoyed  a  great

reputation. The Bavarian princes used to visit her when they had any

undertaking in mind. All that she required was to be supplied with a

date. (I omitted to enquire whether this had to include the date of the

year.) It was understood that the date was that of the birth of some

particular person, but she did not ask whose. Having been given this

date, she would consult her astrological books, make long calculations

and  finally  utter  a  prophecy  about  the  person  concerned.  In  the

previous  March  my  patient  resolved  to  visit  the  fortune-teller.  He

presented her with the date of his brother-in-law’s birth, without, of

course, mentioning his name or betraying the fact that he had him in

mind. The oracle pronounced as follows: ‘The person in question will

die next July or August of crayfish- or oyster-poisoning.’ After telling

me this, my patient exclaimed: ‘It was marvellous!’

 


                            Psycho-Analysis And Telepathy

                                                                                      3868 

   I could not understand this and contradicted him vigorously: ‘What

do you see in it that’s marvellous? You’ve been working with me now

for several weeks, and if your brother-in-law had really died you would

have told me long ago. So he must be alive. The prophecy was made

in March and was to be fulfilled during the height of the summer. It’s

November  now,  so  it  has not  been  fulfilled.  What  do  you  find  so

wonderful in that?

   ‘No doubt it has not come true,’ he replied. ‘But the remarkable thing

about it is this. My brother-in-law is passionately fond of crayfish and

oysters and so on, and last August he really did have an attack of

crayfish-poisoning and almost died of it.’ The matter was not further

discussed.

   Let us now consider this case.

   I believe in the narrator’s truthfulness. He is entirely trustworthy and

is at present lecturer in philosophy at K----. I can think of no motive

which could have induced him to bamboozle me. The story was an

incidental  one  and  served  no  ulterior  purpose;  nothing  further

emerged from it and no conclusions were drawn from it. He had no

intention  of  persuading  me  of  the  existence  of  occult  mental

phenomena; and indeed I had an impression that he was not at all

clear about the significance of his experience. I myself was so much

struck - to tell the truth, so disagreeably affected - that I omitted to

make any analytic use of his tale.

      And  the  observation  seems  to  me  equally  unobjectionable  from

another  point  of  view.  It  is  certain  that  the  fortune-teller  was  not

acquainted with the man who put the question. But consider what a

degree of intimacy with an acquaintance would be necessary before

one could recognize the date of his brother in-law’s birthday. On the

other hand, you will no doubt all agree with me in offering the most

obstinate  resistance  to  the  possibility  that  so  detailed  an  event  as

falling ill of crayfish poisoning could be inferred from the date of the

subject’s birth by the help of any tables or formulae whatever. Do not

forget how many people are born on the same day. Is it credible that

the similarity of the futures of people born on the same day can be

carried down to such details as this? I therefore venture to exclude the

astrological  calculations  entirely  from  the  discussion;  I  believe  thefortune-teller  might  have  adopted  some  other  procedure  without

affecting the outcome of the interrogation. Accordingly, we can also,

so it seems to me, leave the fortune-teller (or, as we may say straight

out,  the  ‘medium’)  quite  out  of  account  as  a  possible  source  of

deception.

 


                            Psycho-Analysis And Telepathy

                                                                                      3869

 

      If  you  grant  the  genuineness  and  truth  of  this  observation,  its

explanation will be near. And we at once find - and this is the case

with  the  majority  of  these  phenomena  -  that  its  explanation  on  an

occult  basis  is  remarkably  adequate  and  covers  what  has  to  be

explained  completely,  except  that  it  is  so  unsatisfying  in  itself.  It  is

impossible  that  the  knowledge  that  this  man  -  born  on  the  day  in

question - had had an attack of crayfish-poisoning could have been

present in the fortune-teller’s mind; nor can she have arrived at that

knowledge from her tables and calculations. It was, however, present

in  the  mind  of  her  questioner.  The  event  becomes  completely

explicable  if  we  are  ready  to  assume  that  the  knowledge  was

transferred from him to the supposed prophetess - by some unknown

method which excluded the means of communication familiar to us.

That is to say, we must draw the inference that there is such a thing

as  thought-transference.  The  fortune-teller’s  astrological  activities

would in that case have performed the function of diverting her own

psychical forces and occupying them in a harmless way, so that she

could become receptive and accessible to the effects upon her of her

client’s thoughts - so that she could become a true ‘medium’. We have

found similar distracting contrivances employed (for instance, in the

case of jokes) where there is a question of securing a more automatic

discharge for some mental process.

      The  application  of  analysis  to  this  case  does  more  than  this,

however; it further increases its significance. It teaches us that what

has been communicated by this means of induction from one person

to another is not merely a chance piece of indifferent knowledge. It

shows that an extraordinarily powerful wish harboured by one personand  standing  in  a  special  relation  to  his  consciousness  has

succeeded,  with  the  help  of  a  second  person,  in  finding  conscious

expression in a slightly disguised form - just as the invisible end of the

spectrum reveals itself to the senses on a light-sensitive plate as a

coloured extension. It seems possible to reconstruct the young man’s

train of thought after the illness and recovery of the brother-in-law who

was his hated rival: ‘Well, he’s got over it this time; but he won’t give

up his dangerous taste on that account, and let’s hope that next time it

will be the end of him.’ It was this ‘let’s hope’ that was changed into

the prophecy. I could quote a parallel to this from a dream (dreamt by

another person), in which a prophecy was part of the subject-matter.

The analysis of the dream showed that the content of the prophecy

coincided with the fulfilment of a wish.

   I cannot simplify my statement by describing my patient’s death-wish

against his brother-in-law as an unconscious, repressed one. For it

had been made conscious during the treatment the year before and

the consequences which had followed from its repression had yielded

to the treatment. But it still persisted, and, though it was no longer

pathogenic,  it  was  sufficiently  intense.  It  might  be  described  as  a

‘suppressed’ wish.

 


                            Psycho-Analysis And Telepathy

                                                                                      3870

 

                                            II

 

   In the city of F--- a child grew up who was the eldest of a family of

five, all girls. The youngest was ten years younger than herself; she

once dropped this child out of her arms when it was a baby; later she

called it ‘her child’. Her mother was older than her father and not an

agreeable person. Her father - and it was not in years only that he was

the younger - saw a lot of the little girls and impressed them by his

many dexterities. Unfortunately he was not impressive in any other

way: he was incompetent at business and was unable to support the

family without help from relatives. The eldest girl became at an early

age the repository of all the worries that arose from his lack of earningpower.

   Once she had left behind the rigid and passionate character of her

childhood, she grew up into a regular mirror of all the virtues. Her high

moral feelings were accompanied by a narrowly limited intelligence.

She  became  a  teacher  in  an  elementary  school  and  was  much

respected. The timid homage paid to her by a young relation who was

a music teacher left her unmoved. No other man had hitherto attracted

her notice.

      One  day  a  relative  of  her  mother’s  appeared  on  the  scene,

considerably older than she was, but still (for she was only nineteen) a

youngish man. He was a foreigner who lived in Russia as the head of

a  large  commercial  undertaking  and  had  grown  very  rich.  It  took

nothing less than a world war and the overthrow of a great despotism

to impoverish him. He fell in love with his young and severe cousin

and asked her to be his wife. Her parents put no pressure on her, but

she understood their wishes. Behind all her moral ideals she felt the

attraction of the fulfilment of a wishful phantasy of helping her father

and rescuing him from his necessitous state. She calculated that her

cousin would give her father financial support so long as he carried on

his business and pension him when he finally gave it up, and that he

would provide her sisters with dowries and trousseaux so that they

could get married. And she fell in love with him, married him soon

afterwards and followed him to Russia.

      Except  for  a  few  occurrences  which  were  not  entirely

understandable  at  first  sight  and  whose  significance  only  became

evident in retrospect, everything went very well in the marriage. She

grew into an affectionate wife, sexually satisfied, and a providential

support to her family. Only one thing was wanting: she was childless.

She was now 27 years old and in the eighth year of her marriage. She

lived in Germany, and after overcoming every kind of hesitation she

went  for  a  consultation  to  a  German  gynaecologist.  With  the  usual

thoughtlessness  of  a  specialist,  he  assured  her  of  recovery  if  she

underwent  a  small  operation.  She  agreed,  and  on  the  eve  of  the

operation discussed the matter with her husband. It was the hour of

twilight and she was about to turn on the lights when her husband

asked her not to: he had something to say to her and he would prefer

to be in darkness. He told her to countermand the operation, as theblame for their childlessness was his. During a medical congress two

years earlier he had learnt that certain illnesses can deprive a man of

the  capacity  to  procreate  children.  An  examination  had  shown  that

such was the case with him. After this revelation the operation was

abandoned.  She  herself  suffered  from  a  temporary  collapse,  which

she vainly sought to disguise. She had only been able to love him as a

substitute father, and she had now learnt that he never could be a

father.  Three  paths  were  open  to  her,  all  equally  impassable:

unfaithfulness, renunciation of her wish for a child, or separation from

her  husband.  The  last  of  them  was  excluded  for  the  best  practical

reasons  and  the  middle  one  for  the  strongest  unconscious  ones,

which you can easily guess: her whole childhood had been dominated

by the thrice disappointed wish to get a child from her father. There

remained one other way out, which is what interests us in her case.

She fell seriously ill of a neurosis. For a time she put up a defence

against various temptations with the help of an anxiety neurosis, but

later her symptoms changed into severe obsessional acts. She spent

some time in institutions and eventually, after her illness had lasted for

ten years, came to me. Her most striking symptom was that when she

was in bed she used to fasten [anstecken = bring into contact] her

sheets to the blankets with safety-pins. In this way she was revealing

the  secret  of  her  husband’s  contagion  [Ansteckung],  to  which  her

childlessness was due.

   On one occasion, when she was perhaps 40 years old, the patient

told me an episode dating back to the time when her depression was

beginning, before the outbreak of her obsessional neurosis. To divert

her mind, her husband had taken her with him on a business trip to

Paris. The couple were sitting with a business friend of her husband’s

in the hall of their hotel when they became aware of some kind of stir

and  movement.  She  asked  one  of  the  hotel  servants  what  was

happening and was told that Monsieur le Professeur had arrived for

consultations in his little room near the hotel entrance. Monsieur le

Professeur,  it  appeared,  was  a  famous  fortune-teller;  he  asked  no

questions, but got his clients to press down a hand into a dish full of

sand  and  foretold  the  future  by  studying  the  imprint.  My  patient

declared that she would go in and have her fortune told. Her husband

dissuaded her, saying it was nonsense. But after he had gone off withhis business friend she took off her wedding-ring and slipped into the

fortune-teller’s cabinet. He made a long study of the imprint of her

hand and then spoke as follows: ‘In the near future you will have to go

through some severe struggles, but all will turn out well. You will get

married and have two children by the time you are 32.’ In telling this

story  she  gave  every  sign  of  being  greatly  impressed  by  it  without

understanding  it.  My  comment  that  it  was  nevertheless  unfortunate

that the date laid down by the prophecy had already gone by some

eight years made no impression on her. I reflected that perhaps she

was admiring the confident boldness of the prophecy - like the faithful

disciple of the long-sighted Rabbi.

 


                            Psycho-Analysis And Telepathy

                                                                                      3871

 

   Unluckily my memory, which is usually so trustworthy, is not certain

whether the first part of the prophecy ran: ‘All will turn out well. You will

get married.’ Or whether it was: ‘You will become happy.’ My attention

was  focused  too  completely  on  my  sharp  impression  of  the  final

phrase with its striking details. But actually the first remarks, about

struggles  that  will  have  a  happy  ending,  are  among  the  vague

expressions that figure in all prophecies - even in those that can be

purchased  ready-made.  The  contrast  afforded  by  the  two  numbers

specified in the final phrase is all the more remarkable. Nevertheless,

it would certainly have been of interest to know whether the Professor

really  spoke  of  her marriage.  It  is  true  that  she  had  taken  off  her

wedding-ring  and,  at  the  age  of  27,  had  looked  very  youthful  and

might easily have been taken for an unmarried girl. But, on the other

hand, it would not have needed any great refinement of observation to

discover the trace of the ring on her finger.

   Let us restrict ourselves to the problem contained in the last phrase,

which promised her two children at the age of 32. These details seem

quite  arbitrary  and  inexplicable.  Even  the  most  credulous  person

would scarcely undertake to deduce them from an interpretation of the

lines on a hand. They would have received an indisputable justification

if the future had confirmed them. But this was not the case. She wasnow forty years old and had no children. What, then, were the source

and meaning of these numbers? The patient herself had no notion.

The obvious thing would be to dismiss the question entirely and to

consign it to the rubbish heap among so many other meaningless and

ostensibly  occult  messages.  That  would  be  delightful:  the  simplest

solution and a greatly desirable relief. But unluckily I must add that it

was  possible  -  and  precisely  by  the  help  of  analysis  -  to  find  an

explanation  of  the  two  numbers  and  one  which,  once  again,  was

completely satisfactory and arose, almost as a matter of course, out of

the actual situation.

 


                            Psycho-Analysis And Telepathy

                                                                                      3872

 

   For the two numbers fitted in perfectly with the life-story of - our

patient’s mother. She had not married till she was thirty and it was in

her thirty-second year that (unlike most women and to make up, as it

were, for her dilatoriness) she gave birth to two children. So it is easy

to  translate  the  prophecy:  ‘There’s  no  need  to  worry  about  your

present childlessness. There’s nothing in that. You can still follow the

example of your mother, who was not even married at your age and

nevertheless  had  two  children  by  the  time  she  was  thirty-two.’  The

prophecy  promised  her  the  fulfilment  of  the  identification  with  her

mother which had been the secret of her childhood, and it was spoken

through the mouth of a fortune-teller who was in ignorance of all her

personal affairs and was busy examining an imprint in the sand. And

we may add, as the precondition of this wish-fulfilment (unconscious

as  it  was  in  every  sense):  ‘You  will  be  set  free  from  your  useless

husband by his death, or you will find strength to separate from him.’

The  first  alternative  would  fit  in  better  with  the  nature  of  an

obsessional neurosis, while the second is suggested by the struggles

which, according to the prophecy, she was successfully to overcome.

   As you will observe, the part played by analytic interpretation is even

more  important  in  this  example  than  in  the  last  one.  Analysis  may

actually  be  said  to  have  created  the  occult  fact.  Accordingly,  this

example, too, would seem to offer positively conclusive evidence of itsbeing possible to transfer an unconscious wish and the thoughts and

knowledge  relating  to  it.  I  can  see  only  one  way  of  evading  the

conclusiveness of this last case and you may be sure that I shall not

conceal it. It is possible that in the course of the twelve or thirteen

years that elapsed between the prophecy and the account of it given

during the treatment the patient may have formed a paramnesia: the

Professor may have uttered some general and colourless consolation

- which would be nothing to wonder at - and the patient may have

gradually inserted the significant numbers out of her unconscious. If

so, we should have avoided the fact which threatened us with such

momentous consequences. We will gladly identify ourselves with the

sceptics who will only attach value to a report of this kind if it is made

immediately  after  the  event  -  and  even  then,  perhaps,  not  without

hesitation. I remember that after I was appointed to a professorship I

had an audience with the Minister to express my thanks. As I was on

my way home from this audience I caught myself in the act of trying to

falsify the words that had passed between us and I was never able to

recapture correctly the actual conversation. I must leave it to you to

decide  whether  the  explanation  I  have  suggested  is  tenable.  I  can

neither prove nor disprove it. Thus, this second observation, though in

itself more impressive than the first, is not equally free from doubt.

 


                            Psycho-Analysis And Telepathy

                                                                                      3873

 

 

   The two cases that I have reported to you are both concerned with

unfulfilled prophecies. Observations of this kind, in my opinion, can

provide the best material on the question of thought-transference, and

I  should  like  to  encourage  you  to  collect  similar  ones.  I  had  also

intended to bring you an example based on material of another kind -

a case in which a patient of a special sort talked during one session of

things which touched in the most remarkable way on an experience

which I had had myself immediately before. But I can now give you

visible proof of the fact that I discuss the subject of occultism under

the pressure of the greatest resistance. When, while I was at Gastein,I looked out the notes which I had put together and brought with me

for the purpose of this paper, the sheet on which I had noted down this

last observation was not there, but in its place I found another sheet of

indifferent  memoranda  on  quite  another  topic,  which  I  had  brought

with  me  by  mistake.  Nothing  can  be  done  against  such  a  clear

resistance. I must ask you to excuse me for omitting this case, for I

cannot make the loss good from memory.

   I will instead add a few remarks about someone who is very well

known  in  Vienna,  a  graphologist,  Rafael  Schermann,  who  has  a

reputation for the most astonishing performances. He is said to be

able not merely to read a person’s character from a specimen of his

handwriting,  but  also  to  describe  his  appearance  and  to  add

predictions  about  him  which  later  come  true.  Incidentally,  many  of

these remarkable achievements are based on his own stories. A friend

of mine once, without my previous knowledge, made the experiment

of getting him to allow his imagination to play over a specimen of my

writing. All that he produced was that the writing was that of an old

gentleman (which it was easy to guess), with whom it was hard to live

since he was an intolerable tyrant in his home. Those who share my

house  would  hardly  confirm  this.  But,  as  we  know,  the  field  of  the

occult is subject to the convenient principle that negative cases prove

nothing.  I  have  made  no  direct  observations  on  Schermann,  but

through a patient of mine I have been in contact with him without his

knowing it. I will tell you about it.

 


                            Psycho-Analysis And Telepathy

                                                                                      3874

 

   A few years ago a young man came to me who made a particularly

sympathetic impression on me, so that I gave him preference over a

number of others. It appeared that he was involved with one of the

best known demi-mondaines and that he wanted to get free from her,

because the relationship deprived him of all independence of action,

but was unable to do so. I succeeded in setting him free and at the

same time I obtained full insight into his compulsion. Not many months

ago he contracted a normal and respectable marriage. The analysissoon  showed  that  the  compulsion  against  which  he  was  struggling

was not a tie with the demi-mondaine but with a married lady in his

own circle with whom he had had a liason from his earliest youth. The

demi-mondaine served merely as a whipping-boy on whom he could

satisfy all the feelings of revenge and jealousy which really applied to

the other lady. On a model that is familiar to us, he had made use of

displacement  onto  a  fresh  object  in  order  to  escape  the  inhibition

brought about by his ambivalence.

      It  was  his  habit  to  inflict  the  most  refined  torment  on  the demi-

mondaine,  who  had  fallen  in  love  with  him  in  an  almost  unselfish

fashion. But when she could no longer conceal her sufferings, he in

turn passed over on to her the affection he had felt for the woman he

had loved since his youth; he made her presents and propitiated her,

and the cycle started on its course once more. When finally, under the

influence of the treatment, he broke with her, it became clear what it

was that he was trying to achieve by his behaviour to this substitute

for his early love: revenge for an attempt at suicide of his own when

his love had rejected his advances. After the attempted suicide he had

at last succeeded in overcoming her reluctance. During this period of

the  treatment  he  used  to  visit  the  celebrated  Schermann.  And  the

latter, on the basis of specimens of the demi-mondaine’s handwriting,

repeatedly told him by way of interpretation that she was at her last

gasp, was at the point of suicide and would quite certainly kill herself.

This, however, she did not do, but shook off her human weakness,

and  recalled  the  principles  of  her  profession  and  her  duties  to  her

official friend. I saw clearly that the miracle-man had merely revealed

to my patient his own intimate wish.

 


                            Psycho-Analysis And Telepathy

                                                                                      3875

 

   After disposing of this spurious figure, my patient set about seriously

the  task  of  freeing  himself  from  his  real  bond.  I  detected  from  his

dreams a plan that he was forming by means of which he would be

able to escape from his relation with his early love without causing her

too much mortification or material damage. She had a daughter, whowas very fond of the young friend of the family and ostensibly knew

nothing of the secret part he played. He now proposed to marry this

girl.  Soon  afterwards  the  scheme  became  conscious,  and  the  man

took  the  first  steps  towards  putting  it  into  effect.  I  supported  his

intentions, since it offered what was a possible way out of his difficult

situation even though an irregular one. But presently there came a

dream  which  showed  hostility  to  the  girl;  and  now  once  more  he

consulted  Schermann,  who  reported  that  the  girl  was  childish  and

neurotic and should not be married. This time the great observer of

human nature was right. The girl, who was by now regarded as the

man’s fiancée, behaved in a more and more contradictory manner,

and it was decided that she should be analysed. As a result of the

analysis the scheme for the marriage was abandoned. The girl had a

complete unconscious knowledge of the relations between her mother

and  her fiancé,  and  was  only  attached  to  him  on  account  of  her

Oedipus complex.

   At about this time our analysis broke off. The patient was free and

capable of going his own way in the future. He chose as his wife a

respectable girl outside his family circle - a girl on whom Schermann

has passed a favourable judgement. Let us hope that this time he will

be right once more.

 

   You will have grasped the sense in which I am inclined to interpret

these experiences of mine with Schermann. You will see that all my

material  touches  only  on  the  single  point  of  thought-transference.  I

have nothing to say about all the other miracles that are claimed by

occultism. My own life, as I have already openly admitted, has been

particularly poor in an occult sense. Perhaps the problem of thought-

transference may seem very trivial to you in comparison with the great

magical  world  of  the  occult.  But  consider  what  a  momentous  step

beyond  what  we  have  hitherto  believed  would  be  involved  in  this

hypothesis alone. What the custodian of Saint-Denis used to add to

his account of the saint’s martyrdom remains true. Saint-Denis is said,

after his head was cut off, to have picked it up and to have walked

quite  a  distance  with  it  under  his  arm.  But  the  custodian  used  to

remark: ‘Dans des cas pareils, ce n’est que le premier pas qui coûte.’

The rest is easy.                                                                                       3876

 

                            DREAMS AND TELEPATHY

                                        (1922)

 

 


                                                                                      3877

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3878

 

                            DREAMS AND TELEPATHY

 

At the present time, when such great interest is felt in what are called

‘occult’  phenomena,  very  definite  anticipations  will  doubtless  be

aroused by the announcement of a paper with this title. I will therefore

hasten to explain that there is no ground for any such anticipations.

You will learn nothing from this paper of mine about the enigma of

telepathy; indeed, you will not even gather whether I believe in the

existence of ‘telepathy’ or not. On this occasion I have set myself the

very  modest  task  of  examining  the  relation  of  the  telepathic

occurrences in question, whatever their origin may be, to dreams, or

more  exactly,  to  our  theory  of  dreams.  You  will  know  that  the

connection between dreams and telepathy is commonly held to be a

very intimate one; I shall put forward the view that the two have little to

do with each other, and that if the existence of telepathic dreams were

to be established there would be no need to alter our conception of

dreams in any way.

   The material on which the present communication is based is very

slight. In the first place, I must express my regret that I could make no

use of my own dreams, as I did when I wrote my Interpretation of

Dreams (1900a). But I have never had a ‘telepathic’ dream. Not that I

have been without dreams of the kind that convey an impression that

a certain definite event is happening at some distant place, leaving itto  the  dreamer  to  decide  whether  the  event  is  happening  at  that

moment or will do so at some later time. In waking life, too, I have

often  become  aware  of  presentiments  of  distant  events.  But  these

hints, foretellings and premonitions have none of them ‘come true’, as

we say; there proved to be no external reality corresponding to them,

and  they  had  therefore  to  be  regarded  as  purely  subjective

anticipations.

   For example, I once dreamt during the war that one of my sons then

serving at the front had been killed. This was not directly stated in the

dream, but was expressed in an unmistakable manner, by means of

the well-known death-symbolism of which an account was first given

by  Stekel.  (We  must  not  omit  to  fulfil  the  duty,  often  felt  to  be

inconvenient, of making literary acknowledgements.)  I saw the young

soldier  standing  on  a  landing-stage,  between  land  and  water,  as  it

were; he looked to me very pale. I spoke to him but he did not answer.

There  were  other  unmistakable  indications.  He  was  not  wearing

military  uniform,  but  a  ski-ing  costume  that  he  had  worn  when  a

serious ski-ing accident had happened to him several years before the

war. He stood on something like a footstool with a cupboard in front of

him; a situation always closely associated in my mind with the idea of

‘falling’, through a memory of my own childhood. As a child of little

more than two years old I had myself climbed on a footstool like this to

get something off the top of a cupboard - probably something good to

eat - and I fell down and gave myself an injury, of which I can even

now show the scar. My son, however, whom the dream pronounced to

be dead, came home from the war unscathed.

 


                                Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3879

 

   Only a short time ago, I had another dream bearing ill-tidings; it was,

I think, just before I decided to put together these few remarks. This

time there was not much attempt at disguise. I saw my two nieces who

live  in  England.  They  were  dressed  in  black  and  said  to  me,  ‘We

buried her on Thursday.’ I knew the reference was to the death of their

mother,  now  eighty-seven  years  of  age,  the  widow  of  my  eldestbrother.

   A time of disagreeable anticipation followed; there would of course

be nothing surprising in such an old lady suddenly passing away, yet it

would be very unpleasant for the dream to coincide exactly with the

occurrence.  The  next  letter  from  England,  however,  dissipated  this

fear. For the benefit of those who are concerned for the wish-fulfilment

theory of dreams I may interpolate a reassurance by saying that there

was no difficulty in detecting by analysis the unconscious motives that

might be presumed to exist in these death-dreams just as in others.

   I hope you will not object that what I have just related is valueless

because negative experiences prove as little here as they do in less

occult matters. I am well aware of that and have not adduced these

instances  with  any  intention  whatever  of  proving  anything  or  of

surreptitiously  influencing  you  in  any  particular  direction.  My  sole

purpose was to explain the paucity of my material.

 


                                Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3880

 

   Another fact certainly seems to me of more significance, namely,

that during some twenty-seven years of work as an analyst I have

never been in a position to observe a truly telepathic dream in any of

my  patients.  And  yet  those  patients  made  up  a  fair  collection  of

severely  neuropathic  and  ‘highly  sensitive’  natures.  Many  of  them

have related to me most remarkable incidents in their earlier life on

which they based a belief in mysterious occult influences. Events such

as accidents or illnesses of near relatives, in particular the death of a

parent,  have  often  enough  happened  during  the  treatment  and

interrupted it; but not on one single occasion did these occurrences,

eminently suitable as they were in character, afford me the opportunity

of registering a single telepathic dream, although treatment extended

over several months or even years. Anyone who cares to may look for

an explanation of this fact, which still further restricts the material at

my  disposal.  In  any  case  it  will  be  seen  that  such  an  explanation

would not affect the subject of this paper.

   Nor does it embarrass me to be asked why I have made no use ofthe abundant store of telepathic dreams that have appeared in the

literature of the subject. I should not have had far to seek, since the

publications  of  the  English  as  well  as  of  the  American  Society  for

Psychical  Research  are  accessible  to  me  as  a  member  of  both

societies. In none of these communications is any attempt ever made

to subject such dreams to analytic investigation, which would be our

first interest in such cases.¹ Moreover, you will soon perceive that for

the purposes of this paper one single dream will serve well enough.

   My material thus consists simply and solely of two communications

which have reached me from correspondents in Germany. The writers

are  not  personally  known  to  me,  but  they  give  their  names  and

addresses: I have not the least ground for presuming any intention to

mislead on their part.

 

   ¹ In two publications by W. Stekel, the author mentioned above (Der telepathische Traum,

no date, and Die Sprache des Traumes, Second Edition, 1922), there are at least attempts to
apply the analytic technique to alleged telepathic dreams. The author expresses his belief in
the reality of telepathy.
 


                                Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3881

 

                                            I

 

   With the first of the two I had already been in correspondence; he

had  been  good  enough  to  send  me,  as  many  of  my  readers  do,

observations of everyday occurrences and the like. He is obviously an

educated and highly intelligent man; this time he expressly places his

material at my disposal if I care to turn it ‘to literary account’.

   His letter runs as follows:

   ‘I consider the following dream of sufficient interest for me to hand it

on to you as material for your researches.

   ‘I must first state the following facts. My daughter, who is married

and lives in Berlin, was expecting her first confinement in the middle of

December of this year. I intended to go to Berlin about that time with

my  (second)  wife,  my  daughter’s  stepmother.  During  the  night  of

November  16-17  I  dreamt,  with  a  vividness  and  clearness  I  havenever before experienced, that my wife, had given birth to twins. I saw

the two healthy infants quite plainly with their chubby faces lying in

their cot side by side. I did not observe their sex; one with fair hair had

distinctly  my  features  and  something  of  my  wife’s,  the  other  with

chestnut-brown hair clearly resembled her with a look of me. I said to

my wife, who has red-gold hair, "Probably ‘your’ child’s chestnut hair

will also go red later on." My wife gave them the breast. In the dream

she had also made some jam in a wash-basin and the two children

crawled about on all fours in the basin and licked up the contents.

   ‘So much for the dream. Four or five times I had half woken from it,

asked myself if it were true that we had twins, but did not come to the

conclusion  with  any  certainty  that  it  was  only  a  dream.  The  dream

lasted till I woke, and after that it was some little time before I felt quite

clear about the true state of affairs. At breakfast I told my wife the

dream, which much amused her. She said, "Surely Ilse (my daughter)

won’t have twins?" I answered, "I should hardly think so, as twins are

not the usual thing either in my family or in G.’s" (her husband). On

November 18, at ten o’clock in the morning, I received a telegram from

my son-in-law, handed in the afternoon before, telling me of the birth

of twins, a boy and a girl. The birth thus took place at the time when I

was dreaming that my wife had twins. The confinement occurred four

weeks  earlier  than  any  of  us  had  expected  on  the  basis  of  my

daughter and son in-law’s calculations.

 


                                Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3882

 

   ‘But there is a further circumstance: the next night I dreamt that my

deceased wife, my daughter’s own mother, had undertaken the care

of  forty-eight  new-born  infants.  When  the  first  dozen  were  being

brought in, I protested. At that point the dream ended.

   ‘My late wife was very fond of children. She often talked about it,

saying she would like a whole troop round her, the more the better,

and that she would do very well if she had charge of a Kindergarten

and would be quite happy so. The noise children make was music to

her. From time to time she would invite in a whole troop of childrenfrom  the  streets  and  regale  them  with  chocolate  and  cakes  in  the

courtyard of our villa. My daughter must have thought at once of her

mother after her confinement, especially because of the surprise of its

coming on prematurely, the arrival of twins, and their difference in sex.

She knew her mother would have greeted the event with the liveliest

joy and sympathy. "Only think what mother would say, if she were with

me now!" This thought must undoubtedly have gone through her mind.

And then I dream of my dead wife, of whom I very seldom dream, and

had neither spoken of nor thought of after the first dream.

   ‘Do you think that the coincidence between dream and event was

accidental in both cases? My daughter is much attached to me and

was  most  certainly  thinking  of  me  during  her  labour,  particularly

because  we  had  often  exchanged  letters  about  her  mode  of  living

during her pregnancy and I had constantly given her advice.’

   It is easy to guess what my answer to this letter was. I was sorry to

find  that  my  correspondent’s  interest  in  analysis  had  been  so

completely killed by his interest in telepathy. I therefore avoided his

direct question, and, remarking that the dream contained a good deal

besides its connection with the birth of the twins, I asked him to give

me any information or ideas that occurred to him which could give me

a clue to the meaning of the dream.

   Thereupon I received the following second letter which, it must be

admitted, did not give me quite all I wanted:

   ‘I have not been able to answer your kind letter of the 24th until to-

day.  I  shall  be  only  too  pleased  to  tell  you  "without  omission  or

reserve" all the associations that occur to me. Unfortunately there is

not much; more would come out in talking.

 


                                Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3883

 

   ‘Well then - my wife and I do not wish for any more children. We

almost never have sexual intercourse; at any rate at the time of the

dream there was certainly no "danger". My daughter’s confinement,

which was expected about the middle of December, was naturally a

frequent subject of conversation between us. My daughter had beenexamined  and  X-rayed  in  the  summer,  and  the  doctor  making  the

examination was certain that the child would be a boy. My wife said at

the time, "I should laugh if it was a girl after all." At the time she also

remarked that it would be better if it were an H. rather than a G. (my

son-in-law’s family name); my daughter is handsomer and has a better

figure than my son-in-law, although he has been a naval officer. I have

made some study of the question of heredity and am in the habit of

looking at babies to see whom they resemble. One more thing. We

have a small dog which sits with us at table in the evening to have his

food and licks the plates and dishes. All this material appears in the

dream.

   ‘I am fond of small children and have often said that I should like to

have the bringing up of a child once more, now that I should have so

much more understanding, interest and time to devote to it; but with

my wife I should not wish it, as she does not possess the necessary

qualities  for  rearing  a  child  judiciously.  The  dream  makes  me  a

present of two children - I did not observe their sex. I see them even at

this moment lying in the bed and I recognize the features, the one

more "me", the other more my wife, but each with minor traits from the

other side. My wife has red-gold hair, but the one child had chestnut

(reddish) brown hair. I said, "Oh well, it will go red, too, later on." Both

the children crawl round a large wash basin in which my wife has been

stirring jam and lick its bottom and sides (dream). The origin of this

detail is easily explicable, just as is the dream as a whole. The dream

would not be difficult to understand or interpret if it had not coincided

with the unexpectedly early arrival of my grandchildren (three weeks

too soon), a coincidence of time almost to the hour. (I cannot exactly

say when the dream began; my grandchildren were born at nine p. m.

and a quarter past; I went to bed at about eleven and had my dream

during the course of the night.) Our knowledge too that the child would

be a boy adds to the difficulty, though possibly the doubt whether this

had been fully established might account for the appearance of twins

in  the  dream.  All  the  same,  there  remains  the  coincidence  of  the

dream  with  the  unexpected  and  premature  appearance  of  my

daughter’s twins.

                                 Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3884

 

   ‘It is not the first time that distant events have become known to me

before I received the actual news. To give one instance among many.

In October I had a visit from my three brothers. We had not all been

together  for  thirty  years,  except  for  quite  a  short  time,  once  at  my

father’s funeral and once at my mother’s. Both deaths were expected,

and I had had no ‘presentiments’ in either case. But about twenty-five

years ago my youngest brother died quite suddenly and unexpectedly

when he was ten. As the postman handed me the postcard with the

news of his death, before I had glanced at it, the thought came to me

at once, "It is to say that your brother is dead." He was the only one

left at home, a strong healthy lad, while we four elder brothers were

already fully fledged and had left our parents’ house. At the time of my

brothers’ visit the talk by chance came round to this experience of

mine, and, as if at the word of command, all three brothers came out

with  the  declaration  that  exactly  the  same  thing  had  happened  to

them. Whether it happened in exactly the same manner I cannot say;

at all events each one said that he had felt perfectly certain of the

death just before the quite unexpected news had arrived. We are all

from the mother’s side of a sensitive disposition, though tall, strong

men, but not one of us is in the least inclined towards spiritualism or

occultism;  on  the  contrary,  we  disclaim  adherence  to  either.  My

brothers are all three University men, two are schoolmasters, one a

surveyor, all rather pedants than visionaries. - That is all I can tell you

in  regard  to  the  dream.  If  you  can  turn  it  to  literary  account,  I  am

delighted to place it at your disposal.’

 


                                Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3885

 

 

   I am afraid that you may behave like the writer of these two letters.

You,  too,  will  be  primarily  interested  in  the  question  whether  this

dream  can  really  be  regarded  as  a  telepathic  notification  of  the

unexpected birth of the twin children, and you will not be disposed tosubmit  this  dream  to  analysis  like  any  other.  I  foresee  that  it  will

always  be  so  when  psycho-analysis  and  occultism  encounter  each

other. The former has, so to speak, all our mental instincts against it;

the latter is met half-way by powerful and mysterious sympathies. I am

not, however, going to take up the position that I am nothing but a

psycho-analyst,  that  the  problems  of  occultism  do  not  concern  me:

you would rightly judge that to be only an evasion of a problem. On

the contrary, I may say that it would be a great satisfaction to me if I

could convince myself and others on unimpeachable evidence of the

existence  of  telepathic  processes,  but  I  also  consider  that  the

information  provided  about  this  dream  is  altogether  inadequate  to

justify any such pronouncement. You will observe that it does not once

occur to this intelligent man, deeply interested as he is in the problem

of his dream, to tell us when he had last seen his daughter or what

news he had lately had from her. He writes in the first letter that the

birth was a month too soon; in the second, however, the month has

become three weeks only, and in neither are we told whether the birth

was  really  premature,  or  whether,  as  so  often  happens,  those

concerned were out in their reckoning. But we should have to consider

these  and  other  details  of  the  occurrence  if  we  are  to  weigh  the

probability of the dreamer having made unconscious estimates and

guesses. I felt too that it would be of no use even if I succeeded in

getting  answers  to  such  questions.  In  the  course  of  arriving  at  the

information new doubts would constantly arise, which could only be

set at rest if one had the man in front of one and could revive all the

relevant memories which he had perhaps dismissed as unessential.

He is certainly right in what he says at the beginning of his second

letter that more would have come out in talking.

   Consider another and similar case, in which the disturbing interest of

occultism  has  no  part.  You  must  often  have  been  in  a  position  to

compare the anamnesis and the information about the illness given

during the first session by any neurotic with what you have gained

from him after some months of psycho-analysis. Apart from inevitable

abbreviations, how many essentials were left out or suppressed, how

many  connections  were  displaced  -  in  fact,  how  much  that  was

incorrect or untrue was told you on that first occasion! You will not call

me  hyper-critical  if  I  refuse  in  the  circumstances  to  make  anypronouncement whether the dream in question is a telepathic event or

a  particularly  subtle  achievement  on  the  part  of  the  dreamer’s

unconscious  or  whether  it  is  simply  to  be  taken  as  a  striking

coincidence. Our curiosity must be satisfied with the hope of some

later occasion on which it may be possible to make a detailed oral

examination of the dreamer. But you cannot say that this outcome of

our investigation has disappointed you, for I prepared you for it; I said

you would hear nothing which would throw any light on the problem of

telepathy.

 


                                Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3886

 

   If we now pass on to the analytic treatment of this dream, we are

obliged once more to express dissatisfaction. The thoughts that the

dreamer associates with the manifest content of the dream are again

insufficient; they do not enable us to make any analysis of the dream.

For instance, the dream goes into great detail over the likeness of the

children  to  the  parents,  discusses  the  colour  of  their  hair  and  the

probable change of colour at a later age, and as an explanation of

these elaborate details we only have the dry piece of information from

the  dreamer  that  he  has  always  been  interested  in  questions  of

likeness  and  heredity.  We  are  accustomed  to  expect  rather  more

material  than  this!  But  at one  point  the  dream  does  admit  of  an

analytic interpretation, and precisely at this point analysis, which has

otherwise no connection with occultism, comes to the aid of telepathy

in a remarkable way. It is only on account of this single point that I am

asking for your attention to this dream at all.

   Correctly speaking, this dream has no right whatever to be called

‘telepathic’. It did not inform the dreamer of anything which (outside

his normal knowledge) was taking place elsewhere. What the dream

did relate was something quite different from the event reported in the

telegram received on the second day after the night of the dream. The

dream and the actual occurrence diverge at a particularly important

point; but they agree, apart from the coincidence of time, in another

very interesting element. In the dream the dreamer’s wife had twins.The occurrence, however, was that his daughter had given birth to

twins  in  her  distant  home.  The  dreamer  did  not  overlook  this

difference; he did not seem to know any way of getting over it and, as

according to his own account he had no leaning towards the occult, he

only asked quite tentatively whether the coincidence between dream

and occurrence on the point of the twin-birth could be more than an

accident. The psycho-analytic interpretation of dreams, however, does

away with this difference between the dream and the event, and gives

both the same content. If we consult the associative material to this

dream, it shows, in spite of its sparseness, that an intimate bond of

feeling  existed  between  the  father  and  daughter,  a  bond  of  feeling

which  is  so  usual  and  so  natural  that  we  ought  to  cease  to  be

ashamed of it, one that in daily life merely finds expression as a tender

interest and is only pushed to its logical conclusion in dreams. The

father knew that his daughter clung to him, he was convinced that she

often thought of him during her labour. In his heart I think he grudged

her  to  his  son-in-law,  to  whom  in  one  letter  he  makes  a  few

disparaging references. On the occasion of her confinement (whether

expected  or  communicated  by  telepathy)  the  unconscious  wish

became active in the repressed part of his mind: ‘she ought to be my

(second) wife instead’; it was this wish that had distorted the dream-

thoughts and was the cause of the difference between the manifest

content of the dream and the event. We are entitled to replace the

second  wife  in  the  dream  by  the  daughter.  If  we  possessed  more

associations to the dream, we could undoubtedly verify and deepen

this interpretation.

   And now I have reached the point I wish to put before you. We have

endeavoured  to  maintain  the  strictest  impartiality  and  have  allowed

two conceptions of the dream to rank as equally probable and equally

unproved. According to the first the dream is a reaction to a telepathic

message:  ‘your  daughter  has  just  brought  twins  into  the  world.’

According to the second an unconscious process of thought underlies

the dream, which may be reproduced somewhat as follows: ‘To-day is

the  day  the  confinement  should  take  place  if  the  young  people  in

Berlin are really out in their reckoning by a month, as I suspect. And if

my (first) wife were still alive, she certainly would not be content with

one grandchild. To please her there would have to be at least twins!’ Ifthis second view is right, no new problems arise. It is simply a dream

like any other. The (preconscious) dream-thoughts as outlined above

are  reinforced  by  the  (unconscious)  wish  that  no  other  than  the

daughter should be the dreamer’s second wife, and thus the manifest

dream as described to us arises.

 


                                Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3887

 

      If  you  prefer  to  assume  that  a  telepathic  message  about  the

daughter’s confinement reached the sleeper, further questions arise of

the relation of a message such as this to a dream and of its influence

on the formation of dreams. The answer is not far to seek and is quite

unambiguous. A telepathic message will be treated as a portion of the

material that goes to the formation of a dream, like any other external

or internal stimulus, like a disturbing noise in the street or an insistent

organic  sensation  in  the  sleeper’s  own  body.  In  our  example  it  is

evident how the message, with the help of a lurking repressed wish,

became remodelled into a wish-fulfilment; it is unfortunately less easy

to show that it combined with other material that had become active at

the same time and was blended into a dream. Telepathic messages -

if we are justified in recognizing their existence - can thus make no

alteration in the process of forming a dream; telepathy has nothing to

do with the nature of dreams. And in order to avoid the impression that

I  am  trying  to  conceal  a  vague  notion  behind  abstract  and  fine-

sounding words, I am willing to repeat: the essential nature of dreams

consists in the peculiar process of ‘dream-work’ which, with the help of

an  unconscious  wish,  carries  the  preconscious  thoughts  (day’s

residues) over into the manifest content of the dream. The problem of

telepathy concerns dreams as little as does the problem of anxiety.

      I  am  hoping  that  you  will  grant  this,  but  that  you  will  raise  the

objection  that  there  are,  nevertheless,  other  telepathic  dreams  in

which there is no difference between the event and the dream, and in

which there is nothing else to be found but an undistorted reproduction

of  the  event.  I  have  no  knowledge  of  such  dreams  from  my  own

experience, but I know they have often been reported. If we assumethat we have such an undisguised and unadulterated telepathic dream

to  deal  with,  another  question  arises.  Ought  we  to  call  such  a

telepathic experience a ‘dream’ at all? You will certainly do so as long

as you keep to popular usage, in which everything that takes place in

mental life during sleep is called a dream. You, too, perhaps say, ‘I

tossed  about  in  my  dream’,  and  still  less  are  you  conscious  of

anything incorrect when you say, ‘I shed tears in my dream’ or ‘I felt

apprehensive in my dream’. But you will no doubt notice that in all

these  cases  you  are  using  ‘dream’  and  ‘sleep’  and  ‘state  of  being

asleep’ interchangeably, as if there were no distinction between them.

I think it would be in the interests of scientific accuracy to keep ‘dream’

and ‘state of sleep’ more distinctly separate. Why should we provide a

counterpart to the confusion evoked by Maeder who, by refusing to

distinguish between the dream-work and the latent dream-thoughts,

has discovered a new function for dreams? Supposing, then, that we

are brought face to face with a pure telepathic ‘dream’, let us rather

call it instead a telepathic experience in a state of sleep. A dream

without  condensation,  distortion,  dramatization,  above  all,  without

wish-fulfilment, surely does not deserve the name. You will remind me

that, if so, there are other mental products in sleep to which the right

to be called ‘dreams’ would have to be refused. Actual experiences of

the  day  are  sometimes  simply  repeated  in  sleep;  reproductions  of

traumatic  scenes  in  ‘dreams’  have  led  us  only  lately  to  revise  the

theory of dreams. There are dreams which are to be distinguished

from the usual type by certain special qualities, which are, properly

speaking,  nothing  but  night-phantasies,  not  having  undergone

additions or alterations of any kind and being in all other ways similar

to the familiar day-dreams. It would be awkward, no doubt, to exclude

these structures from the domain of ‘dreams’. But still they all come

from  within,  are  products  of  our  mental  life,  whereas  the  very

conception  of  the  purely  ‘telepathic  dream’  lies  in  its  being  a

perception  of  something  external,  in  relation  to  which  the  mind

remains passive and receptive.

 


                                Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3888 

                                            II

 

      The  second  case  which  I  shall  bring  before  your  notice  in  fact

follows along other lines. This is not a telepathic dream, but a dream

that has recurred from childhood onwards, in a person who has had

many  telepathic  experiences.  Her  letter,  which  I  reproduce  here,

contains some remarkable things, about which we cannot form any

judgement. A part of it is of interest in connection with the problem of

the relation of telepathy to dreams.

 

   (1) ‘. . . My doctor, Herr Dr. N., advises me to give you an account of

a dream that has pursued me for some thirty or thirty-two years. I am

following his advice, and perhaps the dream may possess interest for

you in some scientific respect. Since, in your opinion, such dreams are

to be traced to an experience of a sexual nature in the first years of

my  childhood,  I  relate  some  reminiscences  of  childhood.  They  are

experiences whose impression on me still persists and which were of

so marked a character as to have determined my religion for me.

   ‘May I beg of you to send me word in what way you explain this

dream and whether it is not possible to banish it from my life, for it

haunts  me  like  a  ghost,  and  the  circumstances  that  always

accompany it - I always fall out of bed, and have inflicted on myself

not  inconsiderable  injuries  -  make  it  particularly  disagreeable  and

distressing.’

   (2)  ‘I am thirty-seven years old, very strong and in good physical

health, but in childhood I had, besides measles and scarlet fever, an

attack of nephritis. Furthermore, in my fifth year I had a very severe

inflammation of the eyes, which left double vision. The images are at

an angle to each other and their outline is blurred, as the scars from

the ulcers affect clearness of vision. In the specialist’s opinion there is

nothing more to be done to the eyes and no chance of improvement.

The left side of my face is drawn up from having screwed up my left

eye to see better. By dint of practice and determination I can do the

finest needlework; and, similarly, when a six-year old child, I broke

myself of squinting by practising in front of a looking-glass, so that

now there is no external sign of the defect in vision.   ‘From my very earliest years I was always solitary. I kept apart from

other children, and had visions (clairvoyance and clairaudience). I was

not able to distinguish these from reality, and in consequence often

found myself in conflict with other people in embarrassing positions,

with the result that I have become a very reserved and shy person.

Since as a quite small child I already knew far more than I could have

learnt,  I  simply  did  not  understand  children  of  my  own  age.  I  am

myself the eldest of a family of twelve.

 


                                Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3889

 

   ‘From six to ten years old I attended the parish school and up to

sixteen the high-school of the Ursuline Nuns in B--. At ten I had taken

in as much French in four weeks, in eight lessons, as other children

learn in two years. I had only to say it over. It was just as if I had

already learnt it and only forgotten it. I have never had any need to

learn  French,  in  contradistinction  to  English,  which  gave  me  no

trouble, certainly, but which was not known to me beforehand. The

same  thing  happened  to  me  with  Latin  as  with  French  and  I  have

never properly learnt it, only knowing it from Church Latin, which is,

however, quite familiar to me. If I read a French book to-day, then I

immediately begin thinking in French, whereas this never happens to

me  with  English,  although  I  have  more  command  of  English.  My

parents are peasant people (who for generations have never spoken

any languages except German and Polish.

   ‘Visions. - Sometimes reality vanishes for some moments and I see

something quite different. In my house, for example, I often see an old

married couple and a child; and the house is then differently furnished.

In the sanatorium a friend once came into my room at about four in the

morning; I was awake, had the lamp burning, and was sitting at my

table reading, as I suffer much from sleeplessness. This apparition of

her always means a trying time for me - as it did on this occasion.

   ‘In 1914 my brother was on active service; I was not with my parents

in B-- but in Ch--. It was ten a. m. on August 22 when I heard my

brother’s voice calling, "Mother! Mother!" It came again ten minuteslater, but I saw nothing. On August 24 I came home, found my mother

greatly depressed, and in answer to my questions she said that she

had had a message from the boy on August 22. She had been in the

garden  in  the  morning,  when  she  had  heard  him  call,  "Mother!

Mother!" I comforted her and said nothing about myself. Three weeks

after  there  came  a  card  from  my  brother,  written  on  August  22

between nine and ten in the morning; shortly after that he died.

      ‘On  September  27,  1921,  while  in  the  sanatorium,  I  received  a

message  of  some  kind.  There  were  violent  knockings  two  or  three

times repeated on the bed of the patient who shared my room. We

were both awake; I asked if she had knocked; she had not even heard

anything. Eight weeks later I heard that one of my friends had died in

the night of September 26-7.

 


                                Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3890

 

   ‘Now something which is regarded as a hallucination - a matter of

opinion! I have a friend who married a widower with five children; I got

to know the husband only through my friend. Nearly every time that I

have been to see her, I have seen a lady going in and out of the

house. It was natural to suppose that this was the husband’s first wife.

I asked at some convenient opportunity for a portrait of her, but could

not identify the apparition with the photograph. Seven years later I saw

a picture with the features of the lady, belonging to one of the children.

It was the first wife after all. In the picture she looked in much better

health:  she  had  just  been  through  a  feeding-up  treatment  and  that

alters the appearance of a consumptive patient. These are only a few

examples out of many.

   ‘The dream. - I saw a tongue of land surrounded by water. The

waves were being driven forward and then back by the breakers. On

this  piece  of  land  stood  a  palm-tree,  bent  somewhat  towards  the

water. A woman had her arm wound round the stem of the palm and

was bending low towards the water, where a man was trying to reach

the shore. At last she lay down on the ground, held tightly to the palm-

tree with her left hand and stretched out her right hand as far as shecould towards the man in the water, but without reaching him. At that

point I would fall out of bed and wake. I was about fifteen or sixteen

years old when I realized that this woman was myself, and from that

time I not only experienced all the woman’s apprehensions on behalf

of the man but sometimes stood there as a third person looking on at

the  scene  without  taking  part  in  it.  I  dreamed  this  dream  too  in

separate scenes. As an interest in men awoke in me (at eighteen to

twenty years old), I tried to see the man’s face; but this was never

possible. The foam hid everything but his neck and the back of his

head. I have twice been engaged to be married, but judging by his

head and build he was neither of the two men I was engaged to. -

Once,  when  I  was  lying  in  the  sanatorium  under  the  influence  of

paraldehyde, I saw the man’s face, which I now always see in this

dream. It was that of the doctor under whose care I was. I liked him as

a doctor, but I was not drawn to him in any other way.

   ‘Memories. Six to nine months old. - I was in a perambulator. On my

right were two horses; one, a brown, was looking at me very intently

and expressively. This was my most vivid experience; I had the feeling

that it was a human being.

 


                                Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3891

 

   ‘One year old. - Father and I in the town-park, where a park-keeper

was putting a little bird into my hand. Its eyes looked back into mine. I

felt "That is a creature like yourself".

   ‘Animals being slaughtered. - When I heard the pigs squealing I

always called for help and cried out "You are killing a person" (four

years  old).  I  always  refused  to  eat  meat.  Pork  always  makes  me

vomit.  It  was  not  till  the  war  that  I  came  to  eat  meat,  and  only

unwillingly; now I am learning to do without it again.

   ‘Five years old. - My mother was confined and I heard her cry out. I

had the feeling, "There is a human being or an animal in the greatest

distress", just as I had over the pig-killing.

   ‘I was quite indifferent as a child to sexual matters; at ten years old I

had as yet no conception of offences against chastity. Menstruationcame on at the age of twelve. The woman first awakened in me at six-

and-twenty, after I had given life to a child; up to that time (six months)

I constantly had violent vomiting after intercourse. This also came on

whenever I was at all oppressed in mood.

      ‘I  have  extraordinarily  keen  powers  of  observation,  and  quite

exceptionally sharp hearing, also a very keen sense of smell. With my

eyes bandaged I can pick out by smell people I know from among a

number of others.

      ‘I  do  not  regard  my  abnormal  powers  of  sight  and  hearing  as

pathological,  but  ascribe  them  to  finer  perceptions  and  greater

quickness of thought; but I have only spoken of it to my pastor and to

Dr.-- (very unwillingly to the latter, as I was afraid he would tell me that

what  I  regarded  as plus-qualities  were minus-qualities,  and  also

because from being misunderstood in childhood I am very reserved

and shy).’

 


                                Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3892

 

 

   The dream which the writer of the letter asks us to interpret is not

hard to understand. It is a dream of rescuing from water, a typical

birth-dream. The language of symbolism, as you are aware, knows no

grammar; it is an extreme case of a language of infinitives, and even

the active and passive are represented by one and the same image. If

in a dream a woman pulls (or tries to pull) a man out of the water, that

may mean that she wants to be his mother (takes him for her son as

Pharaoh’s daughter did with Moses). Or it may mean that she wants

him to make her into a mother: she wants to have a son by him, who,

as a likeness of him, can be his equivalent. The tree-trunk to which the

woman was clinging is easily recognized as a phallic symbol, even

though it is not standing straight up, but inclined towards the surface

of the water - in the dream the word is ‘bent’. The onrush and recoil of

the breakers brought to the mind of another dreamer who was relating

a similar dream a comparison with the intermittent pains of labour; and

when, knowing that she had not yet borne a child, I asked her how sheknew of this characteristic of labour, she said that she imagined labour

as a kind of colic - a quite unimpeachable description physiologically.

She gave the association ‘The Waves of the Sea and of Love’. How

our present dreamer at so early as age can have arrived at the finer

details of symbolism - tongue of land, palm-tree - I am naturally unable

to say. We must not, moreover, overlook the fact that, when people

assert that they have for years been pursued by the same dream, it

often turns out that the manifest content is not quite the same. Only

the  kernel  of  the  dream  has  recurred  each  time;  the  details  of  the

content are changed or additions are made to them.

   At the end of this dream, which is clearly charged with anxiety, the

dreamer falls out of bed. This is a fresh representation of childbirth.

Analytic investigation of the fear of heights, of the dread of an impulse

to throw oneself out of the window, has doubtless led you all to the

same conclusion.

   Who then is the man, by whom the dreamer wishes to have a child,

or of whose likeness she would like to be the mother?  She often tried

to see his face, but the dream never allowed her to; the man had to

remain incognito.  We  know  from  countless  analyses  what  this

concealment means, and the conclusion we should base on analogy

is verified by another statement of the dreamer’s. Under the influence

of paraldehyde she once recognized the face of the man in the dream

as that of the hospital physician who was treating her, and who meant

nothing more to her conscious emotional life. The original thus never

divulged  its  identity,  but  this  impression  of  it  in  ‘transference’

establishes the conclusion that earlier it must always have been her

father. Ferenczi is perfectly right in pointing out that these ‘dreams of

the unsuspecting’ are valuable sources of information, as confirming

the  conjectures  of  analysis.  Our  dreamer  was  the  eldest  of  twelve

children; how often must she have suffered the pangs of jealousy and

disappointment when it was not she but her mother who obtained from

her father the child she longed for!

 


                                Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3893

    Our dreamer quite correctly supposed that her first memories of

childhood  would  be  of  value  in  the  interpretation  of  her  early  and

recurrent dream. In the first scene, before she was one year old, as

she was sitting in her perambulator she saw two horses beside her,

one looking at her. This she described as her most vivid experience;

she had the feeling that it was a human being. This was a feeling

which  we  can  understand  only  if  we  assume  that  the  two  horses

represented, in this case as so often, a married couple, father and

mother. It was, as it were, a flash of infantile totemism. If we could, we

should ask the writer whether the brown horse who looked at her so

humanly could not be recognized by its colouring as her father. The

second recollection was associatively connected with the first through

the  same  ‘understanding’  gaze.  Taking  the  little  bird  in  her  hand,

however, reminds the analyst, who has prejudices of his own, of a

feature in the dream in which the woman’s hand was in contact with

another phallic symbol.

   The next two memories belong together; they make still slighter

demands  on  the  interpreter.  The  mother  crying  out  during  her

confinement  reminded  the  daughter  directly  of  the  pigs  squealing

when they were being killed and put her into the same frenzy of pity.

But we may also conjecture that this was a violent reaction against an

angry death-wish directed at the mother.

   With these indications of tenderness for her father, of contact with

his genitals, and of death-wishes against her mother, the outline of the

female  Oedipus  complex  is  sketched  in.  Her  long  retention  of  her

ignorance of sexual matters, and her frigidity at a later period bear out

these suppositions. The writer of the letter became potentially - and at

times no doubt actually - a hysterical neurotic. The forces of life have,

for  her  own  happiness,  carried  her  along  with  them.  They  have

awakened in her the sexual feelings of a woman and brought her the

joys of motherhood, and the capacity to work. But a portion of her

libido still clings to its points of fixation in childhood; she still dreams

the  dream  that  throws  her  out  of  bed  and  punishes  her  for  her

incestuous object-choice by ‘not inconsiderable injuries’.

   And now an explanation, given in writing by a doctor who was a

stranger to her, was expected to effect what all the most important

experiences  of  her  later  life  had  failed  to  do!    Probably  a  regularanalysis continued for a considerable time would have succeeded in

this. As things were, I was obliged to content myself with writing to her

that  I  was  convinced  she  was  suffering  from  the  after-effects  of  a

strong  emotional  tie  binding  her  to  her  father  and  from  a

corresponding identification with her mother, but that I did not myself

expect  that  this  explanation  would  help  her.  Spontaneous  cures  of

neurosis usually leave scars behind, and these become painful again

from time to time. We are very proud of our art if we achieve a cure

through psycho-analysis, yet here too we cannot always prevent the

formation of a painful scar as an outcome.

 


                                Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3894

 

   The little series of reminiscences must engage our attention for a

while longer. I have stated elsewhere that such scenes of childhood

are  ‘screen memories’ selected at a later period, put together, and not

infrequently  falsified  in  the  process.  This  subsequent  remodelling

serves a purpose that is sometimes easy to guess. In our case one

can almost hear the writer’s ego glorifying or soothing itself by means

of this series of recollections. ‘I was from infancy a particularly noble

and  compassionate  creature.  I  learnt  quite  early  that  animals  have

souls as we have, and could not endure cruelty to animals. The sins of

the flesh were far from me and I preserved my chastity till late in life.’

With  declarations  such  as  these  she  was  loudly  contradicting  the

inferences  that  we  have  to  make  about  her  early  childhood  on  the

basis  of  our  analytical  experience,  namely,  that  she  had  an

abundance  of  premature  sexual  impulses  and  violent  feelings  of

hatred for her mother and her younger brothers and sisters. (Besides

the genital significance I have just assigned to it, the little bird may

also be a symbol of a child, like all small animals; her recollection thus

accentuated very insistently the fact that this small creature had the

same  right  to  exist  as  she  herself.)  Hence  the  short  series  of

recollections furnishes a very nice example of a mental structure with

a twofold aspect. Viewed superficially, we may find in it the expression

of  an  abstract  idea,  here,  as  usually,  with  an  ethical  reference.  InSilberer’s  nomenclature  the  structure  has  an anagogic  content.  On

deeper  investigation  it  reveals  itself  as  a  chain  of  phenomena

belonging to the region of the repressed life of the instincts - it displays

its psycho-analytic content. As you know, Silberer, who was among

the first to issue a warning to us not to lose sight of the nobler side of

the human soul, has put forward the view that all or nearly all dreams

permit such a twofold interpretation, a purer, anagogic one beside the

ignoble, psycho-analytic one. This is, however, unfortunately not so.

On the contrary, an over-interpretation of this kind is rarely possible.

To my knowledge no valid example of such a dream-analysis with a

double  meaning  has  been  published  up  to  the  present  time.  But

observations  of  this  kind  can  often  be  made  upon  the  series  of

associations that our patients produce during analytic treatment. On

the one hand the successive ideas are linked by a line of association

which is plain to the eye, while on the other hand you become aware

of an underlying theme which is kept secret but which at the same

time  plays  a  part  in  all  these  ideas.  The  contrast  between  the  two

themes  that  dominate  the  same  series  of  ideas  is  not  always  one

between  the  lofty  anagogic  and  the  low  psycho-analytic,  but  one

rather between offensive and respectable or indifferent ideas - a fact

that easily explains why such a chain of associations with a twofold

determination  arises.  In  our  present  example  it  is  of  course  not

accidental that the anagogic and the psycho-analytic interpretations

stood in such a sharp contrast to each other; both related to the same

material, and the later trend was no other than that of the reaction-

formations which had been erected against the disowned instinctual

impulses.

   But why do we look for a psycho-analytic interpretation at all instead

of contenting ourselves with the more accessible anagogic one? The

answer  to  this  is  linked  up  with  many  other  problems  -  with  the

existence  in  general  of  neurosis  and  the  explanations  it  inevitably

demands - with the fact that virtue does not reward a man with as

much  joy  and  strength  in  life  as  one  would  expect,  as  though  it

brought with it too much of its origin (our dreamer, too, had not been

well rewarded for her virtue), and with other things which I need not

discuss before this audience.

                                 Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3895

 

      So  far,  however,  we  have  completely  neglected  the  question  of

telepathy, the other point of interest for us in this case; it is time to

return to it. In a sense we have here an easier task than in the case of

Herr H. With a person who so easily and so early in life lost touch with

reality  and  replaced  it  by  the  world  of  phantasy,  the  temptation  is

irresistible to connect her telepathic experiences and ‘visions’ with her

neurosis and to derive them from it, although here too we should not

allow  ourselves  to  be  deceived  as  to  the  cogency  of  our  own

arguments.  We  shall  merely  be  replacing  what  is  unknown  and

unintelligible by possibilities that are at least comprehensible.

      On  August  22,  1914,  at  ten  o’clock  in  the  morning,  our

correspondent experienced a telepathic impression that her brother,

who was at the time on active service, was calling, ’Mother! Mother!’;

the phenomenon was purely acoustic, it was repeated shortly after,

but nothing was seen. Two days later she saw her mother and found

her much depressed because the boy had announced himself to her

with a repeated call of ’Mother! Mother!’ She immediately remembered

the same telepathic message, which she had experienced at the same

time, and as a matter of fact some weeks later it was established that

the young soldier had died on that day at the hour in question.

   It cannot be proved, but also cannot be disproved, that instead of

this, what happened was the following. Her mother told her one day

that her son had sent a telepathic message; whereupon the conviction

at once arose in her mind that she had had the same experience at

the  same  time.  Such  illusions  of  memory  arise  in  the  mind  with  a

compelling  force  which  they  draw  from  real  sources;  but  they  turn

psychical reality into material reality. The strength of the illusion lies in

its  being  an  excellent  way  of  expressing  the  sister’s  proneness  to

identify herself with her mother. ‘You are anxious about the boy, but I

am  really  his  mother,  and  his  cry  was  meant  for  me; I  had  this

telepathic  message.’  The  sister  would  naturally  firmly  reject  our

attempt at explanation and would hold to her belief in the authenticity

of  her  experience.  But  she  could  not  do  otherwise.  She  would  be

bound to believe in the reality of the pathological effect so long as thereality of its unconscious premises were unknown to her. Every such

delusion  derives  its  strength  and  its  unassailable  character  from

having a source in unconscious psychical reality. I note in passing that

it is not incumbent on us here to explain the mother’s experience or to

investigate its authenticity.

 


                                Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3896

 

      The  dead  brother,  however,  was  not  only  our  correspondent’s

imaginary child; he also represented a rival whom she had regarded

with hatred from the time of his birth. By far the greater number of all

telepathic intimations relate to death or the possibility of death; when

patients under analysis keep telling us of the frequency and infallibility

of their gloomy forebodings, we can with equal regularity show them

that  they  are  fostering  particularly  strong  death-wishes  in  their

unconscious against their nearest relations and have long been thus

suppressing them. The patient whose history I related in 1909¹ was an

example to the point; he was called a ‘carrion crow’ by his relations.

But when this kindly and highly intelligent man - who has since himself

perished in the war - began to make progress towards recovery, he

himself  gave  me  considerable  assistance  in  clearing  up  his  own

psychological conjuring tricks. In the same way, the account given in

our first correspondent’s letter, of how he and his three brothers had

received the news of their youngest brother’s death as a thing they

had  long  been  inwardly  aware  of,  appears  to  need  no  other

explanation. The elder brothers would all have been equally convinced

of the superfluousness of the youngest arrival.

      Here  is  another  of  our  dreamer’s  ‘visions’  which  will  probably

become more intelligible in the light of analytic knowledge. Women

friends obviously had a great significance in her emotional life. Only

recently the death of one of them was conveyed to her by a knocking

at night on the bed of a room-mate in the sanatorium. Another friend

had many years before married a widower with several (five) children.

On  the  occasion  of  her  visits  to  their  house  she  regularly  saw  the

apparition  of  a  lady,  who  she  could  not  help  supposing  was  thehusband’s first wife; this did not at first permit of confirmation, and only

became  a  matter  of  certainty  with  her  seven  years  later,  on  the

discovery of a fresh photograph of the dead woman. This achievement

in the way of a vision on the part of our correspondent had the same

intimate dependence on the family complexes familiar to us as had

her presentiment of her brother’s death. By identifying herself with her

friend she could in the person of the latter find the fulfilment of her own

wishes; for every eldest daughter of a numerous family builds up in

her unconscious the phantasy of becoming her father’s second wife by

the death of her mother. If the mother is ill or dies, the eldest daughter

takes  her  place  as  a  matter  of  course  in  relation  to  her  younger

brothers  and  sisters,  and  may  even  take  over  some  part  of  the

functions of the wife in respect to the father. The unconscious wish fills

in the other part.

 

    ¹ ‘Notes upon a Case of Obsessional Neurosis’

 


                                Dreams And Telepathy

                                                                                      3897

 

 

   I am now almost at the end of what I wish to say. I might, however,

add  the  observation  that  the  instances  of  telepathic  messages  or

productions which have been discussed here are clearly connected

with emotions belonging to the sphere of the Oedipus complex. This

may sound startling; I do not intend to give it out as a great discovery,

however.  I  would  rather  revert  to  the  result  we  arrived  at  through

investigating the dream I considered first. Telepathy has no relation to

the essential nature of dreams; it cannot deepen in any way what we

already  understand  of  them  through  analysis.  On  the  other  hand,

psycho-analysis may do something to advance the study of telepathy,

in so far as, by the help of its interpretations, many of the puzzling

characteristics  of  telepathic  phenomena  may  be  rendered  more

intelligible to us; or other, still doubtful, phenomena may for the first

time definitely be ascertained to be of a telepathic nature.

   There remains one element of the apparently intimate connection

between telepathy and dreams which is not affected by any of theseconsiderations:  namely,  the  incontestable  fact  that  sleep  creates

favourable  conditions  for  telepathy.  Sleep  is  not,  it  is  true,

indispensable  to  the  occurrence  of  telepathic  processes  -  whether

they originate in messages or in unconscious activity. If you are not

already aware of this, you will learn it from the instance given by our

second  correspondent,  of  the  young  man’s  message  which  came

between nine and ten in the morning. We must add, however, that no

one has a right to take exception to telepathic occurrences if the event

and  the  intimation  (or  message)  do  not  exactly  coincide  in

astronomical  time.  It  is  perfectly  conceivable  that  a  telepathic

message might arrive contemporaneously with the event and yet only

penetrate to consciousness the following night during sleep (or even in

waking life only after a while, during some pause in the activity of the

mind).  We  are,  as  you  know,  of  opinion  that  dream-formation  itself

does not necessarily wait for the onset of sleep before it begins. Often

the latent dream-thoughts may have been being got ready during the

whole day, till at night they find the contact with the unconscious wish

that shapes them into a dream. But if the phenomenon of telepathy is

only  an  activity  of  the  unconscious  mind,  then,  of  course,  no  fresh

problem lies before us. The laws of unconscious mental life may then

be taken for granted as applying to telepathy.

      Have  I  given  you  the  impression  that  I  am  secretly  inclined  to

support the reality of telepathy in the occult sense? If so, I should very

much regret that it is so difficult to avoid giving such an impression.

For in reality I have been anxious to be strictly impartial. I have every

reason  to  be  so,  since  I  have  no  opinion  on  the  matter  and  know

nothing about it.

                                                                                       3898

 

      SOME NEUROTIC MECHANISMS IN JEALOUSY, PARANOIA

                            AND HOMOSEXUALITY

                                        (1922)

 


                                                                                      3899

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3900

 

      SOME NEUROTIC MECHANISMS IN JEALOUSY, PARANOIA

                            AND HOMOSEXUALITY

 

                                            A

 

Jealousy  is  one  of  those  affective  states,  like  grief,  that  may  be

described as normal. If anyone appears to be without it, the inference

is justified that it has undergone severe repression and consequently

plays all the greater part in his unconscious mental life. The instances

of  abnormally  intense  jealousy  met  with  in  analytic  work  reveal

themselves as constructed of three layers. The three layers or grades

of  jealousy  may  be  described  as  (1) competitive  or  normal,  (2)

projected, and (3) delusional jealousy.

   There is not much to be said from the analytic point of view. It is

easy to see that essentially it is compounded of grief, the pain caused

by  the  thought  of  losing  the  loved  object,  and  of  the  narcissistic

wound,  in  so  far  as  this  is  distinguishable  from  the  other  wound;

further,  of  feelings  of  enmity  against  the  successful  rival,  and  of  a

greater  or  lesser  amount  of  self-criticism  which  tries  to  hold  the

subject’s own ego accountable for his loss. Although we may call it

normal,  this  jealousy  is  by  no  means  completely  rational,  that  is,

derived  from  the  actual  situation,  proportionate  to  the  real

circumstances and under the complete control of the conscious ego;for  it  is  rooted  deep  in  the  unconscious,  it  is  a  continuation  of  the

earliest  stirrings  of  the  child’s  affective  life,  and  it  originates  in  the

Oedipus  or  brother-and-sister  complex  of  the  first  sexual  period.

Moreover,  it  is  noteworthy  that  in  some  people  it  is  experienced

bisexually.  That  is  to  say,  a  man  will  not  only  feel  pain  about  the

woman he loves and hatred of the man who is his rival, but also grief

about  the  man,  whom  he  loves  unconsciously,  and  hatred  of  the

woman  as  his  rival;  and  this  latter  set  of  feelings  will  add  to  the

intensity  of  his  jealousy.  I  even  know  of  a  man  who  suffered

exceedingly during his attacks of jealousy and who, according to his

own  account,  went  through  unendurable  torments  by  consciously

imagining  himself  in  the  position  of  the  faithless  woman.  The

sensation of helplessness which then came over him and the images

he used to describe his condition - exposed to the vulture’s beak like

Prometheus, or thrown bound into a nest of serpents - were referred

by  him  to  impressions  received  during  several  homosexual  acts  of

aggression to which he had been subjected as a boy.

 


          Some Neurotic Mechanisms In Jealousy, Paranoia And

                                    Homosexuality

                                                                                      3901

 

   The jealousy of the second layer, projected jealousy, is derived in

both men and women either from their own actual unfaithfulness in

real  life  or  from  impulses  towards  it  which  have  succumbed  to

repression.  It  is  a  matter  of  everyday  experience  that  fidelity,

especially that degree of it required in marriage, is only maintained in

the  face  of  continual  temptations.  Anyone  who  denies  these

temptations in himself will nevertheless feel their pressure so strongly

that  he  will  be  glad  enough  to  make  use  of  an  unconscious

mechanism to alleviate his situation. He can obtain this alleviation -

and,  indeed,  acquittal  by  his  conscience  -  if  he  projects  his  own

impulses to faithlessness on to the partner to whom he owes faith.

This  strong  motive  can  then  make  use  of  the  perceptual  material

which betrays unconscious impulses of the same kind in the partner,

and the subject can justify himself with the reflection that the other isprobably not much better than he is himself.¹

   Social conventions have wisely taken this universal state of things

into account, by granting a certain amount of latitude to the married

woman’s  craving  to  attract  and  the  married  man’s  thirst  to  make

conquests,  in  the  expectation  that  this  inevitable  tendency  to

unfaithfulness will thus find a safety valve and be rendered innocuous.

Convention  has  laid  down  that  neither  partner  is  to  hold  the  other

accountable  for  these  little  excursions  in  the  direction  of

unfaithfulness,  and  they  usually  result  in  the  desire  that  has  been

awakened by the new object finding satisfaction in some kind of return

to faithfulness to the original object. A jealous person, however, does

not recognize this convention of tolerance; he does not believe in any

such thing as a halt or a turning-back once the path has been trodden,

nor that a flirtation may be a safeguard against actual infidelity. In the

treatment of a jealous person like this, one must refrain from disputing

with him the material on which he bases his suspicions; one can only

aim at bringing him to regard the matter in a different light.

 

   ¹ Cf. Desdemona’s song:

 
                    I called my love false love; but what said he then?
                    If I court moe women, you’ll couch with moe men.

 


          Some Neurotic Mechanisms In Jealousy, Paranoia And

                                    Homosexuality

                                                                                      3902

 

   The jealousy that arises from such a projection has, it is true, an

almost delusional character; it is, however, amenable to the analytic

work  of  exposing  the  unconscious  phantasies  of  the  subject’s  own

infidelity. The position is worse as regards jealousy belonging to the

third layer, the true delusional type. It too has its origin in repressed

impulses towards unfaithfulness; but the object in these cases is of the

same  sex  as  the  subject.  Delusional  jealousy  is  what  is  left  of  a

homosexuality that has run its course, and it rightly takes its position

among  the  classical  forms  of  paranoia.  As  an  attempt  at  defence

against an unduly strong homosexual impulse it may, in a man, bedescribed in the formula: ‘I do not love him, she loves him!’ ¹  In a

delusional case one will be prepared to find jealousy belonging to all

three layers, never to the third alone.

 

                                            B

 

   Paranoia - Cases of paranoia are for well-known reasons not usually

amenable  to  analytic  investigation.  I  have  recently  been  able,

nevertheless,  by  an  intensive  study  of  two  paranoics,  to  discover

something new to me.

   The first case was that of a youngish man with a fully developed

paranoia of jealousy, the object of which was his impeccably faithful

wife.  A  stormy  period  in  which  the  delusion  had  possessed  him

uninterruptedly already lay behind him. When I saw him he was only

subject to clearly separated attacks, which lasted for several days and

which, curiously enough, regularly appeared on the day after he had

had sexual intercourse with his wife, which was, incidentally, satisfying

to both of them. The inference is justified that after every satiation of

the  heterosexual  libido  the  homosexual  component,  likewise

stimulated  by  the  act,  forced  an  outlet  for  itself  in  the  attack  of

jealousy.

   These attacks drew their material from his observation of minute

indications,  by  which  his  wife’s  quite  unconscious  coquetry,

unnoticeable  to  any  one  else,  had  betrayed  itself  to  him.  She  had

unintentionally touched the man sitting next her with her hand; she

had turned too much towards him, or she had smiled more pleasantly

than when alone with her husband. He was extraordinarily observant

of all these manifestations of her unconscious, and always knew how

to interpret them correctly, so that he really was always in the right

about it, and could furthermore call in analysis to justify his jealousy.

His abnormality really reduced itself to this, that he watched his wife’s

unconscious mind much more closely and then regarded it as far more

important than anyone else would have thought of doing.

 

   ¹ See the Schreber analysis (1911c).

           Some Neurotic Mechanisms In Jealousy, Paranoia And

                                    Homosexuality

                                                                                      3903

 

   We are reminded that sufferers from persecutory paranoia act in just

the same way. They, too, cannot regard anything in other people as

indifferent, and they, too, take up minute indications with which these

other, unknown, people present them, and use them in their delusions

of reference. The meaning of their delusion of reference is that they

expect from all strangers something like love. But these people show

them  nothing  of  the  kind;  they  laugh  to  themselves,  flourish  their

sticks, even spit on the ground as they go by - and one really does not

do such things while a person in whom one takes a friendly interest is

near.  One  does  them  only  when  one  feels  quite  indifferent  to  the

passer-by, when one can treat him like air; and, considering, too, the

fundamental  kinship  of  the  concepts  of  ‘stranger’  and  ‘enemy’,  the

paranoic is not so far wrong in regarding this indifference as hate, in

contrast to his claim for love.

   We begin to see that we describe the behaviour of both jealous and

persecutory paranoics very inadequately by saying that they project

outwards  on  to  others  what  they  do  not  wish  to  recognize  in

themselves. Certainly they do this; but they do not project it into the

blue, so to speak, where there is nothing of the sort already. They let

themselves  be  guided  by  their  knowledge  of  the  unconscious,  and

displace to the unconscious minds of others the attention which they

have withdrawn from their own. Our jealous husband perceived his

wife’s  unfaithfulness  instead  of  his  own;  by  becoming  conscious  of

hers and magnifying it enormously he succeeded in keeping his own

unconscious. If we accept his example as typical, we may infer that

the  enmity  which  the  persecuted  paranoic  sees  in  others  is  the

reflection of his own hostile impulses against them. Since we know

that with the paranoic it is precisely the most loved person of his own

sex  that  becomes  his  persecutor,  the  question  arises  where  this

reversal of affect takes its origin; the answer is not far to seek - the

ever-present ambivalence of feeling provides its source and the non-

fulfilment of his claim for love strengthens it. This ambivalence thus

serves  the  same  purpose  for  the  persecuted  paranoic  as  jealousyserved for my patient - that of a defence against homosexuality.

 


          Some Neurotic Mechanisms In Jealousy, Paranoia And

                                    Homosexuality

                                                                                      3904

 

      The  dreams  of  my  jealous  patient  presented  me  with  a  great

surprise.  They  were  not  simultaneous  with  the  outbreaks  of  the

attacks, it is true, but they occurred within the period which was under

the dominance of the delusion; yet they were completely free from

delusion and they revealed the underlying homosexual impulses with

no  more  than  the  usual  degree  of  disguise.  Since  I  had  had  little

experience of the dreams of paranoics, it seemed plausible at the time

to suppose that it was true in general that paranoia does not penetrate

into dreams.

   This patient’s homosexual position was easily surveyed. He had

made no friendships and developed no social interests; one had the

impression that only the delusion had carried forward the development

of his relations with men, as if it had taken over some of the arrears

that  had  been  neglected.  The  fact  that  his  father  was  of  no  great

importance  in  the  family,  combined  with  a  humiliating  homosexual

trauma in early boyhood, had forced his homosexuality into repression

and barred the way to its sublimation. The whole of his youth was

governed by a strong attachment to his mother. Of all her many sons

he was her declared favourite, and he developed marked jealousy of

the normal type in regard to her. When later he made his choice of a

wife  -  mainly  prompted  by  an  impulse  to  enrich  his  mother  -  his

longing for a virgin mother expressed itself in obsessive doubts about

his fiancée’s virginity. The first years of his marriage were free from

jealousy. Then he became unfaithful to his wife and entered upon an

intimate  relationship  with  another  woman  that  lasted  for  a

considerable  time.  Frightened  by  a  certain  suspicion,  he  at  length

made an end of this love affair, and not until then did jealousy of the

second, projected type break out, by means of which he was able to

assuage his self-reproaches about his own unfaithfulness. It was soon

complicated by an accession of homosexual impulses, of which hisfather-in-law  was  the  object,  and  became  a  fully  formed  jealous

paranoia.

 


          Some Neurotic Mechanisms In Jealousy, Paranoia And

                                    Homosexuality

                                                                                      3905

 

      My  second  case  would  probably  not  have  been  classified  as

persecutory paranoia, apart from analysis; but I had to recognize the

young man as a candidate for a terminal illness of that kind. In his

attitude to his father there existed an ambivalence which in its range

was  quite  extraordinary.  On  the  one  hand,  he  was  the  most

pronounced rebel imaginable, and had developed manifestly in every

direction in opposition to his father’s wishes and ideals; on the other

hand, at a deeper level he was still the most submissive of sons, who

after his father’s death denied himself all enjoyment of women out of a

tender  sense  of  guilt.  His  actual  relations  with  men  were  clearly

dominated by suspiciousness; his keen intellect easily rationalized this

attitude;  and  he  knew  how  to  bring  it  about  that  both  friends  and

acquaintances deceived and exploited him. The new thing I learned

from  studying  him  was  that  classical  persecutory  ideas  may  be

present  without  finding  belief  or  acceptance.  They  flashed  up

occasionally during the analysis, but he regarded them as unimportant

and  invariably  scoffed  at  them.  This  may  occur  in  many  cases  of

paranoia;  it  may  be  that  the  delusions  which  we  regard  as  new

formations when the disease breaks out have already long been in

existence.

   It seems to me that we have here an important discovery - namely,

that the qualitative factor, the presence of certain neurotic formations,

has less practical significance than the quantitative factor, the degree

of  attention  or,  more  correctly,  the  amount  of  cathexis  that  these

structures are able to attract to themselves. Our consideration of the

first  case,  the  jealous  paranoia,  led  to  a  similar  estimate  of  the

importance of the quantitative factor, by showing that there also the

abnormality  essentially  consisted  in  the  hypercathexis  of  the

interpretations of someone else’s unconscious. We have long knownof  an  analogous  fact  in  the  analysis  of  hysteria.  The  pathogenic

phantasies,  derivatives  of  repressed  instinctual  impulses,  are  for  a

long time tolerated alongside the normal life of the mind, and have no

pathogenic effect until by a revolution in the libidinal economy they

receive a hypercathexis; not till then does the conflict which leads to

the formation of symptoms break out. Thus as our knowledge grows

we are increasingly impelled to bring the economic point of view into

the foreground. I should also like to throw out the question whether

this quantitative factor that I am now dwelling on does not suffice to

cover the phenomena which Bleuler and others have lately proposed

to  name  ‘switching’.  One  need  only  assume  that  an  increase  in

resistance in the course taken by the psychical current in one direction

results in a hypercathexis of another path and thus causes the flow to

be switched into that path.

 


          Some Neurotic Mechanisms In Jealousy, Paranoia And

                                    Homosexuality

                                                                                      3906

 

   My two cases of paranoia showed an instructive contrast in the

behaviour of their dreams. Whereas those of the first case were free

from delusion, as has already been said, the other patient produced

great  numbers  of  persecutory  dreams,  which  may  be  regarded  as

forerunners  of  or  substitutes  for  the  delusional  ideas.  The  pursuer,

whom  he  only  managed  to  escape  with  great  fear,  was  usually  a

powerful bull or some other male symbol which even in the dream

itself he sometimes recognized as representing his father. One day he

produced a very characteristic paranoic transference-dream. He saw

me shaving in front of him, and from the scent he realized that I was

using the same soap as his father had used. I was doing this in order

to oblige him to make a father-transference on to me. The choice of

this  incident  for  his  dream  quite  unmistakably  betrays  the  patient’s

depreciatory attitude to his paranoic phantasies and his disbelief in

them; for his own eyes could tell him every day that I was never in a

position to make use of shaving-soap and that therefore there was in

this respect nothing to which a father-transference could attach itself.   A comparison of the dreams of the two patients shows, however,

that  the  question  whether  or  not  paranoia  (or  any  other

psychoneurosis)  can  penetrate  into  dreams  is  based  on  a  false

conception of dreams. Dreams are distinguished from waking thought

by the fact that they can include material (belonging to the region of

the repressed) which must not emerge in waking thought. Apart from

this,  dreams  are  merely  a form  of  thinking,  a  transformation  of

preconscious  material  of  thought  by  the  dream-work  and  its

conditions.  Our  terminology  of  the  neuroses  is  not  applicable  to

repressed material; this cannot be called hysterical, nor obsessional,

nor paranoic. As against this, the other part of the material which is

subjected  to  the  process  of  dream-formation  -  the  preconscious

thoughts - may be normal or may bear the character of any neurosis;

they may be the products of any of the pathogenic processes in which

the essence of a neurosis lies There seems to be no reason why any

such  pathological  idea  should  not  be  transformed  into  a  dream.  A

dream may therefore quite simply represent a hysterical phantasy, an

obsessional idea, or a delusion - that is, may reveal one or other of

these  upon  interpretation.  Observation  of  the  two  paranoics  shows

that the dreams of the one were quite normal while he was subject to

his  delusion,  and  that  those  of  the  other  were  paranoic  in  content

while  he  was  treating  his  delusional  ideas  with  contempt.  In  both

cases, therefore, the dream took up the material that was at the time

forced into the background in waking life. This too, however, need not

necessarily be an invariable rule.

 


          Some Neurotic Mechanisms In Jealousy, Paranoia And

                                    Homosexuality

                                                                                      3907

 

                                            C

 

   Homosexuality. - Recognition of the organic factor in homosexuality

does  not  relieve  us  of  the  obligation  of  studying  the  psychical

processes  connected  with  its  origin.  The  typical  process,  already

established  in  innumerable  cases,  is  that  a  few  years  after  thetermination  of  puberty  a  young  man,  who  until  this  time  has  been

strongly  fixated  to  his  mother,  changes  his  attitude;  he  identifies

himself with his mother, and looks about for love-objects in whom he

can re-discover himself, and whom he might then love as his mother

loved him. The characteristic mark of this process is that for several

years one of the necessary conditions for his love is usually that the

male object shall be of the same age as he himself was when the

change  took  place.  We  have  come  to  know  of  various  factors

contributing to this result, probably in different degrees. First there is

the  fixation  on  the  mother,  which  makes  it  difficult  to  pass  on  to

another woman. Identification with the mother is an outcome of this

attachment, and at the same time in a certain sense it enables the son

to  keep  true  to  her,  his  first  object.  Then  there  is  the  inclination

towards a narcissistic object-choice, which in general lies readier to

hand and is easier to put into effect than a move towards the other

sex.  Behind  this  latter  factor  there  lies  concealed  another  of  quite

exceptional strength, or perhaps it coincides with it: the high value set

upon the male organ and the inability to tolerate its absence in a love-

object. Depreciation of women, and aversion to them, even horror of

them, are generally derived from the early discovery that women have

no penis. We subsequently discovered, as another powerful motive

urging towards homosexual object-choice, regard for the father or fear

of him; for the renunciation of women means that all rivalry with him

(or  with  all  men  who  may  take  his  place)  is  avoided.  The  two  last

motives - the clinging to the condition of a penis in the object, as well

as  the  retiring  in  favour  of  the  father  -  may  be  ascribed  to  the

castration  complex.  Attachment  to  the  mother,  narcissism,  fear  of

castration  -  these  are  the  factors  (which  incidentally  have  nothing

specific  about  them)    that  we  have  hitherto  found  in  the  psychical

aetiology  of  homosexuality;  and  with  these  must  be  reckoned  the

effect of seduction, which is responsible for a premature fixation of the

libido, as well as the influence of the organic factor which favours the

passive role in love.

 


          Some Neurotic Mechanisms In Jealousy, Paranoia And

                                    Homosexuality                                                                                      3908

 

   We have, however, never regarded this analysis of the origin of

homosexuality  as  complete.  I  can  now  point  to  a  new  mechanism

leading to homosexual object-choice, although I cannot say how large

a part it plays in the formation of the extreme, manifest and exclusive

type  of  homosexuality.  Observation  has  directed  my  attention  to

several cases in which during early childhood impulses of jealousy,

derived from the mother-complex and of very great intensity, arose

against  rivals,  usually  older  brothers.  This  jealousy  led  to  an

exceedingly  hostile  and  aggressive  attitude  towards  these  brothers

which might sometimes reach the pitch of actual death-wishes, but

which  could  not  maintain  themselves  in  the  face  of  the  subject’s

further  development.  Under  the  influences  of  upbringing  -  and

certainly not uninfluenced also by their own continuing powerlessness

-  these  impulses  yielded  to  repression  and  underwent  a

transformation, so that the rivals of the earlier period became the first

homosexual love-objects. Such an outcome of the attachment to the

mother  shows  various  interesting  relations  with  other  processes

known to us. First of all it is a complete contrast to the development of

persecutory paranoia, in which the person who has before been loved

becomes  the  hated  persecutor,  whereas  here  the  hated  rivals  are

transformed into love objects. It represents, too, an exaggeration of

the process which, according to my view, leads to the birth of social

instincts in the individual.¹ In both processes there is first the presence

of jealous and hostile impulses which cannot achieve satisfaction; and

both the affectionate and the social feelings of identification arise as

reactive formations against the repressed aggressive impulses.

 

   ¹ Cf. my Group psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (1921c).

 


          Some Neurotic Mechanisms In Jealousy, Paranoia And

                                    Homosexuality

                                                                                      3909

 

   This new mechanism of homosexual object-choice - its origin in

rivalry which has been overcome and in aggressive impulses whichhave  become  repressed  -  is  sometimes  combined  with  the  typical

conditions already familiar to us. In the history of homosexuals one

often hears that the change in them took place after the mother had

praised another boy and set him up as a model. The tendency to a

narcissistic object-choice was thus stimulated, and after a short phase

of keen jealousy the rival became a love-object. As a rule, however,

the new mechanism is distinguished by the change taking place at a

much earlier period, and the identification with the mother receding

into the background. Moreover, in the cases I have observed, it led

only  to  homosexual  attitudes  which  did  not  exclude  heterosexuality

and did not involve a horror feminae.

      It  is  well  known  that  a  good  number  of  homosexuals  are

characterized  by  a  special  development  of  their  social  instinctual

impulses and by their devotion to the interests of the community. It

would be tempting, as a theoretical explanation of this, to say that the

behaviour towards men in general of a man who sees in other men

potential love-objects must be different from that of a man who looks

upon other men in the first instance as rivals in regard to women. The

only  objection  to  this  is  that  jealousy  and  rivalry  play  their  part  in

homosexual love as well, and that the community of men also includes

these  potential  rivals.  Apart  from  this  speculative  explanation,

however,  the  fact  that  homosexual  object-choice  not  infrequently

proceeds  from  an  early  overcoming  of  rivalry  with  men  cannot  be

without  a  bearing  on  the  connection  between  homosexuality  and

social feeling.

   In the light of psycho-analysis we are accustomed to regard social

feeling as a sublimation of homosexual attitudes towards objects. In

the homosexuals with marked social interests, it would seem that the

detachment  of  social  feeling  from  object  choice  has  not  been  fully

carried through.

                                                                                       3910

 

                      TWO ENCYCLOPAEDIA ARTICLES

                                        (1923)

 


                                                                                      3911

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3912

 

                      TWO ENCYCLOPAEDIA ARTICLES

 

                            (A) PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

Psycho-analysis is the name (1) of a procedure for the investigation of

mental processes which are almost inaccessible in any other way, (2)

of  a  method  (based  upon  that  investigation)  for  the  treatment  of

neurotic disorders and (3) of a collection of psychological information

obtained along those lines, which is gradually being accumulated into

a new scientific discipline.

   History - The best way of understanding psycho-analysis is still by

tracing its origin and development. In 1880 and 1881 Dr. Josef Breuer

of Vienna, a well-known physician and experimental physiologist, was

occupied  in  the  treatment  of  a  girl  who  had  fallen  ill  of  a  severe

hysteria while she was nursing her sick father. The clinical picture was

made  up  of  motor  paralyses,  inhibitions,  and  disturbances  of

consciousness. Following a hint given him by the patient herself, who

was a person of great intelligence, he put her into a state of hypnosis

and contrived that, by describing to him the moods and thoughts that

were uppermost in her mind, she returned on each particular occasion

to  a  normal  mental  condition.  By  consistently  repeating  the  same

laborious process, he succeeded in freeing her from all her inhibitions

and paralyses, so that in the end he found his trouble rewarded by a

great therapeutic success as well as by an unexpected insight into thenature of the puzzling neurosis. Nevertheless, Breuer refrained from

following up his discovery or from publishing anything about the case

until some ten years later, when the personal influence of the present

writer (Freud, who had returned to Vienna in 1886 after studying in the

school of Charcot) prevailed on him to take up the subject afresh and

embark  upon  a  joint  study  of  it.  These  two,  Breuer  and  Freud,

published  a  preliminary  paper  ‘On  the  Psychical  Mechanism  of

Hysterical Phenomena’ in 1893, and in 1895 a volume entitled Studies

on Hysteria (which reached its fourth edition in 1922), in which they

described their therapeutic procedure as ‘cathartic’.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3913

 

   Catharsis. - The investigations which lay at the root of Breuer and

Freud’s  studies  led  to  two  chief  results,  and  these  have  not  been

shaken  by  subsequent  experience:  first,  that  hysterical  symptoms

have sense and meaning, being substitutes for normal mental acts;

and  secondly,  that  the  uncovering  of  this  unknown  meaning  is

accompanied by the removal of the symptoms - so that in this case

scientific research and therapeutic effort coincide. The observations

were carried out upon a series of patients who were treated in the

same manner as Breuer’s first patient, that is to say, put into a state of

deep hypnosis; and the results seemed brilliant, until later their weak

side became evident. The theoretical ideas put forward at that time by

Breuer and Freud were influenced by Charcot’s theories on traumatic

hysteria and could find support in the findings of his pupil Pierre Janet,

which, though they were published earlier than the Studies, were in

fact subsequent to Breuer’s first case. From the very beginning the

factor of affect was brought into the foreground: hysterical symptoms,

the authors maintained, came into existence when a mental process

with a heavy charge of affect was in any way prevented from being

levelled  out  along  the  normal  path  leading  to  consciousness  and

movement (i. e. was prevented from being ‘abreacted’); as a result of

this the affect, which was in a sense ‘strangulated’, was diverted along

wrong paths and flowed off into the somatic innervation (a processnamed ‘conversion’). The occasions upon which ‘pathogenic ideas’ of

this  kind  arose  were  described  by  Breuer  and  Freud  as  ‘psychical

traumas’, and, since these often dated back to the very remote past, it

was possible for the authors to say that hysterics suffered mainly from

reminiscences (which had not been dealt with). Under the treatment,

therefore, ‘catharsis’ came about when the path to consciousness was

opened and there was a normal discharge of affect. It will be seen that

an essential part of this theory was the assumption of the existence of

unconscious  mental  processes.  Janet  too  had  made  use  of

unconscious  acts  in  mental  life;  but,  as  he  insisted  in  his  later

polemics  against  psycho-analysis,  to  him  the  phrase  was  no  more

than a make-shift expression, a ‘manière de parler’, and he intended

to suggest no new point of view by it.

   In a theoretical section of the Studies Breuer brought forward some

speculative ideas about the processes of excitation in the mind. These

ideas determined the direction of future lines of thought and even to-

day  have  not  received  sufficient  appreciation.  But  they  brought  his

contributions to this branch of science to an end, and soon afterwards

he withdrew from the common work.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3914

 

   Transition to Psycho-analysis. - Contrasts between the views of the

two authors had been visible even in the Studies. Breuer supposed

that the pathogenic ideas produced their traumatic effect because they

arose during ‘hypnoid states’, in which mental functioning was subject

to special limitations. The present writer rejected this explanation and

inclined to the belief that an idea became pathogenic if its content was

in opposition to the predominant trend of the subject’s mental life so

that it provoked him into ’defence’.(Janet had attributed to hysterical

patients a constitutional incapacity for holding together the contents of

their minds; and it was at this point that his path diverged from that of

Breuer  and  Freud.)  Moreover,  the  two  innovations  which  led  the

present writer to move away from the cathartic method had already

been mentioned in the Studies. After Breuer’s withdrawal they becamethe starting-point of fresh developments.

     Abandonment of Hypnosis.  -  The  first  of  these  innovations  was

based on practical experience and led to a change in technique. The

second  consisted  in  an  advance  in  the  clinical  understanding  of

neuroses.  It  soon  appeared  that  the  therapeutic  hopes  which  had

been placed upon cathartic treatment in hypnosis were to some extent

unfulfilled. It was true that the disappearance of the symptoms went

hand-in-hand with the catharsis, but total success turned out to be

entirely  dependent  upon  the  patient’s  relation  to  the  physician  and

thus  resembled  the  effect  of  ‘suggestion’.  If  that  relation  was

disturbed,  all  the  symptoms  reappeared,  just  as  though  they  had

never been cleared up. In addition to this, the small number of people

who  could  be  put  into  a  deep  state  of  hypnosis  involved  a  very

considerable  limitation,  from  the  medical  standpoint,  of  the

applicability of the cathartic procedure. For these reasons the present

writer decided to give up the use of hypnosis. But at the same time the

impressions he had derived from hypnosis afforded him the means of

replacing it.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3915

 

   Free Association. - The effect of the hypnotic condition upon the

patient  had  been  so  greatly  to  increase  his  ability  to  make

associations  that  he  was  able  straight  away  to  find  the  path  -

inaccessible to his conscious reflection - which led from the symptom

to the thoughts and memories connected with it. The abandonment of

hypnosis  seemed  to  make  the  situation  hopeless,  until  the  writer

recalled a remark of Bernheim’s to the effect that things that had been

experienced  in  a  state  of  somnambulism  were  only apparently

forgotten and that they could be brought into recollection at any time if

the physician insisted forcibly enough that the patient knew them. The

writer  therefore  endeavoured  to  insist  on  his unhypnotized  patients

giving him their associations, so that from the material thus provided

he might find the path leading to what had been forgotten or fended

off.  He  noticed  later  that  the  insistence  was  unnecessary  and  thatcopious ideas almost always arose in the patient’s mind, but that they

were held back from being communicated and even from becoming

conscious by certain objections put by the patient in his own way. It

was to be expected - though this was still unproved and not until later

confirmed  by  wide  experience  -  that  everything  that  occurred  to  a

patient setting out from a particular starting-point must also stand in an

internal connection with that starting-point; hence arose the technique

of educating the patient to give up the whole of his critical attitude and

of making use of the material which was thus brought to light for the

purpose  of  uncovering  the  connections  that  were  being  sought.  A

strong  belief  in  the  strict  determination  of  mental  events  certainly

played  a  part  in  the  choice  of  this  technique  as  a  substitute  for

hypnosis.

     The  ‘Fundamental  Technical  Rule’  of  this  procedure  of  ‘free

association’ has from that time on been maintained in psycho-analytic

work.  The  treatment  is  begun  by  the  patient  being  required  to  put

himself in the position of an attentive and dispassionate self-observer,

merely to read off all the time the surface of his consciousness, and

on the one hand to make a duty of the most complete honesty while

on the other not to hold back any idea from communication, even if (1)

he  feels  that  it  is  too  disagreeable  or  if  (2)  he  judges  that  it  is

nonsensical or (3) too unimportant or (4) irrelevant to what is being

looked  for.  It  is  uniformly  found  that  precisely  those  ideas  which

provoke  these  last-mentioned  reactions  are  of  particular  value  in

discovering the forgotten material.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3916

 

   Psycho-analysis as an Interpretive Art. - The new technique altered

the picture of the treatment so greatly, brought the physician into such

a new relation to the patient and produced so many surprising results

that  it  seemed  justifiable  to  distinguish  the  procedure  from  the

cathartic method by giving it a new name. The present writer gave this

method  of  treatment,  which  could  now  be  extended  to  many  other

forms of neurotic disorder, the name of psycho-analysis. Now, in thefirst resort, this psycho-analysis was an art of interpretation and it set

itself the task of carrying deeper the first of Breuer’s great discoveries

- namely, that neurotic symptoms are significant substitutes for other

mental  acts  which  have  been  omitted.  It  was  now  a  question  of

regarding  the  material  produced  by  the  patients’  associations  as

though it hinted at a hidden meaning and of discovering that meaning

from it. Experience soon showed that the attitude which the analytic

physician could most advantageously adopt was to surrender himself

to his own unconscious mental activity, in a state of evenly suspended

attention, to avoid so far as possible reflection and the construction of

conscious  expectations,  not  to  try  to  fix  anything  that  he  heard

particularly in his memory, and by these means to catch the drift of the

patient’s  unconscious  with  his  own  unconscious.  It  was  then  found

that, except under conditions that were too unfavourable, the patient’s

associations  emerged  like  allusions,  as  it  were,  to  one  particular

theme and that it was only necessary for the physician to go a step

further in order to guess the material which was concealed from the

patient himself and to be able to communicate it to him. It is true that

this work of interpretation was not to be brought under strict rules and

left  a  great  deal  of  play  to  the  physician’s  tact  and  skill;  but,  with

impartiality and practice, it was usually possible to obtain trustworthy

results - that is to say, results which were confirmed by being repeated

in  similar  cases.  At  a  time  when  so  little  was  as  yet  known  of  the

unconscious,  the  structure  of  the  neuroses  and  the  pathological

processes  underlying  them,  it  was  a  matter  for  satisfaction  that  a

technique  of  this  kind  should  be  available,  even  if  it  had  no  better

theoretical  basis.  Moreover  it  is  still  employed  in  analyses  at  the

present  day  in  the  same  manner,  though  with  a  sense  of  greater

assurance and with a better understanding of its limitations.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3917

 

   The Interpretation of Parapraxes and Haphazard Acts. - It was a

triumph for the interpretative art of psycho-analysis when it succeeded

in demonstrating that certain common mental acts of normal people,for which no one had hitherto attempted to put forward a psychological

explanation, were to be regarded in the same light as the symptoms of

neurotics: that is to say, they had a meaning, which was unknown to

the subject but which could easily be discovered by analytic means.

The  phenomena  in  question  were  such  events  as  the  temporary

forgetting  of  familiar  words  and  names,  forgetting  to  carry  out

prescribed  tasks,  everyday  slips  of  the  tongue  and  of  the  pen,

misreadings,  losses  and  mislayings  of  objects,  certain  errors,

instances  of  apparently  accidental  self-injury,  and  finally  habitual

movements carried out seemingly without intention or in play, tunes

hummed ‘thoughtlessly’, and so on. All of these were shorn of their

physiological explanation, if any such had ever been attempted, were

shown to be strictly determined and were revealed as an expression

of  the  subject’s  suppressed  intentions  or  as  a  result  of  a  clash

between two intentions one of which was permanently or temporarily

unconscious. The importance of this contribution to psychology was of

many kinds. The range of mental determinism was extended by it in

an  unforeseen  manner;  the  supposed  gulf  between  normal  and

pathological  mental  events  was  narrowed;  in  many  cases  a  useful

insight  was  afforded  into  the  play  of  mental  forces  that  must  be

suspected to lie behind the phenomena. Finally, a class of material

was  brought  to  light  which  is  calculated  better  than  any  other  to

stimulate a belief in the existence of unconscious mental acts even in

people  to  whom  the  hypothesis  of  something  at  once  mental  and

unconscious seems strange and even absurd. The study of one’s own

parapraxes and haphazard acts, for which most people have ample

opportunities, is even to-day the best preparation for an approach to

psycho-analysis. In analytic treatment, the interpretation of parapraxes

retains a place as a means of uncovering the unconscious, alongside

the immeasurably more important interpretation of associations.

   The Interpretation of Dreams. - A new approach to the depths of

mental life was opened when the technique of free association was

applied to dreams, whether one’s own or those of patients in analysis.

In fact, the greater and better part of what we know of the processes

in the unconscious levels of the mind is derived from the interpretation

of dreams. Psycho-analysis has restored to dreams the importance

which was generally ascribed to them in ancient times, but it treatsthem differently. It does not rely upon the cleverness of the dream-

interpreter but for the most part hands the task over to the dreamer

himself by asking him for his associations to the separate elements of

the  dream.  By  pursuing  these  associations  further  we  obtain

knowledge  of  thoughts  which  coincide  entirely  with  the  dream  but

which  can  be  recognized  -  up  to  a  certain  point  -  as  genuine  and

completely  intelligible  portions  of  waking  mental  activity.  Thus  the

recollected dream emerges as the manifest dream content, in contrast

to the latent dream-thoughts discovered by interpretation. The process

which has transformed the latter into the former, that is to say into ‘the

dream’, and which is undone by the work of interpretation, may be

called the ‘dream-work’.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3918

 

   We also describe the latent dream-thoughts, on account of their

connection with waking life, as ’residues of the day’. By the operation

of the dream-work (to which it would be quite incorrect to ascribe any

‘creative’ character ) the latent dream thoughts are condensed in a

remarkable  way,  are distorted  by  the displacement  of  psychical

intensities and are arranged with a view to being represented in visual

pictures; and, besides all this, before the manifest dream is arrived at,

they are submitted to a process of secondary revision which seeks to

give the new product something in the nature of sense and coherence.

Strictly speaking, this last process does not form a part of the dream-

work.

   The Dynamic Theory of Dream-Formation. The motive power for the

formation of dreams is not provided by the latent dream-thoughts or

day’s residues, but by an unconscious impulse, repressed during the

day, with which the day’s residues have been able to establish contact

and  which  contrives  to  make  a wish-fulfilment  for  itself  out  of  the

material of the latent thoughts. Thus every dream is on the one hand

the fulfilment of a wish on the part of the unconscious and on the other

hand (in so far as it succeeds in guarding the state of sleep against

being disturbed) the fulfilment of the normal wish to sleep which setthe sleep going. If we disregard the unconscious contribution to the

formation of the dream and limit the dream to its latent thoughts, it can

represent  anything  with  which  waking  life  has  been  concerned  -  a

reflection,  a  warning,  an  intention,  a  preparation  for  the  immediate

future  or,  once  again,  the  satisfaction  of  an  unfulfilled  wish.  The

unrecognizability,  strangeness  and  absurdity  of  the  manifest  dream

are partly the result of the translation of the thoughts into a different,

so  to  say archaic,  method  of  expression,  but  partly  the  effect  of  a

restrictive, critically disapproving agency in the mind which does not

entirely cease to function during sleep. It is plausible to suppose that

the ‘dream-censorship’, which we regard as being responsible in the

first instance for the distortion of the dream-thoughts into the manifest

dream, is an expression of the same mental forces which during the

day-time had held back or repressed the unconscious wishful impulse.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3919

 

   It has been worth while to enter in some detail into the explanation

of dreams, since analytic work has shown that the dynamics of the

formation  of  dreams  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  formation  of

symptoms. In both cases we find a struggle between two trends, of

which  one  is  unconscious  and  ordinarily  repressed  and  strives

towards  satisfaction  -  that  is,  wish-fulfilment  -  while  the  other,

belonging  probably  to  the  conscious  ego,  is  disapproving  and

repressive.  The  outcome  of  this  conflict  is  a compromise-formation

(the  dream  or  the  symptom)  in  which  both  trends  have  found  an

incomplete expression. The theoretical importance of this conformity

between dreams and symptoms is illuminating. Since dreams are not

pathological phenomena, the fact shows that the mental mechanisms

which produce the symptoms of illness are equally present in normal

mental life, that the same uniform law embraces both the normal and

the  abnormal  and  that  the  findings  of  research  into  neurotics  or

psychotics cannot be without significance for our understanding of the

healthy mind.

   Symbolism. - In the course of investigating the form of expressionbrought  about  by  the  dream-work,  the  surprising  fact  emerged  that

certain  objects,  arrangements  and  relations  are  represented,  in  a

sense indirectly, by ‘symbols’, which are used by the dreamer without

his  understanding  them  and  to  which  as  a  rule  he  offers  no

associations. Their translation has to be provided by the analyst, who

can himself only discover it empirically by experimentally fitting it into

the context. It was later found that linguistic usage, mythology and

folklore afford the most ample analogies to dream-symbols. Symbols,

which  raise  the  most  interesting  and  hitherto  unsolved  problems,

seem  to  be  a  fragment  of  extremely  ancient  inherited  mental

equipment. The use of a common symbolism extends far beyond the

use of a common language.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3920

 

   The Aetiological Significance of Sexual Life. - The second novelty

which  emerged  after  the  hypnotic  technique  had  been  replaced  by

free  associations  was  of  a  clinical  nature.  It  was  discovered  in  the

course  of  the  prolonged  search  for  the  traumatic  experiences  from

which hysterical symptoms appeared to be derived.The more carefully

the search was pursued the more extensive seemed to be the network

of aetiologically significant impressions involved, but the further back,

too, did they reach into the patient’s puberty or childhood. At the same

time  they  assumed  a  uniform  character  and  eventually  it  became

inevitable to bow before the evidence and recognize that at the root of

the  formation  of  every  symptom  there  were  to  be  found  traumatic

experiences from early sexual life. Thus a sexual trauma stepped into

the place of an ordinary trauma and the latter was seen to owe its

aetiological significance to an associative or symbolic connection with

the  former,  which  had  preceded  it.  An  investigation  of  cases  of

common nervousness (falling into the two classes of neurasthenia and

anxiety  neurosis)  which  was  simultaneously  undertaken  led  to  the

conclusion  that  these  disorders  could  be  traced  to contemporary

abuses in the patients’ sexual life and could be removed if these were

brought to an end. It was thus easy to infer that neuroses in generalare an expression of disturbances in sexual life, the so-called actual-

neuroses  being  the  consequences  (by  chemical  agency)  of

contemporary injuries and the psycho-neuroses the consequences (by

psychical modification) of bygone injuries to a biological function which

had hitherto been gravely neglected by science. None of the theses of

psycho-analysis  has  met  with  such  tenacious  scepticism  or  such

embittered  resistance  as  this  assertion  of  the  preponderating

aetiological  significance  of  sexual  life  in  the  neuroses.  It  should,

however, be expressly remarked that, in its development up to the

present day, psycho-analysis has found no reason to retreat from this

opinion.

     Infantile  Sexuality.  -  As  a  result  of  its  aetiological  researches,

psycho-analysis found itself in the position of dealing with a subject

the very existence of which had scarcely been suspected previously.

Science had become accustomed to consider sexual life as beginning

with puberty and regarded manifestations of sexuality in children as

rare signs of abnormal precocity and degeneracy. But now psycho-

analysis revealed a wealth of phenomena, remarkable, yet of regular

occurrence, which made it necessary to date back the beginning of

the sexual function in children almost to the commencement of extra-

uterine  existence;  and  it  was  asked  with  astonishment  how  all  this

could have come to be overlooked.The first glimpses of sexuality in

children had indeed been obtained through the analytic examination of

adults and were consequently saddled with all the doubts and sources

of  error  that  could  be  attributed  to  such  a  belated  retrospect;  but

subsequently (from 1908 onwards) a beginning was made with the

analysis  of  children  themselves  and  with  the  unembarrassed

observation of their behaviour, and in this way direct confirmation was

reached for the whole factual basis of the new view.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3921

 

   Sexuality in children showed a different picture in many respects

from that in adults, and, surprisingly enough, it exhibited numerous

traces of what, in adults, were condemned as ‘perversions’. It becamenecessary to enlarge the concept of what was sexual, till it covered

more than the impulsion towards the union of the two sexes in the

sexual act or towards provoking particular pleasurable sensations in

the genitals. But this enlargement was rewarded by the new possibility

of  grasping  infantile,  normal  and  perverse  sexual  life  as  a  single

whole.

   The analytic researches carried out by the writer fell, to begin with,

into the error of greatly overestimating the importance of seduction as

a source of sexual manifestations in children and as a root for the

formation of neurotic symptoms. This misapprehension was corrected

when it became possible to appreciate the extraordinarily large part

played  in  the  mental  life  of  neurotics  by  the  activities  of phantasy,

which clearly carried more weight in neurosis than did external reality.

Behind these phantasies there came to light the material which allows

us to draw the picture which follows of the development of the sexual

function.

   The Development of the Libido. - The sexual instinct, the dynamic

manifestation of which in mental life we shall call ‘libido’, is made up of

component instincts into which it may once more break up and which

are only gradually united into well-defined organizations. The sources

of  these  component  instincts  are  the  organs  of  the  body  and  in

particular certain specially marked erotogenic zones; but contributions

are made to libido from every important functional process in the body.

At  first  the  individual  component  instincts  strive  for  satisfaction

independently of one another, but in the course of development they

become  more  and  more  convergent  and  concentrated.  The  first

(pregenital) stage of organization to be discerned is the oral one, in

which - in conformity with the suckling’s predominant interest - the oral

zone  plays  the  leading  part.  This  is  followed  by  the sadistic-anal

organization, in which the anal zone and the component instinct of

sadism are particularly prominent; at this stage the difference between

the sexes is represented by the contrast between active and passive.

The third and final stage of organization is that in which the majority of

the  component  instincts  converge  under  the primacy  of  the  genital

zones.  As  a  rule  this  development  is  passed  through  swiftly  and

unobtrusively;  but  some  individual  portions  of  the  instincts  remain

behind at the prodromal stages of the process and thus give rise tofixations of libido, which are important as constituting predispositions

for subsequent irruptions of repressed impulses and which stand in a

definite relation to the later development of neuroses and perversions.

(See the article on ‘The Libido Theory’.)

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3922

 

   The Process of Finding an Object, and the Oedipus Complex. - In

the  first  instance  the  oral  component  instinct  finds  satisfaction  by

attaching  itself  to  the  sating  of  the  desire  for  nourishment;  and  its

object  is  the  mother’s  breast.  It  then  detaches  itself,  becomes

independent and at the same time auto-erotic, that is, it finds an object

in the child’s own body. Others of the component instincts also start by

being  auto-erotic  and  are  not  until  later  diverted  on  to  an  external

object. It is a particularly important fact that the component instincts

belonging  to  the  genital  zone  habitually  pass  through  a  period  of

intense  auto-erotic  satisfaction.  The  component  instincts  are  not  all

equally serviceable in the final genital organization of libido; some of

them (for instance, the anal components) are consequently left aside

and suppressed, or undergo complicated transformations.

   In the very earliest years of childhood (approximately between the

ages of two and five) a convergence of the sexual impulses occurs of

which, in the case of boys, the object is the mother. This choice of an

object,  in  conjunction  with  a  corresponding  attitude  of  rivalry  and

hostility towards the father, provides the content of what is known as

the Oedipus complex, which in every human being is of the greatest

importance in determining the final shape of his erotic life. It has been

found  to  be  characteristic  of  a  normal  individual  that  he  learns  to

master his Oedipus complex, whereas the neurotic subject remains

involved in it.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3923

 

   The Diphasic Onset of Sexual Development. - Towards the end ofthe fifth year this early period of sexual life normally comes to an end.

It is succeeded by a period of more or less complete latency, during

which ethical restraints are built up, to act as defences against the

desires of the Oedipus complex. In the subsequent period of puberty,

the  Oedipus  complex  is  revivified  in  the  unconscious  and  embarks

upon further modifications. It is only at puberty that the sexual instincts

develop to their full intensity; but the direction of that development, as

well as all the predispositions for it, have already been determined by

the early efflorescence of sexuality during childhood which preceded

it. This diphasic development of the sexual function - in two stages,

interrupted  by  the  latency  period  -  appears  to  be  a  biological

peculiarity of the human species and to contain the determining factor

for the origin of neuroses.

   The Theory of Repression. - These theoretical considerations, taken

together with the immediate impressions derived from analytic work,

lead to a view of the neuroses which may be described in the roughest

outline  as  follows.  The  neuroses  are  the  expression  of  conflicts

between the ego and such of the sexual impulses as seem to the ego

incompatible with its integrity or with its ethical standards. Since these

impulses are not ego-syntonic, the ego has repressed them: that is to

say, it has withdrawn its interest from them and has shut them off from

becoming conscious as well as from obtaining satisfaction by motor

discharge.  If  in  the  course  of  analytic  work  one  attempts  to  make

these  repressed  impulses  conscious,  one  becomes  aware  of  the

repressive forces in the form of resistance. But the achievement of

repression fails particularly readily in the case of the sexual instincts.

Their dammed-up libido finds other ways out from the unconscious: for

it regresses  to  earlier  phases  of  development  and  earlier  attitudes

towards  objects,  and,  at  weak  points  in  the  libidinal  development

where  there  are  infantile  fixations,  it  breaks  through  into

consciousness and obtains discharge. What results is a symptom and

consequently  in  its  essence  a  substitutive  sexual  satisfaction.

Nevertheless the symptom cannot entirely escape from the repressive

forces  of  the  ego  and  must  therefore  submit  to  modifications  and

displacements exactly as happens with dreams - by means of which

its  characteristic  of  being  a  sexual  satisfaction  becomes

unrecognizable.  Consequently  symptoms  are  in  the  nature  ofcompromises  between  the  repressed  sexual  instincts  and  the

repressing  ego-instincts;  they  represent  a  wish-fulfilment  for  both

partners to the conflict simultaneously, but one which is incomplete for

each of them. This is quite strictly true of the symptoms of hysteria,

while  in  the  symptoms  of  obsessional  neurosis  there  is  often  a

stronger emphasis upon the side of the repressing function owing to

the  erection  of  reaction-formations,  which  are  assurances  against

sexual satisfaction.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3924

 

   Transference. - If further proof were needed of the truth that the

motive  forces  behind  the  formation  of  neurotic  symptoms  are  of  a

sexual  nature,  it  would  be  found  in  the  fact  that  in  the  course  of

analytic  treatment  a  special  emotional  relation  is  regularly  formed

between the patient and the physician. This goes far beyond rational

limits. It varies between the most affectionate devotion and the most

obstinate enmity and derives all of its characteristics from earlier erotic

attitudes  of  the  patient’s  which  have  become  unconscious.  This

transference alike in its positive and in its negative form is used as a

weapon  by  the  resistance;  but  in  the  hands  of  the  physician  it

becomes the most powerful therapeutic instrument and it plays a part

scarcely to be over-estimated in the dynamics of the process of cure.

   The Corner-Stones of Psycho-Analytic Theory. - The assumption

that there are unconscious mental processes, the recognition of the

theory  of  resistance  and  repression,  the  appreciation  of  the

importance of sexuality and of the Oedipus complex - these constitute

the principal subject-matter of psycho-analysis and the foundations of

its theory. No one who cannot accept them all should count himself a

psycho-analyst.

     Later  History  of  Psycho-Analysis.  -  Psycho-analysis  was  carried

approximately thus far by the work of the writer of this article, who for

more than ten years was its sole representative. In 1906 the Swiss

psychiatrists  Bleuler  and  C.  G.  Jung  began  to  play  a  lively  part  in

analysis;  in  1907  a  first  conference  of  its  supporters  took  place  atSalzburg;  and  the  young  science  soon  found  itself  the  centre  of

interest  both  among  psychiatrists  and  laymen.  Its  reception  in

Germany, with her morbid craving for authority, was not precisely to

the credit of German science and moved even so cool a partisan as

Bleuler to an energetic protest. Yet no condemnation or dismissal at

official congresses served to hold up the internal growth or external

expansion of psycho-analysis. In the course of the next ten years it

extended far beyond the frontiers of Europe and became especially

popular in the United States of America, and this was due in no small

degree to the advocacy and collaboration of Putnam (Boston), Ernest

Jones  (Toronto;  later  London),  Flournoy  (Geneva),  Ferenczi

(Budapest),  Abraham  (Berlin),  and  many  others  besides.  The

anathema which was imposed upon psycho-analysis led its supporters

to combine in an international organization which in the present year

(1922)  is  holding  its  eighth  private  Congress  in  Berlin  and  now

includes  local  groups  in  Vienna,  Budapest,  Berlin,  Holland,  Zurich,

London, New York, Calcutta and Moscow. This development was not

interrupted even by the World War. In 1918-19 Dr. Anton von Freund

of  Budapest  founded  the  Internationaler  Psychoanalytischer  Verlag,

which publishes journals and books concerned with psycho analysis,

and in 1920 Dr. M. Eitingon opened in Berlin the first psycho-analytic

clinic  for  the  treatment  of  neurotics  without  private  means.

Translations  of  the  writer’s  principal  works,  which  are  now  in

preparation,  into  French,  Italian  and  Spanish,  testify  to  a  growing

interest in psycho-analysis in the Latin world as well.

      Between  1911  and  1913  two  movements  of  divergence  from

psycho-analysis took place, evidently with the object of mitigating its

repellent  features.  One  of  these  (sponsored  by  C.  G.  Jung),  in  an

endeavour  to  conform  to  ethical  standards,  divested  the  Oedipus

complex of its real significance by giving it only a symbolic value, and

in practice neglected the uncovering of the forgotten and, as we may

call it, ‘prehistoric’ period of childhood. The other (originated by Alfred

Adler in Vienna) reproduced many factors from psycho-analysis under

other  names  -  repression,  for  instance,  appeared  in  a  sexualized

version as the ‘masculine protest’. But in other respects it turned away

from the unconscious and the sexual instincts, and endeavoured to

trace back the development of character and of the neuroses to the‘will to power’, which by means of overcompensation strives to check

the  dangers  arising  from  ‘organ  inferiority’.  Neither  of  these

movements,  with  their  systematic  structures,  had  any  permanent

influence on psycho-analysis. In the case of Adler’s theories it soon

became clear that they had very little in common with psycho-analysis,

which they were designed to replace.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3925

 

   More Recent Advances in Psycho-Analysis. - Since psycho-analysis

has become the field of work for such a large number of observers it

has made advances, both in extent and depth; but unfortunately these

can receive only the briefest mention in the present article.

   Narcissism. - The most important theoretical advance has certainly

been the application of the libido theory to the repressing ego. The

ego itself came to be regarded as a reservoir of what was described

as  narcissistic  libido,  from  which  the  libidinal  cathexes  of  objects

flowed out and into which they could be once more withdrawn. By the

help  of  this  conception  it  became  possible  to  embark  upon  the

analysis  of  the  ego  and  to  make  a  clinical  distinction  of  the

psychoneuroses into transference neuroses and narcissistic disorders.

In the former (hysteria and obsessional neurosis) the subject has at

his  disposal  a  quantity  of  libido  striving  to  be  transferred  on  to

extraneous objects, and use is made of this in carrying out analytic

treatment;  on  the  other  hand,  the  narcissistic  disorders  (dementia

praecox, paranoia, melancholia) are characterized by a withdrawal of

the libido from objects and they are therefore scarcely accessible to

analytic therapy. But their therapeutic inaccessibility has not prevented

analysis from making the most fruitful beginnings in the deeper study

of these illnesses, which are counted among the psychoses.

   Development of Technique. - After the analyst’s curiosity had, as it

were,  been  gratified  by  the  elaboration  of  the  technique  of

interpretation, it was inevitable that interest should turn to the problem

of discovering the most effective way of influencing the patient. It soon

became evident that the physician’s immediate task was to assist thepatient  in  getting  to  know,  and  afterwards  in  overcoming,  the

resistances which emerged in him during treatment and of which, to

begin with, he himself was unaware. And it was found at the same

time  that  the  essential  part  of  the  process  of  cure  lay  in  the

overcoming of these resistances and that unless this was achieved no

permanent mental change could be brought about in the patient. Since

the analyst’s efforts have in this way been directed upon the patient’s

resistance,  analytic  technique  has  attained  a  certainty  and  delicacy

rivalling that of surgery. Consequently, everyone is strongly advised

against  undertaking  psycho-analytic  treatments  without  a  strict

training, and a physician who ventures upon them on the strength of

his medical qualification is in no respect better than a layman.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3926

 

   Psycho-Analysis as a Therapeutic Procedure. - Psycho-analysis has

never set itself up as a panacea and has never claimed to perform

miracles. In one of the most difficult spheres of medical activity it is the

only possible method of treatment for certain illnesses and for others it

is the method which yields the best or the most permanent results -

though never without a corresponding expenditure of time and trouble.

A physician who is not wholly absorbed in the work of giving help will

find his labours amply repaid by obtaining an unhoped-for insight into

the  complications  of  mental  life  and  the  interrelations  between  the

mental and the physical. Where at present it cannot offer help but only

theoretical understanding, it may perhaps be preparing the way for

some later, more direct means of influencing neurotic disorders. Its

province  is  above  all  the  two  transference  neuroses,  hysteria  and

obsessional neurosis, in which it has contributed to the discovery of

their internal structure and operative mechanisms; and, beyond them,

all  kinds  of  phobias,  inhibitions,  deformities  of  character,  sexual

perversions  and  difficulties  in  erotic  life.  Some  analysts  (Jelliffe,

Groddeck, Felix Deutsch) have reported too that the analytic treatment

of gross organic diseases is not unpromising, since a mental factor not

infrequently  contributes  to  the  origin  and  continuance  of  suchillnesses.  Since  psycho-analysis  demands  a  certain  amount  of

psychical plasticity from its patients, some kind of age-limit must be

laid down in their selection; and since it necessitates the devotion of

long  and  intense  attention  to  the  individual  patient,  it  would  be

uneconomical  to  squander  such  expenditure  upon  completely

worthless  persons  who  happen  to  be  neurotic.  Experience  upon

material  in  clinics  can  alone  show  what  modifications  may  be

necessary in order to make psycho-analytic treatment accessible to

wider strata of the population or to adapt it to weaker intelligences.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3927

 

   Comparison between Psycho-Analysis and Hypnotic and Suggestive

Methods. - Psycho-analytic procedure differs from all methods making

use  of  suggestion,  persuasion,  etc.,  in  that  it  does  not  seek  to

suppress  by  means  of  authority  any  mental  phenomenon  that  may

occur  in  the  patient.  It  endeavours  to  trace  the  causation  of  the

phenomenon  and  to  remove  it  by  bringing  about  a  permanent

modification  in  the  conditions  that  led  to  it.  In  psycho-analysis  the

suggestive influence which is inevitably exercised by the physician is

diverted  on  to  the  task  assigned  to  the  patient  of  overcoming  his

resistances,  that  is,  of  carrying  forward  the  curative  process.  Any

danger of falsifying the products of a patient’s memory by suggestion

can be avoided by prudent handling of the technique; but in general

the  arousing  of  resistances  is  a  guarantee  against  the  misleading

effects of suggestive influence. It may be laid down that the aim of the

treatment  is  to  remove  the  patient’s  resistances  and  to  pass  his

repressions in review and thus to bring about the most far-reaching

unification and strengthening of his ego, to enable him to save the

mental energy which he is expending upon internal conflicts, to make

the best of him that his inherited capacities will allow and so to make

him  as  efficient  and  as  capable  of  enjoyment  as  is  possible.  The

removal of the symptoms of the illness is not specifically aimed at, but

is  achieved,  as  it  were,  as  a  by-product  if  the  analysis  is  properly

carried  through.  The  analyst  respects  the  patient’s  individuality  anddoes not seek to remould him in accordance with his own - that is,

according  to  the  physician’s  -  personal  ideals;  he  is  glad  to  avoid

giving advice and instead to arouse the patient’s power of initiative.

   Its Relation to Psychiatry. - Psychiatry is at present essentially a

descriptive and classificatory science whose orientation is still towards

the  somatic  rather  than  the  psychological  and  which  is  without  the

possibility of giving explanations of the phenomena which it observes.

Psycho-analysis does not, however, stand in opposition to it, as the

almost  unanimous  behaviour  of  the  psychiatrists  might  lead  one  to

believe.  On  the  contrary,  as  a depth-psychology,  a  psychology  of

those  processes  in  mental  life  which  are  withdrawn  from

consciousness,  it  is  called  upon  to  provide  psychiatry  with  an

indispensable groundwork and to free it from its present limitations.

We can foresee that the future will give birth to a scientific psychiatry,

to which psycho-analysis has served as an introduction.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3928

 

     Criticisms  and  Misunderstandings  of  Psycho-Analysis.  -  Most  of

what is brought up against psycho-analysis, even in scientific works, is

based  upon  insufficient  information  which  in  its  turn  seems  to  be

determined by emotional resistances. Thus it is a mistake to accuse

psycho-analysis  of  ‘pan-sexualism’  and  to  allege  that  it  derives  all

mental occurrences from sexuality and traces them all back to it. On

the contrary, psycho-analysis has from the very first distinguished the

sexual  instincts  from  others  which  it  has  provisionally  termed  ‘ego

instincts’.  It  has  never  dreamt  of  trying  to  explain  ‘everything’,  and

even the neuroses it has traced back not to sexuality alone but to the

conflict between the sexual impulses and the ego. In psycho-analysis

(unlike  the  works  of  C.  G.  Jung)  the  term  ‘libido’  does  not  mean

psychical  energy  in  general  but  the  motive  force  of  the  sexual

instincts. Some assertions, such as that every dream is the fulfilment

of a sexual wish, have never been maintained by it at all. The charge

of  one-sidedness  made  against  psycho-analysis,  which,  as the

science of the unconscious mind, has its own definite and restrictedfield of work, is as inapplicable as it would be if it were made against

chemistry. To believe that psycho-analysis seeks a cure for neurotic

disorders  by  giving  a  free  rein  to  sexuality  is  a  serious

misunderstanding  which  can  only  be  excused  by  ignorance.  The

making conscious of repressed sexual desires in analysis makes it

possible, on the contrary, to obtain a mastery over them which the

previous repression had been unable to achieve. It can more truly be

said  that  analysis  sets  the  neurotic  free  from  the  chains  of  his

sexuality.  Moreover,  it  is  quite  unscientific  to  judge  analysis  by

whether it is calculated to undermine religion, authority and morals;

for,  like  all  sciences,  it  is  entirely  non-tendentious  and  has  only  a

single aim - namely to arrive at a consistent view of one portion of

reality. Finally, one can only characterize as simple-minded the fear

which is sometimes expressed that all the highest goods of humanity,

as they are called - research, art, love, ethical and social sense - will

lose  their  value  or  their  dignity  because  psycho-analysis  is  in  a

position  to  demonstrate  their  origin  in  elementary  and  animal

instinctual impulses.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3929

 

   The Non-Medical Applications and Correlations of Psycho-analysis.

- Any estimate of psycho-analysis would be incomplete if it failed to

make clear that, alone among the medical disciplines, it has the most

extensive relations with the mental sciences, and that it is in a position

to play a part of the same importance in the studies of religious and

cultural history and in the sciences of mythology and literature as it is

in psychiatry. This may seem strange when we reflect that originally its

only  object  was  the  understanding  and  improvement  of  neurotic

symptoms. But it is easy to indicate the starting-point of the bridge that

leads over to the mental sciences. The analysis of dreams gave us an

insight into the unconscious processes of the mind and showed us

that the mechanisms which produce pathological symptoms are also

operative in the normal mind. Thus psychoanalysis became a depth-

psychology  and  capable  as  such  of  being  applied  to  the  mentalsciences, and it was able to answer a good number of questions with

which  the  academic  psychology  of  consciousness  was  helpless  to

deal. At quite an early stage problems of human phyllogenesis arose.

It became clear that pathological function was often nothing more than

a regression to an earlier stage in the development of normal function.

C.  G.  Jung  was  the  first  to  draw  explicit  attention  to  the  striking

similarity  between  the  disordered  phantasies  of  sufferers  from

dementia  praecox  and  the  myths  of  primitive  peoples;  while  the

present writer pointed out that the two wishes which combine to form

the  Oedipus  complex  coincide  precisely  with  the  two  principal

prohibitions imposed by totemism (not to kill the tribal ancestor and

not to marry any woman belonging to one’s own clan) and drew far-

reaching conclusions from this fact. The significance of the Oedipus

complex began to grow to gigantic proportions and it looked as though

social  order,  morals,  justice  and  religion  had  arisen  together  in  the

primaeval  ages  of  mankind  as  reaction-formations  against  the

Oedipus complex. Otto Rank threw a brilliant light upon mythology and

the history of literature by the application of psycho-analytic views, as

did Theodor Reik upon the history of morals and religions, while Dr.

Pfister,  of  Zurich,  aroused  the  interest  of  religious  and  secular

teachers  and  demonstrated  the  importance  of  the  psycho-analytic

standpoint for education. Further discussion of these applications of

psycho-analysis would be out of place here, and it is enough to say

that the limits of their influence are not yet in sight.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3930

 

   Psycho-analysis an Empirical Science. - Psycho-analysis is not, like

philosophies, a system starting out from a few sharply defined basic

concepts, seeking to grasp the whole universe with the help of these

and,  once  it  is  completed,  having  no  room  for  fresh  discoveries  or

better understanding. On the contrary, it keeps close to the facts in its

field of study, seeks to solve the immediate problems of observation,

gropes its way forward by the help of experience, is always incomplete

and  always  ready  to  correct  or  modify  its  theories.  There  is  noincongruity (any more than in the case of physics or chemistry) if its

most general concepts lack clarity and if its postulates are provisional;

it leaves their more precise definition to the results of future work.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3931

 

                            (B) THE LIBIDO THEORY

 

Libido is a term used in the theory of the instincts for describing the

dynamic manifestation of sexuality. It was already used in this sense

by Moll (1898) and was introduced into psycho-analysis by the present

writer.  What  follows  is  limited  to  a  description  of  the  developments

which  the  theory  of  the  instincts  has  passed  through  in  psycho-

analysis - developments which are still proceeding.

   Contrast between Sexual and Ego Instincts. - Psycho-analysis early

became aware that all mental occurrences must be regarded as built

on the basis of an interplay of the forces of the elementary instincts.

This,  however,  led  to  a  difficult  predicament,  since  psychology

included no theory of the instincts. No one could say what an instinct

really  was,  the  question  was  left  entirely  to  individual  caprice,  and

every psychologist was in the habit of postulating any instincts in any

number that he chose. The first sphere of phenomena to be studied by

psycho-analysis  comprised  what  are  known  as  the  transference

neuroses (hysteria and obsessional neurosis). It was found that their

symptoms came about by sexual instinctual impulses being rejected

(repressed)  by  the  subject’s  personality  (his  ego)  and  then  finding

expression by circuitous paths through the unconscious. These facts

could be met by drawing a contrast between the sexual instincts and

ego instincts (instincts of self-preservation ), which was in line with the

popular  saying  that  hunger  and  love  are  what  make  the  world  go

round: libido was the manifestation of the force of love in the same

sense as was hunger of the self-preservative instinct. The nature of

the ego instincts remained for the time being undefined and, like all

the other characteristics of the ego, inaccessible to analysis. There

was  no  means  of  deciding  whether,  and  if  so  what,  qualitativedifferences were to be assumed to exist between the two classes of

instincts.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3932

 

   Primal Libido. - C. G. Jung attempted to resolve this obscurity along

speculative  lines  by  assuming  that  there  was  only  a  single  primal

libido  which  could  be  either  sexualized  or  desexualized  and  which

therefore coincided in its essence with mental energy in general. This

innovation was methodologically disputable, caused a great deal of

confusion,  reduced  the  term  ‘libido’  to  the  level  of  a  superfluous

synonym and was still in practice confronted with the necessity for

distinguishing  between  sexual  and  asexual  libido.  The  difference

between the sexual instincts and instincts with other aims was not to

be got rid of by means of a new definition.

   Sublimation. - An attentive examination of the sexual trends, which

alone were accessible to psycho-analysis, had meanwhile led to some

remarkable detailed findings. What is described as the sexual instinct

turns  out  to  be  of  a  highly  composite  nature  and  is  liable  to

disintegrate once more into its component instincts. Each component

instinct is unalterably characterized by its source, that is, by the region

or  zone  of  the  body  from  which  its  excitation  is  derived.  Each  has

furthermore as distinguishable features an object and an aim. The aim

is always discharge accompanied by satisfaction, but it is capable of

being  changed  from  activity  to  passivity.  The  object  is  less  closely

attached  to  the  instinct  than  was  at  first  supposed;  it  is  easily

exchanged for another one, and, moreover, an instinct which had an

external object can be turned round upon the subject’s own self. The

separate instincts can either remain independent of one another or - in

what is still an inexplicable manner - can be combined and merged

into one another to perform work in common. They are also able to

replace  one  another  and  to  transfer  their  libidinal  cathexis  to  one

another, so that the satisfaction of one instinct can take the place of

the  satisfaction  of  others.  The  most  important  vicissitude  which  an

instinct can undergo seems to be sublimation; here both object andaim are changed, so that what was originally a sexual instinct finds

satisfaction in some achievement which is no longer sexual but has a

higher social or ethical valuation. These different features do not as

yet combine to form an integral picture.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3933

 

   Narcissism. - A decisive advance was made when the analysis of

dementia praecox and other psychotic disorders was ventured upon

and thus the examination was begun of the ego itself, which had so far

been known only as the agency of repression and opposition. It was

found  that  the  pathogenic  process  in  dementia  praecox  is  the

withdrawal of the libido from objects and its introduction into the ego,

while  the  clamorous  symptoms  of  the  disease  arise  from  the  vain

struggles of the libido to find a pathway back to objects. It thus turned

out to be possible for object-libido to change into cathexis of the ego

and vice versa. Further reflection showed that this process must be

presumed  to  occur  on  the  largest  scale  and  that  the  ego  is  to  be

regarded as a great reservoir of libido from which libido is sent out to

objects and which is always ready to absorb libido flowing back from

objects. Thus the instincts of self-preservation were also of a libidinal

nature: they were sexual instincts which, instead of external objects,

had taken the subject’s own ego as an object. Clinical experience had

made us familiar with people who behaved in a striking fashion as

though  they  were  in  love  with  themselves  and  this  perversion  had

been given the name of narcissism. The libido of the self-preservative

instincts  was  now  described  as narcissistic  libido  and  it  was

recognized that a high degree of this self-love constituted the primary

and  normal  state  of  things.  The  earlier  formula  laid  down  for  the

transference neuroses consequently required to be modified, though

not corrected. It was better, instead of speaking of a conflict between

sexual  instincts  and  ego  instincts,  to  speak  of  a  conflict  between

object-libido and ego-libido, or, since the nature of these instincts was

the same, between the object-cathexes and the ego.

   Apparent Approach to Jung’s Views. - It thus seemed on the face ofit  as  though  the  slow  process  of  psycho-analytic  research  was

following  in  the  steps  of  Jung’s  speculation  about  a  primal  libido,

especially because the transformation of object-libido into narcissism

necessarily carried along with it a certain degree of desexualization, or

abandonment of the specifically sexual aims. Nevertheless, it has to

be borne in mind that the fact that the self-preservative instincts of the

ego are recognized as libidinal does not necessarily prove that there

are no other instincts operating in the ego.

   The Herd Instinct. - It has been maintained in many quarters that

there  is  a  special  innate  and  not  further  analysable  ‘herd  instinct’,

which determines the social behaviour of human beings and impels

individuals to come together into larger communities. Psycho-analysis

finds itself in contradiction to this view. Even if the social instinct is

innate,  it  may  without  any  difficulty  be  traced  back  to  what  were

originally  libidinal  object-cathexes  and  may  have  developed  in  the

childhood  of  the  individual  as  a  reaction-formation  against  hostile

attitudes of rivalry. It is based on a peculiar kind of identification with

other people.

 


                            Two Encyclopaedia Articles

                                                                                      3934

 

   Aim-inhibited Sexual Impulses. - The social instincts belong to a

class  of  instinctual  impulses  which  need  not  be  described  as

sublimated, though they are closely related to these. They have not

abandoned  their  directly  sexual  aims,  but  they  are  held  back  by

internal resistances from attaining them; they rest content with certain

approximations  to  satisfaction  and  for  that  very  reason  lead  to

especially firm and permanent attachments between human beings.

To this class belong in particular the affectionate relations between

parents  and  children,  which  were  originally  fully  sexual,  feelings  of

friendship, and the emotional ties in marriage which had their origin in

sexual attraction.

   Recognition of Two Classes of Instincts in Mental Life. - Though

psycho-analysis  endeavours  as  a  rule  to  develop  its  theories  as

independently  as  possible  from  those  of  other  sciences,  it  isnevertheless obliged to seek a basis for the theory of the instincts in

biology.  On  the  ground  of  a  far-reaching  consideration  of  the

processes  which  go  to  make  up  life  and  which  lead  to  death,  it

becomes  probable  that  we  should  recognize  the  existence  of  two

classes  of  instincts,  corresponding  to  the  contrary  processes  of

construction and dissolution in the organism. On this view, the one set

of instincts, which work essentially in silence, would be those which

follow the aim of leading the living creature to death and therefore

deserve  to  be  called  the  ‘death instincts’;  these  would  be  directed

outwards as the result of the combination of numbers of unicellular

elementary  organisms,  and  would  manifest  themselves  as

destructiveness  or aggressive  impulses.  The  other  set  of  instincts

would be those which are better known to us in analysis - the libidinal,

sexual or life instincts, which are best comprised under the name of

Eros; their purpose would be to form living substance into ever greater

unities,  so  that  life  may  be  prolonged  and  brought  to  higher

development.  The  erotic  instincts  and  the  death  instincts  would  be

present in living beings in regular mixtures or fusions; but ‘defusions’

would also be liable to occur. Life would consist in the manifestations

of the conflict or interaction between the two classes of instincts; death

would mean for the individual the victory of the destructive instincts,

but reproduction would mean for him the victory of Eros.

     The  Nature  of  the  Instincts.  -  This  view  would  enable  us  to

characterize  instincts  as  tendencies  inherent  in  living  substance

towards restoring an earlier state of things: that is to say, they would

be  historically  determined  and  of  a  conservative  nature  and,  as  it

were,  the  expression  of  an  inertia  or  elasticity  present  in  what  is

organic. Both classes of instincts, Eros as well as the death instinct,

would, on this view, have been in operation and working against each

other from the first origin of life.

                                                                                       3935

 

        A NOTE ON THE PREHISTORY OF THE TECHNIQUE OF

                                      ANALYSIS

                                        (1920)

 

A recent book by Havelock Ellis (so justly admired for his researches

into sexual science, and an eminent critic of psycho-analysis), which

bears the title of The Philosophy of Conflict (1919), includes an essay

on ‘Psycho-Analysis in Relation to Sex.’ The aim of this essay is to

show that the writings of the creator of analysis should be judged not

as a piece of scientific work but as an artistic production. We cannot

but  regard  this  view  as  a  fresh  turn  taken  by  resistance  and  as  a

repudiation  of  analysis,  even  though  it  is  disguised  in  a  friendly,

indeed in too flattering a manner. We are inclined to meet it with a

most decided contradiction.

   It is not, however, with a view to contradicting him on this point that

we are now concerned with Havelock Ellis’s essay, but for another

reason. His wide reading has enabled him to bring forward an author

who  practised  and  recommended  free  association  as  a  technique,

though  for  purposes  other  than  ours,  and  thus  has  a  claim  to  be

regarded as a forerunner of psycho-analysis.

   ‘In 1857, Dr. J. J. Garth Wilkinson, more noted as a Swedenborgian

mystic and poet than as a physician, published a volume of mystic

doggerel verse written by what he considered "a new method", the

method  of  "Impression".  "A  theme  is  chosen  or  written  down,"  he

stated; "as soon as this is done the first impression upon the mind

which  succeeds  the  act  of  writing  the  title  is  the  beginning  of  the

evolution of that theme, no matter how strange or alien the word or

phrase may seem." "The first mental movement, the first word that

comes" is "the response to the mind’s desire for the unfolding of the

subject."  It  is  continued  by  the  same  method,  and  Garth  Wilkinson

adds:  "I  have  always  found  it  lead  by  an  infallible  instinct  into  the

subject."  The  method  was,  as  Garth  Wilkinson  viewed  it,  a  kind  of

exalted laissez-faire, a command to the deepest unconscious instincts

to express themselves. Reason and will, he pointed out, are left aside;you trust to "an influx", and the faculties of the mind are "directed to

ends  they  know  not  of".  Garth  Wilkinson,  it  must  be  clearly

understood,  although  he  was  a  physician,  used  this  method  for

religious and literary, and never for scientific or medical ends; but it is

easy to see that essentially it is the method of psycho-analysis applied

to oneself, and it is further evidence how much Freud’s method is an

artist’s method.’

 


          A Note On The Prehistory Of The Technique Of Analysis

                                                                                      3936

 

   Those who are familiar with psycho-analytic literature will recall at

this  point  the  interesting  passage  in  Schiller’s  correspondence  with

Körner¹  in  which  (1788)  the  great  poet  and  thinker  recommends

anyone  who  desires  to  be  productive  to  adopt  the  method  of  free

association.  It  is  to  be  suspected  that  what  is  alleged  to  be  Garth

Wilkinson’s new technique had already occurred to the minds of many

others  and  that  its  systematic  application  in  psycho-analysis  is  not

evidence  so  much  of  Freud’s  artistic  nature  as  of  his  conviction,

amounting almost to a prejudice, that all mental events are completely

determined.  It  followed  from  this  view  that  the  first  and  most  likely

possibility was that a free association would be related to the subject

designated; and this was confirmed by experience in analysis except

in  so  far  as  too  great  resistances  made  the  suspected  connection

unrecognizable.

      Meanwhile  it  is  safe  to  assume  that  neither  Schiller  nor  Garth

Wilkinson had in fact any influence on the choice of psycho-analytic

technique. It is from another direction that there are indications of a

personal influence at work.

 

   ¹ Pointed out by Otto Rank and quoted in my Interpretation of Dreams (1900a)

 


          A Note On The Prehistory Of The Technique Of Analysis

                                                                                      3937

 

      A  short  time  ago  in  Budapest  Dr.  Hugo  Dubowitz  drew  Dr.Ferenczi’s  attention  to  a  short  essay  covering  only  four  and  a  half

pages, by Ludwig Börne. This was written in 1823 and was reprinted

in  the  first  volume  of  the  1862  edition  of  his  collected  works.  It  is

entitled ‘The Art of Becoming an Original Writer in Three Days’, and

shows the familiar stylistic features of Jean Paul, of whom Börne was

at  that  time  a  great  admirer.  He  ends  the  essay  with  the  following

sentences:

   ‘And here follows the practical application that was promised. Take a

few sheets of paper and for three days on end write down, without

fabrication or hypocrisy, everything that comes into your head. Write

down what you think of yourself, of your wife, of the Turkish War, of

Goethe, of Fonk’s trial, of the Last Judgement, of your superiors - and

when three days have passed you will be quite out of your senses with

astonishment at the new and unheard-of thoughts you have had. This

is the art of becoming an original writer in three days.’

      When  Professor  Freud  came  to  read  this  essay  of  Börne’s,  he

brought forward a number of facts that may have an important bearing

on the question that is under discussion here as to the prehistory of

the psycho-analytic use of free associations. He said that when he

was fourteen he had been given Börne’s works as a present, that he

still possessed the book now, fifty years later, and that it was the only

one that had survived from his boyhood. Börne, he said, had been the

first author into whose writings he had penetrated deeply. He could

not remember the essay in question, but some of the others that were

contained in the same volume - such as ‘A Tribute to the Memory of

Jean Paul,’ ‘The Artist in Eating’, and ‘The Fool at the White Swan Inn’

-  kept  on  recurring  to  his  mind  for  no  obvious  reason  over  a  long

period of years. He was particularly astonished to find expressed in

the advice to the original writer some opinions which he himself had

always  cherished  and  vindicated.  For  instance:  ‘A  disgraceful

cowardliness in regard to thinking holds us all back. The censorship of

governments  is  less  oppressive  than  the  censorship  exercised  by

public opinion over our intellectual productions.’ (Moreover there is a

reference here to a ‘censorship’, which reappears in psycho-analysis

as  the  dream-censorship.)  ‘It  is  not  lack  of  intellect  but  lack  of

character that prevents most writers from being better than they are. .

. . Sincerity is the source of all genius, and men would be cleverer ifthey were more moral. . . .’

   Thus it seems not impossible that this hint may have brought to light

the  fragment  of  cryptomnesia  which  in  so  many  cases  may  be

suspected to lie behind apparent originality.

                                                                                       3938

 

                ASSOCIATIONS OF A FOUR-YEAR-OLD CHILD

                                        (1920)

 

Here is part of a letter from an American mother: ‘I must tell you what

my  little  girl  said  yesterday.  I  have  not  yet  recovered  from  my

astonishment. Cousin Emily was talking of how she was going to take

an apartment. Whereupon the child said: "If Emily gets married, she’ll

have a baby." I was very much surprised and asked her: "Why, how

do you know that?" And she replied: "Well, when anyone gets married,

a baby always comes." I repeated: "But how can you tell that?" And

the little girl answered: "Oh, I know a lot besides. I know that trees

grow  in  the  ground."  What  a  strange  association!  That  is  precisely

what I intend to say to her one day by way of enlightening her. Then

she went on: "And I know that God makes the world." When she talks

like this I can scarcely believe that she is not yet four years old.’

   The mother herself seems to have understood the transition from

the child’s first remark to her second one. What she was trying to say

was:  ‘I  know  that  babies  grow  inside  their  mother.’  She  was  not

expressing this knowledge directly, but symbolically, by replacing the

mother  by  Mother  Earth.  We  have  already  learnt  from  numerous

incontestable observations the early age at which children know how

to make use of symbols. But the little girl’s third remark carries on the

same context. We can only suppose that she was trying to convey a

further piece of her knowledge about the origin of babies: ‘I know that

it’s all the work of the father.’ But this time she was replacing the direct

thought by the appropriate sublimation - that God makes the world.

                                                                                       3939

 

                            DR. ANTON VON FREUND

                                        (1920)

 

DR. ANTON VON FREUND, who has been General Secretary of the

International  Psycho-Analytical  Association  since  the  Budapest

Congress in September 1918, died on January 20, 1920, in a Vienna

sanatorium, a few days after completing his fortieth year. He was the

most powerful promoter of our science and one of its brightest hopes.

Born in Budapest in 1880, he obtained a doctorate in philosophy. He

intended to become a teacher, but was persuaded to enter his father’s

industrial  undertaking.  But  the  great  successes  he  attained  as  a

manufacturer and organizer failed to satisfy the two needs which were

active in the depths of his nature - for social benefaction and scientific

activity. Seeking nothing for himself, and possessing every gift which

can charm and captivate, he used his material powers to assist others

and to soften the hardness of their destiny as well as to sharpen in all

directions the sense of social justice. In this way he acquired a wide

circle of friends, who will deeply mourn his loss.

   When, during his last years, he came to know psycho-analysis, it

seemed to him to promise the fulfilment of his two great wishes. He

set himself the task of helping the masses by psycho-analysis and of

making use of the therapeutic effects of that medical technique, which

had hitherto only been at the service of the rich, in order to mitigate

the neurotic suffering of the poor. Since the State took no heed of the

neuroses of the common people, since hospital clinics for the most

part rejected psycho-analytic therapy without being able to offer any

substitute for it, and since the few psycho-analytic physicians, tied by

the  necessity  for  maintaining  themselves,  were  unequal  to  such  a

gigantic  task,  Anton  von  Freund  sought,  by  his  private  initiative,  to

open  a  path  for  every  one  towards  the  fulfilment  of  this  important

social duty. During the years of the war he had collected what was

then the very considerable sum of one and a half million kronen for

humanitarian purposes in the city of Budapest. With the concurrence

of Dr Stephan von Bárczy, the then Burgomaster, he assigned thissum for the foundation of a psycho-analytic Institute in Budapest, in

which analysis was to be practised, taught and made accessible to the

people. It was intended to train a considerable number of physicians in

this  Institute  who  would  then  receive  an  honorarium  from  it  for  the

treatment  of  poor  neurotics  in  an  out-patient  clinic.  The  Institute,

furthermore,  was  to  be  a  centre  for  further  scientific  research  in

analysis. Dr. Ferenczi was to be the scientific head of the Institute; von

Freund himself was to undertake its organization and finances. The

founder handed over a relatively smaller sum to Professor Freud for

the foundation of an international psycho-analytic publishing house.

But,

 

                                    Was sind Hoffnungen, was sind Entwürfe,

                                    die der Mensch, der vergängliche, baut?

 

Von Freund’s premature death has put an end to these philanthropic

schemes,  with  all  their  scientific  hopes.  Though  the  fund  which  he

collected  is  still  in  existence,  the  attitude  of  those  who  are  now  in

power in the Hungarian capital gives no promise that his intentions will

be fulfilled. Only the psycho-analytical publishing house has come to

birth in Vienna.

   None the less, the example which von Freund sought to set has

already  had  its  effect.  A  few  weeks  after  his  death,  thanks  to  the

energy and liberality of Dr. Max Eitingon, the first psycho-analytical

out-patients’ clinic has been opened in Berlin. Thus von Freund’s work

is carried on, though he himself can never be replaced or forgotten.

                                                                                       3940

 

        PREFACE TO J. J. PUTNAM’S ADDRESSES ON PSYCHO-

                                      ANALYSIS

                                        (1921)

 

The editor of this series must feel a special satisfaction in being able

to issue as its opening volume this collection of the psycho-analytical

writings of Professor James J. Putnam, the distinguished neurologist

of Harvard University. Professor Putnam, who died in 1918 at the age

of seventy-two, was not only the first American to interest himself in

psycho-analysis, but soon became its most decided supporter and its

most  influential  representative  in  America.  In  consequence  of  the

established reputation which he had gained through his activities as a

teacher,  as  well  as  through  his  important  work  in  the  domain  of

organic nervous disease, and thanks to the universal respect which

his personality enjoyed, he was able to do perhaps more than anyone

for the spread of psycho-analysis in his own country, and was able to

protect it from aspersions which, on the other side of the Atlantic no

less than this, would inevitably have been cast upon it. But all such

reproaches were bound to be silenced when a man of Putnam’s lofty

ethical standards and moral rectitude had ranged himself among the

supporters of the new science and of the therapeutics based upon it.

   The papers here collected into a single volume, which were written

by Putnam between 1909 and the end of his life, give a good picture

of  his  relations  to  psycho-analysis.  They  show  how  he  was  at  first

occupied in correcting a provisional judgement which was based on

insufficient knowledge; how he then accepted the essence of analysis,

recognized its capacity for throwing a clear light upon the origin of

human  imperfections  and  failings,  and  how  he  was  struck  by  the

prospect of contributing towards the improvement of humanity along

analytical lines; how he then became convinced by his own activities

as  a  physician  as  to  the  truth  of  most  of  the  psycho-analytical

conclusions and postulates, and then in his turn bore witness to the

fact  that  the  physician  who  makes  use  of  analysis  understands  far

more about the sufferings of his patients and can do far more for themthan was possible with the earlier methods of treatment; and finally

how he began to extend beyond the limits of analysis, demanding that

as  a  science  it  should  be  linked  on  to  a  particular  philosophical

system,  and  that  its  practice  should  be  openly  associated  with  a

particular set of ethical doctrines.

 


          Preface To J. J. Putnam's Addresses On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3941

 

   So it is not to be wondered at that a mind with such pre-eminently

ethical  and  philosophical  tendencies  as  Putnam’s  should  have

desired, after he had plunged deep into psycho-analysis, to establish

the  closest  relation  between  it  and  the  aims  which  lay  nearest  his

heart. But his enthusiasm, so admirable in a man of his advanced age,

did not succeed in carrying others along with him. Younger people

remained  cooler.  It  was  especially  Ferenczi  who  expressed  the

opposite  view.  The  decisive  reason  for  the  rejection  of  Putnam’s

proposals was the doubt as to which of the countless philosophical

systems  should  be  accepted,  since  they  all  seemed  to  rest  on  an

equally  insecure  basis,  and  since  everything  had  up  till  then  been

sacrificed for the sake of the relative certainty of the results of psycho-

analysis. It seemed more prudent to wait, and to discover whether a

particular attitude towards life might be forced upon us with all the

weight of necessity by analytical investigation itself.

   It is our duty to express our thanks to the author’s widow, Mrs.

Putnam, for her assistance with the manuscripts, with the copyrights,

and with financial support, without all of which the publication of this

volume  would  have  been  impossible.  No  English  manuscripts  were

forthcoming in the case of the papers numbered VI, VII, and X. They

have been translated into English by Dr. Katherine Jones from the

German text which originated from Putnam himself.

   This volume will keep fresh in analytical circles the memory of the

friend whose loss we so profoundly deplore. May it be the first of a

series  of  publications  which  shall  serve  the  end  of  furthering  the

understanding and application of psycho-analysis among those who

speak  the  English  tongue  -  an  end  to  which  James  J.  Putnamdedicated the last ten years of his fruitful life.

 

January 1921

  3942

 

      INTRODUCTION TO J. VARENDONCK’S THE PSYCHOLOGY

                                OF DAY-DREAMS

                                        (1921)

 

This  present  volume  of  Dr.  Varendonck’s  contains  a  significant

novelty,  and  will  justly  arouse  the  interest  of  all  philosophers,

psychologists  and  psycho-analysts.  After  an  effort  lasting  for  some

years  the  author  has  succeeded  in  getting  hold  of  the  mode  of

thought-activity  to  which  one  abandons  oneself  during  the  state  of

distraction into which we readily pass before sleep or upon incomplete

awakening.  He  has  brought  to  the  consciousness  the  chains  of

thought originating in these conditions without the interference of the

will;  he  has  written  them  down,  studied  their  peculiarities  and

differences with directed conscious thinking, and has made thereby a

series of important discoveries which lead to still vaster problems and

give rise to the formulation of still more far-reaching questions. Many a

point  in  the  psychology  of  the  dream  and  the  defective  act  finds,

thanks  to  the  observations  of  Dr.  Varendonck,  a  trustworthy

settlement.

   It is not my intention to give a review of the author’s results. I will

content myself with pointing to the significance of his work and will

permit myself only a remark concerning the terminology which he has

adopted.  He  includes  the  sort  of  thought-activity  which  he  has

observed  in  Bleuler’s  autistic  thinking,  but  calls  it,  as  a  rule, fore-

conscious  thinking,  according  to  the  custom  prevailing  in  psycho-

analysis.  However,  the  autistic  thinking  of  Bleuler  does  not  by  any

means correspond with the extension and the contents of the fore-

conscious, neither can I admit that the name used by Bleuler has been

happily chosen. The designation ‘fore-conscious’ thinking itself as a

characteristic appears to me misleading and unsatisfactory. The point

in question is that the sort of thought-activity of which the well-known

day-dream is an example - complete by itself, developing a situation

or an act that is being brought to a close - constitutes the best and

until now the only studied example. This day-dreaming does not oweits  peculiarities  to  the  circumstances  that  it  proceeds  mostly  fore-

consciously,  nor  are  the  forms  changed  when  it  is  accomplished

consciously.  From  another  point  of  view  we  know  also  that  even

strictly directed reflection may be achieved without the co-operation of

consciousness, that is to say, fore-consciously. For that reason I think

it is advisable, when establishing a distinction between the different

modes of thought-activity, not to utilize the relation to consciousness

in the first instance, and to designate the day-dream, as well as the

chains  of  thought  studied  by  Varendonck,  as  freely  wandering  or

phantastic thinking, in opposition to intentionally directed reflection. At

the  same  time  it  should  be  taken  into  consideration  that  even

phantastic  thinking  is  not  invariably  in  want  of  an  aim  and  end-

representations.

                                                                                       3943

 

                                    MEDUSA’S HEAD

                                    (1940 [1922])

 

We  have  not  often  attempted  to  interpret  individual  mythological

themes, but an interpretation suggests itself easily in the case of the

horrifying decapitated head of Medusa.

   To decapitate = to castrate. The terror of Medusa is thus a terror of

castration that is linked to the sight of something. Numerous analyses

have made us familiar with the occasion for this: it occurs when a boy,

who  has  hitherto  been  unwilling  to  believe  the  threat  of  castration,

catches  sight  of  the  female  genitals,  probably  those  of  an  adult,

surrounded by hair, and essentially those of his mother.

   The hair upon Medusa’s head is frequently represented in works of

art in the form of snakes, and these once again are derived from the

castration complex. It is a remarkable fact that, however frightening

they  may  be  in  themselves,  they  nevertheless  serve  actually  as  a

mitigation  of  the  horror,  for  they  replace  the  penis,  the  absence  of

which is the cause of the horror. This is a confirmation of the technical

rule  according  to  which  a  multiplication  of  penis  symbols  signifies

castration.

   The sight of Medusa’s head makes the spectator stiff with terror,

turns him to stone. Observe that we have here once again the same

origin  from  the  castration  complex  and  the  same  transformation  of

affect!  For  becoming  stiff  means  an  erection.  Thus  in  the  original

situation it offers consolation to the spectator: he is still in possession

of a penis, and the stiffening reassures him of the fact.

   This symbol of horror is worn upon her dress by the virgin goddess

Athene.  And  rightly  so,  for  thus  she  becomes  a  woman  who  is

unapproachable and repels all sexual desires - since she displays the

terrifying genitals of the Mother. Since the Greeks were in the main

strongly  homosexual,  it  was  inevitable  that  we  should  find  among

them a representation of woman as a being who frightens and repels

because she is castrated.

   If Medusa’s head takes the place of a representation of the femalegenitals,  or  rather  if  it  isolates  their  horrifying  effects  from  their

pleasure-giving ones, it may be recalled that displaying the genitals is

familiar  in  other  connections  as  an  apotropaic  act.  What  arouses

horror in oneself will produce the same effect upon the enemy against

whom one is seeking to defend oneself. We read in Rabelais of how

the Devil took to flight when the woman showed him her vulva.

   The erect male organ also has an apotropaic effect, but thanks to

another mechanism. To display the penis (or any of its surrogates) is

to say: ‘I am not afraid of you. I defy you. I have a penis.’ Here, then,

is another way of intimidating the Evil Spirit.

      In  order  seriously  to  substantiate  this  interpretation  it  would  be

necessary to investigate the origin of this isolated symbol of horror in

Greek mythology as well as parallels to it in other mythologies.

                                                                                       3944

 

                                THE EGO AND THE ID

                                        (1923)

 

 


                                                                                      3945

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3946

 

 

                                THE EGO AND THE ID

 

The present discussions are a further development of some trains of

thought which I opened up in Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920g),

and to which, as I remarked there, my attitude was one of a kind of

benevolent curiosity. In the following pages these thoughts are linked

to  various  facts  of  analytic  observation  and  an  attempt  is  made  to

arrive at new conclusions from this conjunction; in the present work,

however,  there  are  no  fresh  borrowings  from  biology,  and  on  that

account  it  stands  closer  to  psycho-analysis  than  does Beyond  the

Pleasure Principle. It is more in the nature of a synthesis than of a

speculation and seems to have had an ambitious aim in view. I am

conscious, however, that it does not go beyond the roughest outline

and with that limitation I am perfectly content.

   In these pages things are touched on which have not yet been the

subject of psycho-analytic consideration, and it has not been possible

to avoid trenching upon some theories which have been put forward

by non-analysts or by former analysts on their retreat from analysis. I

have  elsewhere  always  been  ready  to  acknowledge  what  I  owe  to

other workers; but in this instance I feel burdened by no such debt of

gratitude. If psycho-analysis has not hitherto shown its appreciation of

certain  things,  this  has  never  been  because  it  overlooked  their