 

   The forgetting of impressions and experiences demonstrates much

more  clearly  and  exclusively  than  the  forgetting  of  names  the

operation  of  the  purpose  of  keeping  disagreeable  things  out  of

memory. The whole field of this kind of forgetting does not, of course,

fall within the class of parapraxes, but only such cases as, measured

by  the  standard  of  our  usual  experience,  seem  to  us  striking  and

unjustified: for instance, when the forgetting affects impressions that

are too fresh or important, or when the missing memory tears a gap in

what is otherwise a well remembered chain of events. Why and in

what way we are able to forget in general, and among other things

experiences which have certainly left the deepest impression upon us,

such  as  the  events  of  our  earliest  childhood  years,  -  that  is  quite

another problem, in which fending off unpleasurable impulses plays a

certain  part  but  is  far  from  being  the  whole  explanation.  It  is  an

undoubted  fact  that  disagreeable  impressions  are  easily  forgotten.

Various psychologists have noticed it and the great Darwin was so

much impressed by it that he made it ‘a golden rule’ to note down with

especial  care  any  observations  which  seemed  unfavourable  to  his

theory, since he had convinced himself that precisely they would not

remain in his memory.

   A person who hears for the first time of this principle of the fending

off of unpleasurable memories by forgetting rarely fails to object that

on the contrary it has been his experience that distressing things are

particularly hard to forget but keep on returning to torment him against

his will - memories, for instance, of insults and humiliations. This is

also a true fact, but the objection is not to the point. It is important to

begin in good time to reckon with the fact that mental life is the arena

and battle-ground for mutually opposing purposes or, to put it non-

dynamically, that it consists of contradictions and pairs of contraries.

Proof of the existence of a particular purpose is no argument against

the existence of an opposite one; there is room for both. It is only a

question of the attitude of these contraries to each other, and of what

effects are produced by the one and by the other.

 

   Losing and mislaying are of particular interest to us owing to the

many meanings they may have - owing, that is, to the multiplicity ofthe  purposes  which  can  be  served  by  these  parapraxes.  All  cases

have in common the fact that there was a wish to lose something; they

differ in the basis and aim of that wish. We lose a thing when it is worn

out, when we intend to replace it by a better one, when we no longer

like it, when it originates from someone with whom we are no longer

on good terms or when we acquired it in circumstances we no longer

want to recall. Dropping, damaging or breaking the object can serve

the same purpose. In the sphere of social life experience is said to

have shown that unwanted and illegitimate children are far more frail

than  those  legitimately  conceived.  The  crude  technique  of  baby-

farmers  is  not  necessary  for  bringing  about  this  result;  a  certain

amount  of  neglect  in  looking  after  the  children  should  be  quite

sufficient.  The  preserving  of things  may  be  subject  to  the  same

influences as that of children.

   Things may, however, be condemned to be lost without their value

having suffered any diminution - when, that is, there is an intention to

sacrifice something to Fate in order to ward off some other dreaded

loss. Analysis tells us that it is still quite a common thing among us to

exorcize  Fate  in  this  way;  and  thus  our  losing  is  often  a  voluntary

sacrifice.  In  the  same  way,  losing  may  also  serve  the  purpose  of

defiance or self-punishment. In short, the more remote reasons for the

intention to get rid of a thing by losing it are beyond number.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3182

 

 

   Bungled actions, like other errors, are often used to fulfil wishes

which one ought to deny oneself. Here the intention disguises itself as

a lucky accident. For instance, as happened to one of my friends, a

man  may  be  due,  obviously  against  his  will,  to  go  by  train  to  visit

someone near the town where he lives, and then, at a junction where

he has to change, may by mistake get into a train that takes him back

to where he came from. Or someone on a journey may be anxious to

make  a  stop  at  an  intermediate  station  but  may  be  forbidden  from

doing so by other obligations, and he may then overlook or miss someconnection so that he is after all obliged to break his journey in the

way  he  wished.  Or  what  happened  to  one  of  my  patients:  I  had

forbidden him to telephone to the girl he was in love with, and then,

when he meant to telephone to me, he asked for the wrong number

‘by mistake’ or ‘while he was thinking of something else’ and suddenly

found himself connected to the girl’s number. A good example of an

outright blunder, and one of practical importance, is provided by an

observation made by an engineer in his account of what preceded a

case of material damage:

   ‘Some time ago I worked with several students in the laboratory of

the  technical  college  on  a  series  of  complicated  experiments  in

elasticity, a piece of work which we had undertaken voluntarily but

which was beginning to take up more time than we had expected. One

day as I returned to the laboratory with my friend F., he remarked how

annoying it was to him to lose so much time on that particular day as

he had so much else to do at home. I could not help agreeing with him

and added half jokingly, referring to an incident the week before: "Let

us hope that the machine will go wrong again so that we can stop

work and go home early."

   ‘In arranging the work it happened that F. was given the regulation

of the valve of the press; that is to say, he was, by cautiously opening

the  valve,  to  let  the  fluid  under  pressure  flow  slowly  out  of  the

accumulator  into  the  cylinder  of  the  hydraulic  press.  The  man

conducting  the  experiment  stood  by  the  manometer  and  when  the

right pressure was reached called out a loud "Stop!" At the word of

command F. seized the valve and turned it with all his might - to the

left! (All valves without exception are closed by being turned to the

right.)  This  caused  the  full  pressure  of  the  accumulator  to  come

suddenly on to the press, a strain for which the connecting-pipes are

not designed, so that one of them immediately burst - quite a harmless

accident to the machine, but enough to oblige us to suspend work for

the day and go home.

   ‘It is characteristic, by the way, that when we were discussing the

affair some time later my friend F. had no recollection whatever of my

remark, which I recalled with certainty.’

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3183

 

   This may lead you to suspect that it is not always just an innocent

chance that turns the hands of your domestic servants into dangerous

enemies of your household belongings. And you may also raise the

question whether it is always a matter of chance when people injure

themselves and risk their own safety. These are notions whose value

you may care to test, if occasion arises, by analysing observations of

your own.

 

   This, Ladies and Gentlemen, is far from being all that might be said

about  parapraxes.  Much  remains  that  might  be  examined  and

discussed. But I am satisfied if our discussion of the subject so far has

to some extent shaken your previous views and has made you a little

prepared to accept new ones. I am content, for the rest, to leave you

faced  with  an  unclarified  situation.  We  cannot  establish  all  our

doctrines from a study of parapraxes and we are not obliged to draw

our evidence from that material alone. The great value of parapraxes

for our purposes lies in their being very common phenomena which,

moreover, can easily be observed in oneself, and which can occur

without the slightest implication of illness. There is only one of your

unanswered questions which I should like to put into words before I

end. If, as we have found from many instances, people come so close

to an understanding of parapraxes and so often behave as though

they grasped their sense, how is it possible that they none the less set

down  these  same  phenomena  as  being  in  general  chance  events

without  sense  or  meaning,  and  that  they  can  oppose  the  psycho-

analytic elucidation of them with so much vigour?

      You  are  right.  This  is  a  remarkable  fact  and  it  calls  for  an

explanation. But I will not give you one. Instead, I will introduce you by

degrees to fields of knowledge from which the explanation will force

itself upon you without any contribution of mine.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3184

                                         PART II

 

                                        DREAMS

 

                                        (1916)

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3185

 

                                        LECTURE V

 

                DIFFICULTIES AND FIRST APPROACHES

 

LADIES  AND  GENTLEMEN,  -  It  was  discovered  one  day  that  the

pathological symptoms of certain neurotic patients have a sense.¹ On

this discovery the psycho-analytic method of treatment was founded. It

happened  in  the  course  of  this  treatment  that  patients,  instead  of

bringing forward their symptoms, brought forward dreams. A suspicion

thus arose that the dreams too had a sense.

   We will not, however, follow this historical path, but will proceed in

the opposite direction. We will demonstrate the sense of dreams by

way  of  preparing  for  the  study  of  the  neuroses.  This  reversal  is

justified, since the study of dreams is not only the best preparation for

the  study  of  the  neuroses,  but  dreams  are  themselves  a  neurotic

symptom,  which,  moreover,  offers  us  the  priceless  advantage  of

occurring in all healthy people. Indeed, supposing all human beings

were  healthy,  so  long  as  they  dreamt  we  could  arrive  from  their

dreams  at  almost  all  the  discoveries  which  the  investigation  of  the

neuroses has led to.

 

   ¹ By Josef Breuer in the years 1880-2. Cf. the lectures delivered by me in America in 1909

(Five Lectures on Psycho-Analysis) and ‘On the History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement’.
 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3186

    Dreams, then, have become a subject of psycho-analytic research:

once  again  ordinary  phenomena,  with  little  value  set  on  them,  and

apparently of no practical use - like parapraxes, with which indeed

they have in common the fact of occurring in healthy people. But apart

from this the conditions for our work are a good deal less favourable

here.  Parapraxes  had  merely  been  neglected  by  science,  little

attention had been paid to them; but at least there was no harm in

concerning oneself with them. ‘No doubt’, people would say, ‘there are

more important things. But something may possibly come of it.’ But to

concern oneself with dreams is not merely unpractical and uncalled-

for,  it  is  positively  disgraceful.  It  brings  with  it  the  odium  of  being

unscientific  and  rouses  the  suspicion  of  a  personal  inclination  to

mysticism. Imagine a medical man going in for dreams when there are

so many more serious things even in neuropathology and psychiatry -

tumours  as  big  as  apples  compressing  the  organ  of  the  mind,

haemorrhages, chronic inflammation, in all of which the changes in the

tissues can be demonstrated under the microscope! No, dreams are

much too trivial, and unworthy to be an object of research.

   And there is something else which from its very nature frustrates the

requirements  of  exact  research.  In  investigating  dreams  one  is  not

even  certain  about  the  object  of  one’s  research.  A  delusion,  for

instance,  meets  one  squarely  and  with  definite  outlines.  ‘I  am  the

Emperor of China’, says the patient straight out. But dreams? As a

rule  no  account  at  all  can  be  given  of  them.  If  anyone  gives  an

account of a dream, has he any guarantee that his account has been

correct, or that he may not, on the contrary, have altered his account

in  the  course  of  giving  it  and  have  been  obliged  to  invent  some

addition to it to make up for the indistinctness of his recollection? Most

dreams  cannot  be  remembered  at  all  and  are  forgotten  except  for

small fragments. And is the interpretation of material of this kind to

serve  as  the  basis  of  a  scientific  psychology  or  as  a  method  for

treating patients?

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3187

    An excess of criticism may make us suspicious. These objections to

dreams  as  an  object  of  research  are  obviously  carried  too  far.  We

have already dealt with the question of unimportance in connection

with  parapraxes.  We  have  told  ourselves  that  big  things  can  show

themselves by small indications. As regards their indistinctness - that

is one of the characteristics of dreams, like any other: we cannot lay

down for things what their characteristics are to be. And incidentally

there  are  clear  and  distinct  dreams  as  well.  There  are,  more  over,

other  objects  of  psychiatric  research  which  suffer  from  the  same

characteristic  of  indistinctness  -  in  many  instances,  for  example,

obsessions, and these have been dealt with, after all, by respected

and esteemed psychiatrists. I recall the last such case that I came

across  in  my  medical  practice.  This  was  a  woman  patient  who

introduced herself with these words: ‘I have a sort of feeling as though

I had injured or had wanted to injure some living creature - a child? -

no, more like a dog - as though I may have thrown it off a bridge, or

something  else.’  We  can  help  to  overcome  the  defect  of  the

uncertainty  in  remembering  dreams  if  we  decide  that  whatever  the

dreamer tells us must count as his dream, without regard to what he

may have forgotten or have altered in recalling it. And finally it cannot

even  be  maintained  so  sweepingly  that  dreams  are  unimportant

things. We know from our own experience that the mood in which one

wakes  up  from  a  dream  may  last  for  the  whole  day;  doctors  have

observed cases in which a mental disease has started with a dream

and  in  which  a  delusion  originating  in  the  dream  has  persisted;

historical  figures  are  reported  to  have  embarked  on  momentous

enterprises in response to dreams. We may therefore ask what may

be  the  true  source  of  the  contempt  in  which  dreams  are  held  in

scientific circles.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3188

 

   It is, I believe, a reaction against the overvaluation of dreams in

earlier days. The reconstruction of the past is, as we know, no easy

matter, but we may assume with certainty, if I may put it as a joke, thatour ancestors three thousand or more years ago already had dreams

like  ours.  So  far  as  we  know,  all  the  peoples  of  antiquity  attached

great  significance  to  dreams  and  thought  they  could  be  used  for

practical purposes. They deduced signs for the future from them and

searched  in  them  for  auguries.  For  the  Greeks  and  other  oriental

nations, there may have been times when a campaign without dream-

interpreters seemed as impossible as one without air-reconnaissance

seems to-day. When Alexander the Great started on his conquests,

his  train  included  the  most  famous  dream-interpreters.  The  city  of

Tyre, which at that time still stood on an island, offered the king such a

stiff resistance that he considered the possibility of raising the siege.

Then one night he had a dream of a satyr who seemed to be dancing

in  triumph,  and  when  he  reported  it  to  his  dream-interpreters  they

informed him that it foretold his conquest of the city. He ordered an

assault and captured Tyre. Among the Etruscans and Romans other

methods of foretelling the future were in use; but throughout the whole

of  the  Hellenistic-Roman  period  the  interpretation  of  dreams  was

practised  and  highly  esteemed.  Of  the  literature  dealing  with  the

subject  the  principal  work  at  least  has  survived:  the  book  by

Artemidorus  of  Daldis,  who  probably  lived  during  the  reign  of  the

Emperor  Hadrian.  How  it  came  about  after  this  that  the  art  of

interpreting  dreams  declined  and  that  dreams  fell  into  discredit  I

cannot tell you. The spread of enlightenment cannot have had much

to  do  with  it,  for  many  things  more  absurd  than  the  dream-

interpretation of antiquity were faithfully preserved in the obscurity of

the Middle Ages. The fact remains that interest in dreams gradually

sank  to  the  level  of  superstition  and  could  survive  only  among  the

uneducated  classes.  The  final  abuse  of  dream-interpretation  was

reached  in  our  days  with  attempts  to  discover  from  dreams  the

numbers fated to be drawn in the game of lotto. On the other hand the

exact science of to-day has repeatedly concerned itself with dreams

but always with the sole aim of applying its physiological theories to

them.  Medical  men,  of  course,  looked  on  dreams  as  non-psychical

acts, as the expression in mental life of somatic stimuli. Binz (1878)

pronounced that dreams are ‘somatic processes, which are in every

case useless and in many cases positively pathological, to which the

soul of the universe and immortality are as sublimely superior as theblue sky above some weed-grown, low-lying stretch of sand.’ Maury

compares dreams to the disordered twitchings of St. Vitus’s dance as

contrasted  with  the  co-ordinated  movements  of  a  healthy  man.

According  to  an  old  analogy,  the  contents  of  a  dream  are  like  the

sounds produced when ‘the ten fingers of a man who knows nothing

of music wander over the keys of a piano’.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3189

 

   Interpreting means finding a hidden sense in something; there can

of course be no question of doing that if we adopt this last estimate of

the function of dreams. Look at the description of dreams given by

Wundt,  Jodl,  and  other  more  recent  philosophers.  They  content

themselves with enumerating the respects in which dream-life differs

from  waking  thought,  always  in  a  sense  depreciatory  to  dreams  -

emphasizing  the  fact  that  associations  are  broken  apart,  that  the

critical faculty ceases to work, that all knowledge is eliminated, as well

as  other  signs  of  diminished  functioning.  The  only  valuable

contribution to the knowledge of dreams for which we have to thank

exact science relates to the effect produced on the content of dreams

by the impact of somatic stimuli during sleep. A recently deceased

Norwegian  author,  J.  Mourly  Vold,  published  two  stout  volumes  of

experimental  researches  into  dreams  (German  edition,  1910  and

1912), which are devoted almost exclusively to the consequences of

alterations in the posture of the limbs. They have been recommended

to us as models of exact research into dreams. Can you imagine what

exact science would say if it learnt that we want to make an attempt to

discover the sense of dreams? Perhaps it has already said it. But we

will not let ourselves be frightened off. If it was possible for parapraxes

to have a sense, dreams can have one too; and in a great many cases

parapraxes have a sense, which has escaped exact science. So let us

embrace the prejudice of the ancients and of the people and let us

follow in the footsteps of the dream-interpreters of antiquity.

 

   We must begin by finding our bearings in the task before us andtaking a general survey of the field of dreams. What, then, is a dream?

It is hard to answer in a single sentence. But we will not attempt a

definition when it is enough to point to something familiar to everyone.

We  should,  however,  bring  the  essential  feature  of  dreams  into

prominence.  Where  is  that  to  be  found,  though?  There  are  such

immense  differences  within  the  frame  that  comprises  our  subject  -

differences in every direction. The essential feature will presumably be

something that we can point to as common to all dreams.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3190

 

   The first thing common to all dreams would seem to be, of course,

that  we  are  asleep  during  them.  Dreaming  is  evidently  mental  life

during sleep - something which has certain resemblances to waking

mental life but which, on the other hand, is distinguished from it by

large differences. This was, long ago, Aristotle’s definition. It may be

that there are still closer connections between dreams and sleep. We

can be woken by a dream; we very often have a dream when we wake

up  spontaneously  or  if  we  are  forcibly  aroused  from  sleep.  Thus

dreams  seem  to  be  an  intermediate  state  between  sleeping  and

waking. So our attention is turned to sleep. Well, then, what is sleep?

   That is a physiological or biological problem about which much is

still in dispute. On that we can come to no conclusion; but we ought, I

think,  to  try  to  describe  the  psychological  characteristics  of  sleep.

Sleep is a state in which I want to know nothing of the external world,

in which I have taken my interest away from it. I put myself to sleep by

withdrawing from the external world and keeping its stimuli away from

me. I also go to sleep when I am fatigued by it. So when I go to sleep I

say to the external world: ‘Leave me in peace: I want to go to sleep.’

On the contrary, children say: ‘I’m not going to sleep yet; I’m not tired,

and I want to have some more experiences.’ The biological purpose of

sleep  seems  therefore  to  be  rehabilitation,  and  its  psychological

characteristic  suspense  of  interest  in  the  world.  Our  relation  to  the

world, into which we have come so unwillingly, seems to involve our

not being able to tolerate it uninterruptedly. Thus from time to time wewithdraw into the premundane state, into existence in the womb. At

any rate, we arrange conditions for ourselves very like what they were

then: warm, dark and free from stimuli. Some of us roll ourselves up

into a tight package and, so as to sleep, take up a posture much as it

was in the womb. The world, it seems, does not possess even those

of us who are adults completely, but only up to two thirds; one third of

us is still quite unborn. Every time we wake in the morning it is like a

new birth. Indeed, in speaking of our state after sleep, we say that we

feel as though we were newly born. (In saying this, incidentally, we are

making what is probably a very false assumption about the general

sensations of a new-born child, who seems likely, on the contrary, to

be feeling very uncomfortable.) We speak, too, of being born as ‘first

seeing the light of day’.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3191

 

      If  this  is  what  sleep  is,  dreams  cannot  possibly  form  part  of  its

programme, but seem on the contrary to be an unwelcome addition to

it. In our opinion too, a dreamless sleep is the best, the only proper

one. There ought to be no mental activity in sleep; if it begins to stir,

we  have  not  succeeded  in  establishing  the  foetal  state  of  rest:  we

have  not  been  able  entirely  to  avoid  residues  of  mental  activity.

Dreaming would consist in these residues. But if so, it would really

seem  that  there  is  no  need  for  dreams  to  have  any  sense.  It  was

different with parapraxes; they, after all, were activities during waking

life. But if I am asleep and have stopped mental activity completely

and have merely failed to suppress some residues of it, then there is

no need whatever for these residues to have any sense. I cannot even

make  use  of  any  such  sense,  since  the  rest  of  my  mental  life  is

asleep. So it really can only be a matter of reactions, in the nature of

‘twitchings’,  of  mental  phenomena  such  as  result  directly  from  a

somatic stimulus. Dreams would accordingly be residues of waking

mental activity which were disturbing sleep, and we might well decide

to drop the subject at once, as not being suited to psycho-analysis.

   Even if dreams are superfluous, however, they do exist, and we cantry to account for their existence. Why does mental life fail to go to

sleep? Probably because there is something that will not allow the

mind any peace. Stimuli impinge upon it and it must react to them. A

dream, then, is the manner in which the mind reacts to stimuli that

impinge upon it in the state of sleep. And here we see a way of access

to an understanding of dreams. We can take various dreams and try

to discover what the stimulus was which was seeking to disturb sleep

and to which the reaction was a dream. Our examination of the first

thing common to all dreams seems to have taken us so far.

 

      Is  there  anything  else  common  to  them?  Yes,  something

unmistakable  but  much  harder  to  grasp  and  to  describe.  Mental

processes  in  sleep  have  a  quite  different  character  from  those  of

waking life. We experience every sort of thing in dreams and believe

in it, whereas nevertheless we experience nothing, except, perhaps,

the  single  disturbing  stimulus.  We  experience  it  predominantly  in

visual images; feelings may be present too, and thoughts interwoven

in it as well; the other senses may also experience something, but

nonetheless  it  is  predominantly  a  question  of  images.  Part  of  the

difficulty  of  giving  an  account  of  dreams  is  due  to  our  having  to

translate these images into words. ‘I could draw it’, a dreamer often

says to us, ‘but I don’t know how to say it.’ This is not, however, a

reduced  mental  activity,  like  that  of  a  feeble-minded  person  as

compared to that of a genius: it is qualitatively different, though it is

hard to say where the difference lies. G. T. Fechner once voiced a

suspicion that the scene of action of dreams (in the mind) is different

from that of waking ideational life. Though we do not understand this

and do not know what we are to make of it, it does in fact reproduce

the impression of strangeness which most dreams make on us. The

comparison between dream-activity and the effects of an unmusical

hand  on  the  piano  does  not  help  us  here.  The  piano  will  after  all

respond with the same sounds, though not with tunes, to any chance

pressure on its keys. Let us carefully bear this second thing common

to all dreams in mind, even though we may not have understood it.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis                                                                                      3192

 

 

   Are there any other things common to them? I cannot discover any; I

can see nothing anywhere but differences, and differences in all kinds

of ways: in their apparent duration, as well as in their clarity, in the

amount  of  affect  accompanying  them,  in  the  possibility  of  retaining

them, and so on. This variety is not in fact what we might expect to

find  in  a  mere  defensive  reaction  to  a  stimulus,  something

mechanically imposed, an empty thing, like the twitchings of St. Vitus’s

dance. As regards the dimensions of dreams, some are very short and

comprise only a single image or a few, a single thought, or even a

single  word;  others  are  uncommonly  rich  in  their  content,  present

whole novels and seem to last a long time. There are dreams which

are as clear as experience, so clear that quite a time after waking we

do not realize that they were dreams; and there are others which are

indescribably dim, shadowy and blurred. Indeed in one and the same

dream  excessively  definite  portions  may  alternate  with  others  of

scarcely discernible vagueness. Dreams may be entirely sensible or at

least coherent, witty even, or fantastically beautiful; others, again, are

confused,  feeble-minded  as  it  were,  absurd,  often  positively  crazy.

There are dreams that leave us quite cold and others in which affects

of all kinds are manifest - pain to the point of tears, anxiety to the point

of waking us up, astonishment, delight, and so on. Dreams are usually

quickly  forgotten  after  waking,  or  they  may  last  through  the  day,

remembered  more  and  more  dimly  and  incompletely  till  evening;

others, again - for instance, childhood dreams - are so well preserved

that  after  thirty  years  they  remain  in  the  memory  like  some  fresh

experience. Dreams may appear, like individuals, on a single occasion

only  and  never  again,  or  they  may  recur  in  the  same  person

unchanged or with small divergences. In short, this fragment of mental

activity during the night has an immense repertory at its disposal; it is

capable, in fact, of all that the mind creates in daytime - yet it is never

the same thing.

   We might try to account for these many variations in dreams by

supposing  that  they  correspond  to  different  intermediate  stages

between sleeping and waking, different degrees of in complete sleep.Yes, but if this were so, the value, content and clarity of a dream’s

product - and the awareness, too, of its being a dream - would have to

increase in dreams in which the mind was coming near to waking; and

it would not be possible for a clear and rational fragment of dream to

be immediately followed by one that was senseless and obscure and

for this in turn to be followed by another good piece. The mind could

certainly not alter the depth of its sleep so quickly as that. So this

explanation is of no help: there can be no short cut out of the difficulty.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3193

 

 

   We will for the moment leave on one side the ‘sense’ of dreams, and

try to make our way to a better understanding of them from what we

have  found  is  common  to  them.  We  inferred  from  the  relation  of

dreams to the state of sleep that dreams are the reaction to a stimulus

which disturbs sleep. We have learnt that this too is the single point on

which  exact  experimental  psychology  is  able  to  come  to  our

assistance:  it  brings  us  evidence  that  stimuli  which  impinge  during

sleep make their appearance in dreams. Many investigations of this

kind have been made, most recently those by Mourly Vold which I

have already mentioned; and each of us, no doubt, has been in a

position to confirm this finding from personal observation. I will select

a  few  of  the  earlier  experiments.  Maury  had  some  experiments

performed on himself. He was given some eau-de-cologne to smell in

his sleep. He dreamt he was in Cairo, in Johann Maria Farina’s shop,

and  some  further  absurd  adventures  followed.  Or,  he  was  pinched

lighdy on the neck; he dreamt of a mustard plaster being applied to

him and of a doctor who had treated him as a child. Or again, a drop

of water was dropped on his forehead; he was in Italy, was sweating

violently and was drinking white Orvieto wine.

   The striking thing about these experimentally produced dreams will

perhaps be even more plainly visible in another series of stimulus-

dreams. They are three dreams reported by an intelligent observer,

Hildebrandt, all of them reactions to the ringing of an alarm-clock:   ‘I dreamt, then, that one spring morning I was going for a walk and

was  strolling  through  the  green  fields  till  I  came  to  a  neighbouring

village,  where  I  saw  the  villagers  in  their  best  clothes,  with  hymn-

books  under  their  arms,  flocking  to  the  church.  Of  course!  It  was

Sunday,  and  early  morning  service  would  soon  be  beginning.  I

decided I would attend it; but first, as I was rather hot from walking, I

went into the church yard which surrounded the church, to cool down.

While I was reading some of the tombstones, I heard the bell-ringer

climbing up the church tower and at the top of it I now saw the little

village bell which would presently give the signal for the beginning of

devotions. For quite a while it hung there motionless, then it began to

swing, and suddenly its peal began to ring out clear and piercing - so

clear and piercing that it put an end to my sleep. But what was ringing

was the alarm-clock.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3194

 

   ‘Here is another instance. It was a bright winter’s day and the streets

were covered with deep snow. I had agreed to join a party for a sleigh-

ride; but I had to wait a long time before news came that the sleigh

was at the door. Now followed the preparations for getting in - the fur

rug spread out, the foot muff put ready - and at last I was sitting in my

seat. But even then the moment of departure was delayed till a pull at

the reins gave the waiting horses the signal. Then off they started,

and, with a violent shake, the sleigh bells broke into their familiar jingle

- with such violence, in fact, that in a moment the cobweb of my dream

was torn through. And once again it was only the shrill sound of the

alarm-clock.

   ‘And now yet a third example. I saw a kitchenmaid, carrying several

dozen plates piled on one another, walking along the passage to the

dining-room. The column of china in her arms seemed to me in danger

of  losing  its  balance.  "Take  care,"  I  exclaimed,  "or  you’ll  drop  the

whole  load."  The  inevitable  rejoinder  duly  followed:  she  was  quite

accustomed to that kind of job, and so on. And meanwhile my anxious

looks followed the advancing figure. Then - just as I expected - shestumbled at the threshold and the fragile crockery slipped and rattled

and clattered in a hundred pieces on the floor. But the noise continued

without ceasing, and soon it seemed no longer to be a clattering; it

was turning into a ringing - and the ringing, as my waking self now

became aware, was only the alarm-clock doing its duty.’

   These are very nice dreams, entirely sensible and by no means as

incoherent as dreams are usually apt to be. I am not objecting to them

on that account. What they have in common is that in each case the

situation  ends  in  a  noise,  which,  when  the  dreamer  wakes  up,  is

recognized as being made by the alarm-clock. So we see here how a

dream is produced; but we learn something more than this. The dream

does not recognize the alarm-clock - nor does it appear in the dream -

but it replaces the noise of the alarm-clock by another; it interprets the

stimulus which is bringing sleep to an end, but it interprets it differently

each time. Why does it do that? There is no answer to this; it seems a

matter of caprice. Understanding the dream would mean being able to

say  why  this  particular  noise  and  none  other  was  chosen  for  the

interpretation of the stimulus from the alarm-clock. We may make an

analogous objection to Maury’s experiments: we can see quite clearly

that the impinging stimulus appears in the dream; but why it should

take this particular form we are not told, and it does not seem by any

means to follow from the nature of the stimulus that disturbed sleep. In

Maury’s experiments, too, a quantity of other dream material usually

appears in addition to the direct effect of the stimulus - for instance,

the ‘absurd adventures’ in the eau-de-cologne dream -, which cannot

be accounted for.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3195

 

   And now consider that arousal dreams offer the best chance of

establishing the influence of external sleep-disturbing stimuli. In most

other cases it will become more difficult. We do not wake out of every

dream, and if we remember a dream of the past night in the morning,

how are we to discover a disturbing stimulus which may perhaps have

made  its  impact  on  us  during  the  night?  I  once  succeeded  inidentifying a sound-stimulus of that kind retrospectively, but only, of

course, owing to special circumstances. I woke up one morning in a

mountain resort in the Tyrol, knowing I had had a dream that the Pope

was dead. I could not explain the dream to myself; but later on my wife

asked me if I had heard the fearful noise made by the pealing of bells

towards  morning  which  had  broken  out  from  all  the  churches  and

chapels.  No,  I  had  heard  nothing,  my  sleep  is  more  resistant  than

hers; but thanks to her information I understood my dream. How often

may  stimuli  of  this  kind  instigate  dreams  in  a  sleeper  without  his

getting news of them afterwards? Perhaps very often, but perhaps not.

If the stimulus can no longer be pointed to, we cannot be convinced of

its  existence.  And  in  any  case  we  have  changed  our  view  of  the

importance of external stimuli that disturb sleep since we learnt that

they can explain only a small portion of the dream and not the whole

dream-reaction.

   There is no need to give up this theory entirely on that account.

Moreover  it  is  capable  of  extension.  It  is  obviously  a  matter  of

indifference  what  it  is  that  disturbs  sleep  or  instigates  the  mind  to

dream.  If  it  cannot  invariably  be  a  sensory  stimulus  coming  from

outside,  there  may  instead  be  what  is  called  a  somatic  stimulus,

arising from the internal organs. This is a very plausible notion and

agrees with the most popular view of the origin of dreams: ‘dreams

come from indigestion’, people often say. Here too unluckily we must

often suspect that there are cases when a somatic stimulus which has

impinged  on  a  sleeper  during  the  night  is  no  longer  manifest  after

waking  and  can  therefore  not  be  proved  to  have  occurred.  But  we

shall not overlook the number of clear experiences which support the

origin  of  dreams  from  somatic  stimuli.  In  general,  there  can  be  no

doubt that the condition of the internal organs can influence dreams.

The relation of the content of some dreams to an over full bladder or

to a state of excitation of the genital organs is too plain to be mistaken.

These clear cases lead to others in which the content of the dreams

give rise to a justifiable suspicion that there has been an impact from

somatic stimuli because there is something in the content which can

be regarded as a working over, a representation or an interpretation of

such  stimuli.  Scherner  (1861),  who  made  researches  into  dreams,

argued particularly strongly in favour of the derivation of dreams fromorganic stimuli and brought forward some good examples of it. For

instance, in one dream he saw ‘two rows of pretty boys with fair hair

and  delicate  complexions  facing  one  another  in  pugnacious  array,

making an onset and attacking one another, and then drawing back

and  taking  up  their  old  position  again,  and  then  starting  the  whole

business once more.’ His interpretation of these two rows of boys as

teeth is plausible in itself and seems fully confirmed when we learn

that after this scene the dreamer ‘pulled a long tooth out of his jaw.’

Similarly,  the  interpretation  of  ‘long,  narrow,  winding  passages’  as

derived  from  an  intestinal  stimulus  seems  valid,  and  confirms  the

assertion by Scherner that dreams seek above all to represent the

organ that sends out the stimulus by objects resembling it.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3196

 

   Thus we must be prepared to admit that internal stimuli can play the

same  part  in  dreams  as  external  ones.  Any  estimate  of  their

importance is unfortunately open to the same objections. In a large

number of cases an interpretation pointing to a somatic stimulus is

uncertain or unprovable. Not all dreams, but only a certain number of

them give rise to a suspicion that internal organic stimuli had a share

in their origin. And lastly, internal somatic stimuli are as little able as

external  sensory  stimuli  to  explain  more  of  a  dream  than  what

corresponds in it to a direct reaction to the stimulus. Where the rest of

the dream comes from remains obscure.

   Let us notice, however, one peculiarity of dream-life which comes to

light  in  this  study  of  the  effects  of  stimuli.  Dreams  do  not  simply

reproduce the stimulus; they work it over, they make allusions to it,

they include it in some context, they replace it by something else. This

is a side of the dream-work which is bound to interest us since it may

perhaps bring us nearer to the essence of dreams. When a person

constructs something as a result of a stimulus, the stimulus need not

on  that  account  exhaust  the  whole  of  the  work.  Shakespeare’s

Macbeth, for instance, was a pièce d’occasion composed to celebrate

the  accession  of  the  king  who  first  united  the  crowns  of  the  threekingdoms.  But  does  this  immediate  historical  occasion  cover  the

content  of  the  tragedy?  Does  it  explain  its  greatnesses  and  its

enigmas?  It  may  be  that  the  external  and  internal  stimuli,  too,

impinging on the sleeper, are only the instigators of the dream and will

accordingly betray nothing to us of its essence.

      The  second  thing  that  is  common  to  dreams,  their  psychical

peculiarity, is on the one hand hard to grasp and on the other offers us

no starting-point for further enquiry. We experience things in dreams

as a rule in visual forms. Can the stimuli throw any light on this? Is

what  we  experience  in  fact  the  stimulus?  But,  if  so,  why  is  the

experience  visual,  while  it  is  only  in  the  rarest  cases  that  optical

stimulation has instigated the dream? Or if we dream spoken words,

can  it  be  shown  that  during  sleep  a  conversation,  or  some  noise

resembling one made its way into our ears? I venture to dismiss that

possibility decisively.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3197

 

 

   If we can get no further with what is common to dreams, let us see

whether their differences can help us. Dreams are, of course, often

senseless, confused and absurd; but there are also sensible, matter-

of-fact, and reasonable ones. Let us enquire whether the latter, the

sensible ones, can throw any light on the senseless ones. Here is the

latest reasonable dream that I have had reported to me. It was dreamt

by a young man: ‘I went for a walk along the Kärntnerstrasse and met

Herr X. there and joined him for a time. Then I went into a restaurant.

Two ladies and a gentleman came and sat at my table. I was annoyed

at this to begin with and wouldn’t look at them. Then I did look and

found that they were quite nice.’ The dreamer commented on this that

on  the  evening  before  the  dream  he  had  in  fact  walked  along  the

Kärntnerstrasse, which is the way he usually goes, and had met Herr

X. there. The other part of the dream was not a direct recollection, and

only had some similarity to an experience a considerable time earlier.

Or  here  is  another  matter-of-fact  dream,  this  time  a  lady’s:  ‘Herhusband  asked  her:  "Don’t  you  think  we  ought  to  have  the  piano

tuned?"  And  she  replied:  "It’s  not  worth  while;  the  hammers  need

reconditioning  in  any  case."'  This  dream  repeated,  without  much

alteration, a conversation which had taken place between her and her

husband the day before the dream. What do we learn from these two

reasonable dreams? Nothing except that they contain repetitions from

daily life or things connected with it. That would already be something,

if it could be said of dreams generally. But there is no question of that;

it applies only to a minority, and in most dreams there is no sign of a

connection with the day before, and no light is thrown by this on the

senseless and absurd dreams. It only shows that we have come upon

a new task. We not only want to know what a dream says, but, if it

speaks clearly, as it does in these examples of ours, we also want to

know why and for what purpose this familiar material, only recently

experienced, has been repeated in the dream.

 

   I think that, like me, you must be tired of pursuing enquiries like

those we have so far been making. All one’s interest in a problem is

evidently insufficient unless one knows as well of a path of approach

that  will  lead  to  its  solution.  We  have  not  yet  found  such  a  path.

Experimental  psychology  has  brought  us  nothing  but  some  very

valuable  information  on  the  significance  of  stimuli  as  instigators  to

dreaming. We have nothing to expect from philosophy except that it

will once again haughtily point out to us the intellectual inferiority of the

object of our study. Nor have we any wish to borrow anything from the

occult sciences. History and popular opinion tell us that dreams have

a sense and a meaning: that they look into the future - which is hard to

accept and certainly incapable of proof. So our first effort leaves us

completely at a loss.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3198

 

   Unexpectedly, a hint reaches us from a direction in which we have

not so far looked. Linguistic usage, which is no chance thing, but the

precipitate  of  old  discoveries,  though,  to  be  sure,  it  must  not  beemployed incautiously - our language, then, is acquainted with things

that  bear  the  strange  name  of  ‘day  dreams’.  Day-dreams  are

phantasies  (products  of  the  imagination);  they  are  very  general

phenomena,  observable,  once  more,  in  healthy  as  well  as  in  sick

people, and are easily accessible to study in our own mind. The most

remarkable thing about these imaginative structures is that they have

been given the name of ‘day-dreams’, for there is no trace in them of

the two things that are common to dreams. Their relation to sleep is

already contradicted by their name; and, as regards the second thing

common to dreams, we do not experience or hallucinate anything in

them but imagine something, we know that we are having a phantasy,

we do not see but think. These day-dreams appear in the prepubertal

period,  often  in  the  later  part  of  childhood  even;  they  persist  until

maturity is reached and are then either given up or maintained till the

end of life. The content of these phantasies is dominated by a very

transparent motive. They are scenes and events in which the subject’s

egoistic  needs  of  ambition  and  power  or  his  erotic  wishes  and

satisfaction.  In  young  men  the  ambitious  phantasies  are  the  most

prominent, in women, whose ambition is directed to success in love,

the  erotic  ones.  But  in  men,  too,  erotic  needs  are  often  enough

present in the background: all their heroic deeds and successes seem

only to aim at courting the admiration and favour of women. In other

respects  these  day-dreams  are  of  many  different  kinds  and  pass

through  changing  vicissitudes.  They  are  either,  each  one  of  them,

dropped after a short time and replaced by a fresh one, or they are

retained, spun out into long stories and adapted to the changes in the

circumstances of the subject’s life. They go along with the times, so to

speak, and receive a ‘date stamp’ which bears witness to the influence

of the new situation. They are the raw material of poetic production,

for the creative writer uses his day-dreams, with certain remodellings,

disguises  and  omissions,  to  construct  the  situations  which  he

introduces into his short stories, his novels or his plays. The hero of

the day dreams is always the subject himself, either directly or by an

obvious identification with someone else.

   It may be that day-dreams bear their name on account of having the

same relation to reality - in order to indicate that their content is to be

looked on as no less unreal than that of dreams. But perhaps theyshare this name because of some psychical characteristic of dreams

which is still unknown to us, one which we are in search of. It is also

possible that we are being quite wrong in trying to make use of this

similarity  of  name  as  something  significant.  Only  later  will  it  be

possible to clear this up.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3199

 

                                        LECTURE VI

 

    THE PREMISSES AND TECHNIQUE OF INTERPRETATION

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - What we need, then, is a new path, a method

which will enable us to make a start in the investigation of dreams. I

will put a suggestion to you which presents itself. Let us take it as a

premiss  from  this  point  onwards  that dreams  are  not  somatic  but

psychical phenomena. You know what that means, but what justifies

our making the assumption? Nothing: but there is nothing either to

prevent  our  making  it.  Here  is  the  position:  if  dreams  are  somatic

phenomena they are no concern of ours, they can only interest us on

the assumption that they are mental phenomena. We will therefore

work on the assumption that they really are, to see what comes of it.

The outcome of our work will decide whether we are to hold to this

assumption and whether we may then go on to treat it in turn as a

proved finding. But what is it actually that we want to arrive at? What

is our work aiming at? We want something that is sought for in all

scientific  work  -  to  understand  the  phenomena,  to  establish  a

correlation between them and, in the latter end, if it is possible, to

enlarge our power over them.

      We  proceed  with  our  work,  accordingly,  on  the  supposition  that

dreams are psychical phenomena. In that case they are products and

utterances  of  the  dreamer’s,  but  utterances  which  tell  us  nothing,

which  we  do  not  understand.  Well,  what  do  you  do  if  I  make  an

unintelligible utterance to you? You question me, is that not so? Why

should we not do the same thing to the dreamer - question him as to

what his dream means?   As you will remember, we found ourselves in this situation once

before. It was while we were investigating certain parapraxes - a case

of  a  slip  of  the  tongue.  Someone  had  said:  ‘Then  facts  came  to

Vorschwein’ and we thereupon asked him - no, it was luckily not we

but  some  other  people  who  had  no  connection  at  all  with  psycho-

analysis - these other people, then, asked him what he meant by this

unintelligible remark. And he replied at once that he had intended to

say ‘these facts were Schweinereien [disgusting]’, but had forced this

intention  back  in  favour  of  the  milder  version  ‘then  facts  came  to

Vorschein [light]’. I pointed out to you at the time that this piece of

information was the model for every psycho-analytic investigation, and

you will understand now that psycho-analysis follows the technique of

getting the people under examination so far as possible themselves to

produce  the  solution  of  their  riddles.  Thus,  too,  it  is  the  dreamer

himself who should tell us what his dream means.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3200

 

      But,  as  we  know,  things  are  not  so  simple  with  dreams.  With

parapraxes it worked all right in a number of cases; but then others

came  along  in  which  the  person  who  was  questioned  would  say

nothing,  and  even  indignantly  rejected  the  answer  we  proposed  to

him.  With  dreams  cases  of  the  first  sort  are  entirely  lacking;  the

dreamer  always  says  he  knows  nothing.  He  cannot  reject  our

interpretation as we have none to offer him. Are we to give up our

attempt then? Since he knows nothing and we know nothing and a

third person could know even less, there seems to be no prospect of

finding out. If you feel inclined, then, give up the attempt! But if you

feel otherwise, you can accompany me further. For I can assure you

that it is quite possible, and highly probable indeed, that the dreamer

does know what his dream means: only that he does not know that he

knows it and for that reason thinks that he does not know it.

 

      You  will  point  out  to  me  that  I  am  once  more  introducing  an

assumption, the second already in this short argument, and that indoing so I am enormously reducing my procedure’s claim to credibility:

‘Subject to the premiss that dreams are psychical phenomena, and

subject to the further premiss that there are mental things in a man

which he knows without knowing that he knows them.’ and so on. If

so, one has only to consider the internal improbability of each of these

two  premisses,  and  one  can  quietly  divert  one’s  interest  from  any

conclusions that may be based on them.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3201

 

   I have not brought you here, Ladies and Gentlemen, to delude you

or to conceal things from you. In my prospectus, it is true, I announced

a  course  of  ‘Elementary  Lectures  to  Serve  as  an  Introduction  to

Psycho-Analysis’, but what I had in mind was nothing in the nature of

a  presentation in  usum  Delphini,¹  which  would  give  you  a  smooth

account with all the difficulties carefully concealed, with the gaps filled

in and the doubts glossed over, so that you might believe with an easy

mind that you had learnt something new. No, for the very reason of

your being beginners. I wanted to show you our science as it is, with

its unevennesses and roughnesses, its demands and hesitations. For

I  know  that  it  is  the  same  in  all  sciences  and  cannot  possibly  be

otherwise, especially in their beginnings. I know also that ordinarily

instruction is at pains to start out by concealing such difficulties and

incompletenesses from the learner. But that will not do for psycho-

analysis. So I have in fact laid down two premisses, one within the

other;  and  if  anyone  finds  the  whole  thing  too  laborious  and  too

insecure, or if anyone is accustomed to higher certainties and more

elegant deductions, he need go no further with us. I think, however,

that he should leave psychological problems entirely alone, for it is to

be feared that in this quarter he will find impassable the precise and

secure paths which he is prepared to follow. And, for a science which

has something to offer, there is no necessity to sue for a hearing and

for followers. Its findings are bound to canvass on its behalf and it can

wait until these have compelled attention to it.

   But for those who would like to persist in the subject, I can point outthat my two assumptions are not on a par. The first, that dreams are

psychical phenomena, is the premiss which we seek to prove by the

outcome  of  our  work;  the  second  one  has  already  been  proved  in

another field, and I am merely venturing to bring it over from there to

our own problems.

   Where, then, in what field, can it be that proof has been found that

there  is  knowledge  of  which  the  person  concerned  nevertheless

knows nothing, as we are proposing to assume of dreamers? After all,

this would be a strange, surprising fact and one which would alter our

view of mental life and which would have no need to hide itself: a fact,

incidentally,  which  cancels  itself  in  its  very  naming  and  which

nevertheless claims to be something real - a contradiction in terms.

Well, it does not hide itself. It is not its fault if people know nothing

about it of do not pay enough attention to it. Any more than we are to

blame  because  judgement  is  passed  on  all  these  psychological

problems  by  people  who  have  kept  at  a  distance  from  all  the

observations and experiences which are decisive on the matter.

 

   ¹ [‘For the use of the Dauphin’ - an edition of the Classics prepared for his son by order of

Louis XIV: ‘bowdlerized’.]
 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3202

 

   The proof was found in the field of hypnotic phenomena. When, in

1889, I took part in the extraordinarily impressive demonstrations by

Liébeault  and  Bernheim  at  Nancy,  I  witnessed  the  following

experiment  among  others.  If  a  man  was  put  into  a  state  of

somnambulism,  was  made  to  experience  all  kinds  of  things  in  a

hallucinatory manner, and was then woken up, he appeared at first to

know  nothing  of  what  had  happened  during  his  hypnotic  sleep.

Bernheim then asked him straight out to report what had happened to

him  under  hypnosis.  The  man  maintained  that  he  could  remember

nothing. But Bernheim held out against this, brought urgent pressure

to bear on him, insisted that he knew it and must remember it. And, lo

and behold! the man grew uncertain, began to reflect, and recalled in

a shadowy way one of the experiences that had been suggested tohim, and then another piece, and the memory be came clearer and

clearer and more and more complete, and finally came to light without

a break. Since, however, he knew afterwards what had happened and

had learnt nothing about it from anyone else in the interval, we are

justified  in  concluding  that  he  had  known  it  earlier  as  well.  It  was

merely  inaccessible  to  him;  he  did  not  know  that  he  knew  it  and

thought he did not know it. That is to say, the position was exactly the

same as what we suspected in our dreamer.

   I hope you will be surprised that this fact has been established and

will ask me: ‘Why did you omit to bring this proof forward earlier, in

connection  with  the  parapraxes,  when  we  came  to  the  point  of

attributing to a man who had made a slip of the tongue an intention to

say things of which he knew nothing and which he denied? If a person

thinks  he  knows  nothing  of  experiences  the  memory  of  which  he

nevertheless  has  within  him,  it  is  no  longer  so  improbable  that  he

knows nothing of other mental processes within him. This argument

would  certainly  have  impressed  us,  and  helped  us  to  understand

parapraxes.’  Of  course  I  could  have  brought  it  forward  then,  but  I

reserved  it  for  another  place,  where  it  was  more  needed.  The

parapraxes explained themselves in part, and in part left us with a

suggestion that, in order to preserve the continuity of the phenomena

concerned,  it  would  be  wise  to  assume  the  existence  of  mental

processes of which the subject knows nothing. In the case of dreams

we  are  compelled  to  bring  in  explanations  from  elsewhere  and

moreover I expect that in their case you will find it easier to accept my

carrying over of the explanations from hypnosis. The state in which a

parapraxis occurs is bound to strike you as being the normal one; it

has no similarity with the hypnotic state. On the other hand there an

obvious  kinship  between  the  hypnotic  state  and  the  state  of  sleep,

which  is  a  necessary  condition  of  dreaming.  Hypnosis,  indeed,  is

described as an artificial sleep. We tell the person we are hypnotizing

to sleep, and the suggestions we make are comparable to the dreams

of natural sleep. The psychical situations in the two cases are really

analogous. In natural sleep we withdraw our interest from the whole

external  world;  and  in  hypnotic  sleep  we  also  withdraw  it  from  the

whole  world,  but  with  the  single  exception  of  the  person  who  has

hypnotized us and with whom we remain in rapport. Incidentally, thesleep of a nursing mother, who remains in rapport with her child and

can be woken only by him, is a normal counterpart of hypnotic sleep.

So it scarcely seems a very bold venture to transpose a situation from

hypnosis to natural sleep. The assumption that in a dreamer too a

knowledge about his dreams is present, though it is inaccessible to

him so that he himself does not believe it, is not something entirely out

of  the  blue.  It  should  be  noticed,  moreover,  that  a  third  line  of

approach  to  the  study  of  dreams  is  opened  at  this  point:  from  the

stimuli which disturb sleep, from day-dreams, and now in addition from

the suggested dreams of the hypnotic state.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3203

 

 

      We  may  now  go  back  to  our  task  with  increased  confidence

perhaps. It is very probable, then, that the dreamer knows about his

dream; the only question is how to make it possible for him to discover

his knowledge and communicate it to us. We do not require him to tell

us straight away the sense of his dream, but he will be able to find its

origin, the circle of thoughts and interests from which it sprang. You

will recall that in the case of the parapraxis the man was asked how

he had arrived at the wrong word ‘Vorschwein’ and the first thing that

occurred to him gave us the explanation. Our technique with dreams,

then, is a very simple one, copied from this example. We shall once

more ask the dreamer how he arrived at the dream, and once more

his  first  remark  is  to  be  looked  on  as  an  explanation.  Thus  we

disregard the distinction between his thinking or not thinking that he

knows something, and we treat both cases as one and the same.

   This technique is certainly very simple, but I fear it will rouse your

liveliest opposition. You will say: ‘A fresh assumption! the third! And

the most unlikely of all! If I ask the dreamer what occurs to him in

connection with the dream, is precisely the first thing that occurs to

him going to bring the explanation we are hoping for? But nothing at

all  may  occur  to  him,  or  heaven  knows  what  may  occur  to  him.  I

cannot see what an expectation of that kind is based on. That is reallyshowing too much trust in Providence at a point where rather more

exercise of the critical faculty would be appropriate. Besides, a dream

is not a single wrong word; it consists of a number of elements. So

which association are we to take up?’

   You are correct on all your minor points. A dream differs from a slip

of the tongue, among other things, in the multiplicity of its elements.

Our technique must take this into account. I therefore suggest to you

that we should divide the dream-into its elements and start a separate

enquiry into each element; if we do this, the analogy with a slip of the

tongue is re-established. You are also right in thinking that when the

dreamer is questioned about the separate elements of the dream he

may reply that nothing occurs to him. There are some instances in

which we let this reply pass, and you will later hear which these are;

strangely  enough,  they  are  instances  in  which  definite  ideas  may

occur  to  us  ourselves.  But  in  general  if  the  dreamer  asserts  that

nothing occurs to him we contradict him; we bring urgent pressure to

bear on him, we insist that something must occur to him - and we turn

out to be right. He will produce an idea - some idea, it is a matter of

indifference to us which. He will give us certain pieces of information,

which may be described as ‘historical’, with particular ease. He may

say: ‘That’s something that happened yesterday’ (as was the case in

our two ‘matter-of-fact’ dreams), or: ‘That reminds me of something

that happened a short time ago’ - and we shall discover in this way

that dreams are connected with impressions of the last day or two

much more often than we thought to begin with. And finally he will also

recall,  starting  from  the  dream,  events  from  further  back  and  even

perhaps from the far distant past.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3204

 

   But on your main point you are wrong. If you think it is arbitrary to

assume that the first thing that occurs to the dreamer is bound to bring

what we are looking for or to lead us to it, if you think that what occurs

to him might be anything in the world and might have no connection

with what we are looking for, and that it is only exhibiting my trust inProvidence if I expect something different - then you are making a

great mistake. Once before I ventured to tell you that you nourish a

deeply rooted faith in undetermined psychical events and in free will,

but that this is quite unscientific and must yield to the demand of a

determinism whose rule extends over mental life. I beg you to respect

it  as  a  fact  that that  is  what  occurred  to  the  man  when  he  was

questioned  and  nothing  else.  But  I  am  not  opposing  one  faith  with

another. It can be proved that the idea produced by the man was not

arbitrary  nor  indeterminable  nor  unconnected  with  what  we  were

looking for. Indeed, not long ago I learnt - without, I may say, attaching

too much importance to the fact - that experimental psychology too

had brought up evidence to that effect.

 

   In view of the importance of the matter, I will ask for your special

attention. If I ask someone to tell me what occurs to him in response

to  a  particular  element  of  a  dream,  I  am  asking  him  to  surrender

himself to free association while keeping an idea in mind as a starting

point. This calls for a special attitude of the attention which is quite

different from reflection and which excludes reflection. Some people

achieve this attitude with ease; others show an incredibly high degree

of  clumsiness  when  they  attempt  it.  There  is,  however,  a  higher

degree  of  freedom  of  association:  that  is  to  say,  I  may  drop  the

insistence on keeping an initial idea in mind and only lay down the sort

or  kind  of  association  I  want  -  I  may,  for  instance,  require  the

experimenter to allow a proper name or a number to occur to him

freely.  What  then  occurs  to  him  would  presumably  be  even  more

arbitrary and more indeterminable than with our own technique. It can

be shown, however, that it is always strictly determined by important

internal attitudes of mind which are not known to us at the moment at

which they operate - which are as little known to us as the disturbing

purposes of parapraxes and the provoking ones of chance actions.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3205

 

   I and many others after me have repeatedly made such experimentswith names and numbers thought of at random, and a few of these

have been published. Here the procedure is to produce a series of

associations  to  the  name  which  has  emerged;  these  latter

associations are accordingly no longer completely free but have a link,

like the associations to the elements of dreams. One continues doing

this until one finds the impulse exhausted. But by then light will have

been  thrown  both  on  the  motive  and  the  meaning  of  the  random

choice  of  the  name.  These  experiments  always  lead  to  the  same

result; reports on them often cover a wealth of material and call for

extensive expositions. The associations to numbers chosen at random

are perhaps the most convincing; they run off so quickly and proceed

with such incredible certainty to a hidden goal that the effect is really

staggering. I will give you only one example of an analysis like this of

a name, since dealing with it calls for a conveniently small amount of

material.

   In the course of treating a young man I had occasion to discuss this

topic, and mentioned the thesis that, in spite of an apparently arbitrary

choice, it is impossible to think of a name at random which does not

turn out to be closely determined by the immediate circumstances, the

characteristics of the subject of the experiment and his situation at the

moment. Since he was sceptical, I suggested that he should make an

experiment of the kind himself on the spot. I knew that he carried on

particularly numerous relationships of every kind with married women

and girls, so I thought he would have a specially large choice open to

him if it were to be a woman’s name that he was asked to choose. He

agreed  to  this.  To  my  astonishment,  or  rather,  perhaps,  to  his,  no

avalanche of women’s names broke over me; he remained silent for a

moment and then admitted that only a single name had come into his

head and none other besides: ‘Albine’. - How curious! But what does

that name mean to you? How many ‘Albines’ do you know? - Strange

to say, he knew no one called ‘Albine’ and nothing further occurred to

him in response to the name. So it might be thought that the analysis

had  failed.  But  not  at  all:  it  was  already  complete,  and  no  further

associations were needed. The man had an unusually fair complexion

and in conversation during the treatment I had often jokingly called

him  an  albino.  We  were  engaged  at  the  time  in  determining  the

feminine part of his constitution. So it was he himself who was this‘Albine’,  the  woman  who  was  the  most  interesting  to  him  at  the

moment.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3206

 

   In the same way tunes that come into one’s head without warning

turn out to be determined by and to belong to a train of thought which

has a right to occupy one’s mind though without one’s being aware of

its activity. It is easy to show then that the relation to the tune is based

on  its  text  or  its  origin.  But  I  must  be  careful  not  to  extend  this

assertion to really musical people, of whom, as it happens, I have had

no experience. It may be that for such people the musical content of

the tune is what decides its emergence. The earlier case is certainly

the commoner one. I know of a young man, for instance, who was

positively persecuted for a time by the tune (incidentally a charming

one)  of  Paris’s  song  in La  belle  Hélène,  till  his  analysis  drew  his

attention  to  a  contemporary  competition  in  his  interest  between  an

‘Ida’ and a ‘Helen’.

   If then things that occur to one quite freely are determined in this

way  and  form  parts  of  a  connected  whole,  we  shall  no  doubt  be

justified in concluding that things that occur to one with a single link -

namely their link with the idea which serves as their starting-point -

cannot be any less determined. Investigation shows, in fact, that, apart

from the link we have given them with the initial idea, they are found to

be dependent as well on groups of strongly emotional thoughts and

interests, ‘complexes’, whose participation is not known at the moment

- that is to say, is unconscious.

   The occurrence of ideas with links of this kind has been the subject

of  very  instructive  experimental  researches,  which  have  played  a

notable part in the history of psycho-analysis. The school of Wundt

had introduced what are known as association-experiments, in which

a stimulus word is called out to the subject and he has the task of

replying to it as quickly as possible with any reaction that occurs to

him. It is then possible to study the interval that passes between the

stimulus  and  the  reaction,  the  nature  of  the  answer  given  as  areaction, possible errors when the same experiment is repeated later,

and  so  on.  The  Zurich  school,  led  by  Bleuler  and  Jung,  found  the

explanation  of  the  reactions  that  followed  in  the  association-

experiment by getting the subjects to throw light on their reactions by

means  of  subsequent  associations,  if  those  reactions  had  shown

striking features. It then turned out that these striking reactions were

determined in the most definite fashion by the subject’s complexes. In

this manner Bleuler and Jung built the first bridge from experimental

psychology to psycho-analysis.

 

   Having learnt thus much, you will be able to say: ‘We acknowledge

now  that  thoughts  that  occur  to  one  freely  are  determined  and  not

arbitrary as we supposed. We admit that this is also true of thoughts

occurring in response to the elements of dreams. But that is not what

we are concerned with. You assert that what occurs to the dreamer in

response to the dream-element will be determined by the psychical

background (unknown to us) of that particular element. This does not

seem to us to be proved. We quite expect that what occurs to the

dreamer  in  response  to  the  dream-element  will  turn  out  to  be

determined by one of the dreamer’s complexes, but what good does

that do us? This does not lead us to an understanding of dreams but,

like  the  association-experiment,  to  a  knowledge  of  these  so-called

complexes. But what have they got to do with dreams?’

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3207

 

   You are right, but you are overlooking one factor. Moreover it is

precisely  the  factor  on  account  of  which  I  did  not  choose  the

  association-experiment as the starting-point of this exposition. In that

experiment  the  single  determinant  of  the  reaction  -  that  is,  the

stimulus-word - is arbitrarily chosen by us. The reaction is in that case

an  intermediary  between  the  stimulus-word  and  the  complex  which

has  been  aroused  in  the  subject.  In  dreams  the  stimulus-word  is

replaced by something that is itself derived from the dreamer’s mental

life, from sources unknown to him, and may therefore very easily itselfbe a ‘derivative of a complex’. It is therefore not precisely fantastic to

suppose that the further associations linked to the dream-elements will

be determined by the same complex as that of the element itself and

will lead to its discovery.

   Let me show you from another instance that the facts are as we

expect. The forgetting of proper names is actually an excellent model

of what happens in dream-analysis; the difference is only that events

that are shared between two people in dream-analysis are combined

in a single person in the parapraxis. If I forget a name temporarily, I

nevertheless feel in myself a certainty that I know it - a certainty which

in the case of the dreamer we only arrived at by the round-about path

of  the  Bernheim  experiment.  The  name  which  I  have  forgotten  but

which  I  know  is,  however,  not  accessible  to  me.  Experience  soon

teaches me that thinking about it, with however much effort, is of no

help. But in place of the forgotten name I can always call up one or

several substitute names. It is only after a substitute name of this kind

has occurred to me spontaneously that the conformity of this situation

with that of dream-interpretation becomes obvious. Like this substitute

name,  the  dream-element  is  not  the  right  thing,  but  only  takes  the

place of something else - of the genuine thing which I do not know and

which  I  am  to  discover  by  means  of  the  dream-analysis.  The

difference is once more only that in the case of forgetting the name, I

recognize  the  substitute  unhesitatingly  as  something  ungenuine,

whereas we had to acquire this view laboriously in the case of the

dream-element. Now in the case of forgetting a name there is also a

method by which we can start from the substitute and arrive at the

unconscious genuine thing, the forgotten name. If I direct my attention

to the substitute names and allow further ideas in response to them to

occur  to  me,  I  arrive  by  shorter  or  longer  detours  at  the  forgotten

name,  and  I  find  when  this  happens  that  both  the  spontaneous

substitute name and the ones that I have called up are connected with

the forgotten one and were determined by it.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3208

    I will describe an analysis of this kind to you. I noticed one day that I

could not recall the name of the small country on the Riviera, of which

Monte Carlo is the chief town. It was very tiresome, but so it was. I

summoned up all that I knew about that country. I thought of Prince

Albert of the House of Lusignan, of his marriages, of his devotion to

deep-sea researches, and everything else I could bring together, but it

was of no avail. So I gave up reflection and allowed substitute names

to occur to me instead of the lost one. They came rapidly: Monte Carlo

itself, then Piedmont, Albania, Montevideo, Colico. Of this series I was

struck first by Albania, which was at once replaced by Montenegro, no

doubt because of the contrast between white and black.¹ I then saw

that four of these substitute names contained the same syllable ‘mon’,

then  suddenly  I  had  the  forgotten  word  and  exclaimed  aloud:

‘Monaco!’  So  the  substitute  names  had  in  fact  arisen  from  the

forgotten one: the first four came from its first syllable while the last

reproduced its syllabic structure and its whole last syllable. Moreover I

was  able  to  discover  quite  easily  what  it  was  that  had  temporarily

deprived me of the name. Monaco is also the Italian name for Munich;

and it was that town which exerted the inhibitory influence.

   No doubt this example is a good one, but it is too simple. In other

cases it would have been necessary to call up a longer string of ideas

in response to the first substitute name, and then the analogy with

dream-analysis would have been clearer. I have had experiences of

that sort too. On one occasion a stranger had invited me to drink some

Italian wine with him, but when we were in the inn it turned out that he

had  forgotten  the  name  of  the  wine  which  he  intended  to  order

because of his very agreeable recollections of it. From a quantity of

substitute ideas of different kinds which came into his head in place of

the forgotten name, I was able to infer that thoughts about someone

called  Hedwig  had  made  him  forget  the  name.  And  he  not  only

confirmed the fact that he had first tasted this wine when he was with

someone of that name, but with the help of this discovery he recalled

the name of the wine. He was happily married at the present time and

this  Hedwig  belonged  to  earlier  days  which  he  had  no  wish  to

remember.

   But if it is possible in the case of forgetting a name, it must also be

possible in interpreting dreams to proceed from the substitute alongthe chain of associations attached to it and so to obtain access to the

genuine  thing  which  is  being  held  back.  From  the  example  of  the

forgotten name we may conclude that the associations to the dream-

element will be determined both by the dream-element and also by the

unconscious genuine thing behind it. In this way, then, we seem to

have produced some justification of our technique.

 

   ¹ [‘Albus’ the Latin for ‘white’, and ‘negro’ the Spanish or Portuguese for ‘black’.]

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3209

 

                                        LECTURE VII

 

    THE MANIFEST CONTENT OF DREAMS AND THE LATENT

                                DREAM-THOUGHTS

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - As you see, our study of parapraxes has not

been unprofitable. Thanks to our labours over them we have, subject

to  the  premisses  I  have  explained  to  you,  achieved  two  things:  a

conception  of  the  nature  of  dream-elements  and  a  technique  for

interpreting dreams. The conception of dream-elements tells us that

they  are  ungenuine  things,  substitutes  for  something  else  that  is

unknown to the dreamer (like the purpose of a parapraxis), substitutes

for something the knowledge of which is present in the dreamer but

which is inaccessible to him. We are in hopes that it will be possible to

carry over the same conception to whole dreams, which are made up

of such elements. Our technique lies in employing free association to

these  elements  in  order  to  bring  about  the  emergence  of  other

substitutive  structures,  which  will  enable  us  to  arrive  at  what  is

concealed from view.

      I  now  propose  that  we  should  introduce  a  change  into  our

nomenclature which will give us more freedom of movement. Instead

of speaking of ‘concealed’, ‘inaccessible’, or ‘ungenuine’, let us adopt

the  correct  description  and  say  ‘inaccessible  to  the  dreamer’s

consciousness’  or  ‘unconscious’.  I  mean  nothing  else  by  this  than

what may be suggested to you when you think of a word that hasescaped you or the disturbing purpose in a parapraxis - that is to say, I

mean nothing else than ‘unconscious at the moment’. In contrast to

this, we can of course speak of the dream-elements themselves, and

the substitutive ideas that have been newly arrived at from them by

association,  as  ‘conscious’.  This  nomenclature  so  far  involves  no

theoretical construction. No objection can be made to using the word

‘unconscious’ as an apt and easily understandable description.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3210

 

   If we carry over our conception of the separate elements to the

whole  dream,  it  follows  that  the  dream  as  a  whole  is  a  distorted

substitute  for  something  else,  something  unconscious,  and  that  the

task of interpreting a dream is to discover this unconscious material.

From this, however, there at once follow three important rules, which

we must obey during the work of interpreting dreams.

   (1) We must not concern ourselves with what the dream appears to

tell us, whether it is intelligible or absurd, clear or confused, since it

cannot possibly be the unconscious material we are in search of. (An

obvious limitation to this rule will force itself on our notice later.) (2) We

must  restrict  our  work  to  calling  up  the  substitutive  ideas  for  each

element, we must not reflect about them, or consider whether they

contain anything relevant, and we must not trouble ourselves with how

far  they  diverge  from  the  dream-element.  (3)  We  must  wait  till  the

concealed unconscious material we are in search of emerges of its

own  accord,  exactly  as  the  forgotten  word  ‘Monaco’  did  in  the

experiment I have described.

      Now,  too,  we  can  understand  to  what  extent  it  is  a  matter  of

indifference how much or how little the dream is remembered and,

above  all,  how  accurately  or  how  uncertainly.  For  the  remembered

dream  is  not  the  genuine  material  but  a  distorted  substitute  for  it,

which  should  assist  us,  by  calling  up  other  substitutive  images,  to

come nearer to the genuine material, to make what is unconscious in

the dream conscious. If our memory has been inaccurate, therefore, it

has merely made a further distortion of this substitute - a distortion,moreover, which cannot have been without a reason.

   The work of interpreting can be performed on one’s own dreams just

as on other people’s. In fact one learns more from one’s own: the

process carries more conviction. If, then, we make the attempt, we

notice that something is opposing our work. It is true that ideas occur

to us, but we do not allow all of them to count; testing and selecting

influences make themselves felt. In the case of one idea we may say

to ourselves: ‘No, this is not relevant, it does not belong here’; in the

case of another: ‘this is too senseless’ and of a third: ‘this is totally

unimportant’. And we can further observe how with objections of this

sort we may smother ideas and finally expel them altogether, even

before they have become quite clear. Thus on the one hand we keep

too close to the idea which was our starting point, the dream-element

itself; and on the other hand we interfere with the outcome of the free

associations by making a selection. If we are not by ourselves while

interpreting  the  dream,  if  we  get  someone  else  to  interpret  it,  we

become very clearly aware of yet another motive which we employ in

making this illicit selection, for sometimes we say to ourselves: ‘No,

this idea is too disagreeable; I will not or cannot report it.’

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3211

 

   These objections are obviously a threat to the success of our work.

We must guard against them, and in our own case we do so by firmly

resolving not to give way to them. If we are analysing someone else’s

dream, we do so by laying it down as an inviolable rule that he must

not hold back any idea from us, even if it gives rise to one of the four

objections  -  of  being  too  unimportant  or  too  senseless  or  of  being

irrelevant or too distressing to be reported. The dreamer promises to

obey the rule, and we may be annoyed afterwards to find how badly

he keeps his promise when the occasion arises. We may explain this

to  ourselves  to  begin  with  by  supposing  that,  in  spite  of  our

authoritative  assurance,  he  has  not  yet  realized  the  justification  for

free  association,  and  we  may  perhaps  have  the  notion  of  first

convincing him theoretically by giving him books to read or by sendinghim to lectures which may convert him into a supporter of our views on

free  association.  But  we  shall  be  held  back  from  blunders  like  this

when we consider that in the case of ourselves, as to the strength of

whose  convictions  we  can,  after  all,  hardly  be  in  doubt,  the  same

objections arise to certain ideas and are only set aside subsequently -

by a court of appeal, as it were.

   Instead of being annoyed by the dreamer’s disobedience, we may

take advantage of these experiences by learning something new from

them  -  something  which  is  all  the  more  important  the  less  we  are

expecting  it.  We  perceive  that  the  work  of  interpreting  dreams  is

carried out in the face of a resistance, which opposes it and of which

the  critical  objections  are  manifestations.  This  resistance  is

independent  of  the  dreamer’s  theoretical  conviction.  We  learn  still

more, indeed. We discover that a critical objection of this kind never

turns out to be justified. On the contrary, the ideas which people try to

suppress in this way turn out invariably to be the most important ones

and  those  which  are  decisive  in  our  search  for  the  unconscious

material. It amounts, in fact, to a special distinguishing mark, if an idea

is accompanied by an objection like this.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3212

 

   This resistance is something entirely new: a phenomenon which we

have come upon in connection with our premisses, but one which was

not included among them. The appearance of this new factor in our

reckoning  comes  to  us  as  a  not  altogether  pleasant  surprise.  We

suspect at once that it is not going to make our work any easier. It

might  mislead  us  into  abandoning  our  whole  concern  with  dreams:

something so unimportant as a dream and, on top of that, all these

difficulties instead of a simple straightforward technique! But, on the

other hand, the difficulties might act precisely as a stimulus and make

us suspect that the work will be worth the trouble. We regularly come

up against resistance when we try to make our way forward from the

substitute  which  is  the  dream-element  to  the  unconscious  material

hidden behind it. So we may conclude that there must be something ofimportance concealed behind the substitute. Otherwise, what is the

point of the difficulties that are trying to keep the concealment going?

If a child refuses to open his clenched fist to show what he has in it,

we may feel sure that it is something wrong - something he ought not

to have.

   The moment we introduce the dynamic idea of a resistance into the

facts of the case, we must simultaneously reflect that this factor is

something  variable  in  quantity.  There  may  be  greater  and  smaller

resistances, and we are prepared to find these differences showing

themselves during our work as well. We may perhaps be able to link

with  this  another  experience  we  also  meet  with  during  the  work  of

interpreting dreams: sometimes it requires only a single response, or

no  more  than  a  few,  to  lead  us  from  a  dream-element  to  the

unconscious material behind it, while on other occasions long chains

of  associations  and  the  overcoming  of  many  critical  objections  are

required  for  bringing  this  about.  We  shall  conclude  that  these

differences relate to the changing magnitude of the resistance, and we

shall  probably  turn  out  to  be  right.  If  the  resistance  is  small,  the

substitute cannot be far distant from the unconscious material; but a

greater resistance means that the unconscious material will be greatly

distorted and that the path will be a long one from the substitute back

to the unconscious material.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3213

 

 

   And now perhaps it is time to take a dream and try our technique

upon  it  and  see  whether  our  expectations  are  confirmed.  Yes,  but

what dream are we to choose for the purpose: You cannot imagine

how  hard  I  find  it  to  decide;  nor  can  I  yet  make  the  nature  of  my

difficulties plain to you. There must obviously be dreams which have

on the whole been subjected to only a little distortion, and the best

plan would be to begin with them. But what dreams have been least

distorted?  The  ones  that  are  intelligible  and  not  confused,  two

examples  of  which  I  have  already  put  before  you?  That  would  beleading us quite astray. Investigation shows that such dreams have

been  subjected  to  an  extraordinarily  high  degree  of  distortion.  If,

however,  I  were  to  disregard  particular  requirements  and  were  to

select  a  dream  at  haphazard,  you  would  probably  be  greatly

disappointed. We might have to notice or record such a profusion of

ideas in response to the separate dream-elements that we should be

unable to make head or tail of the work. If we write down a dream and

then make a note of all the ideas that emerge in response to it, these

may prove to be many times longer than the text of the dream. The

best plan would therefore seem to be to choose out a number of short

dreams for analysis, each of which will at least tell us something or

confirm some point. So we will make up our minds to take that course,

unless  experience  may  perhaps  show  us  where  we  can  really  find

dreams that have been only slightly distorted.

   I can however think of something else that will make things easier

for us - something, moreover, which lies along our path. Instead of

starting  on  the  interpretation  of whole  dreams,  we  will  restrict

ourselves to a few dream-elements, and we will trace out in a number

of examples how these can be explained by applying our technique to

them.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3214

 

   (a) A lady reported that she very often dreamt when she was a child

that God wore a paper cocked-hat on his head. What can you make of

that  without  the  dreamer’s  help?  It  sounds  completely  nonsensical.

But it ceases to be nonsense when we hear from the lady that she

used to have a hat of that sort put on her head at meals when she was

a child, because she could never resist taking furtive glances at her

brothers’ and sisters’ plates to see whether they had been given larger

helpings than she had. So the hat was intended to act like a pair of

blinkers. This, incidentally, was a piece of historical information and

was given without any difficulty. The interpretation of this element and

at the same time of the whole short dream was easily made with the

help of a further idea that occurred to the dreamer: ‘As I had heardthat God was omniscient and saw everything’, she said, ‘the dream

can  only  mean  that  I  knew  everything  and  saw  everything,  even

though they tried to prevent me.’ Perhaps this example is too simple.

 

   (b) A sceptical woman patient had a longish dream in the course of

which some people told her about my book on jokes and praised it

highly. Something came in then about a ‘a ‘channel’, perhaps it was

another book that mentioned a channel, or something else about a

channel . . . she didn’t know . . . it was all so indistinct.

   No doubt you will be inclined to expect that the element ‘channel’,

since it was so indistinct, would be inaccessible to interpretation. You

are right in suspecting a difficulty; but the difficulty did not arise from

the indistinctness: both the difficulty and the indistinctness arose from

another cause. Nothing occurred to the dreamer in connection with

‘channel’, and I could of course throw no light on it. A little later - it was

the next day, in point of fact - she told me that she had thought of

something that might have something to do with it. It was a joke, too, -

a joke she had heard. On the steamer between Dover and Calais a

well-known author fell into conversation with an Englishman. The latter

had  occasion  to  quote  the  phrase:  ‘Du  sublime  au  ridicule  il  n’y  a

qu’un pas. [It is only a step from the sublime to the ridiculous.]’ ‘Yes,’

replied the author, ‘le Pas de Calais’ - meaning that he thought France

sublime and England ridiculous. But the Pas de Calais is a channel -

the English Channel. You will ask whether I think this had anything to

do with the dream. Certainly I think so; and it provides the solution of

the puzzling element of the dream. Can you doubt that this joke was

already  present  before  the  dream  occurred,  as  the  unconscious

thought behind the element ‘channel’? Can you suppose that it was

introduced as a subsequent invention? The association betrayed the

scepticism  which  lay  concealed  behind  the  patient’s  ostensible

admiration; and her resistance against revealing this was no doubt the

common cause both of her delay in producing the association and of

the  indistinctness  of  the  dream-element  concerned.  Consider  the

relation of the dream-element to its unconscious background: it was,

as it were, a fragment of the background, an allusion to it, but it was

made quite incomprehensible by being isolated.

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3215

 

      (c)  As  part  of  a  longish  dream  a  patient  dreamt  that several

members of his family were sitting round a table of peculiar shape,

etc. It occurred to him in connection with the table that he had seen a

piece of furniture of the kind when he was on a visit to a particular

family. His thoughts then went on to say that there was a peculiar

relationship between the father and son in this family; and he soon

added  that  the  same  thing  was  true  of  the  relationship  between

himself  and  his  own  father.  So  the  table  had  been  taken  into  the

dream in order to point out this parallel.

   This dreamer had been long familiar with the requirement of dream-

interpretation. Another person might perhaps have taken objection to

such a trivial detail as the shape of a table being made the subject of

investigation. But in fact we regard nothing in a dream as accidental or

indifferent,  and  we  expect  to  obtain  information  precisely  from  the

explanation of such trivial and pointless details. You may perhaps also

feel surprised that the thought that ‘the same thing was true of us and

of them’ should have been expressed by, in particular, the choice of a

table [Tisch]. But this too becomes clear when you learn that the name

of the family in question was Tischler [literally, ‘carpenter’]. By making

his  relations  sit  at  this Tisch,  he  was  saying  that  they  too  were

Tischlers. Incidentally, you will notice how inevitably one is led into

being indiscreet when one reports these dream-interpretations. And

you will guess that this is one of the difficulties I have hinted at over

the choice of examples. I could easily have taken another example in

place  of  this  one,  but  I  should  probably  merely  have  avoided this

indiscretion at the price of committing another.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3216

 

 

   The moment seems to me to have arrived for introducing two terms,

which we could have made use of long ago. We will describe what thedream  actually  tells  us  as  the manifest  dream-content,  and  the

concealed material, which we hope to reach by pursuing the ideas that

occur to the dreamer, as the latent dream-thoughts. Thus we are here

considering the relations between the manifest content of the dream

and the latent dream-thoughts as shown in these examples. These

relations may be of very many different kinds. In examples (a) and (b)

the  manifest  element  is  also  a  constituent  of  the  latent  thoughts,

though only a small fragment of them. A small piece of the large and

complicated psychical structure of unconscious dream-thoughts has

made its way into the manifest dream as well - a fragment of them, or,

in  other  cases,  an  allusion  to  them,  a  caption,  as  it  were,  or  an

abbreviation  in  telegraphic  style.  It  is  the  business  of  the  work  of

interpretation to complete these fragments or this allusion into a whole

- which was achieved particularly nicely in the case of example (b).

Thus one form of the distortion which constitutes the dream-work is

replacement by a fragment or an allusion. In example (c) another kind

of  relation  is  to  be  observed  in  addition;  and  we  shall  find  this

expressed in a purer and clearer form in the examples which follow.

 

      (d)  The  dreamer was  pulling  a  lady  (a  particular  one,  of  his

acquaintance) out from behind a bed. He himself found the meaning

of this dream-element from the first idea that occurred to him. It meant

that he was giving this lady preference.¹

 

   ¹ [This example, like the next, depends on a purely verbal point: the resemblance between

the German words for ‘pulling out’ (hervor ziehen) and ‘preferring’ (vorziehen).]
 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3217

 

   (e) Another man dreamt that his brother was in a box [Kasten]. In his

first response ‘Kasten’ was replaced by ‘Schrank [cupboard]’, and the

second  gave  the  interpretation:  his  brother  was  restricting  himself

[‘schränkt sich ein’].

 

   (f) The dreamer climbed to the top of a mountain, which commanded

an unusually extensive view. This sounds quite rational and you mightsuppose that there is nothing to interpret in it and that all we have to

do is to enquire what memory gave rise to the dream and the reason

for its being stirred up. But you would be wrong. It turned out that this

dream stood in need of interpreting just as much as any other, more

confused one. For none of his own mountain climbs occurred to the

dreamer, but he thought of the fact that an acquaintance of his was

the editor of a ‘Survey’, dealing with our relations with the most remote

parts of the earth. Thus the latent dream-thought was an identification

of the dreamer with the ‘surveyor’,

 

   Here we have a new type of relation between the manifest and

latent dream-elements. The former is not so much a distortion of the

latter as a representation of it, a plastic, concrete, portrayal of it, taking

its start from the wording. But precisely on that account it is once more

a  distortion,  for  we  have  long  since  forgotten  from  what  concrete

image the word originated and consequently fail to recognize it when it

is replaced by the image. When you consider that the manifest dream

is  made  up  predominantly  of  visual  images  and  more  rarely  of

thoughts and words, you can imagine what importance attaches to this

kind of relation in the construction of dreams. You will see, too, that in

this way it becomes possible in regard to a large number of abstract

thoughts  to  create  pictures  to  act  as  substitutes  for  them  in  the

manifest  dream  while  at  the  same  time  serving  the  purpose  of

concealment.  This  is  the  technique  of  the  familiar  picture-puzzles.

Why  it  is  that  these  representations  have  an  appearance  of  being

jokes is a special problem into which we need not enter here.

   There is a fourth kind of relation between the manifest and latent

elements, which I must continue to hold back from you until we come

upon its key-word in considering technique. Even so I shall not have

given you a full list; but it will serve our purpose.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3218

 

   Do you feel bold enough now to venture upon the interpretation of a

whole dream? Let us make the experiment, to see whether we arewell enough equipped for the task. I shall of course not select one of

the most obscure ones; nevertheless, it will be one that gives a well-

marked picture of the attributes of a dream.

 

   Very well then. A lady who, though she was still young, had been

married  for  many  years  had  the  following  dream: She  was  at  the

theatre  with  her  husband.  One  side  of  the  stalls  was  completely

empty.  Her  husband  had  told  her  that  Elisa  L.  and  her  fiancé  had

wanted to go too, but had only been able to get bad seats - three for 1

florin  50  kreuzers  -  and  of  course  they  could  not  take  those.  She

thought it would not really have done any harm if they had.

   The first thing the dreamer reported to us was that the precipitating

cause  of  the  dream  was  touched  on  in  its  manifest  content.  Her

husband had in fact told her that Elise L., who was approximately her

contemporary, had just become engaged. The dream was a reaction

to this information. We know already that it is easy in the case of many

dreams to point to a precipitating cause like this from the previous

day, and that the dreamer is often able to trace this for us without any

difficulty. The dreamer in the present case put similar information at

our disposal for other elements of the manifest dream as well. - Where

did the detail come from about one side of the stalls being empty? It

was an allusion to a real event of the previous week. She had planned

to go to a particular play and had therefore bought her tickets early -

so early that she had had to pay a booking fee. When they got to the

theatre it turned out that her anxiety was quite uncalled-for, since one

side of the stalls was almost empty. It would have been early enough

if she had bought the tickets on the actual day of the performance. Her

husband had kept on teasing her for having been in too much of a

hurry. - What was the origin of the 1 florin 50 kreuzers? It arose in

quite another connection, which had nothing to do with the former one

but also alluded to some information from the previous day. Her sister-

in-law had been given a present of 150 florins by her husband and

had been in a great hurry - the silly goose - to rush off to the jewellers’

and exchange the money for a piece of jewellery. - Where did the

‘three’ come from? She could think of nothing in connection with that,

unless we counted the idea that her newly-engaged friend, Elise L.,

was  only  three  months  her  junior,  though  she  herself  had  been  amarried woman for nearly ten years. - And the absurd notion of taking

three tickets for only two people? She had nothing to say to that, and

refused to report any further ideas or information.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3219

 

   But all the same, she had given us so much material in these few

associations that it was possible to guess the latent dream-thoughts

from them. We cannot help being struck by the fact that periods of

time occur at several points in the information she gave us about the

dream, and these provide a common factor between the different parts

of the material. She took the theatre tickets too early, bought them

over-hurriedly so that she had to pay more than was necessary; so too

her sister-in-law had been in a hurry to take her money to the jewellers

and buy some jewellery with it, as though otherwise she would miss it.

If, in addition to the ‘too early’ and ‘in a hurry’ which we have stressed,

we take into account the precipitating cause of the dream-the news

that her friend, though only three months her junior, had nevertheless

got  an  excellent  husband  -  and  the  criticism  of  her  sister-in-law

expressed in the idea that it was absurd of her to be in such a hurry,

then  we  find  ourselves  presented  almost  spontaneously  with  the

following  construction  of  the  latent  dream-thoughts,  for  which  the

manifest dream is a severely distorted substitute:

   ‘Really it was absurd of me to be in such a hurry to get married! I

can see from Elise’s example that I could have got a husband later

too.’  (Being  in  too  great  a  hurry  was  represented  by  her  own

behaviour in buying the tickets and by her sister-in-laws in buying the

jewellery.  Going  to  the  play  appeared  as  a  substitute  forgetting

married.) This would seem to be the main thought. We may perhaps

proceed further, though with less certainty, since the analysis ought

not to have been without the dreamer’s comments at these points:

‘And I could have got one a hundred times better with the money!’

(150 florins is a hundred times more than 1 florin 50.) If we were to put

her dowry in place of the money, it would mean that her husband was

bought  with  her  dowry:  the  jewellery,  and  the  bad  tickets  as  well,would  be  substitutes  for  her  husband.  It  would  be  still  more

satisfactory if the actual element ‘three tickets’ had something to do

with  a  husband.  But  we  have  not  got  so  far  as  that  in  our

understanding of the dream. We have only discovered that the dream

expresses the low value assigned by her to her own husband and her

regret at having married so early.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3220

 

   We shall, I fancy, be more surprised and confused than satisfied by

the outcome of this first dream-interpretation. We have been given too

much in one dose - more than we are yet able to cope with. We can

already see that we shall not exhaust the lessons of this interpretation

of a dream. Let us hasten to single out what we can recognize as

established new discoveries.

   In the first place, it is a remarkable thing that the main emphasis in

the latent thoughts lies on the element of being in too great a hurry;

nothing of the sort is to be found in the manifest dream. Without the

analysis, we should have had no suspicion that that factor plays any

part. It seems, therefore, to be possible for what is in fact the main

thing,  the  centre  of  the  unconscious  thoughts,  to  be  absent  in  the

manifest dream. This means that the impression made by the whole

dream must be fundamentally altered. In the second place, there is an

absurd combination in the dream: three for 1 florin 50. We detected in

the  dream-thoughts  the  assertion  that  ‘it  was  absurd  (to  marry  so

early)'.  Can  it  be  doubted  that  this  thought,  ‘it  was  absurd’,  is

represented  by  the  inclusion  of  an  absurd  element  in  the  manifest

dream? And in the third place, a glance of comparison shows us that

the relation between the manifest and latent elements is no simple

one; it is far from being the case that one manifest element always

takes the place of one latent one. It is rather that there is a group-

relation between the two layers, within which one manifest element

can replace several latent ones or one latent element can be replaced

by several manifest ones.

   As regards the meaning of the dream and the dreamer’s attitude toit, we might point out much that is similarly surprising. She agreed to

the interpretation indeed, but she was astonished at it. She was not

aware that she assigned such a low value to her husband; nor did she

know why she should set such a low value on him. So there is still

much that is unintelligible about it. It really seems to me that we are

not yet equipped for interpreting a dream and that we need first to be

given some further instruction and preparation.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3221

 

                                      LECTURE VIII

 

                              CHILDREN’S DREAMS

 

LADIES  AND  GENTLEMEN,  -  I  am  under  the  impression  that  we  have

advanced too quickly. Let us go back a little. Before we made our last

attempt at overcoming the difficulty of distortion in dreams by the help

of our technique, we were saying that our best plan would be to get

round  the  difficulty  by  keeping  to  dreams  in  which  there  was  no

distortion or only a very little - if such dreams exist. This will once

more  mean  a  divergence  from  the  historical  development  of  our

discoveries; for actually it was only after the technique of interpretation

had  been  consistently  applied  and  distorted  dreams  had  been

completely analysed that the existence of dreams that are free from

distortion came to our notice.

   The dreams we are in search of occur in children. They are short,

clear, coherent, easy to understand and unambiguous; but they are

nevertheless undoubtedly dreams. You must not suppose, however,

that all children’s dreams are of this kind. Dream-distortion sets in very

early in childhood, and dreams dreamt by children of between five and

eight have been reported which bear all the characteristics of later

ones. But if you limit yourselves to ages between the beginning of

observable mental activity and the fourth or fifth year, you will come

upon a number of dreams which possess the characteristics that can

be described as ‘infantile’ and you will find a few of the same kind in

later years of childhood. Indeed, under certain conditions even adultshave dreams which are quite similar to the typically infantile ones.

   From these children’s dreams we can draw conclusions with great

ease and certainty on the essential nature of dreams in general, and

we can hope that those conclusions will prove decisive and universally

valid.

   (1) No analysis, no application of any technique is necessary in

order to understand these dreams. There is no need to question a

child who tells us his dream. One has, however, to add a piece of

information to it from the events of the child’s life. There is invariably

some experience of the previous day which explains the dream to us.

The dream is the reaction of the child’s mental life in his sleep to this

experience of the previous day.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3222

 

      We  will  take  a  few  examples  on  which  to  base  our  further

conclusions.

   (a) A boy of 22 months was told to hand over a basket of cherries to

someone as a birthday present. He was obviously very unwilling to do

it, although he was promised that he should have a few of them for

himself. Next morning he reported having dreamt: ‘Hermann eaten all

the chewwies!’

   (b) A girl of 3¼ years was taken across the lake for the first time. At

the landing-stage she did not want to leave the boat and wept bitterly.

The  crossing  had  been  too  short  for  her.  Next  morning  she

announced: ‘Last night I went on the lake.’ We may safely add that

this crossing had lasted longer.

   (c) A boy of 5¼ years was taken on an excursion up the Echerntal

near Hallstatt. He had been told that Hallstatt was at the foot of the

Dachstein. He had shown great interest in this mountain. There was a

fine view of it from where he was staying at Aussee, and the Simony

Hut on it could be made out through a telescope. The child had often

tried  to  see  it  through  the  telescope  -  with  what  success  was  not

known.  The  excursion  began  in  an  atmosphere  of  cheerful

expectation.  Whenever  a  fresh  mountain  came  into  view  the  boyasked:  ‘Is  that  the  Dachstein?’  and  he  became  more  and  more

depressed  the  more  often  he  was  told  it  was  not.  Finally  he  fell

completely silent and refused to go with the rest of the party up the

short  ascent  to  the  waterfall,  and  it  was  thought  that  he  must  be

overtired. But next morning he said with a radiant face: ‘Last night I

dreamt we  were  at  the  Simony  Hut.’  So  that  had  been  what  he

expected to do on the excursion. He gave no further details except

something he had heard before: ‘You have to climb up steps for six

hours.’

   These three dreams will give us all the information we require.

   (2) As we can see, these children’s dreams are not senseless. They

are intelligible, completely valid mental acts. You will recall what I told

you of the medical view of dreams and of the analogy with unmusical

fingers wandering over the keys of a piano. You cannot fail to observe

how  sharply  these  children’s  dreams  contradict  this  view.  It  would

really  be  too  strange  if children  could  perform  complete  mental

functions  in  their  sleep  while adults  were  content  under  the  same

conditions  with  reactions  which  were  no  more  than  ‘twitchings’.

Moreover,  we  have  every  reason  to  think  that  children’s  sleep  is

sounder and deeper.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3223

 

   (3) These dreams are without any dream-distortion, and therefore

call  for  no  interpretative  activity.  Here  the  manifest  and  the  latent

dream  coincide. Thus  dream-distortion  is  not  part  of  the  essential

nature of dreams. I expect this will be a weight off your minds. But

when we examine these dreams more closely, we shall recognize a

small  piece  of  dream-distortion  even  in  them,  a  certain  distinction

between  the  manifest  content  of  the  dream  and  the  latent  dream-

thoughts.

   (4) A child’s dream is a reaction to an experience of the previous

day, which has left behind it a regret, a longing, a wish that has not

been dealt with. The dream produces a direct, undisguised fulfilment

of that wish. Let us recall now our discussions on the part played bysomatic stimuli from outside and from within as disturbers of sleep and

instigators of dreams. In that connection we came to know some quite

undoubted facts, but by their means we were only able to explain a

small number of dreams. In these children’s dreams, however, there is

nothing that points to the operation of somatic stimuli of that kind; we

could not be mistaken in this, for the dreams are completely intelligible

and easy to grasp. But this does not mean that we need abandon the

stimulus aetiology of dreams. We can only ask how it has happened

that from the first we have forgotten that besides somatic stimuli there

are mental  stimuli  that  disturb  sleep.  We  know,  after  all,  that  it  is

excitations of this kind that are chiefly responsible for disturbing the

sleep  of  an  adult  by  preventing  him  from  establishing  the  mood

required for falling asleep - the withdrawing of interest from the world.

He does not want to interrupt his life but would rather continue his

work on the things he is concerned with, and for that reason he does

not  fall  asleep.  In  the  case  of  children,  therefore,  the  stimulus  that

disturbs sleep is a mental one - the wish that has not been dealt with -

and it is to this that they react with the dream.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3224

 

   (5) This gives us the most direct approach to understanding the

function of dreams. In so far as a dream is a reaction to a psychical

stimulus, it must be equivalent to dealing with the stimulus in such a

way that it is got rid of and that sleep can continue. We do not yet

know  how  this  dealing  with  the  stimulus  by  the  dream  is  made

possible  dynamically,  but  we  see  already  that dreams  are  not

disturbers  of  sleep,  as  they  are  abusively  called,  but guardians  of

sleep which get rid of disturbances of sleep. We think we should have

slept more soundly if there had been no dream, but we are wrong; in

fact, without the help of the dream we should not have slept at all. It is

due to it that we have slept as soundly as we have. It could not avoid

disturbing  us  a  little,  just  as  the  night-watchman  often  cannot  help

making a little noise while he chases away the disturbers of the peace

who seek to waken us with their noise.   (6) What instigates a dream is a wish, and the fulfilment of that wish

is the content of the dream-this is one of the chief characteristics of

dreams. The other, equally constant one, is that a dream does not

simply give expression to a thought, but represents the wish-fulfilled

as a hallucinatory experience. ‘I should like to go on the lake’ is the

wish that instigates the dream. The content of the dream itself is: ‘I am

going on the lake.’  Thus  even  in  these  simple  children’s  dreams  a

difference remains between the latent and the manifest dream, there

is  a  distortion  of  the  latent  dream-thought: the  transformation  of  a

thought into an experience. In the process of interpreting a dream this

alteration  must  first  be  undone.  If  this  turns  out  to  be  the  most

universal  characteristic  of  dreams,  the  fragment  of  dream  which  I

reported to you earlier ‘I saw my brother in a box [Kasten]’ is not to be

translated ‘my brother is restricting himself [schnärkt sich ein]’ but ‘I

should  like  my  brother  to  restrict  himself: my  brother  must  restrict

himself.’ Of the two general characteristics of dreams which I have

here brought forward, the second clearly has more prospect of being

accepted without contradiction than the first. It is only by means of far-

reaching investigations that we shall be able to establish the fact that

what instigates dreams must always be a wish and cannot be a worry

or  an  intention  or  a  reproach;  but  this  will  not  affect  the  other

characteristic  -  that  the  dream  does  not  simply  reproduce  this

stimulus, but removes it, gets rid of it, deals with it, by means of a kind

of experience.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3225

 

   (7) On the basis of these characteristics of dreams, we can return

once more to a comparison between a dream and a parapraxis. In the

latter we distinguished between a disturbing purpose and a disturbed

one, and the parapraxis was a compromise between them. A dream

can be fitted into the same pattern. The disturbed purpose can only be

that of sleeping. We may replace the disturbing one by the psychical

stimulus, or let us say by the wish which presses to be dealt with,

since we have not learnt so far of any other psychical stimulus thatdisturbs sleep. Here the dream, too, is the result of a compromise.

One sleeps, but one nevertheless experiences the removing of a wish;

one satisfies a wish, but at the same time one continues to sleep. Both

purposes are partly achieved and partly abandoned.

      (8)  You  will  recall  that  at  one  point  we  hoped  to  approach  an

understanding of the problems of dreams from the fact that certain

imaginative structures which are very transparent to us are known as

‘day-dreams’.  Now  these  day-dreams  are  in  fact  wish-fulfilments,

fulfilments of ambitions and erotic wishes which are well known to us;

but  they  are thought,  even  though  vividly  imagined,  and  never

experienced  as  hallucinations.  Of  the  two  chief  characteristics  of

dreams, then, the less well assured is preserved here, while the other,

since  it  depends  on  the  state  of  sleep  and  cannot  be  realized  in

waking  life,  is  entirely  absent.  Linguistic  usage,  therefore,  has  a

suspicion  of  the  fact  that  wish-fulfilment  is  a  chief  characteristic  of

dreams. Incidentally, if our experience in dreams is only a modified

kind of imagining made possible by the conditions of the state of sleep

- that is, a ‘nocturnal day-dreaming’ - we can already understand how

the  process  of  constructing  a  dream  can  dispose  of  the  nocturnal

stimulus and bring satisfaction, since day dreaming too is an activity

bound  up  with  satisfaction  and  is  only  practised,  indeed,  on  that

account.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3226

 

   But other usages of language express the same sense. There are

familiar proverbs such as ‘Pigs dream of acorns and geese dream of

maize’ or ‘What do hens dream of? - Of millet.’ So proverbs go even

lower than we do - below children to animals - and assert that the

content of dreams is the satisfaction of a need. Numbers of figures of

speech seem to point in the same direction: ‘lovely as a dream’, ‘I

shouldn’t have dreamt of such a thing’, ‘I haven’t imagined it in my

wildest dreams’. In this, linguistic usage is evidently taking sides. For

there are anxiety’. dreams as well, and dreams with a distressing or

indifferent content; but linguistic usage has been unmoved by them. Itis true that it knows of ‘bad dreams’, but a dream pure and simple is

only the sweet fulfilment of a wish. Nor is there any proverb which

might tell us that pigs or geese dream of being slaughtered.

   It is inconceivable, of course, that the wish-fulfilling characteristic of

dreams should not have been noticed by writers on the subject. On

the contrary, it has often been noticed; but it has not occurred to any

of  them  to  recognize  this  characteristic  as  a  universal  one  and  to

make it into a corner-stone for the explanation of dreams. We can well

imagine what it is that has held them back from it and we shall go into

the matter later on.

   But consider what a large amount of light has been thrown on things

by our examination of children’s dreams, and with scarcely any effort:

the functions of dreams as the guardians of sleep; their origin from two

concurrent  purposes,  one  of  which,  the  desire  for  sleep,  remains

constant, while the other strives to satisfy a psychical stimulus; proof

that  dreams  are  psychical  acts  with  a  sense;  their  two  chief

characteristics - wish-fulfilment and hallucinatory experience. And in

discovering  all  this  we  were  al  most  able  to  forget  that  we  were

engaged  on  psycho-analysis.  Apart  from  its  connection  with

parapraxes, our work has carried no specific mark. Any psychologist,

knowing  nothing  of  the  postulates  of  psycho-analysis,  might  have

been  able  to  give  this  explanation  of  children’s  dreams.  Why  have

they not done so?

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3227

 

 

   If dreams of the infantile kind were the only ones, the problem would

be solved and our task finished, and that without our questioning the

dreamer  or  bringing  in  the  unconscious  or  resorting  to  free

association.  This  is  evidently  where  a  continuation  of  our  task  lies

ahead. We have already found repeatedly that characteristics which

were claimed as being of general validity have turned out to apply only

to  a  particular  sort  and  number  of  dreams.  The  question  for  us  is

therefore  whether  the  general  characteristics  we  inferred  fromchildren’s dreams have a firmer footing, whether they also hold good

of  dreams  which  are  not  transparently  clear  and  whose  manifest

content gives no sign of being connected with a wish left over from the

previous day. It is our view that these other dreams have undergone a

far-reaching distortion and for that reason cannot be judged at a first

glance. We suspect too that to explain this distortion we shall need the

psycho-analytic technique which we have been able to do without in

the understanding we have just gained of children’s dreams.

      In  any  case,  there  is  yet  another  class  of  dreams  which  are

undistorted and, like children’s dreams, can easily be recognized as

wish-fulfilments. These are the dreams which all through life are called

up by imperative bodily needs - hunger, thirst, sexual need - that is,

they are wish-fufilments as reactions to internal somatic stimuli. Thus I

have  a  note  of  a  dream  dreamt  by  a  little  girl  of  nineteen  months,

which consisted of a menu, to which her own name was attached:

‘Anna F., stawbewwies, wild stawbewwies, omblet, pudden!’ This was

a reaction to a day without food, owing to a digestive upset, which had

actually  been  traced  back  to  the  fruit  which  appeared  twice  in  the

dream.  The  little  girl’s  grandmother  -  their  combined  ages  came  to

seventy years - was simultaneously obliged to go without food for a

whole day on account of a disturbance due to a floating kidney. She

dreamt the same night that she had been ‘asked out’ and had been

served with the most appetizing delicacies.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3228

 

   Observations on prisoners who have been compelled to starve, and

on  people  who  have  been  subjected  to  privations  on  travels  and

explorations, teach us that under these conditions the satisfaction of

their needs is regularly dreamt of. Thus Otto Nordenskjöld (1904, 1,

336 f.) writes as follows of the members of his expedition while they

were wintering in the Antarctic: ‘The direction taken by our innermost

thoughts was very clearly shown by our dreams, which were never

more  vivid  or  numerous  than  at  this  time.  Even  those  of  us  who

otherwise  dreamt  but  rarely  had  long  stories  to  tell  in  the  morningwhen  we  exchanged  our  latest  experiences  in  this  world  of  the

imagination.  They  were  all  concerned  with  the  outside  world  which

was now so remote from us, though they were often adapted to our

actual  circumstances.  .  .  .  Eating  and  drinking,  however,  were  the

pivot round which our dreams most often revolved. One of us, who

had a special gift for attending large luncheon parties during the night,

was proud if he was able to report in the morning that he had "got

through a three-course dinner". Another of us dreamt of tobacco, of

whole mountains of tobacco; while a third dreamt of a ship in full sail

coming in across open water. Yet another dream is worth repeating.

The postman brought round the mail and gave a long explanation of

why we had had to wait so long for it: he had delivered it at the wrong

address and had only succeeded in recovering it with great difficulty.

We dreamt, of course, of still more impossible things. But there was a

most striking lack of imaginativeness shown by almost all the dreams I

dreamt  myself  or  heard  described.  It  would  certainly  be  of  great

psychological interest if all these dreams could be recorded. And it will

easily be understood how much we longed for sleep, since it could

offer each one of us everything that he most eagerly desired.’ So too,

according to Du Prel, ‘Mungo Park, when he was almost dying of thirst

on one of his African journeys, dreamt unceasingly of the well-watered

valleys and meadows of his home. Similarly, Baron Trenck, suffering

torments  of  hunger  while  he  was  a  prisoner  in  the  fortress  at

Magdeburg,  dreamt  of  being  surrounded  by  sumptuous  meals;  and

George Back, who took part in Franklin’s first expedition, when he was

almost dying of starvation as a result of his fearful privations, dreamt

constantly and regularly of copious meals.’

      Anyone  who  has  eaten  some  highly-spiced  dish  at  dinner  and

develops a thirst during the night is very likely to dream that he is

drinking. It is of course impossible to get rid of a fairly strong need for

food or drink by means of a dream. One wakes up from a dream of

this sort still feeling thirsty, and has to have a drink of real water. The

effect  produced  by  the  dream  is  in  this  instance  trivial  from  the

practical point of view; but it is none the less clear that it was produced

with  the  aim  of  protecting  one’s  sleep  against  a  stimulus  that  was

urging  one  to  wake  up  and  take  action.  When  the  need  is  of  less

intensity dreams of satisfaction often help one to get over it. 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3229

 

   In the same way, dreams create satisfactions under the influence of

sexual stimuli, but these show peculiarities which deserve mention.

Since  it  is  characteristic  of  the  sexual  instinct  to  be  a  degree  less

dependent  on  its  object  than  hunger  and  thirst,  the  satisfaction  in

dreams of emission can be a real one; and in consequence of certain

difficulties  (which  I  shall  have  to  mention  later)  in  its  relation  to  its

object, it happens with special frequency that the real satisfaction is

nevertheless  attached  to  a  dream-content  which  is  obscure  or

distorted. This characteristic of dreams of emission (as Otto Rank has

pointed out) makes them particularly favourable subjects for the study

of dream-distortion. Furthermore, all adult dreams arising from bodily

needs usually contain, in addition to the satisfaction, other material

which  is  derived  from  purely  psychical  sources  of  stimulation  and

requires interpretation before it can be understood.

   Moreover I do not mean to assert that the wish-fulfilment dreams of

adults  which  are  constructed  on  infantile  lines  only  appear  as

reactions  to  the  imperative  needs  that  I  have  mentioned.  We  are

acquainted as well with short, clear dreams of this sort which, under

the  influence  of  some  dominant  situation,  arise  out  of  what  are

unquestionably  psychical  sources  of  stimulation.  There  are,  for

instance, dreams of impatience: if someone has made preparations

for a journey, for a theatrical performance that is important to him, for

going to a lecture or paying a visit, he may dream of a premature

fulfilment of his expectation; he may, during the night before the event,

see  himself  arrived  at  his  destination,  present  at  the  theatre,  in

conversation with the person he is going to visit. Or there are what are

justly known as dreams of convenience, in which a person who would

like to sleep longer dreams that he is already up and is washing, or is

already at school, whereas he is really still sleeping and would rather

get up in a dream than in reality. The wish to sleep, which we have

recognized as regularly playing a part in the construction of dreams,

comes into the open in these dreams and reveals itself in them as theessential  dream-constructor.  There  is  good  reason  for  ranking  the

need to sleep alongside of the other great bodily needs.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3230

 

   Here is a reproduction of a picture by Schwind in the Schack Gallery

in Munich, which shows how correctly the artist grasped the way in

which  dreams  arise  from  the  dominant  situation.  Its  title  is  ‘The

Prisoner’s Dream’, a dream whose content is bound to be his escape.

It is a happy point that he is to escape through the window, for it is the

stimulus of the light pouring in by the window that is putting an end to

the  prisoner’s  sleep.  The  gnomes  who  are  clambering  up  on  one

another no doubt represent the successive positions which he himself

would have had to take as he climbed up to the level of the window;

and, if I am not mistaken and am not attributing too much deliberation

to the artist, the topmost of the gnomes, who is sawing through the

bars - that is, who is doing what the prisoner would like to do - has the

same features as himself.

                                 THE PRISONERS DREAM

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3231

 

 

   In all dreams other than children’s dreams and those of an infantile

type our path is, as I have said, obstructed by dream distortion. We

cannot tell, to begin with, whether these other dreams too are wish-

fulfilments  as  we  suspect,  we  cannot  guess  from  their  manifest

content  to  what  psychical  stimulus  they  owe  their  origin,  and  we

cannot prove that they too are endeavouring to get rid of that stimulus

or  in  some  way  deal  with  it.  They  must  be  interpreted  -  that  is,

translated  -,  their  distortion  must  be  undone,  and  their  manifestcontent replaced by their latent one, before we can form a judgement

as to whether what we have found in infantile dreams can claim to be

valid for all dreams.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3232

 

                                        LECTURE IX

 

                      THE CENSORSHIP OF DREAMS

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - The study of the dreams of children has taught

us the origin, the essential nature and the function of dreams. Dreams

are things which get rid of (psychical) stimuli disturbing to sleep, by

the method of hallucinatory satisfaction. We have, however, only been

able to explain one group of the dreams of adults - those which we

have  described  as  dreams  of  an  infantile  type.  What  the  facts  are

about the others we cannot yet say, but we do not understand them.

We have arrived at a provisional finding, however, whose importance

we must not under-estimate. Whenever a dream has been completely

intelligible to us, it has turned out to be the hallucinated fulfilment of a

wish.  This  coincidence  cannot  be  a  chance  one  nor  a  matter  of

indifference.

   We have assumed of dreams of another sort, on the basis of various

considerations and on the analogy of our views on parapraxes, that

they are a distorted substitute for an unknown content, and that the

first thing is to trace them back to it. Our immediate task, then, is an

enquiry  which  will  lead  to  an  understanding  of  this distortion  in

dreams.

      Dream-distortion  is  what  makes  a  dream  seem  strange  and

unintelligible  to  us.  We  want  to  know  a  number  of  things  about  it:

firstly, where it comes from - its dynamics -, secondly, what it does

and, lastly, how it does it. We can also say that dream distortion is

carried out by the dream-work; and we want to describe the dream-

work and trace it back to the forces operating in it.

   And now listen to this dream. It was recorded by a lady belonging to

our group,¹ and, as she tells us, was derived from a highly-esteemedand cultivated elderly lady. No analysis was made of the dream; our

informant remarks that for a psycho-analyst it needs no interpreting.

Nor  did  the  dreamer  herself  interpret  it,  but  she  judged  it  and

condemned it as though she understood how to interpret it; for she

said of it: ‘And disgusting, stupid stuff like this was dreamt by a woman

of fifty, who has no other thoughts day and night but worry about her

child!’

 

   ¹ Frau Dr. von Hug-Hellmuth.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3233

 

 

   Here, then, is the dream - which deals with ‘love services’ in war-

time.¹ ‘She went to Garrison Hospital No. I and informed the sentry at

the gate that she must speak to the Chief Medical Officer (mentioning

a  name  that  was  unknown  to  her)  as  she  wanted  to  volunteer  for

service at the hospital. She pronounced the word "service" in such a

way that the N.C.O. at once understood that she meant "love service".

Since she was an elderly lady, after some hesitation he allowed her to

pass.  Instead  of  finding  the  Chief  Medical  Officer,  however,  she

reached a large and gloomy apartment in which a number of officers

and army doctors were standing and sitting round a long table. She

approached a staff surgeon with her request, and he understood her

meaning after she had said only a few words. The actual wording of

her speech in the dream was: "I and many other women and girls in

Vienna are ready to . . ." at this point in the dream her words turned

into a mumble ". . . for the troops - officers and other ranks without

distinction." She could tell from the expressions on the officers’ faces,

partly embarrassed and partly sly, that everyone had understood her

meaning  correctly.  The  lady  went  on:  "I’m  aware  that  our  decision

must sound surprising, but we mean it in bitter earnest. No one asks a

soldier in the field whether he wishes to die or not." There followed an

awkward silence of some minutes. The staff surgeon then put his arm

round her waist and said "Suppose, madam, it actually came to . . .

(mumble)." She drew away from him, thinking to herself: "He’s like allthe rest of them", and replied: "Good gracious, I’m an old woman and I

might never come to that. Besides, there’s one condition that must be

observed:  age  must  be  respected.  It  must  never  happen  that  an

elderly woman . . . (mumble) . . . a mere boy. That would be terrible."

"I  understand  perfectly,"  replied  the  staff  surgeon.  Some  of  the

officers, and among them one who had been a suitor of hers in her

youth, laughed out loud. The lady then asked to be taken to the Chief

Medical Officer, with whom she was acquainted, so that the whole

matter could be thrashed out; but she found, to her consternation, that

she could not recall his name. Nevertheless, the staff surgeon, most

politely and respectfully, showed her the way up to the second floor by

a very narrow, iron, spiral staircase, which led directly from the room

to the upper storeys of the building. As she went up she heard an

officer  say:  "That’s  a  tremendous  decision  to  make  -  no  matter

whether a woman’s young or old! Splendid of her!" Feeling simply that

she was doing her duty, she walked up an interminable staircase.

   ‘The dream was repeated twice in the course of a few weeks, with,

as  the  lady  remarked,  some  quite  unimportant  and  meaningless

modifications.’

 

     ¹ [‘Liebesdienste’  means  in  the  first  instance  ‘services  performed  for  love’,  i.e.

‘unremunerated services’; but it could bear another, less respectable, meaning.]
 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3234

 

 

      From  its  continuous  nature,  the  dream  resembles  a  daytime

phantasy: there are few breaks in it, and some of the details of its

content could have been explained if they had been enquired into, but

that,  as  you  know,  was  not  done.  But  what  is  remarkable  and

interesting  from  our  point  of  view  is  that  the  dream  shows  several

gaps  -  gaps  not  in  the  dreamer’s  memory  of  the  dream  but  in  the

content of the dream itself. At three points the content was, as it were,

extinguished;  the  speeches  in  which  these  gaps  occurred  were

interrupted by a mumble. As no analysis was carried out, we have,

strictly  speaking,  no  right  to  say  anything  about  the  sense  of  thedream.  Nevertheless  there  are  hints  on  which  conclusions  can  be

based (for instance, in the phrase ‘love services’); but above all, the

portions of the speeches immediately preceding the mumbles call for

the gaps to be filled in, and in an unambiguous manner. If we make

the insertions, the content of the phantasy turns out to be that the

dreamer is prepared, by way of fulfilling a patriotic duty, to put herself

at the disposal of the troops, both officers and other ranks, for the

satisfaction  of  their  erotic  needs.  This  is,  of  course,  highly

objectionable,  the  model  of  a  shameless  libidinal  phantasy  -  but  it

does not appear in the dream at all. Precisely at the points at which

the context would call for this admission, the manifest dream-contains

an indistinct mumble: something has been lost or suppressed.

   You will, I hope, think it plausible to suppose that it was precisely the

objectionable nature of these passages that was the motive for their

suppression. Where shall we find a parallel to such an event? You

need not look far in these days. Take up any political newspaper and

you will find that here and there the, text is absent and in its place

nothing except the white paper is to be seen. This, as you know, is the

work  of  the  press  censorship.  In  these  empty  places  there  was

something that displeased the higher censorship authorities and for

that reason it was removed - a pity, you feel, since no doubt it was the

most interesting thing in the paper - the ‘best bit’.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3235

 

      On  other  occasions  the  censorship  has  not  gone  to  work  on  a

passage after it has already been completed. The author has seen in

advance which passages might expect to give rise to objections from

the censorship and has on that account toned them down in advance,

modified them slightly, or has contented himself with approximations

and allusions to what would genuinely have come from his pen. In that

case there are no blank places in the paper, but circumlocutions and

obscurities of expression appearing at certain points will enable you to

guess where regard has been paid to the censorship in advance.

      Well,  we  can  keep  close  to  this  parallel.  It  is  our  view  that  theomitted pieces of the speeches in the dream which were concealed by

a mumble have likewise been sacrificed to a censorship. We speak in

so  many  words  of  a  ‘dream-censorship’,  to  which  some  share  in

dream-distortion is to be attributed. Wherever there are gaps in the

manifest  dream  the  dream-censorship  is  responsible  for  them.  We

should go further, and regard it as a manifestation of the censorship

wherever  a  dream-element  is  remembered  especially  faintly,

indefinitely and doubtfully among other elements that are more clearly

constructed. But it is only rarely that this censorship manifests itself so

undisguisedly - so naïvely, one might say - as in this example of the

dream  of  ‘love  services’.  The  censorship  takes  effect  much  more

frequently according to the second method, by producing softenings,

approximations and allusions instead of the genuine thing.

   I know of no parallel in the operations of the press-censorship to a

third manner of working by the dream-censorship; but I am able to

demonstrate it from precisely the one example of a dream which we

have  analysed  so  far.  You  will  recall  the  dream  of  the  ‘three  bad

theatre-tickets for 1 florin 50'. In the latent thoughts of that dream the

element  ‘over-hurriedly,  too  early’  stood  in  the  foreground.  Thus:  it

was absurd to marry so early - it was also absurd to take the theatre-

tickets so early - it was ridiculous of the sister-in-law to part with her

money in such a hurry to buy jewellery with it. Nothing of this central

element of the dream-thoughts passed over into the manifest dream;

in  it  the  central  position  is  taken  by  the  ‘going  to  the  theatre’  and

‘taking  the  tickets’.  As  a  result  of  this  displacement  of  accent,  this

fresh grouping of the elements of the content, the manifest dream has

become  so  unlike  the  latent  dream-thoughts  that  no-one  would

suspect  the  presence  of  the  latter  behind  the  former.  This

displacement  of  accent  is  one  of  the  chief  instruments  of  dream-

distortion and it is what gives the dream the strangeness on account

of which the dreamer himself is not inclined to recognize it as his own

production.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3236

    Omission, modification, fresh grouping of the material - these, then,

are  the  activities  of  the  dream-censorship  and  the  instruments  of

dream-distortion. The dream-censorship itself is the originator, or one

of the originators, of the dream-distortion which we are now engaged

in  examining.  We  are  in  the  habit  of  combining  the  concepts  of

modification and re-arrangement under the term ‘displacement’.

 

   After these remarks on the activities of the dream-censorship, we

will now turn to its dynamics. I hope you do not take the term too

anthropomorphically, and do not picture the ‘censor of dreams’ as a

severe little manikin or a spirit living in a closet in the brain and there

discharging his office; but I hope too that you do not take the term in

too ‘localizing’ a sense, and do not think of a ‘brain-centre’, from which

a censoring influence of this kind issues, an influence which would be

brought to an end if the ‘centre’ were damaged or removed. For the

time being it is nothing more than a serviceable term for describing a

dynamic  relation.  The  word  does  not  prevent  our  asking  by  what

purposes this influence is exercised and against what purposes it is

directed. And we shall not be surprised to learn that we have come up

against the dream-censorship once already, though perhaps without

recognizing it.

   For that is in fact the case. You will recall that when we began to

make use of our technique of free association we made a surprising

discovery. We became aware that our efforts at proceeding from the

dream-element to the unconscious element for which it is a substitute

were being met by a resistance. This resistance, we said, could be of

different  magnitudes,  sometimes  enormous  and  sometimes  quite

insignificant. In the latter case we need to pass through only a small

number of intermediate links in our work of interpretation; but when

the resistance is large we have to traverse long chains of associations

from the dream-element, we are led far away from it and on our path

we have to overcome all the difficulties which represent themselves as

critical  objections  to  the  ideas  that  occur.  What  we  met  with  as

resistance in our work of interpretation must now be introduced into

the dream-work in the form of the dream-censorship. The resistance

to interpretation is only a putting into effect of the dream-censorship. It

also proves to us that the force of the censorship is not exhausted inbringing about the distortion of dreams and thereafter extinguished,

but that the censorship persists as a permanent institution which has

as  its  aim  the  maintenance  of  the  distortion.  Moreover,  just  as  the

strength of the resistance varies in the interpretation of each element

in a dream, so too the magnitude of the distortion introduced by the

censorship varies for each element in the same dream. If we compare

the manifest and the latent dream, we shall find that some particular

latent elements have been completely eliminated, others modified to a

greater or less extent, while yet others have been carried over into the

manifest  content  of  the  dream  unaltered  or  even  perhaps

strengthened.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3237

 

 

   But we wanted to enquire what are the purposes which exercise the

censorship  and  against  what  purposes  it  is  directed.  Now  this

question, which is fundamental for the understanding of dreams and

perhaps, indeed, of human life, is easy to answer if we look through

the  series  of  dreams  which  have  been  interpreted.  The  purposes

which exercise the censorship are those which are acknowledged by

the dreamer’s waking judgement, those with which he feels himself at

one. You may be sure that if you reject an interpretation of one of your

own dreams which has been correctly carried out, you are doing so for

the  same  motives  for  which  the  dream-censorship  has  been

exercised, the dream-distortion brought about and the interpretation

made  necessary.  Take  the  dream  of  our  fifty-year-old  lady.  She

thought  her  dream  disgusting  without  having  analysed  it,  and  she

would have been still more indignant if Dr. von Hug-Hellmuth had told

her anything of its inevitable interpretation; it was precisely because of

this condemnation by the dreamer that the objectionable passages in

her dream were replaced by a mumble.

   The purposes against which the dream-censorship is directed must

be described in the first instance from the point of view of that agency

itself. If so, one can only say that they are invariably of a reprehensiblenature, repulsive from the ethical, aesthetic and social point of view -

matters of which one does not venture to think at all or thinks only with

disgust.  These  wishes,  which  are  censored  and  given  a  distorted

expression  in  dreams,  are  first  and  foremost  manifestations  of  an

unbridled and ruthless egoism. And, to be sure, the dreamer’s own

ego appears in every dream and plays the chief part in it, even if it

knows quite well how to hide itself so far as the manifest content goes.

This  ‘sacro  egoisimo’  of  dreams  is  certainly  not  unrelated  to  the

attitude we adopt when we sleep, which consists in our withdrawing

our interest from the whole external world.

   The ego, freed from all ethical bonds, also finds itself at one with all

the  demands  of  sexual  desire,  even  those  which  have  long  been

condemned by our aesthetic upbringing and those which contradict all

the  requirements  of  moral  restraint.  The  desire  for  pleasure  -  the

‘libido’, as we call it - chooses its objects without inhibition, and by

preference, indeed, the forbidden ones: not only other men’s wives,

but above all incestuous objects, objects sanctified by the common

agreement of mankind, a man’s mother and sister, a woman’s father

and brother. (The dream of our fifty-year-old lady, too, was incestuous;

her libido was unmistakably directed to her son.) Lusts which we think

of as remote from human nature show themselves strong enough to

provoke  dreams.  Hatred,  too,  rages  without  restraint.  Wishes  for

revenge  and  death  directed  against  those  who  are  nearest  and

dearest  in  waking  life,  against  the  dreamer’s  parents,  brothers  and

sisters, husband or wife, and his own children are nothing unusual.

These censored wishes appear to rise up out of a positive Hell; after

they  have  been  interpreted  when  we  are  awake,  no  censorship  of

them seems to us too severe.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3238

 

      But  you  must  not  blame  the  dream  itself  on  account  of  its  evil

content. Do not forget that it performs the innocent and indeed useful

function of preserving sleep from disturbance. This wickedness is not

part of the essential nature of dreams. Indeed you know too that thereare dreams which can be recognized as the satisfaction of justified

wishes and of pressing bodily needs. These, it is true, have no dream-

distortion; but they have no need of it, for they can fulfil their function

without insulting the ethical and aesthetic purposes of the ego. Bear in

mind, too, that dream-distortion is proportionate to two factors. On the

one  hand  it  becomes  greater  the  worse  the  wish  that  has  to  be

censored; but on the other hand it also becomes greater the more

severe the demands of the censorship at the moment. Thus a strictly

brought-up and prudish young girl, with a relentless censorship, will

distort dream-impulses which we doctors, for instance, would have to

regard as permissible, harmless, libidinal wishes, and on which in ten

years’ time the dreamer herself will make the same judgement.

   Furthermore, we have not got nearly far enough yet to be able to

feel indignant at this result of our work of interpretation. We do not yet,

I think, understand it properly; but our first duty is to defend it against

certain aspersions. There is no difficulty in finding a weak point in it.

Our  dream-interpretations  are  made  on  the  basis  of  the  premisses

which  we  have  already  accepted  -  that  dreams  in  general  have  a

sense,  that  it  is  legitimate  to  carry  across  from  hypnotic  to  normal

sleep the fact of the existence of mental processes which are at the

time  unconscious,  and  that  everything  that  occurs  to  the  mind  is

determined.  If  on  the  basis  of  these  premisses  we  had  arrived  at

plausible  findings  from  dream-interpretation,  we  should  have  been

justified in concluding that the premisses were valid. But how about it

if these findings seem to be as I have pictured them? We should then

be tempted to say: ‘These are impossible, senseless or at the least

most improbable findings; so there was something wrong about the

premisses. Either dreams are not psychical phenomena, or there is

nothing unconscious in the normal state, or our technique has a flaw

in it. Is it not simpler and more satisfactory to suppose this rather than

accept  all  the  abominations  which  we  are  supposed  to  have

discovered on the basis of our premisses?’

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3239

       Yes,  indeed!  Both  simpler  and  more  satisfactory  -  but  not

necessarily on that account more correct. Let us give ourselves time:

the  matter  is  not  yet  ripe  for  judgement.  And  first  we  can  further

strengthen the criticism of our dream-interpretations. The fact that the

findings  from  them  are  so  disagreeable  and  repellent  need  not,

perhaps,  carry  very  great  weight.  A  stronger  argument  is  that  the

dreamers to whom we are led to attribute such wishful purposes by

the interpretation of their dreams reject them most emphatically and

for good reasons. ‘What?’ says one of them, ‘you want to convince me

from this dream that I regret the money I have spent on my sister’s

dowry  and  my  brother’s  education?  But  that  cannot  be  so.  I  work

entirely for my brothers and sisters; I have no other interest in life but

to  fulfil  my  duties  to  them,  which,  as  the  eldest  of  the  family,  I

promised  our  departed  mother  I  would  do.’  Or  a  woman  dreamer

would  say:  ‘You  think  I  wish  my  husband  was  dead?  That  is  a

shocking piece of nonsense! It is not only that we are most happily

married - you would probably not believe me if I said that - but his

death would rob me of everything I possess in the world.’ Or another

man would answer us: ‘You say that I have sensual desires for my

sister? That is ridiculous! She means nothing at all to me. We are on

bad terms with each other and I have not exchanged a word with her

for  years.’  We  might  still  take  it  lightly,  perhaps,  if  these  dreamers

neither confirmed nor denied the purposes we attribute to them; we

might  say  that  these  were  just  things  they  did  not  know  about

themselves. But when they feel in themselves the precise contrary of

the wish we have interpreted to them and when they are able to prove

to us by the lives they lead that they are dominated by this contrary

wish, it must surely take us aback. Has not the time come to throw

aside  the  whole  work  we  have  done  on  dream-interpretation  as

something which its findings have reduced ad absurdum?

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3240

 

      No,  not  even  now.  Even  this  stronger  argument  collapses  if  we

examine it critically. Granted that there are unconscious purposes inmental life, nothing is proved by showing that purposes opposed to

these are dominant in conscious life. Perhaps there is room in the

mind for contrary purposes, for contradictions, to exist side by side.

Possibly,  indeed,  the  dominance  of  one  impulse  is  precisely  a

necessary condition of its contrary being unconscious. We are after all

left,  then,  with  the  first  objections  that  were  raised:  the  findings  of

dream-interpretation are not simple and they are very disagreeable.

We may reply to the first that all your passion for what is simple will

not be able to solve a single one of the problems of dreams. You must

get accustomed here to assuming a complicated state of affairs. And

we may reply to the second that you are plainly wrong to use a liking

or disliking that you may feel as the ground for a scientific judgement.

What difference does it make if the findings of dream-interpretation

seem disagreeable to you or, indeed, embarrassing and repulsive. ‘Ça

n’empêche pas d’exister’¹, as I heard my teacher Charcot say in a

similar case when I was a young doctor. One must be humble and

hold back one’s sympathies and antipathies if one wants to discover

what is real in this world. If a physicist were able to prove to you that in

a short period organic life on this earth would be brought to an end by

freezing,  would  you  venture  to  make  the  same  reply  to  him:  ‘That

cannot be so, the prospect is too disagreeable’? You would, I think, be

silent, until another physicist came and pointed out to the first one an

error in his premisses or calculations. When you reject something that

is  disagreeable  to  you,  what  you  are  doing  is repeating  the

mechanism of constructing dreams rather than understanding it and

surmounting it.

 

   ¹ [‘It doesn’t prevent things from existing.’]

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3241

 

   You will promise now, perhaps, to disregard the repellent character

of the censored dream-wishes and will withdraw upon the argument

that after all it is unlikely that such a large space should be given to

the  evil  in  the  constitution  of  human  beings.  But  do  your  own

experiences justify your saying this? I will not discuss how you mayappear  to  yourselves;  but  have  you  found  so  much  benevolence

among your superiors and competitors, so much chivalry among your

enemies and so little envy in your social surroundings that you feel it

your  duty  to  protest  against  egoistic  evil  having  a  share  in  human

nature? Are you not aware of how uncontrolled and untrustworthy the

average person is in everything to do with sexual life? Or do you not

know that all the transgressions and excesses of which we dream at

night  are  daily  committed  in  real  life  by  waking  men?  what  does

psycho-analysis do here but confirm Plato’s old saying that the good

are those who are content to dream of what the others, the bad, really

do?

   And now turn your eyes away from individuals and consider the

Great War which is still laying Europe waste. Think of the vast amount

of brutality, cruelty and lies which are able to spread over the civilized

world. Do you really believe that a handful of ambitious and deluding

men without conscience could have succeeded in unleashing all these

evil spirits if their millions of followers did not share their guilt? Do you

venture,  in  such  circumstances,  to  break  a  lance  on  behalf  of  the

exclusion of evil from the mental constitution of mankind?

   You will represent to me that I am giving a one-sided judgement on

the War: that it has also brought to light what is finest and noblest in

men, their heroism, their self-sacrifice, their social sense. No doubt;

but  are  you  not  now  showing  yourselves  as  accessories  to  the

injustice  that  has  so  often  been  done  to  psycho-analysis  in

reproaching  it  with  denying  one  thing  because  it  has  asserted

another?  It  is  not  our  intention  to  dispute  the  noble  endeavours  of

human nature, nor have we ever done anything to detract from their

value. On the contrary; I am exhibiting to you not only the evil dream-

wishes which are censored but also the censorship, which suppresses

them and makes them unrecognizable. We lay a stronger emphasis

on  what  is  evil  in  men  only  because  other  people  disavow  it  and

thereby make the human mind, not better, but incomprehensible. If

now we give up this one-sided ethical valuation, we shall undoubtedly

find a more correct formula for the relation between good and evil in

human nature.

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3242

 

   There it is, then. We need not give up the findings of our work on the

interpretation of dreams even though we cannot but regard them as

strange. Perhaps we shall be able to approach an understanding of

them later from another direction. For the time being let us hold fast to

this: dream-distortion is a result of the censorship which is exercised

by recognized purposes of the ego against wishful impulses in any

way  objectionable  that  stir  within  us  at  night-time  during  our  sleep.

Why  this  should  happen  particularly  at  night-time  and  where  these

reprehensible  wishes  come  from  -  these  are  matters  on  which,  no

doubt, much still remains for questioning and research.

 

   But it would be unfair if we neglected at this point to emphasize

sufficiently another outcome of our investigations. The dream-wishes

which seek to disturb us in our sleep are unknown to us and indeed

we only learnt of them through dream-interpretation. They are thus to

be described, in the sense we have discussed, as unconscious for the

time being. But we must reflect that they are unconscious too for more

than the time being. The dreamer also disavows them, as we have

seen in so many instances, after he has come to know them through

the interpretation of his dream. We are then faced once again with the

position we first came across in the ‘hiccoughing’ slip of the tongue,

where the proposer of the toast protested indignantly that neither then

nor at any earlier time had he become conscious of any disrespectful

impulse towards his Chief. Already at the time we felt some doubts

about the weight of an assurance of this kind, and suggested instead

the  hypothesis  that  the  speaker  was  permanently  unaware  of  the

presence of this impulse in him. This situation is repeated now with

every interpretation of a strongly distorted dream and consequently

gains  an  increased  importance  in  its  bearing  on  the  view  we  have

taken. We are now prepared to assume that there are in the mind

processes and purposes of which one knows nothing at all has known

nothing for a long time, and has even perhaps never known anything.

With  this  the  unconscious  acquires  a  new  sense  for  us;  the

characteristic of ‘for the time being’ or ‘temporary’ disappears from itsessential  nature.  It  can  mean permanently  unconscious  and  not

merely ‘latent at the time’. We shall of course have to hear more about

this on some other occasion.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3243

 

                                        LECTURE X

 

                            SYMBOLISM IN DREAMS

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - We have found that the distortion in dreams,

which  interferes  with  our  understanding  of  them,  is  the  result  of  a

censoring activity which is directed against unacceptable, unconscious

wishful  impulses.  We  have  not,  of  course,  maintained  that  the

censorship is the sole factor responsible for the distortion in dreams,

and in fact when we study them further we can discover that other

factors play a part in producing this result. This amounts to our saying

that even if the dream-censorship was out of action we should still not

be in a position to understand dreams, the manifest dream would still

not be identical with the latent dream-thoughts.

   We come upon this other factor which prevents dreams from being

lucid, this new contribution to dream-distortion, by noticing a gap in

our technique. I have already admitted to you that it does sometimes

really  happen  that  nothing  occurs  to  a  person  under  analysis  in

response to particular elements of his dreams. It is true that this does

not  happen  as  often  as  he  asserts;  in  a  great  many  cases,  with

perseverance, an idea is extracted from him. But nevertheless there

remain  cases  in  which  an  association  fails  to  emerge  or,  if  it is

extracted, does not give us what we expected from it. If this happens

during a psycho-analytic treatment, it has a peculiar significance with

which  we  are  not  here  concerned.  But  it  also  happens  in  the

interpretation of normal people’s dreams or in that of our own. If we

convince ourselves that in such case no amount of pressure is of any

use,  we  eventually  discover  that  this  unwished-for  event  regularly

occurs in connection with particular dream-elements, and we begin to

recognize  that  a  fresh  general  principle  is  at  work  where  we  hadbegun  by  thinking  we  were  only  faced  by  an  exceptional  failure  of

technique.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3244

 

   In this way we are tempted to interpret these ‘mute’ dream-elements

ourselves, to set about translating them with our own resources. We

are then forced to recognize that whenever we venture on making a

replacement  of  this  sort  we  arrive  at  a  satisfactory  sense  for  the

dream,  whereas  it  remains  senseless  and  the  chain  of  thought  is

interrupted  so  long  as  we  refrain  from  intervening  in  this  way.  An

accumulation of many similar cases eventually gives the necessary

certainty to what began as a timid experiment.

      I  am  putting  all  this  in  a  rather  schematic  way;  but  that  is

permissible, after all, for didactic purposes, nor has it been falsified,

but merely simplified.

   In this way we obtain constant translations for a number of dream-

elements - just as popular ‘dream-books’ provide them for everything

that appears in dreams. You will not have forgotten, of course, that

when  we  use  our associative  technique  constant  replacements  of

dream-elements never come to light.

   You will object at once that this method of interpretation strikes you

as far more insecure and open to attack than the earlier one by means

of free association. There is, however, something further. For when,

with  experience,  we  have  collected  enough  of  these  constant

renderings, the time comes when we realize that we should in fact

have  been  able  to  deal  with  these  portions  of  dream-interpretation

from our own knowledge, and that they could really be understood

without the dreamer’s associations. How it is that we must necessarily

have known their meaning will become clear in the second half of our

present discussion.

   A constant relation of this kind between a dream-element and its

translation  is  described  by  us  as  a  ‘symbolic’  one,  and  the  dream-

element itself as a ‘symbol’ of the unconscious dream-thought. You

will  recall  that  earlier,  when  we  were  investigating  the  relationsbetween  dream-elements  and  the  ‘genuine’  thing  behind  them,  I

distinguished  three  such  relations  -  those  of  a  part  to  a  whole,  of

allusion and of plastic portrayal. I warned you at the time that there

was a fourth, but I did not name it. This fourth relation is the symbolic

one  which  I  am  now  introducing.  It  gives  occasion  for  some  most

interesting discussions, and I will turn to them before laying before you

the detailed results of our observations of symbolism.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3245

 

 

   Symbolism is perhaps the most remarkable chapter of the theory of

dreams. In the first place, since symbols are stable translations, they

realize to some extent the ideal of the ancient as well as of the popular

interpretation  of  dreams,  from  which,  with  our  technique,  we  had

departed widely. They allow us in certain circumstances to interpret a

dream  without  questioning  the  dreamer,  who  indeed  would  in  any

case have nothing to tell, us about the symbol. If we are acquainted

with the ordinary dream-symbols, and in addition with the dreamer’s

personality, the circumstances in which he lives and the impressions

which  preceded  the  occurrence  of  the  dream,  we  are  often  in  a

position to interpret a dream straightaway - to translate it at sight, as it

were. A piece of virtuosity of this kind flatters the dream-interpreter

and  impresses  the  dreamer;  it  forms  an  agreeable  contrast  to  the

laborious  work  of  questioning  the  dreamer.  But  do  not  allow

yourselves to be led astray by this. It is not our business to perform

acts of virtuosity. Interpretation based on a knowledge of symbols is

not a technique which can replace or compete with the associative

one. It forms a supplement to the latter and yields results which are

only of use when introduced into it. And as regards acquaintance with

the  dreamer’s  psychical  situation,  you  must  bear  in  mind  that  the

dreams of people you know well are not the only ones you have to

analyse,  that  you  are  not  as  a  rule  familiar  with  the  events  of  the

previous day, which were the instigators of the dream, but that the

associations of the person you are analysing will provide you preciselywith a knowledge of what we call the psychical situation.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3246

 

   Moreover it is quite specially remarkable - having regard, too, to

some  considerations  which  we  shall  mention  later  -  that  the  most

violent resistances have been expressed once again to the existence

of  a  symbolic  relation  between  dreams  and  the  unconscious.  Even

people of judgement and reputation, who, apart from this, have gone a

long way in agreeing with psycho-analysis, have at this point withheld

their support. This behaviour is all the stranger in view, first, of the fact

that  symbolism  is  not  peculiar  to  dreams  alone  and  is  not

characteristic of them, and, secondly, that symbolism in dreams is by

no  means  a  discovery  of  psycho-analysis,  however  many  other

surprising discoveries it has made. The philosopher K. A. Scherner

(1861) must be described as the discoverer of dream-symbolism, if its

beginning is to be placed in modern times at all. Psycho-analysis has

confirmed  Scherner’s  findings,  though  it  has  made  material

modifications in them.

      You  will  now  want  to  hear  something  of  the  nature  of  dream

symbolism and to be given some examples of it. I will gladly tell you

what I know, though I must confess that our understanding of it does

not go as far as we should like.

   The essence of this symbolic relation is that it is a comparison,

though not a comparison of any sort. Special limitations seem to be

attached to the comparison, but it is hard to say what these are. Not

everything with which we can compare an object or a process appears

in dreams as a symbol for it. And on the other hand a dream does not

symbolize  every  possible  element  of  the  latent  dream-thoughts  but

only  certain  definite  ones.  So  there  are  restrictions  here  in  both

directions. We must admit, too, that the concept of a symbol cannot at

present be sharply delimited: it shades off into such notions as those

of a replacement or representation, and even approaches that of an

allusion. With a number of symbols the comparison which underlies

them is obvious. But again there are other symbols in regard to whichwe must ask ourselves where we are to look for the common element,

the tertium comparationis,  of  the  supposed  comparison.  On  further

reflection  we  may  afterwards  discover  it  or  it  may  definitely  remain

concealed. It is strange, moreover, that if a symbol is a comparison it

should not be brought to light by an association, and that the dreamer

should not be acquainted with it but should make use of it without

knowing about it: more than that, indeed, that the dreamer feels no

inclination  to  acknowledge  the  comparison  even  after  it  has  been

pointed  out  to  him.  You  see,  then,  that  a  symbolic  relation  is  a

comparison of a quite special kind, of which we do not as yet clearly

grasp  the  basis,  though  perhaps  we  may  later  arrive  at  some

indication of it.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3247

 

 

      The  range  of  things  which  are  given  symbolic  representation  in

dreams is not wide: the human body as a whole, parents, children,

brothers  and  sisters,  birth,  death,  nakedness  -  and  something  else

besides. The one typical - that is regular - representation of the human

figure as a whole is a house, as was recognized by Scherner, who

even wanted to give this symbol a transcendant importance which it

does not possess. It may happen in a dream that one finds oneself

climbing  down  the  façade  of  a  house,  enjoying  it  at  one  moment,

frightened  at  another.  The  houses  with  smooth  walls  are  men,  the

ones  with  projections  and  balconies  that  one  can  hold  on  to  are

women.  One’s  parents  appear  in  dreams  as  the Emperor  and

Empress, the King and Queen or other honoured personages; so here

dreams  are  displaying  much  filial  piety.  They  treat  children  and

brothers  and  sisters  less  tenderly:  these  are  symbolized  as small

animals or vermin. Birth is almost invariably represented by something

which has a connection with water: one either falls into the water or

climbs out of it, one rescues someone from the water or is rescued by

someone - that is to say, the relation is one of mother to child. Dying is

replaced in dreams by departure, by a train journey, being dead byvarious obscure and, as it were, timid hints, nakedness by clothes and

uniforms.  You  see  how  indistinct  the  boundaries  are  here  between

symbolic and allusive representation.

   It is a striking fact that, compared with this scanty enumeration,

there is another field in which the objects and topics are represented

with an extraordinarily rich symbolism. This field is that of sexual life -

the  genitals,  sexual  processes,  sexual  intercourse.  The  very  great

majority of symbols in dreams are sexual symbols. And here a strange

disproportion is revealed. The topics I have mentioned are few, but the

symbols  for  them  are  extremely  numerous,  so  that  each  of  these

things can be expressed by numbers of almost equivalent symbols.

The  out  come,  when  they  are  interpreted,  gives  rise  to  general

objection. For, in contrast to the multiplicity of the representations in

the dream, the interpretations of the symbols are very monotonous,

and this displeases everyone who hears of it; but what is there that we

can do about it?

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3248

 

 

   Since this is the first time I have spoken of the subject-matter of

sexual life in one of these lectures, I owe you some account of the

way in which I propose to treat the topic. Psycho-analysis finds no

occasion for concealments and hints, it does not think it necessary to

be ashamed of dealing with this important material, it believes it is

right and proper to call everything by its correct name, and it hopes

that  this  will  be  the  best  way  of  keeping  irrelevant  thoughts  of  a

disturbing kind at a distance. The fact that these lectures are being

given before a mixed audience of both sexes can make no difference

to this. Just as there can be no science in usum Delphini, there can be

none for schoolgirls; and the ladies among you have made it clear by

their presence in this lecture-room that they wish to be treated on an

equality with men.

 

   The male genitals, then, are represented in dreams in a number ofways that must be called symbolic, where the common element in the

comparison  is  mostly  very  obvious.  To  begin  with,  for  the  male

genitals as a whole the sacred number 3 is of symbolic significance.

The more striking and for both sexes the more interesting component

of the genitals, the male organ, finds symbolic substitutes in the first

instance in things that resemble it in shape - things, accordingly, that

are long and up-standing, such as sticks, umbrellas, posts, trees and

so on; further, in objects which share with the thing they represent the

characteristic of penetrating into the body and injuring - thus, sharp

weapons of every kind, knives, daggers, spears, sabres, but also fire-

arms, rifles, pistols and revolvers (particularly suitable owing to their

shape). In the anxiety dreams of girls, being followed by a man with a

knife or a fire-arm plays a large part. This is perhaps the commonest

instance of dream symbolism and you will now be able to translate it

easily. Nor is there any difficulty in understanding how it is that the

male  organ  can  be  replaced  by  objects  from  which  water  flows  -

water-taps, watering-cans,  or fountains  -  or  again  by  other  objects

which  are  capable  of  being  lengthened,  such  as hanging-lamps,

extensible pencils, etc. A no less obvious aspect of the organ explains

the  fact  that pencils,  pen-holders,  nail-files,  hammers,  and  other

instruments are undoubted male sexual symbols.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3249

 

   The remarkable characteristic of the male organ which enables it to

rise up in defiance of the laws of gravity, one of the phenomena of

erection,  leads  to  its  being  represented  symbolically  by balloons,

flying-machines and most recently by Zeppelin airships. But dreams

can symbolize erection in yet another, far more expressive manner.

They  can  treat  the  sexual  organ  as  the  essence  of  the  dreamer’s

whole  person  and  make  him  himself fly.  Do  not  take  it  to  heart  if

dreams  of  flying,  so  familiar  and  often  so  delightful,  have  to  be

interpreted  as  dreams  of  general  sexual  excitement,  as  erection-

dreams. Among students of psycho-analysis, Paul Federn has placed

this  interpretation  beyond  any  doubt;  but  the  same  conclusion  wasreached  from  his  investigations  by  Mourly  Vold,  who  has  been  so

much praised for his sobriety, who carried out the dream-experiments

I have referred to with artificially arranged positions of the arms and

legs and who was far removed from psycho-analysis and may have

known nothing about it. And do not make an objection out of the fact

that women can have the same flying dreams as men. Remember,

rather, that our dreams aim at being the fulfilments of wishes and that

the  wish  to  be  a  man  is  found  so  frequently,  consciously  or

unconsciously,  in  women.  Nor  will  anyone  with  a  knowledge  of

anatomy be bewildered by the fact that it is possible for women to

realize  this  wish  through  the  same  sensations  as  men.  Women

possess as part of their genitals a small organ similar to the male one;

and  this  small  organ,  the  clitoris,  actually  plays  the  same  part  in

childhood and during the years before sexual intercourse as the large

organ in men.

   Among the less easily understandable male sexual symbols are

certain reptiles and fishes, and above all the famous symbol of the

snake. It is certainly not easy to guess why hats and overcoats or

cloaks are employed in the same way, but their symbolic significance

is quite unquestionable. And finally we can ask ourselves whether the

replacement of the male limb by another limb, the foot or the hand,

should be described as symbolic. We are, I think, compelled to do so

by the context and by counterparts in the case of women.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3250

 

   The female genitals are symbolically represented by all such objects

as share their characteristic of enclosing a hollow space which can

take something into itself: by pits, cavities and hollows, for instance,

by vessels and bottles, by receptacles, boxes, trunks, cases, chests,

pockets, and so on. Ships, too, fall into this category. Some symbols

have more connection with the uterus than with the female genitals:

thus, cupboard,  stoves  and,  more  especially, rooms.  Here  room-

symbolism touches on house-symbolism. Doors and gates, again, are

symbols of the genital orifice. Materials, too, are symbols for women:wood,  papery  and  objects  made  of  them,  like tables  and books.

Among animals, snails and mussels at least are undeniably female

symbols; among parts of the body, the mouth (as a substitute for the

genital  orifice);  among  buildings, churches  and chapels.  Not  every

symbol, as you will observe, is equally intelligible.

   The breasts must be reckoned with the genitals, and these, like the

larger hemispheres of the female body, are represented by apples,

peaches, and fruit in general. The pubic hair of both sexes is depicted

in dreams as woods and bushes. The complicated topography of the

female  genital  parts  makes  one  understand  how  it  is  that  they  are

often represented as landscapes, with rocks, woods and water, while

the imposing mechanism of the male sexual apparatus explains why

all kinds of complicated machinery which is hard to describe serve as

symbols for it.

   Another symbol of the female genitals which deserves mention is a

jewel-case. Jewel  and treasure  are  used  in  dreams  as  well  as  in

waking  life  to  describe  someone  who  is  loved. Sweets  frequently

represent  sexual  enjoyment.  Satisfaction  obtained  from  a  person’s

own  genitals  is  indicated  by  all  kinds  of playing,  including piano-

playing. Symbolic representations par excellence of masturbation are

gliding or sliding and pulling off a branch.(The falling out of a tooth or

the pulling out of a tooth is a particularly notable dream-symbol. Its

first  meaning  is  undoubtedly  castration  as  a  punishment  for

masturbating.  We  come  across  special  representations  of  sexual

intercourse less often than might be expected from what has been

said so far. Rhythmical activities such as dancing, riding and climbing

must be mentioned here, as well as violent experiences such as being

run over; so, too, certain manual crafts, and, of course, threatening

with weapons.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3251

 

   You must not picture the use or the translation of these symbols as

something  quite  simple.  In  the  course  of  them  all  kinds  of  things

happen  which  are  contrary  to  our  expectations.  It  seems  almostincredible,  for  instance,  that  in  these  symbolic  representations  the

differences between the sexes are often not clearly observed. Some

symbols signify genitals in general, irrespective of whether they are

male or female: for instance, a small child, a small son or a small

daughter. Or again, a predominantly male symbol may be used for the

female genitals or vice versa. We cannot understand this till we have

obtained some insight into the development of sexual ideas in human

beings. In some instances the ambiguity of the symbols may only be

an apparent one; and the most marked symbols, such as weapons,

pockets and chests are excluded from this bisexual use.

 

      I  will  now  go  on  to  make  a  survey,  starting  not  from  the  thing

represented  but  from  the  symbol,  of  the  fields  from  which  sexual

symbols are mostly derived, and I will make a few additional remarks,

with special reference to the symbols where the common element in

the comparison is not understood. The hat is an obscure symbol of

this  kind  -  perhaps,  too,  head-coverings  in  general  -  with  a  male

significance as a rule, but also capable of a female one. In the same

way an overcoat or cloak means a man, perhaps not always with a

genital reference; it is open to you to ask why. Neckties, which hang

down  and  are  not  worn  by  women,  are  a  definitely  male  symbol.

Underclothing and linen in general are female. Clothes and uniforms,

as we have already seen, are a substitute for nakedness or bodily

shapes. Shoes  and slippers  are  female  genitals. Tables  and wood

have  already  been  mentioned  as  puzzling  but  certainly  female

symbols. Ladders, steps, and staircases, or, more precisely, walking

on them, are clear symbols of sexual intercourse. On reflection, it will

occur to us that the common element here is the rhythm of walking up

them - perhaps, too, the increasing excitement and breathlessness the

higher one climbs.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3252

 

   We have earlier referred to landscapes as representing the female

genitals. Hills and rocks are symbols of the male organ. Gardens arecommon symbols of the female genitals. Fruit stands, not for children,

but for the breasts. Wild animals mean people in an excited sensual

state,  and  further,  evil  instincts  or  passions. Blossoms  and flowers

indicate women’s genitals, or, in particular, virginity. Do not forget that

blossoms are actually the genitals of plants.

      We  are  acquainted  already  with rooms  as  a  symbol.  The

representation can be carried further, for windows, and doors in and

out of rooms, take over the meaning of orifices in the body. And the

question of the room being open or locked fits in with this symbolism,

and the key that opens it is a decidedly male symbol.

 

      Here,  then,  is  material  used  for  symbolism  in  dreams.  It  is  not

complete and could be carried deeper as well as further. But I fancy it

will seem to you more than enough and may even have exasperated

you. ‘Do I really live in the thick of sexual symbols?’ you may ask. ‘Are

all the objects around me, all the clothes I put on, all the things I pick

up,  all  of  them  sexual  symbols  and  nothing  else?’  There  is  really

ground enough for raising astonished questions, and, as a first one,

we may enquire how we in fact come to know the meaning of these

dream symbols, upon which the dreamer himself gives us insufficient

information or none at all.

   My reply is that we learn it from very different sources from fairy

tales and myths, from buffoonery and jokes, from folklore (that is, from

knowledge about popular manners and customs, sayings and songs)

and from poetic and colloquial linguistic usage. In all these directions

we come upon the same symbolism, and in some of them we can

understand it without further instruction. If we go into these sources in

detail, we shall find so many parallels to dream-symbolism that we

cannot fail to be convinced of our interpretations.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3253

 

   According to Scherner, as we have said, the human body is often

represented  in  dreams  by  the  symbol  of  a  house.  Carrying  this

representation further, we found that windows, doors and gates stoodfor  openings  in  the  body  and  that  façades  of  houses  were  either

smooth or provided with balconies and projections to hold on to. But

the same symbolism is found in our linguistic usage - when we greet

an acquaintance familiarly as an ‘altes haus’ [‘old house’], when we

speak  of  giving  someone  ‘eins  aufs  Dachl’  [a  knock  on  the  head,

literally, ‘one on the roof’], or when we say of someone else that ‘he’s

not quite right in the upper storey’. In anatomy the orifices of the body

are in so many words termed ‘Leibespforten’ [literally, ‘portals of the

body’].

   It seems surprising at first to find one’s parents in dreams as an

imperial or royal couple. But it has its parallel in fairy tales. It begins to

dawn on us that the many fairy tales which begin ‘Once upon a time

there were a King and Queen’ only mean to say that there were once

a  father  and  mother.  In  a  family  the  children  are  jokingly  called

‘princes’ and the eldest ‘crown prince’. The King himself calls himself

the  father  of  his  country.  We  speak  of  small  children  jokingly  as

‘Würmer’ [‘worms’] and speak sympathetically of a child as ‘der areme

Wurm’ [‘the poor worm’].

   Let us go back to house-symbolism. When in a dream we make use

of the projections on houses for catching hold of, we may be reminded

of a common vulgar expression for well developed breasts: ‘She’s got

something to catch hold of.’ There is another popular expression in

such cases: ‘She’s got plenty of wood in front of the house’, which

seems  to  confirm  our  interpretation  of  wood  as  a  female,  maternal

symbol.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3254

 

   And, speaking of wood, it is hard to understand how that material

came to represent what is maternal and female. But here comparative

philology may come to our help. Our German word –‘Holz’ seems to

come from the same root as the Greek ‘ύλη [hule]’, meaning ‘stuff ’

‘raw material’. This seems to be an instance of the not uncommon

event  of  the  general  name  of  a  material  eventually  coming  to  be

reserved for some particular material. Now there is an island in theAtlantic named ‘Madeira’. This name was given to it by the Portuguese

when they discovered it, because at that time it was covered all over

with woods. For in the Portuguese language ‘madeira’ means ‘wood’.

You will notice, however, that ‘madeira’ is only a slightly modified form

of  the  Latin  word  ‘materia’,  which  once  more  means  ‘material’  in

general. But ‘materia’ is derived from ‘mater’, ‘mother’: the material out

of which anything is made is, as it were, a mother to it. This ancient

view of the thing survives, therefore, in the symbolic use of wood for

‘woman’ or ‘mother’.

   Birth is regularly expressed in dreams by some connection with

water: one falls into the water or one comes out of the water - one

gives birth or one is born. We must not forget that this symbol is able

to appeal in two ways to evolutionary truth. Not only are all terrestrial

mammals,  including  man’s  ancestors,  descended  from  aquatic

creatures  (this  is  the  more  remote  of  the  two  facts),  but  every

individual mammal, every human being, spent the first phase of its

existence in water - namely as an embryo in the amniotic fluid in its

mother’s uterus, and came out of that water when it was born. I do not

say that the dreamer knows this; on the other hand, I maintain that he

need not know it. There is something else that the dreamer probably

knows from having been told it in his childhood; and I even maintain of

that too that his knowledge of it contributed nothing to the construction

of the symbol. He was told in his nursery that the stork brings the

babies. But where does it fetch them from? From the pond, or from the

stream - once again, then, from the water. One of my patients after he

had been given this information - he was a little Count at the time -

disappeared for a whole afternoon. He was found at last lying by the

edge of the castle pool, with his little face bending over the surface of

the  water  eagerly  peering  down  to  try  and  see  the  babies  at  the

bottom.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3255

 

   In myths about the birth of heroes - to which Otto Rank has devoted

a comparative study, the oldest being that of King Sargon of Agade(about 2800 B.C.) - a predominant part is played by exposure in the

water and rescue from the water. Rank has perceived that these are

representations of birth, analogous to those that are usual in dreams.

If one rescues someone from the water in a dream, one is making one

self into his mother, or simply into a mother. In myths a person who

rescues a baby from the water is admitting that she is the baby’s true

mother. There is a well-known comic anecdote according to which an

intelligent Jewish boy was asked who the mother of Moses was. He

replied without hesitation: ‘The Princess.’ ‘No’, he was told, ‘she only

took him out of the water.’ ‘That’s what she says’, he replied, and so

proved that he had found the correct interpretation of the myth.

   Departure in dreams means dying. So, too, if a child asks where

someone is who has died and whom he misses, it is common nursery

usage to reply that he has gone on a journey. Once more I should like

to  contradict  the  belief  that  the  dream  symbol  is  derived  from  this

evasion. The dramatist is using the same symbolic connection when

he speaks of the after-life as ‘the undiscovered country from whose

bourn no traveller returns’. Even in ordinary life it is common to speak

of ‘the last journey’. Every one acquainted with ancient rituals is aware

of how seriously (in the religion of Ancient Egypt, for instance) the idea

is  taken  of  a  journey  to  the  land  of  the  dead.  Many  copies  have

survived of The Book of the Dead, which was supplied to the mummy

like a Baedeker to take with him on the journey. Ever since burial-

places have been separated from dwelling-places the dead person’s

last journey has indeed become a reality.

   It is just as little the case that genital symbolism is something that is

found only in dreams. Every one of you has probably at one time or

another  spoken  impolitely  of  a  woman  as  an  ‘alte  Schachtel’  [‘old

box’], perhaps without knowing that you were using a genital symbol.

In  the  New  Testament  we  find  woman  referred  to  as  ‘the  weaker

vessel’. The Hebrew scriptures, written in a style that comes close to

poetry,  are  full  of  sexually  symbolic  expressions,  which  have  not

always been correctly understood and whose exegesis (for instance,

in  the  case  of  the  Song  of  Solomon)  has  led  to  some

misunderstandings. In later Hebrew literature it is very common to find

a woman represented by a house, whose door stands for the sexual

orifice. A man complains, for instance, in a case of lost virginity, thathe has ‘found the door open’. So, too, the symbol of a table for a

woman in these writings. Thus, a woman says of her husband: ‘I laid

the table for him, but he turned it round.’ Lame children are said to

come about through the man’s ‘turning the table round’. I take these

examples from a paper by Dr. L. Levy of Brünn.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3256

 

   The fact that ships, too, in dreams stand for women is made credible

by the etymologists, who tell us that ‘Schiff [ship]’ was originally the

name of an earthenware vessel and is the same word as ‘Schaff’ [a

dialect  word  meaning  ‘tub’].  That  ovens  represent  women  and  the

uterus is confirmed by the Greek legend of Periander of Corinth and

his wife Melissa. The tyrant, according to Herodotus, conjured up the

shade of his wife, whom he had loved passionately but had murdered

out of jealousy, to obtain some information from her. The dead woman

proved  her  identity  by  saying  that  he  (Periander)  had pushed  his

bread into a cold oven’, as a disguise for an event which no one else

could  know  of.  In  the  periodical Anthropophyteia,  edited  by  F.  S.

Krauss, an invaluable source of knowledge of sexual anthropology, we

learn that in a particular part of Germany they say of a woman who

has given birth to a child that ‘her oven has come to pieces’. Kindling

fire, and everything to do with it, is intimately interwoven with sexual

symbolism.  Flame  is  always  a  male  genital,  and  the  fireplace,  the

hearth is its female counterpart.

      If  you  may  have  felt  surprised  at  the  frequency  with  which

landscapes are used in dreams to represent the female genitals, you

can  learn  from  mythology  the  part  played  by Mother  Earth  in  the

concepts and cults of the peoples of antiquity and how their view of

agriculture was determined by this symbolism. You will perhaps be

inclined to trace the fact that in dreams a room represents a woman to

the common usage in our language by which ‘Frau’ is replaced by

‘Frauenzimmer’¹  -  the  human  being  is  replaced  by  the  apartment

allotted to her. Similarly we speak of the ‘Sublime Porte’, meaning the

Sultan and his government. So too the title of the Ancient Egyptianruler, ‘Pharaoh’, means simply ‘Great Courtyard’. (In the Ancient East

the courts between the double gateways of a city were public meeting-

places like the market-places of the classical world.) This derivation,

however, appears to be too superficial. It seems to me more likely that

a room became the symbol of a woman as being the space which

encloses  human  beings.  We  have  already  found  ‘house’  used  in  a

similar sense; and mythology and poetical language enable us to add

‘city’, ‘citadel’, ‘castle’ and ‘fortress’ as further symbols for ‘woman’.

The question could be easily settled from the dreams of people who

do not speak or understand German. During the last few years I have

mainly treated foreign-speaking patients, and I seem to remember that

in their dreams too ‘Zimmer’ [‘room’] meant ‘Frauenzimmer’, though

they  had  no  similar  usage  in  their  languages.  There  are  other

indications  that  the  symbolic  relation  can  go  beyond  the  limits  of

language  -  which,  incidentally  was  asserted  long  ago  by  an  old

investigator  of  dreams,  Schubert.  However,  none  of  my  dreamers

were completely ignorant of German, so the decision must be left to

psycho-analysts who can collect data from unilingual people in other

countries.

 

   ¹ [Literally ‘woman’s apartment’. The word is very often used in German as a slightly

derogatory synonym for ‘woman’.]
 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3257

 

   There is scarcely one of the symbolic representations of the male

genitals  which  does  not  recur  in  joking,  vulgar  or  poetic  usage,

especially in the ancient classical dramatists. But here we meet not

only the symbols which appear in dreams, but others besides - for

instance  tools  employed  in  various  operations,  and  particularly  the

plough. Moreover, the symbolic representation of masculinity leads us

to a very extensive and much disputed region, which, on grounds of

economy,  we  shall  avoid.  I  should  like,  however,  to  devote  a  few

words to one symbol, which, as it were, falls outside this class - the

number  3.  Whether  this  number  owes  its  sacred  character  to  this

symbolic connection remains undecided. But what seems certain isthat a number of tripartite things that occur in nature - the clover leaf,

for instance - owe their use for coats of arms and emblems to this

symbolic meaning. Similarly, the tripartite lily - the so-called fleur-de-lis

- and the remarkable heraldic device of two islands so far apart as

Sicily and the Isle of Man - the triskeles (three bent legs radiating from

a  centre)  -  seem  to  be  stylized  versions  of  the  male  genitals.

Likenesses of the male organ were regarded in antiquity as the most

powerful apotropaic (means of defence) against evil influences, and,

in conformity with this, the lucky charms of our own day can all be

easily  recognized  as  genital  or  sexual  symbols.  Let  us  consider  a

collection of such things - as they are worn, for instance, in the form of

small silver hanging trinkets: a four-leaved clover, a pig, a mushroom,

a horse-shoe, a ladder, a chimney-sweep. The four-leaved clover has

taken the place of the three-leaved one which is really suited to be a

symbol. The pig is an ancient fertility symbol. The mushroom is an

undoubted  penis-symbol:  there  are  mushrooms  which  owe  their

systematic  name  (Phallus  impudicus)  to  their  unmistakable

resemblance to the male organ. The horseshoe copies the outline of

the female genital orifice, while the chimney-sweep, who carries the

ladder,  appears  in  this  company  on  account  of  his  activities,  with

which sexual intercourse is vulgarly compared. (Cf. Anthropophyteia.)

We have made the acquaintance of his ladder in dreams as a sexual

symbol; here German linguistic usage comes to our help and shows

us how the word ‘steigen’ [‘to climb’, or ‘to mount’] is used in what is

par excellence a sexual sense. We say ‘den Frauen nachsteigen [‘to

run’ (literally ‘climb’) ‘after women’], and ‘ein alter Steiger’ [‘an old rake’

(literally  ‘climber’)].  In  French,  in  which  the  word  for  steps  on  a

staircase is ‘marches’, we find a precisely analogous term ‘un vieux

marcheur’. The fact that in many large animals climbing or ‘mounting’

on  the  female  is  a  necessary  preliminary  to  sexual  intercourse

probably fits into this context.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3258

 

   ‘Pulling off a branch’ as a symbolic representation of masturbation isnot merely in harmony with vulgar descriptions of the act but has far-

reaching mythological parallels. But that masturbation, or rather the

punishment for it - castration -, should be represented by the falling

out or pulling out of teeth is especially remarkable, since there is a

counterpart to it in anthropology which can be known to only a very

small  number  of  dreamers.  There  seems  to  me  no  doubt  that  the

circumcision  practised  by  so  many  peoples  is  an  equivalent  and

substitute for castration. And we now learn that certain primitive tribes

in Australia carry out circumcision as a puberty rite (at the festival to

celebrate a boy’s attaining sexual maturity), while other tribes, their

near neighbours, have replaced this act by the knocking out of a tooth.

   Here I bring my account of these specimens to an end. They are

only specimens. We know more on the subject; but you may imagine

how much richer and more interesting a collection like this would be if

it  were  brought  together,  not  by  amateurs  like  us,  but  by  real

professionals in mythology, anthropology, philology and folklore.

 

   A few consequences force themselves on our notice; they cannot be

exhaustive, but they offer us food for reflection.

   In the first place we are faced by the fact that the dreamer has a

symbolic mode of expression at his disposal which he does not know

in waking life and does not recognize. This is as extraordinary as if

you  were  to  discover  that  your  housemaid  understood  Sanskrit,

though you know that she was born in a Bohemian village and never

learnt  it.  It  is  not  easy  to  account  for  this  fact  by  the  help  of  our

psychological  views.  We  can  only  say  that  the  knowledge  of

symbolism  is  unconscious  to  the  dreamer,  that  it  belongs  to  his

unconscious  mental  life.  But  even  with  this  assumption  we  do  not

meet the point. Hitherto it has only been necessary for us to assume

the  existence  of  unconscious  endeavours  -  endeavours,  that  is,  of

which, temporarily or permanently, we know nothing. Now, however, it

is a question of more than this, of unconscious pieces of knowledge,

of connections of thought, of comparisons between different objects

which result in its being possible for one of them to be regularly put in

place of the other. These comparisons are not freshly made on each

occasion; they lie ready to hand and are complete, once and for all.

This is implied by the fact of their agreeing in the case of differentindividuals  -  possibly,  indeed,  agreeing  in  spite  of  differences  of

language.  What  can  be  the  origin  of  these  symbolic  relations?

Linguistic usage covers only a small part of them. The multiplicity of

parallels in other spheres of knowledge are mostly unknown to the

dreamer; we ourselves have been obliged to collect them laboriously.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3259

 

   Secondly, these symbolic relations are not something peculiar to

dreamers  or  to  the  dream-work  through  which  they  come  to

expression. This same symbolism, as we have seen, is employed by

myths and fairy tales, by the people in their sayings and songs, by

colloquial linguistic usage and by the poetic imagination. The field of

symbolism is immensely wide, and dream symbolism is only a small

part  of  it:  indeed,  it  serves  no  useful  purpose  to  attack  the  whole

problem  from  the  direction  of  dreams.  Many  symbols  which  are

commonly used elsewhere appear in dreams very seldom or not at all.

Some dream symbols are not to be found in all other fields but only,

as you have seen, here and there. One gets an impression that what

we are faced with here is an ancient but extinct mode of expression, of

which different pieces have survived indifferent fields, one piece only

here, another only there, a third, perhaps, in slightly modified forms in

several  fields.  And  here  I  recall  the  phantasy  of  an  interesting

psychotic patient, who imagined a ‘basic language’ of which all these

symbolic relations would be residues.

   Thirdly, it must strike you that the symbolism in the other fields I

have mentioned is by no means solely sexual symbolism, whereas in

dreams  symbols  are  used  almost  exclusively  for  the  expression  of

sexual objects and relations. This is not easily explained either. Are

we to suppose that symbols which originally had a sexual significance

later acquired another application and that, furthermore, the toning-

down of representation by symbols into other kinds of representation

may be connected with this? These questions can evidently not be

answered  so  long  as  we  have  considered  dream-symbolism  alone.

We  can  only  hold  firmly  to  the  suspicion  that  there  is  a  speciallyintimate relation between true symbols and sexuality.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3260

 

   In this connection we have been given an important hint during the

last few years. A philologist, Hans Sperber, of Uppsala, who works

independently of psycho-analysis, has put forward the argument that

sexual  needs  have  played  the  biggest  part  in  the  origin  and

development  of  speech.  According  to  him,  the  original  sounds  of

speech  served  for  communication,  and  summoned  the  speaker’s

sexual  partner;  the  further  development  of  linguistic  roots

accompanied the working activities of primal man. These activities, he

goes  on,  were  performed  in  common  and  were  accompanied  by

rhythmically repeated utterances. In this way a sexual interest became

attached to work. Primal man made work acceptable, as it were, by

treating  it  as  an  equivalent  and  substitute  for  sexual  activity.  The

words  enunciated  during  work  in  common  thus  had  two  meanings;

they denoted sexual acts as well as the working activity equated with

them. As time went on, the words became detached from the sexual

meaning and fixed to the work. In later generations the same thing

happened  with  new  words,  which  had  a  sexual  meaning  and  were

applied to new forms of work. In this way a number of verbal roots

would have been formed, all of which were of sexual origin and had

subsequently lost their sexual meaning. If the hypothesis I have here

sketched out is correct, it would give us a possibility of understanding

dream  symbolism.  We  should  understand  why  dreams,  which

preserve  something  of  the  earliest  conditions,  have  such  an

extraordinarily large number of sexual symbols, and why, in general,

weapons and tools always stand for what is male, while materials and

things that are worked upon stand for what is female. The symbolic

relation  would  be  the  residue  of  an  ancient  verbal  identity;  things

which were once called by the same name as the genitals could now

serve as symbols for them in dreams.

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3261

 

   The parallels we have found to dream-symbolism also allow us to

form  an  estimate  of  the  characteristic  of  psycho-analysis  which

enables  it  to  attract  general  interest  in  a  way  in  which  neither

psychology  nor  psychiatry  has  succeeded  in  doing.  In  the  work  of

psycho-analysis  links  are  formed  with  numbers  of  other  mental

sciences, the investigation of which promises results of the greatest

value:  links  with  mythology  and  philology,  with  folklore,  with  social

psychology and the theory of religion. You will not be surprised to hear

that a periodical has grown up on psycho-analytic soil whose sole aim

is to foster these links. This periodical is known as Imago, founded in

1912 and edited by Hanns Sachs and Otto Rank. In all these links the

share of psycho-analysis is in the first instance that of giver and only

to  a  less  extent  that  of  receiver.  It  is  true  that  this  brings  it  an

advantage in the fact that its strange findings become more familiar

when they are met with again in other fields; but on the whole it is

psycho-analysis which provides the technical methods and the points

of view whose application in these other fields should prove fruitful.

The  mental  life  of  human  individuals,  when  subjected  to  psycho-

analytic investigation, offers us the explanations with the help of which

we  are  able  to  solve  a  number  of  riddles  in  the  life  of  human

communities or at least to set them in a true light.

      Incidentally,  I  have  said  nothing  at  all  to  you  yet  as  to  the

circumstances  in  which  we  can  obtain  our  deepest  insight  into  the

hypothetical ‘primal language’ and as to the field in which most of it

has survived. Until you know this you cannot form an opinion of its

whole  significance.  For  this  field  is  that  of  the  neuroses  and  its

material  is  the  symptoms  and  other  manifestations  of  neurotic

patients, for the explanation and treatment of which psycho-analysis

was, indeed, created.

   The fourth of my reflections takes us back to the beginning and

directs us along our prescribed path. I have said that even if there

were no dream-censorship dreams would still not be easily intelligible

to  us,  for  we  should  still  be  faced  with  the  task  of  translating  the

symbolic language of dreams into that of our waking thought. Thussymbolism  is  a  second  and  independent  factor  in  the  distortion  of

dreams, alongside of the dream-censorship. It is plausible to suppose,

however, that the dream-censorship finds it convenient to make use of

symbolism, since it leads towards the same end - the strangeness and

incomprehensibility of dreams.

   It will shortly become clear whether a further study of dreams may

not  bring  us  up  against  yet  another  factor  that  contributes  to  the

distortion  of  dreams.  But  I  should  not  like  to  leave  the  subject  of

dream-symbolism without once more touching on the problem of how

it can meet with such violent resistance in educated people when the

wide diffusion of symbolism in myths, religion, art and language is so

unquestionable. May it not be that what is responsible is once again

its connection with sexuality?

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3262

 

                                        LECTURE XI

 

                                THE DREAM-WORK

 

LADIES  AND  GENTLEMEN,  -  When  you  have  thoroughly  grasped  the

dream-censorship and representation by symbols, you will not yet, it is

true, have completely mastered the distortion in, dreams, but you will

nevertheless be in a position to understand most dreams. In doing so

you  will  make  use  of  both  of  the  two  complementary  techniques:

calling  up  ideas  that  occur  to  the  dreamer  till  you  have  penetrated

from the substitute to the genuine thing and, on the ground of your

own knowledge, replacing the symbols by what they mean. Later on

we shall discuss some uncertainties that arise in this connection.

   We can now take up once more a task that we tried to carry out

previously  with  inadequate  means,  when  we  were  studying  the

relations between the elements of dreams and the genuine things they

stood for. We laid down four main relations of the kind: the relation of

a part to a whole, approximation or allusion, the symbolic relation and

the plastic representation of words. We now propose to undertake the

same thing on a larger scale, by comparing the manifest content of adream as  a  whole  with  the  latent  dream  as  it  is  revealed  by

interpretation.

   I hope you will never again confuse these two things with each

other. If you reach that point, you will probably have gone further in

understanding  dreams  than  most  readers  of  my Interpretation  of

Dreams.  And  let  me  remind  you  once  again  that  the  work  which

transforms the latent dream-into the manifest one is called the dream-

work.  The  work  which  proceeds  in  the  contrary  direction,  which

endeavours to arrive at the latent dream from the manifest one, is our

work of interpretation. This work of interpretation seeks to undo the

dream-work.  The  dreams  of  infantile  type  which  we  recognize  as

obvious  fulfilments  of  wishes  have  nevertheless  experienced  some

amount of dream-work - they have been transformed from a wish into

an actual experience and also, as a rule, from thoughts into visual

images. In their case there is no need for interpretation but only for

undoing  these  two  transformations.  The  additional  dream-work  that

occurs in other dreams is called ‘dream-distortion’, and this has to be

undone by our work of interpretation.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3263

 

   Having compared the interpretations of numerous dreams, I am in a

position to give you a summary description of what the dream-work

does  with  the  material  of  the  latent  dream-thoughts.  I  beg  you,

however, not to try to understand too much. of what I tell you. It will be

a piece of description which should be listened to with quiet attention.

 

   The first achievement of the dream-work is condensation. By that we

understand  the  fact  that  the  manifest  dream  has  a  smaller  content

than  the  latent  one,  and  is  thus  an  abbreviated  translation  of  it.

Condensation can on occasion be absent; as a rule it is present, and

very often it is enormous. It is never changed into the reverse; that is

to say, we never find that the manifest dream is greater in extent or

content than the latent one. Condensation is brought about (1) by the

total  omission  of  certain  latent  elements,  (2)  by  only  a  fragment  ofsome complexes in the latent dream passing over into the manifest

one  and  (3)  by  latent  elements  which  have  something  in  common

being combined and fused into a single unity in the manifest dream.

   If you prefer it, we can reserve the term ‘condensation’ for the last

only  of  these  processes.  Its  results  are  particularly  easy  to

demonstrate.  You  will  have  no  difficulty  in  recalling  instances  from

your own dreams of different people being condensed into a single

one. A composite figure of this kind may look like A perhaps, but may

be dressed like B, may do something that we remember C doing, and

at the same time we may know that he is D. This composite structure

is  of  course  emphasizing  something  that  the  four  people  have  in

common. It is possible, naturally, to make a composite structure out of

things or places in the same way as out of people, provided that the

various  things  and  places  have  in  common  something  which  is

emphasized by the latent dream. The process is like constructing a

new  and  transitory  concept  which  has  this  common  element  as  its

nucleus. The outcome of this superimposing of the separate elements

that have been condensed together is as a rule a blurred and vague

image,  like  what  happens  if  you  take  several  photographs  on  the

same plate.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3264

 

   The production of composite structures like these must be of great

importance to the dream-work, since we can show that, where in the

first instance the common elements necessary for them were missing,

they are deliberately introduced - for instance, through the choice of

the words by which a thought is expressed. We have already come

across  condensations  and  composite  structures  of  this  sort.  They

played a part in the production of some slips of the tongue. You will

recall  the  young  man  who  offered  to  ‘begleitdigen’  [‘begleiten

(accompany)' + ‘beleidigen (insult)’] a lady. Moreover, there are jokes

of which the technique is based on a condensation like this. But apart

from these cases, it may be said that the process is something quite

unusual and strange. It is true that counterparts to the construction ofthese  composite  figures  are  to  be  found  in  some  creations  of  our

imagination,  which  is  ready  to  combine  into  a  unity  components  of

things that do not belong together in our experience - in the centaurs,

for  instance,  and  the  fabulous  beasts  which  appear  in  ancient

mythology or in Böcklin’s pictures. The ‘creative’ imagination, indeed,

is  quite  incapable  of inventing  anything;  it  can  only  combine

components that are strange to one another. But the remarkable thing

about  the  procedure  of  the  dream-work  lies  in  what  follows.  The

material  offered  to  the  dream-work  consists  of  thoughts  -  a  few  of

which may be objectionable and unacceptable, but which are correctly

constructed and expressed. The dream-work puts these thoughts into

another form, and it is a strange and incomprehensible fact that in

making this translation (this rendering, as it were, into another script or

language) these methods of merging or combining are brought into

use.  After  all,  a  translation  normally  endeavours  to  preserve  the

distinctions made in the text and particularly to keep things that are

similar  separate.  The  dream-work,  quite  the  contrary,  tries  to

condense  two  different  thoughts  by  seeking  out  (like  a  joke)  an

ambiguous word in which the two thoughts may come together. We

need not try to understand this feature all at once, but it may become

important for our appreciation of the dream-work.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3265

 

   But although condensation makes dreams obscure, it does not give

one  the  impression  of  being  an  effect  of  the  dream-censorship.  It

seems traceable rather to some mechanical or economic factor, but in

any case the censorship profits by it.

   The achievements of condensation can be quite extraordinary. It is

sometimes possible by its help to combine two quite different latent

trains of thought into one manifest dream, so that one can arrive at

what appears to be a sufficient interpretation of a dream and yet in

doing so can fail to notice a possible ‘over-interpretation’.

   In regard to the connection between the latent and the manifest

dream,  condensation  results  also  in  no  simple  relation  being  leftbetween the elements in the one and the other. A manifest element

may  correspond  simultaneously  to  several  latent  ones,  and,

contrariwise, a latent element may play a part in several manifest ones

- there is, as it were, a criss-cross relationship. In interpreting a dream,

moreover, we find that the associations to a single manifest element

need  not  emerge  in  succession:  we  must  often  wait  till  the  whole

dream has been interpreted.

   Thus the dream-work carries out a very unusual kind of transcription

of  the  dream-thoughts:  it  is  not  a  word-for-word  or  a  sign-for-sign

translation;  nor  is  it  a  selection  made  according  to  fixed  rules  -  as

though one were to reproduce only the consonants in a word and to

leave  out  the  vowels;  nor  is  it  what  might  be  described  as  a

representative selection - one element being invariably chosen to take

the  place  of  several;  it  is  something  different  and  far  more

complicated.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3266

 

 

      The  second  achievement  of  the  dream-work  is displacement.

Fortunately we have made some preliminary examination of this: for

we  know  that  it  is  entirely  the  work  of  the  dream  censorship.  It

manifests itself in two ways: in the first, a latent element is replaced

not by a component part of itself but by something more remote - that

is, by an allusion; and in the second, the psychical accent is shifted

from an important element on to another which is unimportant, so that

the dream appears differently centred and strange.

   Replacing something by an allusion to it is a process familiar in our

waking thought as well, but there is a difference. In waking thought the

allusion must be easily intelligible, and the substitute must be related

in its subject-matter to the genuine thing it stands for. Jokes, too, often

make use of allusion. They drop the precondition of there being an

association  in  subject  matter,  and  replace  it  by  unusual  external

associations such as similarity of sound, verbal ambiguity, and so on.

But they retain the precondition of intelligibility: a joke would lose all itsefficiency if the path back from the allusion to the genuine thing could

not  be  followed  easily.  The  allusions  employed  for  displacement  in

dreams have set themselves free from both of these restrictions. They

are connected with the element they replace by the most external and

remote relations and are therefore unintelligible; and when they are

undone, their interpretation gives the impression of being a bad joke

or of an arbitrary and forced explanation dragged in by the hair of its

head. For the dream-censorship only gains its end if it succeeds in

making  it  impossible  to  find  the  path  back  from  the  allusion  to  the

genuine thing.

   Displacement of accent is unheard-of as a method of expressing

thoughts. We sometimes make use of it in waking thought in order to

produce  a  comic  effect.  I  can  perhaps  call  up  the  impression  it

produces  of  going  astray  if  I  recall  an  anecdote.  There  was  a

blacksmith  in  a  village,  who  had  committed  a  capital  offence.  The

Court decided that the crime must be punished; but as the blacksmith

was the only one in the village and was indispensable, and as on the

other  hand  there  were  three  tailors  living  there,  one  of them  was

hanged instead.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3267

 

 

   The third achievement of the dream-work is psychologically the most

interesting. It consists in transforming thoughts into visual images. Let

us keep it clear that this transformation does not affect everything in

the dream-thoughts; some of them retain their form and appear as

thoughts or knowledge in the manifest dream as well; nor are visual

images  the  only  form  into  which  thoughts  are  transformed.

Nevertheless they comprise the essence of the formation of dreams;

this part of the dream-work is, as we already know, the second most

regular  one,  and  we  have  already  made  the  acquaintance  of  the

‘plastic’  representation  of  words  in  the  case  of  individual  dream-

elements.

   It is clear that this achievement is not an easy one. To form someidea of its difficulties, let us suppose that you have under taken the

task of replacing a political leading article in a news paper by a series

of illustrations. You will thus have been thrown back from alphabetic

writing to picture writing. In so far as the article mentioned people and

concrete  objects  you  will  replace  them  easily  and  perhaps  even

advantageously by pictures; but your difficulties will begin when you

come to the representation of abstract words and of all those parts of

speech which indicate relations between thoughts - such as particles,

conjunctions and so on. In the case of abstract words you will be able

to help yourselves out by means of a variety of devices. For instance,

you will endeavour to give the text of the article a different wording,

which  may  perhaps  sound  less  usual  but  which  will  contain  more

components that are concrete and capable of being represented. You

will then recall that most abstract words are ‘watered-down’ concrete

ones, and you will for that reason hark back as often as possible to the

original concrete meaning of such words. Thus you will be pleased to

find that you can represent the ‘possession’ of an object by a real,

physical sitting down on it.¹  And the dream-work does just the same

thing. In such circumstances you will scarcely be able to expect very

great accuracy from your representation: similarly, you will forgive the

dream-work for replacing an element so hard to put into pictures as,

for example, ‘adultery’ [‘Ehebruch’, literally, ‘breach of marriage’], by

another breach - a broken leg [‘Beinbruch’].² And in this way you will

succeed to some extent in compensating for the clumsiness of the

picture  writing  that  is  supposed  to  take  the  place  of  the  alphabetic

script.

 

   ¹ [The German word ‘besitzen’ (‘to possess’) is more obviously connected with sitting than

its English equivalent (‘sitzen’ = ‘to sit’).]

    ² While  I  am  correcting  the  proofs  of  these  pages  chance  has  put  into  my  hands  a

newspaper cutting which offers an unexpected confirmation of what I have written above:-
 
                                  ‘DIVINE PUNISHMENT
 
                          ‘A Broken Arm for a Broken Marriage.
 
   ‘Frau Alta M., wife of a militiaman, sued Frau Klementine K. for adultery. According to the
statement of claim, Frau K. had carried on an illicit relationship with Karl M., while her own
husband was at the front and was actually making her an allowance of 70 Kronen a month.
Frau K. had already received a considerable amount of money from the plaintiff’s husband,while she and her child had to live in hunger and poverty. Fellow-soldiers of her husband had
informed her that Frau K. had visited taverns with M. and had sat there drinking till far into the
night. On one occasion the defendant had asked the plaintiff’s husband in the presence of
several other soldiers whether he would not get a divorce soon from "his old woman" and set
up with her. Frau K.’s caretaker also reported that she had repeatedly seen the plaintiff’s
husband in the house most incompletely dressed.
   ‘Before a court in the Leopoldstadt Frau K. yesterday denied knowing M., so that there could
be no question of her having intimate relations with him.
   ‘A witness, Albertine M., stated, however, that she had surprised Frau K. kissing the plaintiff
‘s husband.
   ‘At a previous hearing, M., under examination as a witness, had denied having intimate
relations  with  the  defendant.  Yesterday  the  Judge  received  a  letter  in  which  the  witness
withdrew the statements he had made on the earlier occasion and admitted that he had had a
love-affair with Frau K. up till the previous June. He had only denied his relations with the
defendant at the former hearing because she had come to him before the hearing and begged
him on her knees to save her and say nothing. "Today", the witness wrote, "I feel compelled to
make a full confession to the Court, for I have broken my left arm and this seems to me to be
a divine punishment for my wrong-doing."
   ‘The Judge stated that the penal offence had lapsed under the statute of limitations. The
plaintiff then withdrew her claim and the defendant was discharged.’
 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3268

 

      For  representing  the  parts  of  speech  which  indicate  relations

between  thoughts  -  ‘because’,  ‘therefore’,  ‘however’,  etc.  -  you  will

have no similar aids at your disposal; those constituents of the text will

be lost so far as translation into pictures goes. In the same way, the

dream-work  reduces  the  content  of  the  dream-thoughts  to  its  raw

material of objects and activities. You will feel pleased if there is a

possibility of in some way hinting, through the subtler details of the

pictures,  at  certain  relations  not  in  themselves  capable  of  being

represented. And just so does the dream-work succeed in expressing

some of the content of the latent dream-thoughts by peculiarities in the

form of the manifest dream-by its clarity or obscurity, by its division

into several pieces, and so on. The number of part dreams into which

a dream is divided usually corresponds to the number of main topics

or groups of thoughts in the latent dream. A short introductory dream

will  often  stand  in  the  relation  of  a  prelude  to  a  following,  more

detailed,  main  dream  or  may  give  the  motive  for  it;  a  subordinate

clause in the dream-thoughts will be replaced by the interpolation of a

change of scene into the manifest dream, and so on. Thus the form ofdreams  is  far  from  being  without  significance  and  itself  calls  for

interpretation. When several dreams occur during the same night, they

often have the same meaning and indicate that an attempt is being

made to deal more and more efficiently with a stimulus of increasing

insistence. In individual dreams a particularly difficult element may be

represented by several symbols - by ‘doublets’.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3269

 

 

   If we make a series of comparisons between the dream-thoughts

and the manifest dreams which replace them, we shall come upon all

kinds  of  things  for  which  we  are  unprepared:  for  instance,  that

nonsense and absurdity in dreams have their meaning. At this point,

indeed,  the  contrast  between  the  medical  and  the  psycho-analytic

view of dreams reaches a pitch of acuteness not met with elsewhere.

According  to  the  former,  dreams  are  senseless  because  mental

activity in dreams has abandoned all its powers of criticism; according

to our view, on the contrary, dreams become senseless when a piece

of criticism included in the dream-thoughts - a judgement that ‘this is

absurd’ - has to be represented. The dream you are familiar with of

the visit to the theatre (‘three tickets for 1 florin 50') is a good example

of this. The judgement it expressed was: ‘it was absurd to marry so

early.’

   Similarly, in the course of our work of interpretation we learn what it

is that corresponds to the doubts and uncertainties which the dreamer

so often expresses as to whether a particular element occurred in a

dream,  whether  it  was  this  or  whether,  on  the  contrary,  it  was

something  else.  There  is  as  a  rule  nothing  in  the  latent  dream-

thoughts corresponding to these doubts and uncertainties; they are

entirely  due  to  the  activity  of  the  dream-censorship  and  are  to  be

equated with an attempt at elimination which has not quite succeeded.

 

   Among the most surprising findings is the way in which the dream-

work treats contraries that occur in the latent dream. We know alreadythat conformities in the latent material are replaced by condensations

in the manifest dream. Well, contraries are treated in the same way as

conformities, and there is a special preference for expressing them by

the same manifest element. Thus an element in the manifest dream

which is capable of having a contrary may equally well be expressing

either itself or its contrary or both together: only the sense can decide

which translation is to be chosen. This connects with the further fact

that a representation of ‘no’ - or at any rate an unambiguous one - is

not to be found in dreams.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3270

 

   A welcome analogy to this strange behaviour of the dream-work is

provided  for  us  in  the  development  of  language.  Some  philologists

have maintained that in the most ancient languages contraries such

as ‘strong-weak’, ‘light-dark’, ‘big-small’ are expressed by the same

verbal  roots.  (What  we  term  ‘the  antithetical  meaning  of  primal

words.’) Thus in Ancient Egyptian ‘ken’ originally meant ‘strong’ and

‘weak’.  In  speaking,  misunderstanding  from  the  use  of  such

ambivalent words was avoided by differences of intonation and by the

accompanying  gesture,  and  in  writing,  by  the  addition  of  what  is

termed a ‘determinative’ - a picture which is not itself intended to be

spoken. For instance, ‘ken’ meaning ‘strong’ was written with a picture

of a little upright man after the alphabetic signs; when ‘ken’ stood for

‘weak’, what followed was the picture of a man squatting down limply.

It  was  only  later,  by  means  of  slight  modifications  of  the  original

homologous word, that two distinct representations were arrived at of

the  contraries  included  in  it.  Thus  from  ‘ken’  ‘strong-weak’  were

derived ‘ken’  ‘strong’  and  ‘kan’  ‘weak’.  The  remains  of  this  ancient

antithetical  meaning  seem  to  have  been  preserved  not  only  in  the

latest developments of the oldest languages but also in far younger

ones and even in some that are still living. Here is some evidence of

this, derived from K. Abel (1884).

      In  Latin,  words  that  remained  ambivalent  in  this  way  are  ‘altus’

(‘high’ and ‘deep’) and ‘sacer’ (‘sacred’ and ‘accursed’).      As  instances  of  modifications  of  the  same  root  I  may  mention

‘clamare’ (‘to cry’), ‘clam’ (‘softly’, ‘quietly’, ‘secretly’); ‘siccus’ (‘dry’),

‘succus’ (‘juice’). And in German: ‘Stimme’ [‘voice’], ‘stumm’ [‘dumb’].

   If we compare related languages, there are numerous examples. In

English,  ‘to  lock’;  in  German,  ‘Loch’  [‘hole’]  and  ‘Lücke  [‘gap’].  In

English, ‘to cleave’; in German, ‘kleben’ [‘to stick’].

   The English word ‘without’ (which is really ‘with-without’) is used to-

day  for  ‘without’  alone.  ‘With’,  in  addition  to  its  combining  sense,

originally had a removing one; this is still to be seen in the compounds

‘withdraw and ‘withhold’. Similarly with the German ‘wieder’ [‘together

with’ and ‘wider’ ‘against’].

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3271

 

   Another characteristic of the dream-work also has its counterpart in

the development of language. In Ancient Egyptian, as well as in other,

later languages, the order of the sounds in a word can be reversed,

while  keeping  the  same  meaning.  Examples  of  this  in  English  and

German  are:  ‘Topf’  [‘pot’]-’pot’;  ‘boat’-’tub’;  ‘hurry’-’Ruhe’  [‘rest’];

‘Balken’  [‘beam’]-’Kloben’  [‘log’]  and  ‘club’;  ‘wait’-’täuwen’  [‘tarry’].

Similarly  in  Latin  and  German:  ‘capere’-’packen’  [‘to  seize’];

‘ren’-’Niere’ [’kidney’].

   Reversals like this, which occur here with individual words, take

place in various ways in the dream-work. We already know reversal of

meaning, replacement of something by its opposite. Besides this we

find  in  dreams  reversals  of  situation,  of  the  relation  between  two

people - a ‘topsy-turvy’ world. Quite often in dreams it is the hare that

shoots  the  sportsman.  Or  again  we  find  a  reversal  in  the  order  of

events, so that what precedes an event causally comes after it in the

dream - like a theatrical production by a third-rate touring company, in

which the hero falls down dead and the shot that killed him is not fired

in the wings till afterwards. Or there are dreams where the whole order

of the elements is reversed, so that to make sense in interpreting it we

must take the last one first and the first one last. You will remember

too from our study of dream symbolism that going or falling into thewater means the same as coming out of it - that is, giving birth or

being born, and that climbing up a staircase or a ladder is the same

thing  as  coming  down  it.  It  is  not  hard  to  see  the  advantage  that

dream-distortion can derive from this freedom of representation.

   These features of the dream-work may be described as archaic.

They are equally characteristic of ancient systems of expression by

speech and writing and they involve the same difficulties, which we

shall have to discuss again later in a critical sense.

   And now a few more considerations. In the case of the dream-work

it  is  clearly  a  matter  of  transforming  the  latent  thoughts  which  are

expressed in words into sensory images, mostly of a visual sort. Now

our thoughts originally arose from sensory images of that kind: their

first material and their preliminary stages were sense impressions, or,

more properly, mnemic images of such impressions. Only later were

words attached to them and the words in turn linked up into thoughts.

The dream-work thus submits thoughts to a regressive treatment and

undoes  their  development;  and  in  the  course  of  the  regression

everything  has  to  be  dropped  that  had  been  added  as  a  new

acquisition in the course of the development of the mnemic images

into thoughts.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3272

 

 

      Such  then,  it  seems,  is  the  dream-work.  As  compared  with  the

processes we have come to know in it, interest in the manifest dream

must pale into insignificance. But I will devote a few more remarks to

the latter, since it is of it alone that we have immediate knowledge.

   It is natural that we should lose some of our interest in the manifest

dream. It is bound to be a matter of indifference to us whether it is well

put together, or is broken up into a series of disconnected separate

pictures. Even if it has an apparently sensible exterior, we know that

this has only come about through dream-distortion and can have as

little organic relation to the internal content of the dream as the façade

of  an  Italian  church  has  to  its  structure  and  plan.  There  are  otheroccasions  when  this  façade  of  the  dream has  its  meaning,  and

reproduces an important component of the latent dream-thoughts with

little  or  no  distortion.  But  we  cannot  know  this  before  we  have

submitted the dream to interpretation and have been able to form a

judgement from it as to the amount of distortion that has taken place.

A similar doubt arises when two elements in a dream appear to have

been brought into a close relation to each other. This may give us a

valuable hint that we may bring together what corresponds to these

elements in the latent dream as well; but on other occasions we can

convince ourselves that what belongs together in the dream-thoughts

has been torn apart in the dream.

      In  general  one  must  avoid  seeking  to  explain  one  part  of  the

manifest dream by another, as though the dream had been coherently

conceived and was a logically arranged narrative. On the contrary, it is

as a rule like a piece of breccia, composed of various fragments of

rock  held  together  by  a  binding  medium,  so  that  the  designs  that

appear on it do not belong to the original rocks imbedded in it. And

there  is  in  fact  one  part  of  the  dream-work,  known  as  ‘secondary

revision’, whose business it is to make something whole and more or

less coherent out of the first products of the dream-work. In the course

of  this,  the  material  is  arranged  in  what  is  often  a  completely

misleading sense and, where it seems necessary, interpolations are

made in it.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3273

 

   On the other hand, we must not over-estimate the dream-work and

attribute too much to it. The achievements I have enumerated exhaust

its activity; it can do no more than condense, displace, represent in

plastic  form  and  subject  the  whole  to  a  secondary  revision.  What

appear  in  the  dream  as  expressions  of  judgement,  of  criticism,  of

astonishment or of inference - none of these are achievements of the

dream-work  and  they  are  very  rarely  expressions  of  afterthoughts

about  the  dream;  they  are  for  the  most  part  portions  of  the  latent

dream-thoughts which have passed over into the manifest dream witha greater or less amount of modification and adaptation to the context.

Nor can the dream-work compose speeches. With a few assignable

exceptions,  speeches  in  dreams  are  copies  and  combinations  of

speeches which one has heard or spoken one self on the day before

the dream and which have been included in the latent thoughts either

as  material  or  as  the  instigator  of  the  dream.  The  dream-work  is

equally unable to carry out calculations. Such of them as appear in the

manifest  dream  are  mostly  combinations  of  numbers,  sham

calculations which are quite senseless quâ calculations and are once

again only copies of calculations in the latent dream-thoughts. In these

circumstances it is not to be wondered at that the interest which had

turned  to  the  dream-work  soon  tends  to  move  away  from  it  to  the

latent dream-thoughts, which are revealed, distorted to a greater or

less degree, by the manifest dream. But there is no justification for

carrying  this  shift  of  interest  so  far  that,  in  looking  at  the  matter

theoretically,  one  replaces  the  dream  entirely  by  the  latent  dream-

thoughts  and  makes  some  assertion  about  the  former  which  only

applies to the latter. It is strange that the findings of psycho-analysis

could be misused to bring about this confusion. One cannot give the

name of ‘dream’ to anything other than the product of the dream-work

- that is to say, the form into which the latent thoughts have been

transmuted by the dream-work.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3274

 

   The dream-work is a process of quite a singular kind, of which the

like  has  not  yet  become  known  in  mental  life.  Condensations,

displacements, regressive transformations of thoughts into images -

such things are novelties whose discovery has already richly rewarded

the labours of psycho-analysis. And you can see once more, from the

parallels  to  the  dream-work,  the  connections  which  have  been

revealed between psycho-analytic studies and other fields - especially

those concerned in the development of speech and thought. You will

only  be  able  to  form  an  idea  of  the  further  significance  of  these

discoveries when you learn that the mechanism of dream-constructionis the model of the manner in which neurotic symptoms arise.

   I am also aware that we are not yet able to make a survey of the

whole of the new acquisitions which these studies have brought to

psychology. I will only point out the fresh proofs they have provided of

the existence of unconscious mental acts - for this is what the latent

dream-thoughts are - and what an unimaginably broad access to a

knowledge  of  unconscious  mental  life  we  are  promised  by  the

interpretation of dreams.

   But now the time has no doubt come for me to demonstrate to you

from  a  variety  of  small  examples  of  dreams  what  I  have  been

preparing you for in the course of these remarks.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3275

 

                                        LECTURE XII

 

                SOME ANALYSES OF SAMPLE DREAMS

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - You must not be disappointed if I once again

put before you fragments of dream-interpretations instead of inviting

you  to  take  part  in  the  interpretation  of  a  nice  big  dream.  You  will

argue that after so many preparations you have a right to it, and you

will express your conviction that after so many thousands of dreams

have been successfully interpreted, it should have been possible long

since  to  have  brought  together  a  collection  of  excellent  sample

dreams  on  which  all  our  assertions  about  the  dream-work  and  the

dream-thoughts  could  be  demonstrated.  Just  so.  But  the  difficulties

that stand in the way of the fulfilment of your wish are too many.

      In  the  first  place  I  must  admit  that  no  one  carries  on  the

interpretation of dreams as his main occupation. How does it come

about,  then,  that  people  do  interpret  them?  Occasionally,  with  no

particular end in view, one may interest oneself in the dreams of an

acquaintance, or one may work through one’s own dreams for a time

in order to train oneself in psycho-analytic work; but for the most part

what one has to deal with are the dreams of neurotic patients who are

under  psycho-analytic  treatment.  These  latter  dreams  are  excellentmaterial and are in no way inferior to those of healthy people; but the

technique  of  the  treatment  necessitates  our  subordinating  dream-

interpretation  to  therapeutic  aims,  and  we  have  to  allow  a  whole

number of dreams to drop after we have extracted something from

them  that  is  of  service  to  the  treatment.  Some  dreams  that  occur

during  treatment  entirely  escape  any  full  analysis:  since  they  have

arisen  out  of  the  great  mass  of  psychical  material  which  is  still

unknown  to  us,  it  is  impossible  to  understand  them  before  the

treatment is finished. If I were to report dreams of this kind, it would

oblige me to uncover all the secrets of a neurosis as well; and that will

not do for us, since it is precisely to prepare us for the study of the

neuroses that we have attacked the problem of dreams.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3276

 

   You, however, would be glad to dispense with this material and

would  prefer  to  be  given  an  explanation  of  the  dreams  of  healthy

people or of your own dreams. But this cannot be done, on account of

their content. It is impossible to submit either oneself or anyone else

whose confidence one enjoys to the ruthless exposure that would be

involved in a detailed analysis of his dreams, which, as you already

know, are concerned with the most intimate part of one’s personality.

But there is another difficulty in the way apart from that of providing

the material. You are aware that dreams present an alien appearance

to  the  dreamer  himself,  and  much  more  so  to  anyone  who  is

unacquainted with him personally. Our literature is not poor in good

and detailed dream-analyses. I myself have published a few within the

framework  of  case  histories.  Perhaps  the  best  example  of  the

interpretation of a dream is the one reported by Otto Rank consisting

of two interrelated dreams dreamt by a young girl, which occupy about

two pages of print: but their analysis extends to seventy-six pages. So

I should need something like a whole term to conduct you through a

piece of work of the sort. If one takes up any comparatively long and

much distorted dream, one has to give so many explanations of it, to

bring up so much material in the way of associations and memories, tofollow  up  so  many  by-paths,  that  a  lecture  about  it  would  be  quite

confusing and unsatisfactory. I must therefore ask you to be content

with what can be had more easily - an account of small pieces of the

dreams of neurotic patients, in which it is possible to recognize this or

that  point  in  isolation.  What  is  easiest  to  demonstrate  are  dream-

symbols  and,  after  them,  some  characteristics  of  the  regressive

representation  in  dreams.  In  the  case  of  each  of  the  dreams  that

follow, I will indicate why it is that I think it worth reporting.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3277

 

   (1) This dream consisted only of two short pictures: His uncle was

smoking  a  cigarette  although  it  was  Saturday.  -  A  woman  was

caressing and fondling him as though he were her child.

   In regard to the first picture the dreamer (a Jew) remarked that his

uncle  was  a  pious  man  who  never  had  done  and  never  could  do

anything sinful like that. In regard to the woman in the second picture

nothing  occurred  to  him  except  his  mother.  These  two  pictures  or

thoughts must obviously be seen in connection with each other. But

how? Since he expressly disputed the reality of his uncle’s action, it is

plausible to insert an ‘if’: ‘If my uncle, that pious man, were to smoke a

cigarette on a Saturday, then I might let myself, too, be cuddled by my

mother.’  This  clearly  means  that  cuddling  with  his  mother  was

something impermissible, like smoking on a Saturday to a pious Jew. -

You will recall that I told you that in the course of the dream-work all

the relations between the dream-thoughts drop out; these are resolved

into their raw material and it is the task of the interpretation to re-insert

the omitted relations.

 

   (2) As a result of my publications on dreams I have in a sense

become a public consultant on matters relating to them, and for many

years I have been receiving communications from the most various

sources  in  which  dreams  are  reported  to  me  or  submitted  to  my

judgement.  I  am  of  course  grateful  to  anyone  who  adds  enough

material to the dream to make an interpretation possible or who givesan interpretation himself. The following dream, dreamt by a medical

student  in  Munich  and  dating  from  the  year  1910,  falls  into  this

category. I am bringing it up in order to show you how impossible it is

in general to understand a dream till the dreamer has given us his

information about it. For I suspect that at bottom you consider that the

ideal method of dream-interpretation is by filling in the meaning of the

symbols and that you would like to discard the technique of obtaining

associations to the dream; and I am anxious to disabuse you of this

damaging mistake.

   ‘July 13, 1910 - Towards morning I had this dream: I was bicycling

down  the  street  in  Tübingen  when  a  brown  dachshund  rushed  up

behind me and seized me by the heel. After a little I got off, sat down

on a step, and began to hit at the beast, which had bitten firm hold of

me. (I had no disagreeable feelings either from the bite or from the

scene as a whole.) Some elderly ladies were sitting opposite me and

grinning at me. Then I woke up and, as has often happened before, at

the moment of transition to waking, the whole dream was clear to me.’

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3278

 

   Symbols are of little help here. But the dreamer reported: ‘I have

recently fallen in love with a girl, but only from seeing her in the street,

and  I  have  had  no  means  of  getting  in  contact  with  her.  The

dachshund  might  have  been  the  pleasantest  way  of  doing  so,

especially  as  I  am  a  great  animal-lover  and  I  liked  this  same

characteristic in the girl.’ He added that he had repeatedly intervened

in furious dog-fights with great skill and often to the astonishment of

the onlookers. We learn then that the girl he was attracted by was

always to be seen in the company of this particular dog. As far as the

manifest  dream  was  concerned,  however,  the  girl  was  omitted  and

only  the  dog  associated  with  her  was  left.  The  elderly  ladies  who

grinned at him may perhaps have taken the girl’s place. His further

remarks threw no adequate light on this point. The fact that he was

bicycling  in  the  dream  is  a  direct  repetition  of  the  remembered

situation. He never met the girl with the dog except when he was onhis bicycle.

 

      (3)  When  anyone  has  lost  someone  near  and  dear  to  him,  he

produces dreams of a special sort for some time afterwards, in which

knowledge of the death arrives at the strangest compromises with the

need to bring the dead person to life again. In some of these dreams

the  person  who  has  died  is  dead  and  at  the  same  time  still  alive,

because he does not know he is dead; only if he did know would he

die completely. In others, he is half dead and half alive, and each of

these states is indicated in a particular way. We must not describe

these dreams as simply nonsensical; for being brought to life again is

no more inconceivable in dreams than it is, for instance, in fairy tales,

in which it occurs as a very usual event. So far as I have been able to

analyse  such  dreams,  it  has  turned  out  that  they  are  capable  of  a

reasonable solution, but that the pious wish to bring the dead person

back to life has been able to operate by the strangest means. I will

now  put  before  you  a  dream  of  this  kind  which  sounds  sufficiently

queer and senseless and the analysis of which will show you much for

which  our  theoretical  discussions  will  have  prepared  you.  It  is  the

dream of a man who had lost his father several years before:

   His father was dead but had been exhumed and looked bad. He had

been  living  since  then  and  the  dreamer  was  doing  all  he  could  to

prevent  him  noticing  it.  (The  dream  then  went  on  to  other  and

apparently very remote matters.)

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3279

 

   His father was dead; we know that. His having been exhumed did

not  correspond  to  reality;  and  there  was  no  question  of  reality  in

anything  that  followed.  But  the  dreamer  reported  that  after  he  had

come away from his father’s funeral, one of his teeth began to ache.

He  wanted  to  treat  the  tooth  according  to  the  precept  of  Jewish

doctrine: ‘If thy tooth offend thee, pluck it out!’ And he went off to the

dentist. But the dentist said: ‘One doesn’t pluck out a tooth. One must

have patience with it. I’ll put something into it to kill it; come back inthree days and I’ll take it out.’

   ‘That "take out",’ said the dreamer suddenly, ‘that’s the exhuming!’

      Was  the  dreamer  right  about  this?  It  only  fits  more  or  less,  not

completely; for the tooth was not taken out, but only something in it

that had died. But inaccuracies of this kind can, on the evidence of

other  experiences,  well  be  attributed  to  the  dream-work.  If  so,  the

dreamer had condensed his dead father and the tooth that had been

killed but retained; he had fused them into a unity. No wonder, then,

that something senseless emerged in the manifest dream, for, after

all, not everything that was said about the tooth could fit his father.

Where could there possibly be a tertium comparationis between the

tooth and his father, to make the condensation possible?

   But no doubt he must have been right, for he went on to say that he

knew that if one dreams of a tooth falling out it means that one is

going to lose a member of one’s family.

   This popular interpretation, as we know, is incorrect or at least is

correct only in a scurrilous sense. We shall be all the more surprised

to find the topic thus touched upon re-appearing behind other portions

of the dream’s content.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3280

 

   The dreamer now began, without any further encouragement, to talk

about his father’s illness and death as well as about his own relations

with  him.  His  father  was  ill  for  a  long  time,  and  the  nursing  and

treatment had cost him (the son) a lot of money. Yet it was never too

much, he was never impatient, he never wished that after all it might

soon come to an end. He was proud of his truly Jewish filial piety

towards his father, of his strict obedience to Jewish Law. And here we

are struck by a contradiction in the thoughts belonging to the dream.

He had identified the tooth and his father. He wanted to proceed with

the tooth in accordance with Jewish Law, which commanded him to

pluck it out if it caused him pain or offence. He also wanted to proceed

with his father, too, in accordance with the precepts of the Law, but in

this case it commanded him to spare no expense or trouble, to takeevery burden on himself and to allow no hostile intention to emerge

against  the  object  that  was  causing  him  pain.  Would  not  the  two

attitudes  have  agreed  much  more  convincingly  if  he  had  really

developed feelings towards his sick father similar to those towards his

sick tooth - that is, if he had wished that an early death would put an

end to his unnecessary, painful and costly existence?

   I do not doubt that this was really his attitude towards his father

during the tedious illness and that his boastful assurances of his filial

piety were meant to distract him from these memories. Under such

conditions the death-wish against a father is apt to become active and

to hide itself under the mask of such sympathetic reflections as that ‘it

would be a happy release for him’. But please observe that here we

have passed a barrier in the latent dream-thoughts themselves. No

doubt the first portion of them was unconscious only temporarily - that

is,  during  the  construction  of  the  dream;  but  his  hostile  impulses

against  his  father  must  have  been  permanently  unconscious.  They

may  have  originated  from  scenes  in  his  childhood  and  have

occasionally slipped into consciousness, timidly and disguised, during

his father’s illness. We can assert this with greater certainty of other

latent  thoughts  which  have  made  unmistakable  contributions  to  the

content  of  the  dream.  Nothing,  indeed,  is  to  be  discovered  in  the

dream of his hostile impulses towards his father. But if we look for the

roots of such hostility to a father in childhood, we shall recall that fear

of a father is set up because, in the very earliest years, he opposes a

boy’s sexual activities, just as he is bound to do once more from social

motives after the age of puberty. This relation to his father applies to

our dreamer as well: his love for him included a fair admixture of awe

and anxiety, which had their source in his having been early deterred

by threats from sexual activity.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3281

 

   The remaining phrases in the manifest dream can be explained now

in relation to the masturbation complex. ‘He looked bad’ is indeed an

allusion to another remark of the dentist’s to the effect that it looks badif one has lost a tooth in that part of the mouth; but it relates at the

same  time  to  the  ‘looking  bad’  by  which  a  young  man  at  puberty

betrays, or is afraid he betrays, his excessive sexual activity. It was

not without relief to his own feelings that in the manifest content the

dreamer displaced the ‘looking bad’ from himself on to his father - one

of the kinds of reversal by the dream-work which is familiar to you. ‘He

had been living since then’ coincides with the wish to bring back to life

as well as with the dentist’s promise that the tooth would survive. The

sentence  ‘the  dreamer  was  doing  all  he  could to  prevent  him  (his

father) noticing it’ is very subtly devised to mislead us into thinking that

it  should  be  completed  by  the  words  ‘that  he  was  dead’.  The  only

completion, however, that makes sense comes once more from the

masturbation  complex;  in  that  connection  it  is  self-evident  that  the

young man did all he could to conceal his sexual life from his father.

And finally, remember that we must always interpret what are called

‘dreams with a dental stimulus’ as relating to masturbation and the

dreaded punishment for it.

   You can see now how this incomprehensible dream came about. It

was done by producing a strange and misleading condensation, by

disregarding  all  the  thoughts  that  were  in  the  centre  of  the  latent

thought-process  and  by  creating  ambiguous  substitutes  for  the

deepest and chronologically most remote of those thoughts.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3282

 

   (4) We have already tried repeatedly to come to understand the

matter-of-fact  and  commonplace  dreams  which  have  nothing

senseless or strange about them but which raise the question of why

one should dream about such indifferent stuff. I will therefore offer you

another example of this kind - three interconnected dreams dreamt by

a young lady in one night.

   (a) She was walking across the hall of her house and struck her

head against a low-hanging chandelier and drew blood.

   No reminiscence, nothing that had really happened. The information

she produced in response to it led in quite other directions. ‘You knowhow  badly  my  hair’s  falling  out.  "My  child,"  my  mother  said  to  me

yesterday, "if this goes any further you’ll have a head as smooth as a

bottom."' So here the head stands for the other end of the body. We

can  understand  the  chandelier,  without  any  help,  as  a  symbol:  all

objects capable of being lengthened are symbols of the male organ. It

was therefore a matter of bleeding at the lower end of the body, which

had arisen from contact with a penis. This might still be ambiguous.

Her further associations showed that what was in question concerned

a belief that menstrual bleeding arises from sexual intercourse with a

man - a piece of sexual theory which counts many faithful believers

among immature girls.

   (b) She saw a deep pit in the vineyard, which she knew had been

caused by a tree being torn out. She added a remark that the tree was

missing. She meant that she had not seen the tree in her dream; but

the same wording served to express another thought which made the

symbolic interpretation quite certain. The dream referred to another

piece of infantile sexual theory - to the belief that girls originally had

the same genitals as boys and that their later shape was the result of

castration (the tearing out of a tree).

   (c) She was standing in front of the drawer of her writing-table which

she was so familiar with that she could tell at once if anyone had been

into it.  Like  all  drawers,  chests  and  cases,  the  writing-table  drawer

stood  for  the  female  genitals.  She  knew  that  indications  of  sexual

intercourse (and, as she thought, of touching) could be observed on

the genitals and had long feared such a discovery. In all these three

dreams, I think, the accent is to be placed on knowledge. She was

recalling the period of her sexual researches when she was a child, of

whose outcome she had been quite proud at the time.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3283

 

   (5) Here is a little more symbolism. But this time I must start with a

short  preamble  on  the  psychical  situation.  A  gentleman  who  had

passed  a  night  in  intercourse  with  a  lady  described  her  as  one  of

those  motherly  characters  in  whom  the  wish  for  a  child  breaksirresistibly through in intercourse with a man. The circumstances of

this  meeting,  however,  called  for  a  precaution  which  prevented  the

fertilizing  semen  from  reaching  the  woman’s  uterus.  On  waking  up

after this night the woman reported the following dream:

   An officer in a red cap was running after her in the street. She fled

from him, and ran up the stairs with him still after her. Breathless, she

reached  her  flat,  slammed  the  door  behind  her  and  locked  it.  He

stayed outside, and when she looked through the peep-hole, he was

sitting on a bench outside and weeping.

   You will no doubt recognize the pursuit by the officer in the red cap

and the breathless climbing upstairs as representing the sexual act.

The fact that it was the dreamer who locked herself up against her

pursuer will serve as an example of the reversals that are used so

commonly  in  dreams,  for  it  was  the  man  who  had  avoided  the

consummation  of  the  sexual  act.  In  the  same  way,  her  grief  was

displaced on to the man, for it was he who wept in the dream - and

this was simultaneously a representation of the emission of semen.

   I feel sure that you have heard some time or other that it is asserted

by psycho-analysis that every dream has a sexual meaning. Well, you

yourselves are in a position to form a judgement of the incorrectness

of this reproach. You have become acquainted with wishful dreams

dealing with the satisfaction of the most obvious needs - hunger and

thirst and the longing for freedom - with dreams of convenience and of

impatience, and also with purely covetous and egoistic dreams. But at

the  same  time  you  should  bear  in  mind,  as  one  of  the  results  of

psycho-analytic  research,  that  greatly  distorted  dreams  give

expression mainly (though, again, not exclusively) to sexual wishes.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3284

 

   (6) I have a particular reason for piling up instances of the use of

symbols  in  dreams.  At  our  first  meeting  I  lamented  the  difficulty  of

providing  demonstrations  and  so  of  carrying  conviction  in  giving

instruction  in  psycho-analysis.  And  I  have  no  doubt  that  you  have

since  come  to  agree  with  me.  But  the  different  theses  of  psycho-analysis  are  so  intimately  connected  that  conviction  can  easily  be

carried over from a single point to a larger part of the whole. It might

be said of psycho-analysis that if anyone holds out a little finger to it it

quickly grasps his whole hand. No one, even, who has accepted the

explanation of parapraxes can logically withhold his belief in all the

rest.  A  second,  equally  accessible  position  is  offered  by  dream-

symbolism.  Here  is  the  dream  of  an  uneducated  woman  whose

husband  was  a  policeman  and  who  had  certainly  never  heard

anything about dream-symbolism or psycho-analysis. Then judge for

yourselves whether its explanation by the help of sexual symbols can

be called arbitrary and forced:

   ‘. . . Then someone broke into the house and she was frightened

and called out for a policeman. But he had gone into a church, to

which  a  number  of  steps  led  up,  accompanied  amicably  by  two

tramps. Behind the church there was a hill and above it a thick wood.

The policeman was dressed in a helmet, gorget and cloak. He had a

brown  beard.  The  two  tramps,  who  went  along  peaceably  with  the

policeman, had sack-like aprons tied round their middles. In front of

the church a path led up to the hill; on both sides of it there grew grass

and brushwood, which became thicker and thicker and, at the top of

the hill, turned into a regular wood.’

   You will have no trouble in recognizing the symbols used. The male

genitals are represented by a triad of figures, and the female ones by

a landscape with a chapel, hill and wood. Once again you find steps

as a symbol for the sexual act. What is called a hill in the dream is

also called one in anatomy - the Mons Veneris.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3285

 

      (7)  And  here  is  yet  another  dream  that  must  be  solved  by  the

insertion of symbols. It is notable and convincing from the fact that the

dreamer himself translated all the symbols, though he had no sort of

previous  theoretical  knowledge  of  dream-interpretation.  Such  an

attitude  is  quite  unusual  and  its  determinants  are  not  precisely

understood:   ‘He  was  going  for  a  walk  with  his  father  in  a  place  which  must

certainly have been the Prater, since he saw the Rotunda, with a small

annex in front of it to which a captive balloon was attached, though it

looked rather limp. His father asked him what all this was for; he was

surprised at his asking, but explained it to him. Then they came into a

courtyard which had a large sheet of tin laid out in it. His father wanted

to pull off a large piece of it, but first looked around to see if anyone

was watching. He told him that he need only tell the foreman and he

could take some without any bother. A staircase led down from this

yard into a shaft, whose walls were cushioned in some soft material,

rather like a leather armchair. At the end of the shaft was a longish

platform and then another shaft started. . . .’

   The dreamer himself interpreted: ‘The Rotunda was my genitals and

the captive balloon in front of it was my penis, whose limpness I have

reason  to  complain  of.’  Going  into  greater  detail,  then,  we  may

translate the Rotunda as the bottom (habitually regarded by children

as  part  of  the  genitals)  and  the  small  annex  in  front  of  it  as  the

scrotum. His father asked him in the dream what all this was - that is,

what was the purpose and function of the genitals. It seemed plausible

to  reverse  this  situation  and  turn  the  dreamer  into  the  questioner.

Since he had in fact never questioned his father in this way, we had to

look upon the dream-thought as a wish, or take it as a conditional

clause,  such  as:  ‘If  I  had  asked  my  father  for  sexual

enlightenment. . . .’ We shall presently find the continuation of this

thought in another part of the dream.

   The courtyard in which the sheet of tin was spread out is not to be

taken  symbolically  in  the  first  instance.  It  was  derived  from  the

business premises of the dreamer’s father. For reasons of discretion I

have substituted ‘tin’ for another material in which his father actually

dealt: but I have made no other change in the wording of the dream.

The dreamer had entered his father’s business and had taken violent

objection  to  the  somewhat  dubious  practices  on  which  the  firm’s

earnings in part depended. Consequently the dream-thought I have

just interpreted may have continued in this way: ‘(If I had asked him),

he would have deceived me just as he deceives his customers.’ As

regards  the  ‘pulling  off’  which  served  to  represent  his  father’s

dishonesty  in  business,  the  dreamer  himself  produced  a  secondexplanation - namely that it stood for masturbating. Not only have we

long been familiar with this interpretation, but there was something to

confirm  it  in  the  fact  that  the  secret  nature  of  masturbation  was

represented by its reverse: it might be done openly. Just as we should

expect, the masturbatory activity was once again displaced on to the

dreamer’s father, like the questioning in the first scene of the dream.

He promptly interpreted the shaft as a vagina, having regard to the

soft cushioning of its walls. I added on my own authority that climbing

down, like climbing up in other cases, described sexual intercourse in

the vagina.

   The dreamer himself gave a biographical explanation of the further

details - that the first shaft was followed by a longish platform and then

by another shaft. He had practised intercourse for a time but had then

given it up on account of inhibitions, and he now hoped to be able to

resume it by the help of the treatment.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3286

 

   (8) The two following dreams were dreamt by a foreigner of a highly

polygamous  disposition.  I  repeat  them  to  you  as  evidence  for  my

assertion that the dreamer’s own ego appears in every dream even if

it is concealed in the manifest content. The trunks in the dreams were

symbols of women:

   (a) He was starting on a journey; his luggage was taken to the

station on a carriage, a number of trunks piled up on it, and among

them two big black ones, like boxes of samples. He said to someone

consolingly: ‘Well, they’re only going with me as far as the station.’

   He did in fact travel with a great deal of luggage; but he also brought

a great many stories about women into the treatment. The two black

trunks corresponded to two dark women who were at the time playing

the main part in his life. One of them had wanted to follow him to

Vienna; and on my advice he had telegraphed to put her off.

   (b) A scene at the customs-house: Another traveller opened his box

and,  coolly  smoking  a  cigarette,  said:  ‘There’s  nothing  in  it.’  The

customs  officer  seemed  to  believe  him,  but  felt  about  once  moreinside  it,  and  found  something  quite  particularly  prohibited.  The

traveller said in a resigned voice: ‘There’s nothing to be done about it.’

   He himself was the traveller: I was the customs officer. As a rule he

was very straightforward in making admissions; but he had intended to

keep silent to me about a new connection he had formed with a lady,

because he rightly supposed that she was not unknown to me. He

displaced the distressing situation of being detected on to a stranger,

so that he himself did not seem to appear in the dream.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3287

 

   (9) Here is an example of a symbol which I have not yet mentioned:

   He met his sister in the company of two women friends who were

themselves sisters. He shook hands with both of them but not with his

sister.

   No connection with any real occurrence. But his thoughts took him

back, rather, to a period in which his observations led him to reflect on

how late girls’ breasts developed. So the two sisters were breasts; he

would have liked to take hold of them with his hand - if only it were not

his sister.

 

   (10) Here is an example of death-symbolism in a dream:

   He was walking with two people whose names he knew but had

forgotten  when  he  woke  up,  across  a  very  high,  steep  iron  bridge.

Suddenly they had both gone, and he saw a ghost-like man in a cap

and linen clothes. He asked him if he was the telegraph-boy. No. Was

he the driver? No. Then he walked on further. . . . While he was still

dreaming  he  felt  acute  anxiety,  and  after  he  had  woken  up  he

continued the dream with a phantasy that the iron bridge suddenly

broke and he fell into the abyss.

   People of whom one insists that they are unknown or that one has

forgotten  their  names  are  mostly  people  very  near  to  one.  The

dreamer had a brother and sister; and if he had wished that these two

were dead, it would be only fair that in return he should be victimized

by a fear of death. Of the telegraph boy he remarked that such peoplealways bring bad news. By his uniform he might equally have been the

lamp-lighter; but he puts out the lamps as well, just as the Spirit of

Death puts out the torch. The driver made him think of Uhland’s poem

about King Charles’s Voyage, and reminded him of a dangerous sea-

voyage with two companions during which he had played the part of

the  King  in  the  poem.  The  iron  bridge  made  him  think  of  a  recent

accident and of the foolish saying: ‘Life is a suspension bridge’.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3288

 

   (11) The following dream may count as another representation of

death:

   An unknown gentleman left a black-edged visiting-card on him.

 

   (12) You will be interested in the following dream in a number of

ways,  though  a  neurotic  state  in  the  dreamer  was  one  of  its

preconditions:

   He was travelling in a railway-train. The train came to a stop in open

country. He thought there was going to be an accident and that he

must think of getting away. He went through all the coaches in the

train and killed everyone he met - the guard, the engine-driver, and so

on.

   In connection with this he thought of a story told him by a friend. A

lunatic was being conveyed in a compartment on an Italian line, but

through  carelessness  a  traveller  was  allowed  in  with  him.  The

madman killed the other traveller. Thus he was identifying himself with

the madman, and based his right to do so on an obsession by which

he  was  tormented  from  time  to  time  that  he  must  ‘get  rid  of  all

accessory witnesses’. But then he himself found a better reason, and

this led to the precipitating cause of the dream. At the theatre the night

before he had once more seen the girl whom he had wanted to marry

but had withdrawn from because she had given him ground for being

jealous. In view of the intensity reached by his jealousy he would, he

thought,  really  be  mad  to  want  to  marry  her.  This  meant  that  he

regarded her as so untrustworthy that, in his jealousy, he would haveto kill everyone who came his way. We have already come across

walking through a series of rooms (here, railway coaches) as a symbol

of marriage (a reversal of ‘monogamy’).

   In connection with the train coming to a stop in open country and his

being  afraid  of  an  accident,  he  said  that  once  when  he  was  on  a

railway journey there had been a sudden stop of this kind when they

were not in a station. A young lady who was travelling with him had

said that there might be a collision and that the safest thing to do was

to lift one’s legs up high. But this ‘lifting the legs high’ had also played

a part in the many walks and excursions in the country which he had

taken with the other girl in the happy early days of their love. This was

a fresh argument for thinking he would be mad to marry her now. But

my  knowledge  of  the  situation  made  me  feel  certain  that  he

nevertheless wished he were mad enough to do it.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3289

 

                                      LECTURE XIII

 

    THE ARCHAIC FEATURES AND INFANTILISM OF DREAMS

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - Let us start out once more from the conclusion

we arrived at that the dream-work, under the influence of the dream-

censorship,  transposes  the  latent  dream-thoughts  into  a  different

mode of expression. The latent thoughts do not differ from our familiar

conscious  thoughts  of  waking  life.  The  new  mode  of  expression  is

incomprehensible to us owing to many of its features. We have said

that it harks back to states of our intellectual development which have

long  since  been  superseded  -  to  picture-language,  to  symbolic

connections, to conditions, perhaps, which existed before our thought-

language  had  developed.  We  have  on  that  account  described  the

mode of expression of the dream-work as archaic or regressive.

   You may conclude from this that if we study the dream-work further

we  must  succeed  in  gaining  valuable  light  on  the  little  known

beginnings of our intellectual development. I hope it will be so; but this

work has not so far been started upon. The prehistory into which thedream-work leads us back is of two kinds - on the one hand, into the

individual’s prehistory, his childhood, and on the other, in so far as

each  individual  some  how  recapitulates  in  an  abbreviated  form  the

entire  development  of  the  human  race,  into  phylogenetic  prehistory

too.  Shall  we  succeed  in  distinguishing  which  portion  of  the  latent

mental processes is derived from the individual prehistoric period and

which  portion  from  the  phylogenetic  one?  It  is  not,  I  believe,

impossible that we shall. It seems to me, for instance, that symbolic

connections, which the individual has never acquired by learning, may

justly claim to be regarded as a phylogenetic heritage.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3290

 

   This, however, is not the only archaic characteristic of dreams. You

are  all  familiar,  of  course,  from  your  own  experience,  with  the

remarkable  amnesia  of  childhood.  I  mean  the  fact  that  the  earliest

years of life, up to the age of five, six or eight, have not left behind

them traces in our memory like later experiences. Here and there, it is

true, we come upon people who can boast of a continuous memory

from the first beginnings to the present day; but the other alternative,

of gaps in the memory, is by far the more frequent. There has not, in

my opinion, been enough astonishment over this fact. By the time a

child is two he can speak well, and soon shows that he is at home in

complicated mental situations; and he makes remarks which, if they

are reported to him many years later, he himself will have forgotten.

Moreover, the memory is more efficient at an early age, since it is less

overburdened than it is later. Nor is there any reason for regarding the

function of memory as a particularly high or difficult mental activity; on

the  contrary,  we  can  find  a  good  memory  in  people  of  very  low

intellectual standing.

   A second remarkable fact to which I must draw your attention, and

which comes on top of the first one, is that out of the void of memories

that covers the earliest years of childhood there stand out a few well-

preserved recollections, mostly perceived in plastic form, which cannot

justify  their  survival.  Our  memory  deals  with  the  material  of  theimpressions which impinge on us in later life by making a selection

among them. It retains what is of any importance and drops what is

unimportant. But this is not true of the childhood memories that have

been retained. They do not necessarily correspond to the important

experiences of childhood years, nor even to those which must have

seemed important from the child’s point of view. They are often so

commonplace  and  insignificant  that  we  can  only  ask  ourselves  in

astonishment  why  this  particular  detail  has  escaped  oblivion.  I

attempted long ago, with the help of analysis, to attack the enigma of

childhood  amnesia  and  of  the  residual  memories  which  interrupt  it,

and I arrived at the conclusion that even in the case of children it is

true in spite of everything that only what is important remains in the

memory.  But  through  the  processes,  already  familiar  to  you,  of

condensation and more especially of displacement, what is important

is replaced in memory by something else which appears unimportant.

For  this  reason  I  have  called  these  childhood  memories  ‘screen

memories’,  and  with  a  thorough  analysis  everything  that  has  been

forgotten can be extracted from them.

   In psycho-analytic treatments we are invariably faced by the task of

filling up these gaps in the memory of childhood; and in so far as the

treatment  is  to  any  extent  successful  -  that  is  to  say,  extremely

frequently - we also succeed in bringing to light the content of these

forgotten years of childhood. Those impressions had never been really

forgotten, they were only inaccessible, latent, and had formed part of

the unconscious. But it can come about that they emerge from the

unconscious  spontaneously,  and  this  happens  in  connection  with

dreams. It appears that dream-life knows how to find access to these

latent,  infantile  experiences.  Excellent  examples  of  this  have  been

reported in the literature and I myself have been able to provide a

contribution of the kind. I once dreamt in a certain connection of a

person who must have done me a service and whom I saw clearly be

fore me. He was a one-eyed man of small stature, stout, and with his

head sunk deep in his shoulders. I concluded from the context that he

was a doctor. Luckily I was able to enquire from my mother, who was

still alive, what the doctor at my birth-place (which I had left when I

was three) had looked like; and I learnt from her that he was one-

eyed, short, stout and with his head sunk deep in his shoulders; and Ialso learnt what the accident was for which he had come to my help

and which I myself had forgotten. This fact of dreams having at their

disposal the forgotten material of the first years of childhood is thus a

further archaic feature.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3291

 

 

   This same piece of information can be further applied to another of

the  riddles  we  have  come  up  against.  You  recall  the  amazement

which was caused by our discovery that what instigates dreams are

actively evil and extravagantly sexual wishes, which have made the

censorship  and  distortion  of  dreams  necessary.  When  we  have

interpreted a dream of this sort to the dreamer and if, to take the most

favourable  case,  he  does  not  actually  attack  the  interpretation,  he

nevertheless  regularly  raises  the  question  of  where  these  wishes

come from, since they feel alien to him and their opposite is what he is

conscious of. We need have no hesitation in pointing out their origin.

These evil wishful impulses arise from the past, and often from a past

that is not very remote. It can be shown that there was a time when

they were familiar and conscious, even if they are no longer so to-day.

A woman, whose dream meant that she would like to see her only

daughter,  now  seventeen  years  old,  dead  before  her  eyes,  found

under our guidance that she had indeed at one time harboured this

death wish. The child was the fruit of an unhappy marriage which was

soon dissolved. Once, while she still bore her daughter in her womb,

in a fit of rage after a violent scene with her husband she had beaten

with her fists on her body in order to kill the child inside it. How many

mothers, who love their children tenderly, perhaps over-tenderly, to-

day, conceived them unwillingly and wished at that time that the living

thing  within  them  might  not  develop  further!  They  may  even  have

expressed  that  wish  in  various,  fortunately  harmless,  actions.  Thus

their  death-wish  against  someone  they  love,  which  is  later  so

mysterious, originates from the earliest days of their relationship to

that person.      In  the  same  way,  a  father  had  a  dream  which  justified  the

interpretation that he wished for the death of his favourite eldest child.

He too was led to remember that there had been a time when this

wish  was  not  strange  to  him.  When  the  child  was  still  an  infant  in

arms, the father, discontented with his choice of a wife, often thought

that if the little creature, who meant nothing to him, were to die, he

would be free once more and would make better use of his freedom.

The same origin can be shown in the case of a great number of similar

impulses of hatred; they are recollections of something belonging to

the past, which was once conscious and played its part in mental life.

You will be inclined to conclude from this that such wishes and such

dreams ought not to arise in cases where transformations of this kind

in one’s relation to someone never occurred, where the relation was of

the same kind from the first. I am prepared to admit this; but I must

remind  you  that  what  you  must  take  into  consideration  is  not  the

wording of the dream but its sense after it has been interpreted. It is

possible that a manifest dream of the death of someone loved has

merely assumed a horrifying mask and may mean something quite

different,  or  that  the  loved  person  is  intended  as  a  misleading

substitute for someone else.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3292

 

   But the same subject will suggest another and far more serious

question. ‘Even if,’ you will say, ‘this death-wish was present at one

time and is confirmed by recollection, that is still no explanation. After

all, it was superseded long ago, and can only be present to-day in the

unconscious  as  no  more  than  an  unemotional  memory,  not  as  a

powerful  impulse.  Nothing  speaks  in  favour  of  this  last  possibility.

Why, then, was it recollected at all in the dream?’ This question may

justly be raised. An attempt to answer it would lead us too far and

would  necessitate  our  taking  up  a  position  on  one  of  the  most

important points in the theory of dreams. But I am obliged to keep

within the framework of our discussions and to exercise restraint. So

prepare  yourselves  for  a  provisional  renunciation.  Let  us  contentourselves with the factual evidence that this superseded wish can be

shown to be the instigator of the dream, and let us pursue our enquiry

whether other evil wishes can be similarly traced back to the past.

 

   We will keep to wishes forgetting rid of someone, which may for the

most part be attributed to the dreamer’s unrestricted egoism. A wish of

this kind can very often be pointed to as the constructor of a dream.

Whenever anyone in the course of one’s life gets in one’s way - and

how  often  this  must  happen  in  view  of  the  complication  of  one’s

relationships in life! - a dream is promptly ready to kill that person,

even if it be father or mother, brother or sister, husband or wife. This

wickedness of human nature came as a great surprise to us and we

were  decidedly  disinclined  to  accept  this  outcome  of  dream-

interpretation without question. But as soon as we were led to look for

the origin of these wishes in the past, we discovered the period of the

individual’s past in which there was no longer anything strange in such

egoism and such wishful impulses, directed even against his closest

relatives. It is children, and precisely in those earliest years which are

later veiled by amnesia, who often exhibit this egoism to an extremely

marked  degree  and  who  invariably  show  clear  rudiments  or,  more

correctly speaking, residues of it. Children love themselves first, and it

is only later that they learn to love others and to sacrifice something of

their own ego to others. Even those people whom a child seems to

love from the beginning are loved by him at first because he needs

them and cannot do without them - once again from egoistic motives.

Not  until  later  does  the  impulse  to  love  make  itself  independent  of

egoism. It is literally true that his egoism has taught him to love.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3293

 

   In this connection it will be interesting to compare the child’s attitude

to his brothers and sisters with that towards his parents. A small child

does not necessarily love his brothers and sisters; often he obviously

does not. There is no doubt that he hates them as his competitors,

and it is a familiar fact that this attitude often persists for long years, tillmaturity is reached or even later, without interruption. Quite often, it is

true,  it  is  succeeded,  or  let  us  rather  say  overlaid,  by  a  more

affectionate attitude; but the hostile one seems very generally to be

the  earlier.  This  hostile  attitude  can  be  observed  most  easily  in

children between two and a half and four or five, when a new baby

brother  or  sister  appears.  It  usually  meets  with  a  very  unfriendly

reception. Such remarks as ‘I don’t like him; the stork can take him

away again!’ are quite common. After this, every opportunity is taken

of disparaging the new arrival and attempts to injure him and even

murderous assaults are not unknown. If the difference in age is less,

by the time the child’s mental activity has awakened to some degree

of intensity he finds his competitor already there and adjusts himself to

him.  If  the  difference  is  greater,  the  new  baby  may  from  the  first

arouse a certain sympathy as an interesting object, a sort of live doll;

and where the difference in age is of eight or more years, solicitous,

maternal impulses may already come into play, especially in girls. But,

honestly speaking, if one comes upon a wish for the death of a brother

or sister behind a dream, there is seldom need to find it puzzling and

one can trace its prototype without any trouble in early childhood and

often enough in later years of companionship as well.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3294

 

   There is probably no nursery without violent conflicts between its

inmates.  The  motives  for  these  are  rivalry  for  parental  love,  for

common  possessions,  for  living  space.  The  hostile  impulses  are

directed  against  older  as  well  as  against  younger  members  of  the

family. It was, I believe, Bernard Shaw who remarked: ‘As a rule there

is  only  one  person  an  English  girl  hates  more  than  she  hates  her

mother;  and  thats  her  eldest  sister.’  But  there  is  something  in  this

remark that strikes us as strange. We might at a pinch find hatred and

competition  with  brothers  and  sisters  intelligible.  But  how  can  we

suppose that feelings of hatred can make their way into the relation

between daughter and mother, between parents and children?

      This  relation  is  undoubtedly  a  more  favourable  one,  from  thechildren’s point of view as well. That is what our expectations demand;

we find an absence of love far more repellent between parents and

children  than  between  brothers  and  sisters.  In  the  former  case  we

have, as it were, made something sacred which in the latter we have

left  profane.  Yet  daily  observation  can  show  us  how  frequently  the

emotional relations between parents and their grown-up children fall

behind the ideal set up by society, how much hostility is ready to hand

and would be expressed if it were not held back by admixtures of filial

piety  and  affectionate  impulses.  The  motives  for  this  hostility  are

generally known and their tendency is to divide those of the same sex

-  the  daughter  from  the  mother  and  the  father  from  the  son.  The

daughter finds in her mother the authority which restricts her will and

which is entrusted with the task of imposing on her the renunciation of

sexual freedom which society demands; in a few instances she even

finds in her a competitor who struggles against being supplanted. The

same  thing  is  repeated  between  the  son  and  his  father  still  more

glaringly.  In  the  son’s  eyes  his  father  embodies  every  unwillingly

tolerated social restraint; his father prevents him from exercising his

will, from early sexual pleasure and, where there is common property

in the family, from enjoying it. In the case of an heir to the throne this

waiting  for  a  father’s  death  reaches  an  almost  tragic  height.  There

seems  less  danger  to  the  relation  between  father  and  daughter  or

mother  and  son.  This  last  provides  the  purest  examples  of  an

unchangeable affection, unimpaired by any egoistic considerations.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3295

 

 

      Why  am  I  speaking  of  these  things,  which  are  after  all

commonplaces  and  universally  known?  Because  there  is  an

unmistakable  inclination  to  disavow  their  importance  in  life  and  to

make out that the ideal demanded by society is fulfilled far more often

than it really is. It is better, however, that the truth should be told by

psychologists rather than that the task should be left to cynics. And,

incidentally,  this  disavowal  applies  only  to  real  life.  Narrative  anddramatic  works  of  the  imagination  may  freely  make  play  with  the

themes that arise from a disturbance of this ideal.

   There is no need to feel surprised, therefore, if, in a large number of

people,  dreams  disclose  their  wish  to  get  rid  of  their  parents  and

especially of the parent of their own sex. We may assume that this

wish is also present in waking life and is even conscious sometimes, if

it can be masked by some other motive, as was the case with our

dreamer in Example 3, where it was replaced by pity for his father’s

useless sufferings. It is rarely that the hostility alone dominates the

relationship; far oftener it is in the background of more affectionate

impulses by which it is suppressed, and it must wait until a dream

isolates it, as it were. What seems to us of enormous size in a dream,

on  account  of  this  isolation,  shrinks  up  once  more  when  our

interpretation has given it its place in the context of real life (Hanns

Sachs).  But  we  come  upon  this  dream-wish,  too,  where  it  has  no

relevance in real life, and where the adult need never confess to it in

his  waking  life.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  the  deepest  and  most

invariable motive for estrangement, especially between two people of

the same sex, has already made itself felt in early childhood.

   What I have in mind is rivalry in love, with a clear emphasis on the

subject’s sex. While he is still a small child, a son will already begin to

develop  a  special  affection  for  his  mother,  whom  he  regards  as

belonging to him; he begins to feel his father as a rival who disputes

his sole possession. And in the same way a little girl looks on her

mother as a person who interferes with her affectionate relation to her

father and who occupies a position which she herself could very well

fill. Observation shows us to what early years these attitudes go back.

We refer to them as the ‘Oedipus complex’, because the legend of

Oedipus realizes, with only a slight softening, the two extreme wishes

that  arise  from  the  son’s  situation  -  to  kill  his  father  and  take  his

mother  to  wife.  I  do  not  wish  to  assert  that  the  Oedipus  complex

exhausts the relation of children to their parents: it can easily be far

more  complicated.  The  Oedipus  complex  can,  moreover,  be

developed to a greater or less strength, it can even be reversed; but it

is a regular and very important factor in a child’s mental life, and there

is more danger of our under estimating rather than over-estimating its

influence  and  that  of  the  developments  which  proceed  from  it.Incidentally, children often react in their Oedipus attitude to a stimulus

coming from their parents, who are frequently led in their preferences

by difference of sex, so that the father will choose his daughter and

the mother her son as a favourite, or, in case of a cooling-off in the

marriage, as a substitute for a love-object that has lost its value.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3296

 

      It  cannot  be  said  that  the  world  has  shown  much  gratitude  to

psycho-analytic research for its revelation of the Oedipus complex. On

the contrary, the discovery has provoked the most violent opposition

among  adults;  and  those  who  had  neglected  to  take  part  in  the

repudiation  of  this  proscribed  and  tabooed  emotional  relationship

made  up  for  their  fault  later  by  depriving  the  complex  of  its  value

through  twisted  re-interpretations.  It  is  my  unaltered  conviction  that

there is nothing in this to be disavowed or glossed over. We must

reconcile ourselves to the fact which was recognized by the Greek

legend itself as an inevitable fate. It is once again an interesting fact

that the Oedipus complex, which has been rejected from real life, has

been left to imaginative writing, has been placed freely, as it were, at

its disposal. Otto Rank has shown in a careful study how the Oedipus

complex has provided dramatic authors with a wealth of themes in

endless modifications, softenings and disguises - in distortions, that is

to say, of the kind which we are already familiar with as the work of a

censorship. We may therefore also ascribe this Oedipus complex to

dreamers who have been fortunate enough to escape conflicts with

their parents in later life. And, intimately linked with it, we find what we

call the ‘castration complex’, the reaction to the threats against the

child  aimed  at  putting  a  stop  to  his  early  sexual  activities  and

attributed to his father.

 

   What we have already learnt from our study of the mental life of

children will lead us to expect to find a similar explanation of the other

group of forbidden dream-wishes - the excessive sexual impulses. We

are thus encouraged to make a study of the development of children’ssexual life and from many sources we arrive at what follows.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3297

 

   First and foremost, it is an untenable error to deny that children have

a sexual life and to suppose that sexuality only begins at puberty with

the  maturation  of  the  genitals.  On  the  contrary,  from  the  very  first

children have a copious sexual life, which differs at many points from

what is later regarded as normal. What in adult life is described as

‘perverse’  differs  from  the  normal  in  these  respects:  first,  by

disregarding  the  barrier  of  species  (the  gulf  between  men  and

animals), secondly, by overstepping the barrier against disgust, thirdly

that against incest (the prohibition against seeking sexual satisfaction

from near blood-relations), fourthly that against members of one’s own

sex and fifthly the transferring of the part played by the genitals to

other organs and areas of the body. None of these barriers existed

from the beginning; they were only gradually erected in the course of

development and education. Small children are free from them. They

recognize no frightful gulf between human beings and animals; the

arrogance  with  which  men  separate  themselves  from  animals  does

not emerge until later. To begin with, children exhibit no disgust at

excreta but acquire this slowly under the pressure of education; they

attach no special importance to the distinction between the sexes, but

attribute  the  same  conformation  of  the  genitals  to  both;  they  direct

their first sexual lusts and their curiosity to those who are nearest and

for other reasons dearest to them - parents, brothers and sisters, or

nurses;  and  finally,  they  show  (what  later  on  breaks  through  once

again  at  the  climax  of  a  love-relation)  that  they  expect  to  derive

pleasure not only from their sexual organs, but that many other parts

of the body lay claim to the same sensitivity, afford them analogous

feelings  of  pleasure  and  can  accordingly  play  the  part  of  genitals.

Children may thus be described as ‘polymorphously perverse’, and if

these impulses only show traces of activity, that is because on the one

hand they are of less intensity compared with those in later life and on

the  other  hand  all  a  child’s  sexual  manifestations  are  at  onceenergetically  suppressed  by  education.  This  suppression  is,  as  it

were,  extended  into  theory;  for  adults  endeavour  to  overlook  one

portion  of  the  sexual  manifestations  of  children  and  to  disguise

another portion by misinterpreting its sexual nature, so that they can

then disavow the whole of them. It is often the very same people who

in the nursery are furious with any sexual naughtinesses of children

and afterwards at their writing-tables defend the sexual purity of the

same  children.  when  children  are  left  to  themselves,  or  under  the

influence  of  seduction,  they  often  bring  about  quite  considerable

achievements  in  the  was  of  perverse  sexual  activity.  Adults  are  of

course  right  not  to  take  this  too  seriously  and  to  regard  it  as

‘childishness’, or ‘playfulness’, for children are not to be condemned

as fully capable or fully responsible either before the judgement-seat

of morals or before the law; but nonetheless these things exist. They

have  their  importance  both  as  indications  of  a  child’s  innate

constitution  and  as  causes  and  encouragements  of  later

developments in him; they give us information on the sexual life of

children and so on human sexual life in general. If, therefore, we once

more  find  all  these  perverse  wishful  impulses  behind  our  distorted

dreams, that only means that in this field too dreams have taken a

step backwards into the state of infancy.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3298

 

   Among these forbidden wishes special emphasis deserves to be

further laid on the incestuous ones - that is, on those aiming at sexual

intercourse  with  parents  and  brothers  and  sisters.  You  know  what

horror  is  felt,  or  at  least  professed,  in  human  society  at  such

intercourse, and what stress is laid on the prohibitions directed against

it.  Tremendous  efforts  have  been  made  to  ex  plain  this  horror  of

incest. Some people have supposed that breeding considerations on

the  part  of  Nature  have  found  psychical  representation  in  this

prohibition,  since  inbreeding  would  impair  racial  characters.  Others

have  maintained  that,  as  a  result  of  living  together  from  early

childhood onwards, sexual desire has been diverted from the peoplein question. In both these cases, it may be remarked, an avoidance of

incest would be secured automatically, and it would not be clear why

such severe prohibitions were called for, which would point rather to

the  presence  of  a  strong  desire  for  it.  Psycho-analytic  researches

have shown unmistakably that the choice of an incestuous love-object

is, on the contrary, the first and invariable one, and that it is not until

later that resistance to it sets in; it is no doubt impossible to trace back

this resistance to individual psychology.

 

   Let us now bring together what our researches into child psychology

have contributed to our understanding of dreams. We have not only

found that the material of the forgotten experiences of childhood is

accessible to dreams, but we have also seen that the mental life of

children with all its characteristics, its egoism, its incestuous choice of

love-objects,  and  so  on,  still  persists  in  dreams  -  that  is,  in  the

unconscious,  and  that  dreams  carry  us  back  every  night  to  this

infantile level. The fact is thus confirmed that what is unconscious in

mental life is also what is infantile. The strange impression of there

being so much evil in people begins to diminish. This frightful evil is

simply the initial, primitive, infantile part of mental life, which we can

find in actual operation in children, but which, in part, we overlook in

them on account of their small size, and which in part we do not take

seriously  since  we  do  not  expect  any  high  ethical  standard  from

children. Since dreams regress to this level, they give the appearance

of  having  brought  to  light  the  evil  in  us.  But  this  is  a  deceptive

appearance, by which we have allowed ourselves to be scared. We

are not so evil as we were inclined to suppose from the interpretation

of dreams.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3299

 

   If these evil impulses in dreams are merely infantile phenomena, a

return  to  the  beginnings  of  our  ethical  development  (since  dreams

simply make us into children once more in our thoughts and feelings),

we need not, if we are reasonable, be ashamed of these evil dreams.But what is reasonable is only a part of mental life, a number of other

things  take  place  in  the  mind  which  are  not  sensible;  and  so  it

happens that we are ashamed of these dreams in an unreasonable

way. We subject them to the dream-censorship, we are ashamed and

angry if, as an exception, one of these wishes succeeds in making its

was  into  consciousness  in  such  an  undistorted  form  that  we  are

obliged to recognize it; indeed we are occasionally as ashamed of a

distorted  dream  as  if  we  understood  it.  Only  think  of  the  indignant

judgement  which  the  excellent  elderly  lady  passed  on  her

uninterpreted dream of the ‘love services’. So the problem is not yet

cleared up, and it is still possible that further consideration of the evil

in  dreams  may  lead  us  to  form  another  judgement  and  arrive  at

another estimate of human nature.

   As the outcome of our whole enquiry, let us grasp two discoveries,

though  they  only  signify  the  beginning  of  fresh  enigmas  and  fresh

doubts. First, the regression of the dream-work is not only a formal but

also a material one. It not only translates our thoughts into a primitive

form  of  expression;  but  it  also  revives  the  characteristics  of  our

primitive mental life - the old dominance of the ego, the initial impulses

of our sexual life, and even, indeed, our old intellectual endowment, if

symbolic  connections  may  be  regarded  as  such.  And  secondly,  all

this,  which  is  old  and  infantile  and  was  once  dominant  and  alone

dominant, must to-day be ascribed to the unconscious, our ideas of

which are now becoming altered and extended. ‘Unconscious’ is no

longer the name of what is latent at the moment; the unconscious is a

particular  realm  of  the  mind  with  its  own  wishful  impulses,  its  own

mode of expression and its peculiar mental mechanisms which are not

in  force  elsewhere.  But  the  latent  dream-thoughts  which  we  have

discovered by interpreting dreams do not belong to this realm; they

are on the contrary thoughts just as we might have thought them in

waking  life.  Nevertheless,  they  are  unconscious.  How,  then,  is  this

contradiction to be solved? We begin to suspect that a distinction is to

be drawn here. Something which is derived from our conscious life

and  shares  its  characteristics  -  we  call  it  ‘the  day’s  residues’  -

combines  with  something  else  coming  from  the  realm  of  the

unconscious  in  order  to  construct  a  dream.  The  dream-work  is

accomplished  between  these  two  components.  The  influenceexercised upon the day’s residues by the addition of the unconscious

is no doubt among the determinants of regression. This is the deepest

insight that we can reach here into the essential nature of dreams -

until we have investigated further regions of the mind. But the time will

soon  have  come  to  provide  another  name  for  the  unconscious

character of the latent dream-thoughts in order to distinguish it from

the unconscious which comes from the realm of the infantile.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3300

 

   We can, of course, raise another question besides: ‘What is it that

forces psychical activity during sleep to make this regression? Why

does  it  not  dispose  of  the  mental  stimuli  that  disturb  sleep  without

doing this? And if, for the purposes of the dream censorship, it has to

make use of disguise by means of the old and now unintelligible mode

of  expression,  what  is  the  point  of  reviving  as  well  the  old  mental

impulses, wishes and character traits, which are superseded to-day -

of making use of material regression in addition to the formal kind?’

The only answer that could satisfy us would be that in this way alone

can  a  dream  be  constructed,  that  it  is  not  otherwise  dynamically

possible to get rid of the stimulus to the dream. But so far we have no

right to give such an answer.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3301

 

                                      LECTURE XIV

 

                                  WISH-FULFILMENT

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - Shall I remind you once more of the ground

we  have  covered  so  far?  Of  how,  when  we  began  applying  our

technique, we came up against the distortion in dreams, of how we

thought we would begin by evading it and obtained our first decisive

information  on  the  essential  nature  of  dreams  from  the  dreams  ofchildren? Of how, after that, armed with what we had learnt from that

enquiry, we made a direct assault on dream-distortion and, as I hope,

overcame it step by step? We are bound to admit, however, that the

things we have discovered by the one path and by the other do not

entirely correspond. It will be our task to piece the two sets of findings

together and reconcile them with each other.

      We  found  from  both  sources  that  the  dream-work  consists

essentially  in  the  transformation  of  thoughts  into  a  hallucinatory

experience. How this can happen is sufficiently mysterious; but it is a

problem  of  general  psychology  with  which  we  are  not  properly

concerned  here.  We  learnt  from  children’s  dreams  that  it  is  the

intention of the dream-work to get rid of a mental stimulus, which is

disturbing sleep, by means of the fulfilment of a wish. We were unable

to say anything similar of distorted dreams till we found out how to

interpret them. But it was from the first our expectation that we should

be  able  to  regard  distorted  dreams  in  the  same  light  as  those  of

children. The first confirmation of this expectation was brought to us

by the discovery that in point of fact all dreams are children’s dreams,

that  they  work  with  the  same  infantile  material,  with  the  mental

impulses and mechanisms of childhood. Now that we believe we have

overcome  dream-distortion,  we  must  go  on  to  enquire  whether  the

view of dreams as the fulfilment of wishes is also valid of distorted

dreams.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3302

 

   A short time ago we submitted a series of dreams to interpretation,

but we left wish-fulfilment completely out of account. I feel sure that

you must have repeatedly been driven to ask yourselves: ‘But where

is the wish-fulfilment, which is supposed to be the aim of the dream-

work?’  The  question  is  an  important  one,  for  it  has  become  the

question raised by our lay critics. Human beings, as you know, have

an instinctive tendency to fend off intellectual novelties. One of the

ways in which this tendency is manifested is by immediately reducing

the novelty to the smallest proportions, by compressing it if possibleinto a single catch-word. ‘Wish-fulfilment’ has become the catch word

for the new theory of dreams. The layman asks: ‘Where is the wish-

fulfilment?’ And instantly, having heard that dreams are supposed to

be  wish-fulfilments,  and  in  the  very  act  of  asking  the  question,  he

answers  it  with  a  rejection.  He  immediately  thinks  of  countless

experiences of his own with dreams, in which the dream has been

accompanied  by  feelings  ranging  from  the  unpleasurable  to  severe

anxiety, so that the assertion made by the psycho-analytic theory of

dreams  seems  to  him  most  improbable.  We  have  no  difficulty  in

replying that in distorted dreams the wish-fulfilment cannot be obvious

but must be looked for, so that it cannot be pointed out until the dream

has been interpreted. We know too that the wishes in these distorted

dreams  are  forbidden  ones  -  rejected  by  the  censorship  -  whose

existence  was  precisely  the  cause  of  the  dream’s  distortion,  the

reason for the intervention of the dream censorship. But it is difficult to

make  the  lay  critic  understand  that  before  a  dream  has  been

interpreted one cannot enquire about the fulfilment of its wish. He will

keep on forgetting this. His rejection of the theory of wish-fulfilment is

actually nothing other than a consequence of the dream-censorship, a

substitute  for  the  rejection  of  the  censored  dream-wishes  and  an

effluence from it.

   We too, of course, feel the need to explain to ourselves why there

are so many dreams with a distressing content and, especially why

there are anxiety-dreams. Here for the first time we come upon the

problem  of  affects  in  dreams;  it  would  deserve  a  monograph  of  its

own,  but  unfortunately  we  cannot  enter  into  it.  If  dreams  are  the

fulfilment of wishes, distressing feelings should be impossible in them:

the  lay  critics  would  appear  to  be  right  there.  But  three  kinds  of

complications must be taken into account which they have not thought

of.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3303

 

 

   Firstly, it may be that the dream-work has not completely succeededin creating a wish-fulfilment; so that a portion of the distressing affect

in the dream-thoughts has been left over in the manifest dream. In that

case analysis would have to show that these dream-thoughts were far

more distressing than the dream-constructed out of them. That much

can always be proved. If so, we must admit that the dream-work has

not achieved its aim any more than the dream of drinking, formed in

response to the stimulus of thirst, succeeded in quenching the thirst.

The dreamer remains thirsty and has to wake up in order to drink.

Nevertheless  it  was  a  genuine  dream,  and  had  lost  nothing  of  a

dream’s essential nature. We can only say: ‘Ut desint vires, tamen est

laudanda  voluntas.’¹  The  intention,  at  least,  which  can  clearly  be

recognized,  remains  praiseworthy.  Such  instances  of  failure  are  no

rare event. This is helped by that fact that it is so much harder for the

dream-work to alter the sense of a dream’s affects than of its content;

affects are some times highly resistant. What then happens is that the

dream-work transforms the distressing content of the dream-thoughts

into  the  fulfilment  of  a  wish,  while  the  distressing  affect  persists

unaltered. In dreams of this kind the affect is quite inappropriate to the

content, and our critics can say that dreams are so far from being

wish-fulfilments that even one with a harmless content can be felt as

distressing. We can answer this foolish remark by pointing out that it is

precisely  in  dreams  like  this  that  the  wish-fulfilling  purpose  of  the

dream-work  appears  most  clearly,  because  in  isolation.  The  error

arises because those who are unfamiliar with the neuroses picture the

link between content and affect as too intimate and therefore cannot

imagine the content being altered without a simultaneous alteration of

the expression of affect attached to it.

 

   ¹ [‘Though the strength is lacking, the will deserves to be praised.’]

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3304

 

 

   A second factor, which is much more important and far reaching, but

which is equally overlooked by laymen, is the following. No doubt a

wish-fulfilment must bring pleasure; but the question then arises ‘Towhom?’ To the person who has the wish, of course. But, as we know,

a  dreamer’s  relation  to  his  wishes  is  a  quite  peculiar  one.  He

repudiates  them  and  censors  them  -  he  has  no  liking  for  them,  in

short. So that their fulfilment will give him no pleasure, but just the

opposite; and experience shows that this opposite appears in the form

of anxiety, a fact which has still to be explained. Thus a dreamer in his

relation  to  his  dream-wishes  can  only  be  compared  to  an

amalgamation of two separate people who are linked by some strong

element in common. Instead of enlarging on this, I will remind you of a

familiar fairy tale in which you will find the same situation repeated. A

good fairy promised a poor married couple to grant them the fulfilment

of their first three wishes. They were delighted, and made up their

minds to choose their three wishes carefully. But a smell of sausages

being fried in the cottage next door tempted the woman to wish for a

couple of them. They were there in a flash; and this was the first wish-

fulfilment. But the man was furious, and in his rage wished that the

sausages were hanging on his wife’s nose. This happened too; and

the sausages were not to be dislodged from their new position. This

was the second wish-fulfilment; but the wish was the man’s, and its

fulfilment was most disagreeable for his wife. You know the rest of the

story. Since after all they were in fact one - man and wife - the third

wish was bound to be that the sausages should come away from the

woman’s  nose.  This  fairy  tale  might  be  used  in  many  other

connections; but here it serves only to illustrate the possibility that if

two people are not at one with each other the fulfilment of a wish of

one of them may bring nothing but unpleasure to the other.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3305

 

   It will not be difficult for us now to reach a still better understanding

of anxiety-dreams. We will bring up one more observation and then

make up our minds to adopt a hypothesis in favour of which there is

much to be said. The observation is that anxiety-dreams often have a

content entirely devoid of distortion, a content which has, so to speak,

evaded  the  censorship.  An  anxiety-dream  is  often  the  undisguisedfulfilment of a wish - not, of course, of an acceptable wish, but of a

repudiated one. The generation of anxiety has taken the place of the

censorship. Whereas we can say of an infantile dream that it is the

open fulfilment of a permitted wish, and of an ordinary distorted dream

that it is the disguised fulfilment of a repressed wish, the only formula

which  fits  an  anxiety-dream  is  that  it  is  the  open  fulfilment  of  a

repressed  wish.  The  anxiety  is  a  sign  that  the  repressed  wish  has

shown itself stronger than the censorship, that it has put through, or is

on  the  point  of  putting  through,  its  wish-fulfilment  in  spite  of  the

censorship. We perceive that what is for it a wish-fulfilment can only

be  for  us,  who  are  on  the  side  of  the  censorship,  an  occasion  for

distressing  feelings  and  for  fending  the  wish  off.  The  anxiety  that

emerges in the dream is, if you like, anxiety at the strength of these

wishes which are normally held down. Why this fending-off appears in

the form of anxiety cannot be discovered from the study of dreams

alone; anxiety must clearly be studied elsewhere.

   We may suppose that what is true of undistorted anxiety dreams

applies also to those which are partly distorted as well as to other

unpleasurable  dreams,  in  which  the  distressing  feelings  probably

correspond to an approach to anxiety. Anxiety-dreams are as a rule

also  arousal  dreams;  we  usually  interrupt  our  sleep  before  the

repressed wish in the dream has put its fulfilment through completely

in spite of the censorship. In that case the function of the dream has

failed,  but  its  essential  nature  is  not  altered  by  this.  We  have

compared dreams to the night-watchman or guardian of sleep, who

tries to protect our sleep from disturbance. The night-watchman, too,

may reach the point of waking the sleeper if he feels he is too weak

alone  to  drive  off  the  disturbance  or  the  danger.  Nevertheless  we

sometimes succeed in holding on to our sleep even when the dream

begins  to  be  precarious  and  to  be  turning  into  anxiety.  We  say  to

ourselves in our sleep ‘after all it’s only a dream’, and sleep on.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3306

 

   When does it happen that a dream-wish is in a position to overpowerthe  censorship?  The  condition  necessary  for  this  may  be  fulfilled

equally well by the dream-wish or by the dream censorship. The wish

may for an unknown reason be excessively strong on some occasion;

but one gets an impression that it is more often the behaviour of the

dream-censorship  that  is  responsible  for  this  displacement  of  their

relative strengths. We have already seen that the censorship acts with

varying intensity in each particular case, that it treats each element of

a dream with a different degree of severity. We can now add a further

hypothesis to the effect that it is in general very variable and does not

always employ equal severity to the same objectionable element. If

things  turn  out  so  that  on  some  occasion  it  feels  itself  powerless

against a dream-wish which threatens to take it by surprise, instead of

distortion, it makes use of its last remaining expedient and abandons

the state of sleep, at the same time generating anxiety.

   In this connection it strikes us that we are still quite ignorant of why it

is that these evil, repudiated wishes become active precisely at night

and disturb us during our sleep. The answer is almost bound to lie in

some hypothesis going back to the nature of the state of sleep. In day-

time  the  heavy  weight  of  censorship  rests  on  them  and  as  a  rule

makes it impossible for them to manifest themselves in any activity. At

night  this  censorship,  like  all  the  other  interests  of  mental  life,  is

probably withdrawn, or at least greatly reduced, in favour of the single

wish to sleep. It is this lowering of the censorship at night that the

forbidden wishes have to thank for being able to become active once

more. There are some neurotic patients who are unable to sleep and

who admit to us that their insomnia was originally intentional. They did

not dare to sleep because they were afraid of their dreams - afraid,

that  is,  of  the  results  of  the  weakening  of  the  censorship.  You  will

easily  see,  however,  that  in  spite  of  this  the  withdrawal  of  the

censorship  implies  no  gross  carelessness.  The  state  of  sleep

paralyses our motive powers. If our evil intentions begin to stir, they

can, after all, do nothing more than precisely cause a dream, which is

harmless  from  the  practical  point  of  view.  It  is  this  soothing

consideration that is the basis of the highly sensible remark made by

the sleeper-made at night, it is true, but not forming part of dream-life:

‘After all it’s only a dream. So let us leave it to take its course, and let

us sleep on.’ 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3307

 

 

   If, in the third place, you will recall our idea that the dreamer fighting

against his own wishes is to be compared with a summation of two

separate, though in some way intimately connected, people, you will

understand  another  possibility.  For  there  is  a  possibility  that  the

fulfilment of a wish may bring about something very far from pleasant -

namely, a punishment. Here we can once more use the fairy tale of

the three wishes as an illustration. The fried sausages on a plate were

the direct fulfilment of the wish of the first person, the woman, The

sausages on her nose were the fulfilment of the wish of the second

person,  the  man,  but  were  at  the  same  time  a  punishment  for  the

woman’s foolish wish. (We shall discover in neuroses the motive for

the third wish, the last remaining one in the fairy tale.) There are many

such punitive trends in the mental life of human beings; they are very

powerful,  and  we  may  hold  them  responsible  for  some  of  the

distressing dreams. Perhaps you will now say that this leaves very

little over of the famous wish-fulfilment. But if you look more closely

you  will  admit  that  you  are  wrong.  Compared  with  the  multiplicity

(which I shall mention later) of the things that dreams might be and

according  to  many  authorities  actually  are,  our  solution  -  wish-

fulfilment, anxiety-fulfilment, punishment-fulfilment - is a very restricted

one. We may add that the anxiety is the direct opposite of the wish,

that opposites are especially close to one another in associations and

that  in  the  unconscious  they  coalesce;  and  further,  that  the

punishment is also the fulfilment of a wish - of the wish of the other,

censoring person.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3308

 

 

      On  the  whole,  therefore,  I  have  made  no  concession  to  yourobjection to the theory of wish-fulfilment. It is our duty, however, to be

able  to  indicate  the  wish-fulfilment  in  any  distorted  dream  we  may

come across, and we shall certainly not evade the task. Let us go

back  to  the  dream  we  have  already  interpreted  of  the  three  bad

theatre-tickets for 1 florin 50, from which we have already learnt so

much. I hope you still recollect it. A lady, whose husband had told her

during the day that her friend Elise, who was only three months her

junior, had become engaged, dreamt that she was at the theatre with

her husband. One side of the stalls was almost empty. Her husband

said to her that Elise and her fiancé had wanted to go to the theatre

too but had not been able to, since they had only got bad seats - three

for 1 florin 50. She thought it would not really have done any harm if

they had. We found that the dream-thoughts related to her anger at

having married so early and to her dissatisfaction with her husband.

We  may  be  curious  to  discover  how  these  gloomy  thoughts  were

transformed into the fulfilment of a wish and where any trace of it is to

be found in the manifest content of the dream. We already know that

the element ‘too early, in a hurry’ was eliminated from the dream by

the censorship. The empty stalls were an allusion to it. The mysterious

‘three for 1 florin 50' now becomes more intelligible to us with the help

of the symbolism with which we have meanwhile become acquainted.

The  ‘3'¹  really  means  a  man  and  the  manifest  element  is  easy  to

translate: buying a husband with her dowry. (‘I could have got one ten

times better with my dowry.’) ‘Marrying’ is clearly replaced by ‘going to

the  theatre’.  ‘Taking  the  theatre  tickets  too  early’  is,  indeed,  an

immediate  substitute  for  ‘marrying  too  early’.  This  substitution  is,

however, the work of a wish-fulfilment. Our dreamer was not always

so dissatisfied with her early marriage as she was on the day when

she  received  the  news  of  her  friend’s  engagement.  She  had  been

proud of it at one time and regarded herself as at an advantage over

her friend. Simple-minded girls, after becoming engaged, are reputed

often  to  express  their  joy  that  they  will  soon  be  able  to  go  to  the

theatre, to all the plays which have hitherto been prohibited, and will

be allowed to see everything. The pleasure in looking, or curiosity,

which is revealed in this was no doubt originally a sexual desire to

look,  directed  towards  sexual  happenings  and  especially  on  to  the

girls’ parents, and hence it became a powerful motive for urging themto  an  early  marriage.  In  this  way  a  visit  to  the  theatre  became  an

obvious  substitute,  by  way  of  allusion,  for  being  married.  Thus  the

dreamer, in her present anger at her early marriage, harked back to

the time at which early marriage was the fulfilment of a wish because

it  satisfied  her  scopophilia,  and,  under  the  lead  of  this  old  wishful

impulse, she replaced marriage by going to the theatre.

 

   ¹ I have not mentioned another plausible interpretation of this ‘3' in a childless woman,

since this analysis brought up no material in support of it.
 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3309

 

 

      I  cannot  be  accused  of  having  specially  chosen  out  the  most

convenient example as evidence of a concealed wish-fulfilment. The

procedure  would  have  had  to  be  the  same  in  the  case  of  other

distorted dreams. I cannot demonstrate this to you now, and I will only

express  my  conviction  that  it  could  always  be  successfully

accomplished. I will, however, dwell a little longer on this theoretical

point. Experience has taught me that it is one of those most exposed

to attack in the whole theory of dreams, and that many contradictions

and misunderstandings arise from it. Apart from this, you may perhaps

still be under the impression that I have already withdrawn part of my

assertion in saying that a dream is a fulfilled wish or the opposite of

one, or a realized anxiety or punishment; and you may think this is an

opportunity of forcing further qualifications out of me. I have also been

reproached for putting forward things that seem to me obvious in a

manner that is too concise and consequently unconvincing.

   When someone has accompanied us so far in the interpretation of

dreams and has accepted everything that has been brought forward

up  to  this  point,  it  often  happens  that  he  comes  to  a  halt  at  wish-

fulfilment and says: ‘Granted that dreams always have a sense, and

that  that  sense  can  be  discovered  by  the  technique  of  psycho-

analysis,  why  must  that  sense,  all  evidence  to  the  contrary,  be

invariably pushed into the formula of wish-fulfilment? Why should not

the  sense  of  this  nightly  thinking  be  of  as  many  kinds  as  that  ofdaytime  thinking?  Why,  that  is,  should  not  a  dream  correspond

sometimes to a fulfilled wish, sometimes, as you yourself say, to the

opposite  of  that  or  to  a  realized  fear,  but  sometimes  express  an

intention,  a  warning,  a  reflection  with  its  "pros"  and  "cons",  or  a

reproach,  a  scruple  of  conscience,  an  attempt  at  preparing  for  a

coming task, and so on? Why must it always be only a wish, or at

most its opposite?’

      It  might  be  thought  that  a  difference  of  opinion  on  this  point  is

unimportant, if one is agreed on the rest. It is enough, it might be said,

that  we  have  discovered  the  sense  of  dreams  and  the  way  of

recognizing it; it is of less importance if we seem to have defined that

sense too narrowly. But that is not so. A misunderstanding on this

point  affects  the  essence  of  our  discoveries  about  dreams  and

endangers  their  value  for  the  understanding  of  the  neuroses.

Moreover,  a  compromise  of  this  sort  -  what  is  highly  thought  of  in

commercial  life  as  being  ‘accommodating’  -  is  not  in  place,  but

detrimental rather, in scientific affairs.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3310

 

      My  first  answer  to  the  question  why  dreams  should  not  have  a

variety of meanings in the sense indicated is as usual in such cases: ‘I

don’t know why they shouldn’t. I should have no objection. As far as

I’m concerned it could be so. There’s only one detail in the way of this

broader  and  more  convenient  view  of  dreams  -  that  it  isn’t  so  in

reality.’ My second answer would be that the hypothesis that dreams

correspond to a variety of forms of thinking and intellectual operations

is not unfamiliar to me myself. I once reported a dream in one of my

case histories which appeared on three nights in succession and then

no more, and I explained this behaviour by the fact that the dream

corresponded to an intention, and did not need to be repeated after

the intention had been carried out. Later on I published a dream which

corresponded to an admission. How, then, can I contradict myself and

assert that dreams are never anything but a fulfilled wish?

   I do it because I will not allow a foolish misunderstanding to passwhich  may  rob  us  of  the  fruit  of  our  efforts  with  dreams  -  a

misunderstanding which confuses the dream with the latent dream-

thoughts, and asserts of the former something that applies solely to

the latter. For it is quite correct to say that a dream can represent and

be replaced by everything you have just enumerated - an intention, a

warning, a reflection, a preparation, an attempt at solving a problem,

and  so  on.  But  if  you  look  properly,  you  will  see  that  all  this  only

applies to the latent dream-thoughts, which have been transformed

into the dream. You learn from interpretations of dreams that people’s

unconscious thinking is concerned with these intentions, preparations,

reflections, and so on, out of which the dream-work then makes the

dreams. If at the moment you are not interested in the dream-work,

but are greatly interested in people’s unconscious thought-activity, you

then  eliminate  the  dream-work  and  say  of  the  dream  what  is  in

practice quite correct that it corresponds to a warning, an intention,

and so on. what often happens in psycho-analytic activity is that our

efforts are chiefly directed only to doing away with the dream-form and

inserting in the context instead of it the latent thoughts out of which the

dream was made.

   Thus, quite incidentally, we learn from our examination of the latent

dream-thoughts that all these highly complicated mental acts that we

have named can take place unconsciously - a discovery as imposing

as it is perplexing!

   But to go back, you are only correct so long as you are clearly aware

that you have used an abbreviated form of expression and so long as

you do not believe that the multiplicity you have been describing is to

be related to the essential nature of dreams. When you speak of a

‘dream’,  you  must  mean  either  the  manifest  dream  -  that  is,  the

product of the dream-work or, at most, the dream-work itself as well -

that is, the psychical process which forms the manifest dream out of

the latent dream-thoughts. Any other use of the word is a confusion of

ideas  and  can  only  lead  to  mischief.  If  you  are  making  statements

about the latent thoughts behind the dream, do so directly and do not

obscure  the  problem  of  dreams  by  the  loose  manner  in  which  you

speak. The latent dream-thoughts are the material which the dream-

work  transforms  into  the  manifest  dream.  Why  should  you  want  to

confuse the material with the activity which forms it? If you do, whatadvantage  have  you  over  those  who  only  knew  the  product  of  the

activity and could not explain where it came from or how it was made?

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3311

 

   The only essential thing about dreams is the dream-work that has

influenced the thought-material. We have no right to ignore it in our

theory, even though we may disregard it in certain practical situations.

Analytic observation shows further that the dream-work never restricts

itself to translating these thoughts into the archaic or regressive mode

of  expression  that  is  familiar  to  you.  In  addition,  it  regularly  takes

possession of something else, which is not part of the latent thoughts

of  the  previous  day,  but  which  is  the  true  motive  force  for  the

construction of the dream. This indispensable addition is the equally

unconscious wish for the fulfilment of which the content of the dream

is given its new form. A dream may thus be any sort of thing in so far

as  you  are  only  taking  into  account  the  thoughts  it  represents  -  a

warning, an intention, a preparation, and so on; but it is always also

the fulfilment of an unconscious wish and, if you are considering it as

a product of the dream-work, it is only that. A dream is therefore never

simply  an  intention,  or  a  warning,  but  always  an  intention,  etc.,

translated  into  the  archaic  mode  of  thought  by  the  help  of  an

unconscious  wish  and  transformed  to  fulfil  that  wish.  The  one

characteristic, the wish-fulfilment, is the invariable one; the other may

vary. It may for its part once more be a wish, in which case the dream

will,  with  the  help  of  an  unconscious  wish,  represent  as  fulfilled  a

latent wish of the previous day.

   I can understand all this very clearly; but I cannot tell whether I have

succeeded  in  making  it  intelligible  to  you  as  well.  And  I  also  have

difficulty in proving it to you. That cannot be done without carefully

analysing  a  great  many  dreams,  and  on  the  other  hand  this  most

critical  and  important  point  in  our  view  of  dreams  cannot  be

convincingly represented without referring to what is coming later. It is

impossible to suppose that, since everything is intimately interrelated,

one can penetrate deeply into the nature of one thing without havingconcerned oneself with other things of a similar nature. Since we still

know nothing of the dream’s nearest relatives, neurotic symptoms, we

must once more rest content at this point with what we have achieved.

I will only give you one more illustrative example and lay before you

one fresh consideration.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3312

 

 

   Let us once again take up the dream we have already so often

returned to: the dream of the three theatre-tickets for 1 florin 50. (I can

assure you that I originally chose out this example without any special

purpose  in  view.)  You  know  the  latent  dream  thoughts:  anger  at

having been in such a hurry to get married which arose when she

heard the news that her friend had only just become engaged, putting

a low value on her husband and the idea that she might have got a

better one if only she had waited. We already know the wish which

made a dream out of these thoughts: it was the desire to look, to be

able to go to the theatre, most probably an offshoot of her old curiosity

to discover at long last what really happens when one is married. This

curiosity is, as we know, regularly directed by children towards their

parents’ sexual life,: it is an infantile curiosity, and, so far as it still

persists  later,  an  instinctual  impulse  with  roots  reaching  back  into

infancy. But the news the dreamer had received during the day gave

no occasion for awakening this desire to look, but only for awakening

anger and regret. This wishful impulse was not in the first instance

connected  with  the  latent  dream-thoughts;  and  we  were  able  to

include  the  out  come  of  the  dream-interpretation  in  the  analysis

without taking any account of that impulse. But the anger in itself was

not capable of creating a dream. A dream could not arise out of the

thoughts that ‘it was absurd to marry so early’ until they had awakened

the old wish to see at long last what happens in marriage. This wish

then gave the dream-content its form by replacing marriage by going

to  the  theatre,  and  the  form  was  that  of  an  earlier  wish-fulfilment:

‘There!  now  I  may  go  to  the  theatre  and  look  at  everything  that’sforbidden, and you mayn’t! I’m married and you must wait!’ In this way

the dreamer’s present situation was transformed into its opposite, an

old triumph was put in the place of her recent defeat. And, incidentally,

a satisfaction of her scopophilia was mixed with a satisfaction of her

egoistic  competitive  sense.  This  satisfaction  then  determined  the

manifest content of the dream, in which the position actually was that

she was sitting in the theatre while her friend could not gain admission

to it. The portions of the content of the dream behind which the latent

dream-thoughts  still  lay  concealed  were  superimposed  on  this

situation of satisfaction as a misplaced and unintelligible modification

of  it.  The  dream’s  interpretation  had  to  disregard  everything  that

served  to  represent  the  wish-fulfilment  and  to  re-establish  the

distressing latent dream-thoughts from these obscure remaining hints.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3313

 

 

   The fresh consideration I wish to bring before you is to draw your

attention to the latent dream-thoughts which have now been put in the

foreground.  I  beg  you  not  to  forget  that  in  the  first  place  they  are

unconscious to the dreamer, and secondly that they are completely

rational  and  coherent  so  that  they  can  be  understood  as  natural

reactions to the precipitating cause of the dream, and thirdly that they

can be the equivalent of any mental impulse or intellectual operation. I

shall  now  describe  these  thoughts  more  strictly  than  before  as  the

‘day’s residues’, whether the dreamer confesses to them or not. I shall

now  distinguish  between  the  day’s  residues  and  the  latent  dream-

thoughts, and, in conformity with our earlier usage, I shall designate

as  latent  dream-thoughts  everything  we  learn  in  interpreting  the

dream, whereas the day’s residues are only a portion of the latent

dream-thoughts. Our view is then that something is added to the day’s

residues, something that was also part of the unconscious, a powerful

but  repressed  wishful  impulse;  and  it  is  this  alone  that  makes  the

construction  of  the  dream  possible.  The  influence  of  this  wishful

impulse on the day’s residues creates the further portion of the latentdream-thoughts  -  that  which  need  no  longer  appear  rational  and

intelligible as being derived from waking life.

   I have made use of an analogy for the relation of the day’s residues

to  the  unconscious  wish,  and  I  can  only  repeat  it  here.  In  every

undertaking there must be a capitalist who covers the required outlay

and an entrepreneur who has the idea and knows how to carry it out.

In  the  construction  of  dreams,  the  part  of  the  capitalist  is  always

played  by  the  unconscious  wish  alone;  it  provides  the  psychical

energy  for  the  construction  of  the  dream.  The entrepreneur  is  the

day’s residues, which decide how this outlay is to be employed. It is

possible, of course, for the capitalist himself to have the idea and the

expert knowledge or for the entrepreneur himself to possess capital.

This  simplifies  the  practical  situation  but  makes  its  theoretical

understanding  more  difficult.  In  economics  the  same  person  is

constantly divided into his two aspects of capitalist and entrepreneur

and this restores the fundamental situation on which our analogy was

based.  In  dream-construction  the  same  variations  occur  and  I  will

leave them for you to follow out.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3314

 

   We cannot advance any further here, for you have probably long

been disturbed by a doubt which deserves to be given a hearing. ‘Are

the  day’s  residues,’  you  will  ask,  ‘really  unconscious  in  the  same

sense as the unconscious wish which must be added to them in order

to  make  them  capable  of  producing  a  dream?’  Your  suspicion  is

correct. This is the salient point of the whole business. They are not

unconscious  in  the  same  sense.  The  dream-wish  belongs  to  a

different unconscious - to the one which we have already recognized

as being of infantile origin and equipped with peculiar mechanisms. It

would  be  highly  opportune  to  distinguish  these  two  kinds  of

unconscious by different names. But we would prefer to wait till we

have become familiar with the field of phenomena of the neuroses.

People consider a single unconscious as something fantastic. What

will they say when we confess that we cannot make shift without twoof them?

   Let us break off here. Once again you have only heard something

incomplete. But is it not hopeful to reflect that this knowledge has a

continuation, which either we ourselves or other people will bring to

light?  And  have  not  we  ourselves  learnt  enough  that  is  new  and

surprising?

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3315

 

                                      LECTURE XV

 

                      UNCERTAINTIES AND CRITICISMS

 

LADIES  AND  GENTLEMEN,  -  We  will  nevertheless  not  leave  the  field  of

dreams without dealing with the commonest doubts and uncertainties

which  our  novelties  and  our  theories  have  given  rise  to  so  far.

Attentive listeners among you will themselves have collected some of

the relevant material.

 

      (1)  You  may  have  formed  an  impression  that,  even  though  the

technique  is  correctly  carried  out,  the  findings  of  our  interpretative

work  on  dreams  admit  of  so  many  uncertainties  as  to  defeat  any

secure  translation  of  the  manifest  dream-into  the  latent  dream-

thoughts. You will argue in support of this that in the first place one

never  knows  whether  a  particular  element  of  the  dream  is  to  be

understood  in  its  actual  sense  or  as  a  symbol,  since  the  things

employed as symbols do not cease on that account to be themselves.

If,  however,  one  has  no  objective  clue  for  deciding  this,  the

interpretation must at that point be left to the arbitrary choice of the

interpreter. Furthermore, as a result of the fact that in the dream-work

contraries coalesce, it is always left undetermined whether a particular

element is to be understood in a positive or negative sense - as itself

or  as  its  contrary.  Here  is  a  fresh  opportunity  for  the  interpreter  to

exercise an arbitrary choice. Thirdly, in consequence of the reversals

of every kind of which dreams are so fond, it is open to the interpreter

to carry out a reversal like this in connection with any passage in thedream he chooses. And lastly, you will mention having heard that one

is never certain whether the interpretation one has found for a dream

is the only possible one. We run the risk of overlooking a perfectly

admissible  ‘over-interpretation’  of  the  same  dream.  In  these

circumstances,  you  will  conclude,  so  much  room  is  left  to  the

interpreter’s  arbitrary  decision  as  to  be  incompatible  with  objective

certainty in the findings. Or alternatively you may suppose that the

fault does not lie with dreams but that the inadequacies of our dream-

interpretation are to be attributed to errors in our views and premisses.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3316

 

   All your material is unimpeachable, but it does not, I think, justify

your conclusions, and in two respects: namely that the interpretation

of dreams is, as you insist, at the mercy of arbitrary choice and that

the lack of results throws doubts on the correctness of our procedure.

If instead of the interpreter’s arbitrary choice you would speak of his

skill, his experience and his understanding, I should agree with you.

We  cannot,  of  course,  do  without  a  personal  factor  of  that  kind,

especially in the more difficult problems of dream-interpretation. But

the position is no different in other scientific occupations. There is no

means of preventing one person from handling a particular technique

worse than another, or one person from making better use of it than

another. What in other ways gives an impression of arbitrariness - in,

for instance, the interpretation of symbols - is done away with by the

fact that as a rule the interconnection between the dream-thoughts, or

the  connection  between  the  dream  and  the  dreamer’s  life,  or  the

whole psychical situation in which the dream occurs, selects a single

one from among the possible determinations presented and dismisses

the  rest  as  unserviceable.  The  conclusion  that  because  of  the

imperfections of dream-interpretation our hypotheses are incorrect is

invalidated  by  pointing  out  that  on  the  contrary  ambiguity  or

indefiniteness is a characteristic of dreams which was necessarily to

be anticipated.

      Let  us  recall  that  we  have  said  that  the  dream-work  makes  atranslation of the dream-thoughts into a primitive mode of expression

similar  to  picture-writing.  All  such  primitive  systems  of  expression,

however,  are  characterized  by  indefiniteness  and  ambiguity  of  this

sort, without justifying us in casting doubts on their serviceability. The

coalescence  of  contraries  in  the  dream-work  is,  as  you  know,

analogous to the so-called ‘antithetical meaning of primal words’ in the

most ancient languages. Indeed, Abel (1884), the philologist to whom

we  owe  this  line  of  thought,  implores  us  not  to  suppose  that

communications made by one person to another with the help of such

ambivalent words were on that account ambiguous. On the contrary,

intonation and gesture must have made it quite certain in the context

of  the  speech  which  of  the  two  contraries  the  speaker  intended  to

convey. In writing, where gesture is absent, its place was taken by an

additional  pictograph  which  was  not  intended  to  be  spoken  -  for

instance by a picture of a little man, limply squatting or stiffly erect,

according  to  whether  the  ambiguous  hieroglyph  ‘ken’  was  to  mean

‘weak’ or ‘strong’. In this way, in spite of the ambiguity of the sounds

and signs, misunderstanding was avoided.

   The old systems of expression - for instance, the scripts of the most

ancient languages - betray vagueness in a variety of ways which we

would not tolerate in our writing to-day. Thus in some Semitic scripts

only the consonants in the words are indicated. The reader has to

insert the omitted vowels according to his knowledge and the context.

The hieroglyphic script behaves very similarly, though not precisely in

the  same  way;  and  for  that  reason  the  pronunciation  of  Ancient

Egyptian remains unknown to us. The sacred script of the Egyptians is

indefinite  in  yet  other  ways.  For  instance,  it  is  left  to  the  arbitrary

decision of the scribe whether he arranges the pictures from right to

left or from left to right. In order to be able to read it one must obey the

rule of reading towards the faces of the figures, birds, and so on. But

the scribe might also arrange the pictographs in vertical columns, and

in  making  inscriptions  on  comparatively  small  objects  he  allowed

considerations  of  decorativeness  and  space  to  influence  him  in

altering  the  sequence  of  the  signs  in  yet  other  ways.  The  most

disturbing thing about the hieroglyphic script is, no doubt, that it makes

no  separation  between  words.  The  pictures  are  placed  across  the

page at equal distances apart; and in general it is impossible to tellwhether  a  sign  is  still  part  of  the  preceding  word  or  forms  the

beginning of a new word. In Persian cuneiform script, on the other

hand, an oblique wedge serves to separate words.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3317

 

   An extremely ancient language and script, which however is still

used by four hundred million people, is the Chinese. You must not

suppose that I at all understand it; I only obtained some information

about it because I hoped to find analogies in it to the indefiniteness of

dreams.  Nor  has  my  expectation  been  disappointed.  The  Chinese

language is full of instances of indefiniteness which might fill us with

alarm. As is well known, it consists of a number of syllabic sounds,

which  are  spoken  either  singly  or  combined  into  pairs.  One  of  the

principal  dialects  has  some  four  hundred  such  sounds.  Since,

however,  the  vocabulary  of  this  dialect  is  reckoned  at  about  four

thousand words, it follows that each sound has on an average ten

different  meanings  -  some  fewer  but  some  correspondingly  more.

There are quite a number of methods of avoiding ambiguity, since one

cannot infer from the context alone which of the ten meanings of the

syllabic  sound  the  speaker  intends  to  evoke  in  the  hearer.  Among

these methods are those of combining two sounds into a compound

word  and  of  using  four  different  ‘tones’  in  the  pronunciation  of  the

syllables.  It  is  even  more  interesting  from  the  point  of  view  of  our

comparison to learn that this language has practically no grammar. It

is impossible to tell of any of the monosyllabic words whether it is a

noun or a verb or an adjective; and there are no verbal inflections by

which  one  could  recognize  gender,  number,  termination,  tense  or

mood. Thus the language consists, one might say, solely of the raw

material, just as our thought-language is resolved by the dream-work

into  its  raw  material,  and  any  expression  of  relations  is  omitted.  In

Chinese  the  decision  in  all  cases  of  indefiniteness  is  left  to  the

hearer’s understanding and this is guided by the context. I have made

a note of an example of a Chinese proverb which, literally translated,

runs:                    ‘Little what see much what wonderful.’

This is not hard to understand. It may mean: ‘The less someone has

seen, the more he finds to wonder at’; or: ‘There is much to wonder at

for  him  who  has  seen  little.’  There  is,  of  course,  no  question  of

distinguishing  between  these  two  translations,  which  only  differ

grammatically. In spite of this indefiniteness, we have been assured

that  the  Chinese  language  is  a  quite  excellent  vehicle  for  the

expression of thought. So indefiniteness need not necessarily lead to

ambiguity.

   It must, of course, be admitted that the system of expression by

dreams occupies a far more unfavourable position than any of these

ancient  languages  and  scripts.  For  after  all  they  are  fundamentally

intended  for  communication:  that  is  to  say,  they  are  always,  by

whatever  method  and  with  whatever  assistance,  meant  to  be

understood. But precisely this characteristic is absent in dreams. A

dream does not want to say anything to anyone. It is not a vehicle for

communication; on the contrary, it is meant to remain ununderstood.

For that reason we must not be surprised or at a loss if it turns out that

a number of ambiguities and obscurities in dreams remain undecided.

The  one  certain  gain  we  have  derived  from  our  comparison  is  the

discovery that these points of uncertainty which people have tried to

use as objections to the soundness of our dream-interpretations are

on  the  contrary  regular  characteristics  of  all  primitive  systems  of

expression.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3318

 

   The question of how far the intelligibility of dreams in fact extends

can only be answered by practice and experience. Very far, I believe;

and  my  view  is  confirmed  if  we  compare  the  results  produced  by

correctly trained analysts. The lay public, including the scientific lay

public, are well known to enjoy making a parade of scepticism when

faced by the difficulties and uncertainties of a scientific achievement. I

think  they  are  wrong  in  this.  You  are  perhaps  not  all  aware  that  a

similar  situation  arose  in  the  history  of  the  deciphering  of  theBabylonian-Assyrian  inscriptions.  There  was  a  time  when  public

opinion was very much inclined to regard the decipherers of cuneiform

as visionaries and the whole of their researches as a ‘swindle’. But in

1857  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  made  a  decisive  experiment.  It

requested  four  of  the  most  highly  respected  experts  in  cuneiform,

Rawlinson,  Hincks,  Fox  Talbot  and  Oppert,  to  send  it,  in  sealed

envelopes, independent translations of a newly discovered inscription;

and, after a comparison between the four productions, it was able to

announce that the agreement between these experts went far enough

to justify a belief in what had so far been achieved and confidence in

further advances. The derision on the part of the learned lay world

gradually  diminished  after  this,  and  since  then  certainty  in  reading

cuneiform documents has increased enormously.

 

      (2)  A  second  group  of  doubts  is  closely  connected  with  the

impression, which no doubt you yourselves have not escaped, that a

number  of  the  solutions  to  which  we  find  ourselves  driven  in

interpreting dreams seem to be forced, artificial, dragged in by the hair

of their head - arbitrary, that is, or even comic and facetious. Remarks

to this effect are so frequent that I will choose at random the last that

has  been  reported  to  me.  So  listen  to  this.  In  free  Switzerland  the

head  of  a  training  college  was  recently  removed  from  his  post  on

account of his interest in psycho-analysis. He entered a protest, and a

Berne newspaper published the report of the school authorities on his

appeal. I will select a few sentences dealing with psycho-analysis from

this  document:  ‘Moreover  we  are  surprised  at  the  far-fetched  and

artificial  character  of  many  of  the  examples,  which  are  also  to  be

found in the volume by Dr. Pfister of Zurich which is quoted. . . . It is

really surprising, therefore, that the head of a training-college should

accept  all  these  assertions  and  pretended  proofs  without  criticism.’

These sentences are represented as a decision reached by someone

‘making a calm judgement’. It is rather this calmness, I think, which is

‘artificial’.  Let  us  examine  these  remarks  more  closely,  in  the

expectation that a little reflection and a little expert knowledge can be

of no disadvantage even to a calm judgement.

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3319

 

   It is truly refreshing to see how swiftly and unerringly a person can

arrive at a judgement on some delicate problem of depth-psychology

after  his  first  impression  of  it.  The  interpretations  seem  to  him  far-

fetched and forced and he does not like them; so they are false and all

this business of interpretation is worthless. Not even a fleeting thought

is  given  to  the  other  possibility  -  that  there  are  good  reasons  why

these interpretations are bound to have this appearance; after which

the further question would follow of what these good reasons are.

   The matter under consideration relates in essence to the results of

displacement, which you have become acquainted with as the most

powerful  instrument  of  the  dream-censorship.  With  the  help  of

displacement  the  dream-censorship  creates  substitutive  structures

which we have described as allusions. But they are allusions which

are not easily recognizable as such, from which the path back to the

genuine thing is not easily traced, and which are connected with the

genuine thing by the strangest, most unusual, external associations. In

all these cases it is a question, however, of things which are meant to

be hidden, which are condemned to concealment, for that is what the

dream-censorship is aiming at. But we must not expect that a thing

which has been hidden will be found in its own place, in its proper

position. The frontier-control commissions which are operating to-day

are more cunning in this respect than the Swiss school authorities. In

their  search  for  documents  and  plans  they  are  not  content  with

examining brief-cases and portfolios, but they consider the possibility

that spies and smugglers may have these forbidden things in the most

secret portions of their clothing where they decidedly do not belong -

for instance, between the double soles of their boots. If the hidden

things are there, it will certainly be possible to call them ‘far-fetched’,

but it is also true that a great deal will have been found.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3320

 

   If we recognize that the links between a latent dream-element andits manifest substitute can be of the most out-of-the-way and peculiar

nature,  sometimes  appearing  comic  and  sometimes  resembling  a

joke,  we  are  basing  ourselves  on  copious  experience  of  examples

which, as a rule, we have not solved ourselves. It is often impossible

to give such interpretations on our own account: no sensible person

could guess at the connection. The dreamer gives us the translation

either all at once by a direct association - he is able to, since it was he

who produced the substitute - or else he brings up so much material

that  the  solution  no  longer  calls  for  any  particular  acumen,  but

presents itself, so to speak, as a matter of course. If the dreamer fails

to assist in one or other of these two ways, the manifest element in

question will for ever remain unintelligible to us. I will, if I may, give

you an example which occurred to me recently. One of my women

patients lost her father in the course of the treatment. Since then she

has taken every opportunity of bringing him to life in her dreams. In

one  of  these  her  father  appeared  (in  a  particular  connection  of  no

further relevance) and said: ‘It’s a quarter past eleven, it’s half-past

eleven, it’s a quarter to twelve.’ By way of interpretation of this oddity

all that occurred to her was that her father liked his grown-up children

to appear punctually at the family meals. No doubt this was connected

with the dream-element, but it threw no light on its origin. There was a

suspicion, based on the immediate situation in the treatment, that a

carefully suppressed critical revolt against her beloved and honoured

father  played  some  part  in  the  dream.  In  the  further  course  of  her

associations, apparently remote from the dream, she told how the day

before there had been a lot of talk about psychology in her presence,

and  a  relative  of  hers  had  remarked:  ‘The Urmensch  [primal  man]

survives in all of us.’ This seemed to provide us with the explanation. It

had given her an excellent opportunity of bringing her dead father to

life  once  again.  She  made  him  in  the  dream-into  an  ‘Uhrmensch’

[‘clock-man’] by making him announce the quarter hours at midday.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3321

 

   You will not be able to escape the resemblance of this example to ajoke; and it has in fact often happened that a joke of the dreamer’s has

been regarded as a joke of the interpreter’s. There are other instances

in which it has been far from easy to decide whether what we are

dealing with is a joke or a dream. But you will recall that the same

doubt arose in the case of some parapraxes - slips of the tongue. A

man reported as a dream of his that his uncle had given him a kiss

while  they  were  sitting  in  his auto(mobile).  He  himself  very  quickly

added  the  interpretation:  it  meant  ‘auto-erotism’  (a  term  from  the

theory of the libido, indicating satisfaction obtained without any outside

object). Had the man set out, then, to have some fun with us and was

he passing off a joke that had occurred to him as a dream? I think not;

I believe he really dreamt it. But what is the origin of this puzzling

similarity? This question once led me temporarily aside from my path

by compelling me to make jokes themselves the subject of a detailed

investigation. It was there shown how jokes originate: a preconscious

train of thought is abandoned for a moment to be worked over in the

unconscious, and from this it emerges as a joke. Under the influence

of the unconscious it is subjected to the effects of the mechanisms

that  hold  sway  there  -  condensation  and  displacement  -  the  same

processes that we have found concerned in the dream-work; and it is

to this common feature that is to be ascribed the similarity, when it

occurs, between jokes and dreams. But the unintended ‘dream-joke’

brings none of the yield of pleasure of a true joke. You can learn why if

you go more deeply into the study of jokes. A ‘dream-joke’ strikes us

as a bad joke; it does not make us laugh, it leaves us cold.

   In this, however, we are treading in the footsteps of the dream-

interpretation  of  antiquity,  which,  along  with  much  that  is

unserviceable,  has  left  us  some  good  examples  of  dream-

interpretation, which we ourselves could not better. I will re peat to you

a dream which was of historic importance and which is reported of

Alexander  the  Great,  with  slight  variations,  by  Plutarch  and

Artemidorus  of  Daldis.  When  the  king  was  laying  siege  to  the

obstinately defended city of Tyre (322 B.C.), he once dreamt that he

saw  a  dancing  satyr.  Aristander,  the  dream-interpreter,  who  was

present  with  the  army,  interpreted  the  dream  by  dividing  the  word

‘Satyros’  into σά  Τύgος  [sa  Turos]  (thine  is  Tyre),  and  therefore

promised that he would triumph over the city. Alexander was led bythis interpretation to continue the siege and eventually captured Tyre.

The interpretation, which has a sufficiently artificial appearance, was

undoubtedly the right one.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3322

 

 

   (3) I can well imagine that you will be especially impressed when

you hear that objections to our view of dreams have even been made

by people who have themselves, as psycho-analysts, been engaged

for a considerable time in interpreting dreams. It would have been too

much to expect that such an abundant encouragement to fresh errors

as this theory offers should have been neglected; and so, as a result

of  conceptual  confusions  and  unjustified  generalizations,  assertions

have been made which are not far behind the medical view of dreams

in their incorrectness. You know one of them already. It tells us that

dreams  are  concerned  with  attempts  at  adaptation  to  present

conditions  and  with  attempts  at  solving  future  problems  -  that  they

have a ‘prospective purpose’ (Maeder). We have already shown that

this assertion is based on a confusion between the dream and the

latent  dream-thoughts  and  is  therefore  based  on  disregarding  the

dream-work.  As  a  characterization  of  the  unconscious  intellectual

activity of which the latent dream-thoughts form part, it is on the one

hand no novelty and on the other not exhaustive, since unconscious

intellectual  activity  is  occupied  with  many  other  things  besides

preparing for the future. A far worse confusion seems to underlie the

assurance that the idea of death will be found behind every dream. I

am not clear exactly what is meant by this formula. But I suspect that it

conceals a confusion between the dream and the dreamer’s whole

personality.

   An unjustifiable generalization, based on a few good examples, is

involved  in  the  statement  that  every  dream  allows  of  two

interpretations  -  one  which  agrees  with  our  account,  a  ‘psycho-

analytic’ one, and another, an ‘anagogic’ one, which disregards the

instinctual impulses and aims at representing the higher functions ofthe mind (Silberer). There are dreams of this kind, but you will try in

vain to extend this view even to a majority of dreams. Again, after all

that  I  have  said  to  you,  you  will  find  quite  incomprehensible  an

assertion  that  all  dreams  are  to  be  interpreted  bisexually,  as  a

confluence of two currents described as a masculine and a feminine

one (Adler). There are, of course, a few dreams of this kind too; and

you may learn later that they are constructed like certain hysterical

symptoms. The reason why I have mentioned all these discoveries of

fresh  universal  characteristics  of  dreams  is  in  order  to  warn  you

against them or at least to leave you in no doubt as to what I think of

them.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3323

 

 

   (4) One day the objective value of research into dreams seemed to

be  put  in  question  by  an  observation  that  patients  under  analytic

treatment arrange the content of their dreams in accordance with the

favourite theories of their physicians some dreaming predominantly of

sexual instinctual impulses, others of the struggle for power and yet

others even of rebirth (Stekel). The weight of this observation was,

however, diminished by the reflection that human beings had dreams

before  there  was  any  psycho-analytic  treatment  which  could  give

those  dreams  a  direction,  and  that  people  who  are  now  under

treatment used also to dream during the period before the treatment

started. What was true about this novelty could soon be seen to be

self-evident and of no relevance to the theory of dreams. The day’s

residues which instigate dreams are left over from powerful interests

in waking life. When the remarks made by the physician and the hints

he gives become of significance to the patient, they enter the circle of

the  day’s  residues  and  can  provide  psychical  stimuli  for  the

construction of dreams like any other emotionally coloured interests of

the  previous  day  which  have  not  been  dealt  with,  and  they  then

operate like somatic stimuli which impinge on the sleeper during his

sleep. The trains of thought set going by the physician can, like theseother instigators of dreams, appear in the manifest content of a dream

or be discovered in its latent content. Indeed, we know that a dream

can be experimentally produced, or, to put it more correctly, a part of

the dream. material can be introduced into the dream. In producing

these  effects  on  his  patients,  an  analyst  is  thus  playing  a  part  no

different from an experimenter who, like Mourly Vold, gives particular

postures to the limbs of the subjects of his experiments.

   It is often possible to influence dreamers as to what they shall dream

about, but never as to what they shall dream. The mechanism of the

dream-work and the unconscious dream wish are exempt from any

outside influence. In considering dreams with a somatic stimulus, we

have already found that the characteristic nature and independence of

dream-life are shown in the reaction with which dreams respond to the

somatic or mental stimuli that are brought to bear. The thesis which

we  have  been  discussing,  and  which  seeks  to  throw  doubt  on  the

objectivity of research into dreams, is thus once again based on a

confusion - this time between the dream and the dream-material.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3324

 

   This then, Ladies and Gentlemen, is what I wanted to tell you about

the problems of dreams. As you will guess, there is much that I have

had to pass over, and you will have been aware that on almost every

point  what  I  have  said  has  necessarily  been  incomplete.  That,

however,  is  due  to  the  connection  between  the  phenomena  of

dreaming and those of the neuroses. We have studied dreams as an

introduction to the theory of the neuroses, and this was certainly a

more correct procedure than if we had done the opposite. But just as

dreams prepare the way to an understanding of the neuroses, so, on

the other hand, a true appreciation of dreams can only be achieved

after a knowledge of neurotic phenomena.

   I cannot tell what you will think of it, but I must assure you that I do

not regret having claimed so much of your interest and of the time

available to us for the problems of dreams. There is nothing else from

which one can so quickly arrive at a conviction of the correctness ofthe theses by which psycho-analysis stands or falls. Exacting work

over  many  months  and  even  years  is  called  for  to  show  that  the

symptoms of a case of neurotic illness have a sense, serve a purpose

and arise out of the patient’s experiences in life. On the other hand,

only a few hours’ effort may be enough to prove that the same thing is

true of a dream which is, to start with, confused to the point of being

unintelligible, and thus to confirm all the premisses of psycho-analysis

-  the  unconscious  nature  of  mental  processes,  the  peculiar

mechanisms  which  they  obey  and  the  instinctual  forces  which  are

expressed in them. And when we bear in mind the sweeping analogy

between the structure of dreams and that of neurotic symptoms and at

the same time consider the rapidity of the transformation which makes

a dreamer into a waking and reasonable man, we arrive at a certainty

that neuroses too are based only on an alteration in the play of forces

between the powers of mental life.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3325

 

                                        PART III

 

                  GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES

 

                                        (1917)

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3326

 

                                      LECTURE XVI

 

                  PSYCHO-ANALYSIS AND PSYCHIATRY

 

LADIES  AND  GENTLEMEN,  -  I  am  delighted  to  see  you  again,  at  the

beginning  of  a  new  academic  year,  for  a  resumption  of  our

discussions. Last year I spoke to you of the way in which psycho-

analysis deals with parapraxes and dreams. This year I should like tointroduce  you  to  an  understanding  of  the  phenomena  of  neurosis,

which, as you will soon learn, have a great deal in common with both

of the others. But I must warn you in advance that I shall not be able

to offer you the same position in relation to me this year as I did last

year.  At  that  time  I  set  great  store  on  never  taking  a  step  without

remaining in agreement with your judgement; I discussed a great deal

with you and gave way to your objections - in fact I recognized you

and your ‘common sense’ as a deciding factor. But this is no longer

possible and for a simple reason. Parapraxes and dreams were not

unfamiliar to you as phenomena; we might say that you had as much

experience or could easily obtain as much experience of them as I

had. The region of the phenomena of neurosis is, however, strange to

you; in so far as you are not doctors yourselves, you have no other

access to them than through what I have to tell you; and of what help

is the best judgement if it is not accompanied by familiarity with the

material that is to be judged?

   But you must not take this warning of mine to mean that I propose to

give  you  dogmatic  lectures  and  to  insist  on  your  unqualified  belief.

Such a misunderstanding would do me a grave injustice. I do not wish

to  arouse  conviction;  I  wish  to  stimulate  thought  and  to  upset

prejudices. If as a result of lack of knowledge of the material you are

not in a position to form a judgement, you should neither believe nor

reject. You should listen and allow what I tell you to work on you. It is

not so easy to arrive at convictions, or, if they are reached easily, they

soon turn out to be worthless and incapable of resistance. The only

person who has a right to a conviction is someone who, like me, has

worked for many years at the same material and who, in doing so, has

himself had the same new and surprising experiences. What is the

good, then, in the sphere of the intellect, of these sudden convictions,

these lightning-like conversions, these instantaneous rejections? Is it

not clear that the ‘coup de foudre’, love at first sight, is derived from

quite  another  sphere,  from  that  of  the  emotions?  We  do  not  even

require of our patients that they should bring a conviction of the truth

of psycho-analysis into the treatment or be adherents of it. Such an

attitude often raises our suspicions. The attitude that we find the most

desirable  in  them  is  a  benevolent  scepticism.  So  you  too  should

endeavour to allow the psycho-analytic view to grow up quietly in youalongside of the popular or psychiatric one, till opportunities arise for

the two to influence each other, to compete with each other and to

unite in leading to a conclusion.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3327

 

   On the other hand, you should not for a moment suppose that what I

put before you as the psycho-analytic view is a speculative system. It

is on the contrary empirical - either a direct expression of observations

or  the  outcome  of  a  process  of  working  them  over.  Whether  this

working-over  has  been  carried  out  in  an  adequate  and  justifiable

manner will appear in the course of the further advance of the science,

and  indeed  I  may  assert  without  boasting,  after  a  lapse  of  nearly

twenty-five  years,  and  having  reached  a  fairly  advanced  age,  that

these  observations  are  the  result  of  particularly  hard,  concentrated

and  deep  going  work.  I  have  often  had  an  impression  that  our

opponents  were  unwilling  to  take  any  account  of  this  origin  of  our

theses,  as  though  they  thought  what  was  in  question  were  merely

subjectively determined notions to which someone else might oppose

others  of  his  own  choice.  This  behaviour  of  our  opponents  is  not

entirely intelligible to me. It may perhaps be due to the fact that, as a

doctor, one usually makes so little contact with neurotic patients and

pays so little attention to what they say that one cannot imagine the

possibility  that  anything  valuable  could  be  derived  from  their

communications - the possibility, that is, of carrying out any thorough

observations upon them. I take this opportunity of assuring you that in

the course of these lectures I shall indulge in very little controversy,

especially with individuals. I have never been able to convince myself

of the truth of the maxim that strife is the father of all things. I believe it

is derived from the Greek sophists and is at fault, like them, through

overvaluing dialectics. It seems to me, on the contrary, that what is

known as scientific controversy is on the whole quite unproductive,

apart  from  the  fact  that  it  is  almost  always  conducted  on  highly

personal lines. Up to a few years ago I was able to boast that I had

only  once  engaged  in  a  regular  scientific  dispute  -  with  one  singleworker (Löwenfeld of Munich). It ended in our becoming friends and

we have remained so to this day. But I did not repeat the experiment

for a long time, as I did not feel sure that the outcome would be the

same.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3328

 

   Now you will no doubt conclude that a rejection such as this of all

written  discussion  argues  a  high  degree  of  inaccessibility  to

objections, of obstinacy, or, to use the polite colloquial scientific term,

of pig-headedness. I should like to say in reply that when once, after

such hard work, one has arrived at a conviction, one has at the same

time  acquired  a  certain  right  to  retain  that  conviction  with  some

tenacity. I may also urge that in the course of my work I have modified

my views on a few important points, changed them and replaced them

by fresh ones - and in each case, of course, I have made this publicly

known. And the outcome of this frankness? Some people have taken

no notice whatever of myself - corrections and continue to this day to

criticize me for hypotheses which have long ceased to have the same

meaning for me. Others reproach me precisely for these changes and

regard me as untrustworthy on their account. Of course! a person who

has occasionally changed his opinions is deserving of no belief at all,

since he has made it all too likely that his latest assertions may also

be mistaken; but a person who has unflinchingly maintained what he

once asserted, or who cannot be quickly enough persuaded to give it

up, must naturally be pig-headed or stubborn! What can one do, in the

face of these contradictory objections by the critics, but remain as one

is  and  behave  in  accordance  with  one’s  own  judgement?  I  am

resolved  to  do  that,  and  I  shall  not  be  deterred  from  modifying  or

withdrawing  any  of  my  theories,  as  my  advancing  experience  may

require.  In  regard  to fundamental  discoveries  I  have  hitherto  found

nothing to alter, and I hope this will remain true in the future.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3329 

 

      I  am  to  put  before  you,  then,  the  psycho-analytic  view  of  the

phenomena of neurosis. In doing so, the best plan would seem to be

to make a start in connection with the phenomena we have already

dealt with, for the sake both of analogy and contrast; and I will begin

with a symptomatic action which I have seen many people perform

during  my  consulting  hours.  We  analysts  cannot  do  much  for  the

people who come to us in our consulting-room to lay before us in a

quarter  of  an  hour  the  miseries  of  a  long  lifetime.  Our  deeper

knowledge makes it difficult for us to give the kind of opinion another

doctor  would  -  ‘There’s  nothing  wrong  with  you’  -  with  the  added

advice: ‘You should arrange for a mild hydropathic treatment.’ One of

my  colleagues  who  was  asked  what  he  did  with  his  consultation

patients shrugged his shoulders and replied: ‘I fine them so-and-so

many Kronen  for  a  frivolous  waste  of  time.’  So  you  will  not  be

surprised to hear that even in the case of busy psycho-analysts their

consulting hours are not apt to be very lively. I have had the ordinary

door  between  my  waiting-room  and  my  consulting-  and  treatment-

room doubled and given a baize lining. There can be no doubt about

the purpose of this arrangement. Now it constantly happens that a

person whom I have brought in from the waiting-room omits to shut

the door behind him and almost always he leaves both doors open. As

soon as I notice this I insist in a rather unfriendly tone on his or her

going  back  and  making  good  the  omission  even  if  the  person

concerned  is  a  well-dressed  gentleman  or  a  fashionable  lady.  This

makes  an  impression  of  uncalled-for  pedantry.  Occasionally,  too,  I

have put myself in a foolish position by making this request when it

has turned out to be a person who cannot touch a door-handle himself

and is glad if someone with him spares him the necessity. But in the

majority of cases I have been right; for anyone who behaves like this

and  leaves  the  door  open  between  a  doctor’s  waiting-room  and

consulting-room is ill-mannered and deserves an unfriendly reception.

But do not take sides over this till you have heard the sequel. For this

carelessness on the part of the patient only occurs when he has been

alone in the waiting-room and has therefore left an empty room behind

him; it never happens if other people, strangers to him, have beenwaiting with him. In this latter case he knows quite well that it is in his

interest not to be overheard while he is talking to the doctor, and he

never fails to shut both the doors carefully.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3330

 

   Thus the patient’s omission is neither accidentally nor senselessly

determined; and indeed it is not unimportant, for, as we shall see, it

throws light on the newcomer’s attitude to the doctor. The patient is

one of the great multitude who have a craving for mundane authority,

who wish to be dazzled and intimidated. He may have enquired on the

telephone  as  to  the  hour  at  which  he  could  most  easily  get  an

appointment; he had formed a picture of a crowd of people seeking for

help, like the crowd outside one of Julius Meinl’s branches. He now

comes  into  an  empty,  and  moreover  extremely  modestly  furnished,

waiting-room, and is shocked. He has to make the doctor pay for the

superfluous respect which he had intended to offer him: so - he omits

to shut the door between the waiting-room and the consulting-room.

What he means to say to the doctor by his conduct is: ‘Ah, so there’s

no one here and no one’s likely to come while I’m here.’ He would

behave equally impolitely and disrespectfully during the consultation if

his arrogance were not given a sharp reprimand at the very beginning.

   The analysis of this small symptomatic action tells you no thing you

did not know before: the thesis that it was not a matter of chance but

had  a  motive,  a  sense  and  an  intention,  that  it  had  a  place  in  an

assignable mental context and that it provided information, by a small

indication,  of  a  more  important  mental  process.  But,  more  than

anything else, it tells you that the process thus indicated was unknown

to the consciousness of the person who carried out the action, since

none of the patients who left the two doors open would have been

able to admit- that by this omission he wanted to give evidence of his

contempt. Some of them would probably have been aware of a sense

of disappointment when they entered the empty waiting room; but the

connection between this impression and the symptomatic action which

followed certainly remained unknown to their consciousness.   Beside this small analysis of a symptomatic action we will now place

an observation on a patient. I choose this one because it is fresh in my

memory, but also because it can be reported comparatively briefly A

certain amount of detail is indispensable in any such account.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3331

 

 

   A young officer, home on short leave, asked me to undertake the

treatment  of  his  mother-in-law,  who,  though  in  the  happiest

circumstances,  was  embittering  her  own  life  and  the  lives  of  her

relatives through an absurd idea. In this way I made the acquaintance

of a well-preserved lady of fifty-three, friendly and simple in her nature,

who told me the following story without any reluctance. She lived in

the country, most happily married, with her husband, who was at the

head  of  a  large  factory.  She  could  not  give  enough  praise  to  her

husband’s affectionate solicitude. It had been a love-match thirty years

ago,  and  since  then  there  had  never  been  any  trouble,  discord  or

cause  for  jealousy.  Her  two  children  were  happily  married;  her

husband (and their father), out of a sense of duty, was not yet willing

to  retire.  A  year  before,  she  had  received  an  anonymous  letter

accusing her excellent husband of a love affair with a young girl; and

the  incredible  -  and  to  herself  unintelligible  -  result  was  that  she

immediately  believed  it,  and  since  then  her  happiness  had  been

destroyed. The course of events, in greater detail, was something like

this. She had a housemaid with whom she used, perhaps too often, to

have  intimate  talks.  This  girl  pursued  another  one  with  a  positively

malicious hostility because she had done so much better for herself in

life, though she was of no higher origin. Instead of going into service,

this other girl had managed to get a commercial training, had entered

the  factory  and,  as  a  result  of  shortness  of  personnel,  owing  to

members  of  the  staff  being  called  up  for  military  service,  she  was

promoted to a good position. She now lived in the factory itself, had

social relations with all the gentlemen and was actually addressed as

’Fräulein’.  The  girl  who  had  made  less  of  a  success  in  life  was  ofcourse  ready  to  repeat  all  kinds  of  bad  things  of  her  former

schoolmate. One day our lady had a conversation with the housemaid

about a gentleman who had been staying with them, who was well

known not to be living with his wife but to be having an affair with

another woman. She did not know how it happened, but she suddenly

said: ‘The most dreadful thing that could happen to me would be if I

were to learn that my dear husband was having an affair too.’ The

next day she received an anonymous letter by post which, as though

by magic, gave her this very information, written in a disguised hand.

She  decided,  probably  rightly,  that  the  letter  was  the  work  of  the

malicious housemaid, since it specified as her husband’s mistress the

girl whom the servant pursued with her hatred. But although she at

once saw through the intrigue and had seen enough instances where

she  lived  of  how  little  credence  such  cowardly  denunciations

deserved, what happened was that the letter instantly prostrated her.

She  became  terribly  excited,  sent  for  her  husband  at  once  and

reproached him violently. Her husband laughed the accusation off and

did the best possible thing. He brought in the family doctor (who was

also the factory doctor) who made efforts to soothe the unfortunate

lady. The further conduct of both of them was also entirely sensible.

The housemaid was dismissed, but the alleged rival was not. Since

then the patient had repeatedly been pacified to the point of no longer

believing the content of the anonymous letter, but never thoroughly

and never for long. It was enough for her to hear the young lady’s

name mentioned or to meet her in the street and a fresh attack of

distrust, pain and reproaches would burst out in her.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3332

 

   This, then, is the case history of this excellent woman. Not much

psychiatric experience was needed to understand that, in contrast to

other neurotics, she was giving too mild an account of her case - that

she was, as we say, - dissimulating and that she had never really got

over her belief in the accusation contained in the anonymous letter.

   What attitude, then, will a psychiatrist adopt in a case of illness likethis?  We  know  already  how  he  would  behave  to  the  symptomatic

action of the patient who fails to shut the consulting-room door. He

pronounces it to be a chance event of no psychological interest with

which he has no further concern. But this procedure cannot be carried

over  to  the  illness  of  the  jealous  woman.  The  symptomatic  action

seems to be a matter of indifference; but the symptom forces itself on

our attention as a matter of importance. It is accompanied by intense

subjective  suffering  and,  as  an  objective  fact,  it  threatens  the

communal  life  of  a  family;  it  is  thus  an  undeniable  subject  of

psychiatric  interest.  The  psychiatrist  will  start  by  endeavouring  to

characterize the symptom by some essential feature. The idea with

which the woman torments herself cannot in itself be called absurd; it

does,  indeed,  happen  that  elderly  gentlemen  have  love  affairs  with

young girls. But there is something else about it which is absurd and

hard  to  understand.  The  patient  had  no  other  reason  at  all  for

believing  that  her  affectionate  and  loyal  husband  belonged  to  this

otherwise not so rare class of husbands except what was asserted in

the anonymous letter. She knew that this document had no evidential

value and she was able to give a satisfying explanation of its origin.

She ought therefore to have been able to tell herself that she had no

ground whatever for her jealousy, and she did tell herself so. But in

spite of this she suffered as much as if she regarded this jealousy as

completely  justified.  Ideas  of  this  kind,  which  are  inaccessible  to

logical  arguments  based  on  reality,  are  by  general  agreement

described  as delusions.  The  good  lady,  then,  was  suffering  from

delusions of jealousy. This is no doubt the essential feature of this

case of illness.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3333

 

   After this first point has been established our psychiatric interest will

become even livelier. If a delusion is not to be got rid of by a reference

to reality, no doubt it did not originate from reality either. Where else

did it originate? There are delusions of the most varied content: why in

our case is the content of the delusion jealousy in particular? In whatkind  of  people  do  delusions,  and  especially  delusions  of  jealousy,

come about? We should like to hear what the psychiatrist has to say

about this; but at this point he leaves us in the lurch. He enters into

only a single one of our enquiries. He will investigate the woman’s

family  history  and  will perhaps  give  us  this  reply:  ‘Delusions  come

about in people in whose families similar and other psychical disorders

have repeatedly occurred.’ In other words, if this woman developed a

delusion  she  was  predisposed  to  it  by  hereditary  transmission.  No

doubt that is something; but is it all we want to know? Was this the

only thing that contributed to the causation of the illness? Must we be

content to suppose that it is a matter of indifference or caprice or is

inexplicable  whether  a  delusion  of  jealousy  arises  rather  than  any

other  sort?  And  ought  we  to  understand  the  assertion  of  the

predominance of the hereditary influence in a negative sense as well -

that no matter what experiences this woman’s mind encountered she

was destined some time or other to produce a delusion? You will want

to  know  why  it  is  that  scientific  psychiatry  will  give  us  no  further

information. But my reply to you is: ‘he is a rogue who gives more than

he has.’ The psychiatrist knows no way of throwing more light on a

case like this one. He must content himself with a diagnosis and a

prognosis - uncertain in spite of a wealth of experience - of its future

course.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3334

 

   But can psycho-analysis do more here? Yes, it actually can. I hope

to be able to show you that, even in a case so hard of access as this,

it can discover something which makes a first understanding possible.

And to begin with I would draw your attention to the inconspicuous

detail  that  the  patient  herself  positively  provoked  the  anonymous

letter,  which  now  gave  support  to  her  delusion,  by  informing  the

scheming housemaid on the previous day that it would cause her the

greatest unhappiness if her husband had a love affair with a young

girl.  In  this  way  she  first  put  the  notion  of  sending  the  anonymous

Letter into the housemaid’s head. Thus the delusion acquires a certainindependence of the letter; it had been present already in the patient

as a fear - or was it as a wish? Let us now add to this the small further

indications yielded by only two analytic sessions. The patient, indeed,

behaved in a very unco-operative way when, after telling me her story,

she was asked for her further thoughts, ideas and memories. She said

that nothing occurred to her, that she had told me everything already,

and  after  two  sessions  the  experiment  with  me  had  in  fact  to  be

broken off because she announced that she already felt well and that

she was sure the pathological idea would not come back. She only

said  this,  of  course,  from  resistance  and  from  dread  of  the

continuation of the analysis. Nevertheless, during these two sessions

she let fall a few remarks which allowed of, and indeed necessitated, a

particular interpretation; and this interpretation threw a clear light on

the genesis of her delusion of jealousy. She herself was intensely in

love with a young man, with the same son-in-law who had persuaded

her to come to me as a patient. She herself knew nothing, or perhaps

only a very little, of this love; in the family relationship that existed

between them it was easy for this passionate liking to disguise itself as

innocent affection. After all our experiences elsewhere, it is not hard

for us to feel our way into the mental life of this upright wife and worthy

mother, of the age of fifty-three. Being in love like this, a monstrous

and impossible thing, could not become conscious; but it remained in

existence and, even though it was unconscious, it exercised a severe

pressure. Something had to become of it, some relief had to be looked

for;  and  the  easiest  mitigation  was  offered,  no  doubt,  by  the

mechanism  of  displacement  which  plays  a  part  so  regularly  in  the

generating of delusional jealousy. If not only were she, the old woman,

in love with a young man, but if also her old husband were having a

love affair with a young girl, then her conscience would be relieved of

the  weight  of  her  unfaithfulness.  The  phantasy  of  her  husband’s

unfaithfulness  thus  acted  as  a  cooling  compress  on  her  burning

wound. Her own love had not become conscious to her, but its mirror-

reflection,  which  brought  her  such  an  advantage,  now  became

conscious  as  an  obsession  and  delusion.  No  arguments  against  it

could, of course, have any effect, for they were only directed against

the mirror-image and not against the original which gave the other its

strength and which lay hidden, inviolable, in the unconscious. 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3335

 

   Let us now bring together what this effort at a psycho-analysis, short

and impeded as it was, has brought to light for an understanding of

this  case  -  assuming,  of  course,  that  our  enquiries  were  correctly

carried out, which I cannot here submit to your judgement. Firstly, the

delusion has ceased to be absurd or unintelligible; it had a sense, it

had  good  motives  and  it  fitted  into  the  context  of  an  emotional

experience of the patient’s. Secondly, the delusion was necessary, as

a reaction to an unconscious mental process which we have inferred

from other indications, and it was precisely to this connection that it

owed its delusional character and its resistance to every logical and

realistic attack. It itself was something desired, a kind of consolation.

Thirdly, the fact that the delusion turned out to be precisely a jealous

one and not one of another kind was unambiguously determined by

the experience that lay behind the illness. You recall of course that,

the day before, she had told the scheming maid that the most dreadful

thing that could happen to her would be her husband’s unfaithfulness.

Nor will you have overlooked the two important analogies between this

case and the symptomatic action which we analysed - the explanation

of its sense or intention and its relation to something unconscious that

was involved in the situation.

   Naturally this does not answer all the questions that we might ask in

connection  with  this  case.  On  the  contrary,  the  case  bristles  with

further problems-some that have in general not yet become soluble

and  others  which  could  not  be  solved  owing  to  the  particular

circumstances  being  unfavourable.  For  instance,  why  did  this  lady

who was happily married fall in love with her son-in-law? and why did

the relief, which might have been possible in other ways, take the form

of this mirror-image this projection of her state on to her husband?

You must no: think it is otiose or frivolous to raise such questions. We

already  have  some  material  at  our  disposal  which  might  possibly

serve to answer them. The lady was at a critical age, at which sexual

needs in women suffer a sudden and undesired increase; that alonemight  account  for  the  event.  Or  it  may  further  have  been  that  her

excellent and faithful husband had for some years no longer enjoyed

the sexual capacity which the well-preserved woman required for her

satisfaction. Experience has shown us that it is precisely men in this

position, whose faithfulness can consequently be taken for granted,

who are distinguished by treating their wives with unusual tenderness,

and by showing particular forbearance for their nervous troubles. Or,

again,  it  may  not  be  without  significance  that  the  object  of  this

pathogenic  love  was  precisely  the  young  husband  of  one  of  her

daughters. A powerful erotic tie with a daughter, which goes back in

the last resort to the mother’s sexual constitution, often finds a way of

persisting  in  a  transformation  of  this  sort.  In  this  connection  I  may

perhaps remind you that the relation between mother-in-law and son-

in-law has been regarded from the earliest times of the human race as

a  particularly  awkward  one  and  that  among  primitive  people  it  has

given rise to very powerful taboo regulations and ‘avoidances’. The

relation is frequently excessive by civilized standards both in a positive

and negative direction. Which of these three factors became operative

in  our  case,  or  whether  two  of  them  or  perhaps  all  three  came

together, I cannot, it is true, tell you; but that is only because I was not

permitted  to  continue  the  analysis  of  the  case  for  more  than  two

sessions.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3336

 

 

   I notice now, Gentlemen, that I have been talking to you about a

number of things which you are not yet prepared to understand. I did

so  in  order  to  carry  out  the  comparison  between  psychiatry  and

psycho-analysis. But there is one thing that I can ask you now. Have

you observed any sign of a contradiction between them? Psychiatry

does not employ the technical methods of psycho-analysis; it omits to

make any inferences from the content of the delusion, and, in pointing

to heredity, it gives us a very general and remote aetiology instead of

indicating first the more special and proximate causes. But is there acontradiction,  an  opposition  in  this?  Is  it  not  rather  a  case  of  one

supplementing  the  other?  Does  the  hereditary  factor  contradict  the

importance of experience? Do not the two things rather combine in the

most  effective  manner?  You  will  grant  that  there  is  nothing  in  the

nature of psychiatric work which could be opposed to psycho-analytic

research. What is opposed to psycho-analysis is not psychiatry but

psychiatrists. Psycho-analysis is related to psychiatry approximately

as histology is to anatomy: the one studies the external forms of the

organs, the other studies their construction out of tissues and cells. It

is not easy to imagine a contradiction between these two species of

study,  of  which  one  is  a  continuation  of  the  other.  To-day,  as  you

know,  anatomy  is  regarded  by  us  as  the  foundation  of  scientific

medicine. But there was a time when it was as much forbidden to

dissect the human cadaver in order to discover the internal structure

of the body as it now seems to be to practise psycho-analysis in order

to learn about the internal mechanism of the mind. It is to be expected

that in the not too distant future it will be realized that a scientifically

based psychiatry is not possible without a sound knowledge of the

deeper-lying unconscious processes in mental life.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3337

 

   Perhaps, however, the much-abused psycho-analysis has friends

among  you  who  will  be  pleased  if  it  can  be  justified  from  another

direction  -  from  the  therapeutic  side.  As  you  know,  our  psychiatric

therapy  is  not  hitherto  able  to  influence  delusions.  Is  it  possible,

perhaps, that psycho-analysis can do so, thanks to its insight into the

mechanism  of  these  symptoms?  No,  Gentlemen,  it  cannot.  It  is  as

powerless (for the time being at least) against these ailments as any

other  form  of  therapy. We  can  understand,  indeed,  what  has

happened in the patient, but we have no means of making the patient

himself understand it. You have heard how I was unable to pursue the

analysis of this delusion beyond a first beginning. Will you be inclined

to maintain on that account that an analysis of such cases is to be

rejected because it is fruitless? I think not. We have a right, or rather aduty, to carry on our research without consideration of any immediate

beneficial effect. In the end - we cannot tell where or when - every little

fragment  of  knowledge  will  be  transformed  into  power,  and  into

therapeutic power as well. Even if psycho-analysis showed itself as

unsuccessful in every other form of nervous and psychical disease as

it  does  in  delusions,  it  would  still  remain  completely  justified  as  an

irreplaceable  instrument  of  scientific  research.  It  is  true  that  in  that

case we should not be in a position to practise it. The human material

on which we seek to learn, which lives, has its own will and needs its

motives for co-operating in our work, would hold back from us. Let me

therefore  end  my  remarks  to-day  by  informing  you  that  there  are

extensive groups of nervous disorders in which the transformation of

our  better  understanding  into  therapeutic  power  has  actually  taken

place, and that in these illnesses, which are difficult of access by other

means, we achieve, under favourable conditions, successes which are

second to no others in the field of internal medicine.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3338

 

                                      LECTURE XVII

 

                          THE SENSE OF SYMPTOMS

 

LADIES  AND  GENTLEMEN,  -  In  the  last  lecture  I  explained  to  you  that

clinical psychiatry takes little notice of the outward form or content of

individual  symptoms,  but  that  psycho-analysis  takes  matters  up  at

precisely that point and has established in the first place the fact that

symptoms have a sense and are related to the patient’s experiences.

The sense of neurotic symptoms was first discovered by Josef Breuer

from  his  study  and  successful  cure  (between  1880  and  1882)  of  a

case of hysteria which has since become famous. It is true that Pierre

Janet brought forward the same evidence independently; indeed, the

French  worker  can  claim  priority  of  publication,  for  it  was  only  a

decade later (in 1893 and 1895), while he was collaborating with me,

that  Breuer  published  his  observation.  In  any  case  it  may  seem  a

matter  of  some  indifference  who  made  the  discovery,  for,  as  youknow, every discovery is made more than once and none is made all

at once. And, apart from this, success does not always go along with

merit: America is not named after Columbus. The great psychiatrist

Leuret gave it as his opinion, before Breuer and Janet, that even the

delusional  ideas  of  the  insane  would  certainly  be  found  to  have  a

sense if only we understood how to translate them. I must admit that

for  a  long  time  I  was  prepared  to  give  Janet  very  great  credit  for

throwing light on neurotic symptoms, because he regarded them as

expressions of idées inconscientes which dominated the patients. But

since then he has expressed himself with exaggerated reserve, as if

he wanted to admit that the unconscious had been nothing more to

him than a form of words, a make shift, une façon de parler - that he

had meant nothing real by it. Since then I have ceased to understand

Janet’s writings; but I think he has unnecessarily forfeited much credit.

   Thus neurotic symptoms have a sense, like parapraxes and dreams,

and, like them, have a connection with the life of those who produce

them. I should now like to make this important discovery plainer to you

by a few examples. I can indeed only assert, I cannot prove, that it is

always and in every instance so. Anyone who looks for experiences

himself, will find convincing evidence. But for certain reasons I shall

choose  these  examples  from  cases  not  of  hysteria  but  of  another,

highly remarkable neurosis which is fundamentally very much akin to it

and about which I have a few introductory remarks to make.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3339

 

 

   This neurosis, known as ‘obsessional neurosis’, is not so popular as

the universally familiar hysteria. It is not, if I may express myself thus,

so  obtrusively  noisy,  it  behaves  more  like  a  private  affair  of  the

patient’s, it dispenses almost entirely with somatic phenomena, and

creates all its symptoms in the mental sphere. Obsessional neurosis

and hysteria are the forms of neurotic illness upon the study of which

psycho-analysis was first built, and in the treatment of which, too, our

therapy celebrates its triumphs. But obsessional neurosis, in which thepuzzling  leap  from  the  mental  to  the  physical  plays  no  part,  has

actually,  through  the  efforts  of  psycho-analysis,  become  more

perspicuous and familiar to us than hysteria, and we have learnt that it

displays certain extreme characteristics of the nature of neurosis far

more glaringly.

   Obsessional neurosis is shown in the patient’s being occupied with

thoughts in which he is in fact not interested, in his being aware of

impulses in himself which appear very strange to him and in his being

led to actions the performance of which give him no enjoyment, but

which it is quite impossible for him to omit. The thoughts (obsessions)

may be senseless in themselves, or merely a matter of indifference to

the subject; often they are completely silly, and invariably they are the

starting-point  of  a  strenuous  mental  activity,  which  exhausts  the

patient and to which he only surrenders himself most unwillingly. He is

obliged against his will to brood and speculate as though it were a

question of his most important vital problems. The impulses which the

patient is aware of in himself may also make a childish and senseless

impression; but as a rule they have a content of the most frightful kind,

tempting him, for instance, to commit serious crimes, so that he not

merely disavows them as alien to himself, but flies from them in horror

and  protects  him.  self  from  carrying  them  out  by  prohibitions,

renunciations  and  restrictions  upon  his  freedom.  At  the  same  time,

these  impulse  never  -  literally  never  -  force  their  way  through  to

performance; the outcome lies always in victory for the flight and the

precautions.  What  the  patient  actually  carries  out  -  his  so  called

obsessional actions - are very harmless and certainly trivial things, for

the most part repetitions or ceremonial elaborations of the activities of

ordinary  life.  But  these  necessary  activities  (such  as  going  to  bed,

washing, dressing or going for a walk) become extremely tedious and

almost  insoluble  tasks.  In  different  forms  and  cases  of  obsessional

neurosis  the  pathological  ideas,  impulses  and  actions  are  not

combined in equal proportions; it is the rule, rather, that one or other

of  these  factors  dominates  the  picture  and  gives  its  name  to  the

illness,  but  the  common  element  in  all  these  forms  is  sufficiently

unmistakable.

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3340

 

   Certainly this is a crazy illness. The most extravagant psychiatric

imagination  would  not,  I  think,  have  succeeded  in  constructing

anything like it; and if one did not see it before one every day one

would never bring oneself to believe in it. Do not suppose, however,

that you will help the patient in the least by calling on him to take a

new line, to cease to occupy himself with such foolish thoughts and to

do something sensible instead of his childish pranks. He would like to

do  so  himself,  for  he  is  completely  clear  in  his  head,  shares  your

opinion of his obsessional symptoms and even puts it forward to you

spontaneously.  Only  he  cannot  help  himself.  What  is  carried  into

action in an obsessional neurosis is sustained by an energy to which

we probably know nothing comparable in normal mental life. There is

only  one  thing  he  can  do:  he  can  make  displacements,  and  ex

changes,  he  can  replace  one  foolish  idea  by  another  somewhat

milder, he can proceed from one precaution or prohibition to another,

instead of one ceremonial he can perform another. He can displace

the obsession but not remove it. The ability to displace any symptom

into something far removed from its original conformation is a main

characteristic of his illness. Moreover it is a striking fact that in his

condition  the  contradictions  (polarities)  with  which  mental  life  is

interlaced  emerge  especially  sharply  differentiated.  Alongside  of

obsessions with a positive and negative content, doubt makes itself

felt in the intellectual field and little by little it begins to gnaw even at

what is usually most certain. The whole position ends up in an ever-

increasing  degree  of  indecision,  loss  of  energy  and  restriction  of

freedom. At the same time, the obsessional neurotic starts off with a

very energetic disposition, he is often extraordinarily self-willed and as

a  rule  he  has  intellectual  gifts  above  the  average.  He  has  usually

reached a satisfactorily high level of ethical development; he exhibits

over-conscientiousness,  and  is  more  than  ordinarily  correct  in  his

behaviour. You can imagine that no small amount of work is needed

before one can make one’s way any distance into this contradictory

hotch-potch of character-traits and symptoms. And to begin with we

aim  at  nothing  whatever  else  than  understanding  a  few  of  thesymptoms and being able to interpret them.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3341

 

   Perhaps you would like to know in advance, having in mind our

earlier  talks,  what  attitude  contemporary  psychiatry  adopts  towards

the  problems  of  obsessional  neurosis.  But  it  is  a  meagre  chapter.

Psychiatry gives names to the different obsessions but says nothing

further about them. On the other hand it insists that those who suffer

from these symptoms are ‘degenerates’. This gives small satisfaction;

in  fact  it  is  a  judgement  of  value  a  condemnation  instead  of  an

explanation.  We  are  supposed  to  think  that  every  possible  sort  of

eccentricity may arise in de generates. Well, it is true that we must

regard those who develop such symptoms as somewhat different in

their  nature  from  other  people.  But  we  may  ask:  are  they  more

‘degenerate’ than other neurotics-than hysterical patients, for instance,

or those who fall ill of psychoses? Once again, the characterization is

evidently  too  general.  Indeed,  we  may  doubt  whether  there  is  any

justification for it at all, when we learn that such symptoms occur too in

distinguished  people  of  particularly  high  capacities,  capacities

important  for  the  world  at  large.  It  is  true  that,  thanks  to  their  own

discretion and to the untruthfulness of their biographers, we learn little

that is intimate about the great men who are our models; but it may

nevertheless  happen  that  one  of  them,  like  Émile  Zola,  may  be  a

fanatic for the truth, and we then learn from him of the many strange

obsessional habits to which he was a life-long victim.¹

 

   ¹ E. Toulouse, Émile Zola, enquête médico-psychologique, Paris, 1896.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3342

 

      Psychiatry  has  found  a  way  out  by  speaking  of  ‘dégénérés

supérieurs’. Very nice. But we have found from psycho-analysis that it

is  possible  to  get  permanently  rid  of  these  strange  obsessionalsymptoms, just as of other complaints and just as in people who are

not degenerate. I myself have succeeded repeatedly in this.

   I shall give you only two examples of the analysis of an obsessional

symptom: one an old observation which I cannot find a better one to

replace,  and  another  recently  met  with.  I  limit  myself  to  this  small

number, because it is impossible in such reports to avoid being very

diffuse and entering into every detail.

 

   A lady, nearly thirty years of age, who suffered from the most severe

obsessional manifestations and whom I might perhaps have helped if

a malicious chance had not brought my work to nothing - I may be

able to tell you more about this later on performed (among others) the

following remarkable obsessional action many times a day. She ran

from  her  room  into  another  neighbouring  one,  took  up  a  particular

position there beside a table that stood in the middle, rang the bell for

her  housemaid,  sent  her  on  some  indifferent  errand  or  let  her  go

without one, and then ran back into her own room. This was certainly

not a very distressing symptom, but was nevertheless calculated to

excite curiosity. The explanation was reached in the most unequivocal

and unobjectionable manner, free from any possible contribution on

the doctor’s part. I cannot see how I could possibly have formed any

suspicion of the sense of this obsessional action or could have offered

any suggestion on how it was to be interpreted. Whenever I asked the

patient ‘Why do you do that? What sense has it?’ she answered: ‘I

don’t know.’ But one day, after I had succeeded in defeating a major,

fundamental doubt of hers, she suddenly knew the answer and told

me what it was that was connected with the obsessional action. More

than ten years before, she had married a man very much older than

herself, and on the wedding-night he was impotent. Many times during

the night he had come running from his room into hers to try once

more,  but  every  time  without  success.  Next  morning  he  had  said

angrily: ‘I should feel ashamed in front of the housemaid when she

makes the bed,’ took up a bottle of red ink that happened to be in the

room and poured its contents over the sheet, but not on the exact

place  where  a  stain  would  have  been  appropriate.  I  could  not

understand  at  first  what  this  recollection  had  to  do  with  the

obsessional action in question; the only resemblance I could find wasin the repeated running from one room into the other, and perhaps

also in the entrance of the housemaid. My patient then led me up to

the  table  in  the  second  room  and  showed  me  a  big  stain  on  the

tablecloth.  She  further  explained  that  she  took  up  her  position  in

relation to the table in such a way that the maid who had been sent for

could not fail to see the stain. There could no longer be any doubt of

the intimate connection between the scene on her wedding-night and

her  present  obsessional  action,  though  all  kinds  of  other  things

remained to be learnt.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3343

 

   It was clear, in the first place, that the patient was identifying herself

with her husband; she was playing his part by imitating his running

from one room into the other. Further, to carry on the analogy, we

must agree that the bed and the sheet were re placed by the table and

the  tablecloth.  This  might  seem  arbitrary,  but  surely  we  have  not

studied dream-symbolism to no purpose. In dreams too we often find

a table which has to be interpreted as a bed. Table and bed together

stand for marriage, so that the one can easily take the place of the

other.

   It already seems proved that the obsessional action had a sense; it

appears to have been a representation, a repetition, of the significant

scene. But we are not obliged to come to a halt here. If we examine

the relation between the two more closely, we shall probably obtain

information about something that goes further - about the intention of

the obsessional action. Its kernel was obviously the summoning of the

housemaid,  before  whose  eyes  the  patient  displayed  the  stain,  in

contrast to her husband’s remark that he would feel ashamed in front

of  the  maid.  Thus  he,  whose  part  she  was  playing,  did  not  feel

ashamed in front of the maid; accordingly the stain was in the right

place. We see, therefore, that she was not simply repeating the scene,

she was continuing and at the same time correcting it; she was putting

it right. But by this she was also correcting the other thing, which had

been so distressing that night and had made the expedient with thered  ink  necessary  -  his  impotence.  So  the  obsessional  action  was

saying: ‘No, it’s not true. He had no need to feel ashamed in front of

the housemaid; he was not impotent.’ It represented this wish, in the

manner of a dream, as fulfilled in a present-day action; it served the

purpose of making her husband superior to his past mishap.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3344

 

   Everything I could tell you about this woman fits in with this. Or,

more correctly speaking, everything else we know about her points the

way  to  this  interpretation  of  what  was  in  itself  an  unintelligible

obsessional  action.  The  woman  had  been  living  apart  from  her

husband for years and was struggling with an intention to obtain a

legal divorce. But there was no question of her being free of him; she

was forced to remain faithful to him; she withdrew from the world so as

not to be tempted; she exculpated and magnified his nature in her

imagination. In deed, the deepest secret of her illness was that by

means of it she protected her husband from malicious gossip, justified

her  separation  from  him  and  enabled  him  to  lead  a  comfortable

separate life. Thus the analysis of a harmless obsessional action led

directly to the inmost core of an illness, but at the same time betrayed

to us no small part of the secret of obsessional neurosis in general. I

am glad to let you dwell a little on this example because it combines

conditions which we could not fairly expect to find in every case. Here

the  interpretation  of  the  symptom  was  discovered  by  the  patient

herself at a single blow, without any prompting or intervention on the

analyst’s part; and it resulted from a connection with an event which

did  not  (as  is  usually  the  case)  belong  to  a  forgotten  period  of

childhood, but which had happened in the patient’s adult life and had

remained undimmed in her memory. All the objections which criticism

is  normally  in  the  habit  of  raising  against  our  interpretation  of

symptoms fall to the ground in this particular case. We cannot hope

always to have such good luck.

   And one thing more. Were you not struck by the way in which this

unobtrusive obsessional action has led us into the intimacies of thepatient’s life? A woman cannot have anything much more intimate to

tell than the story of her wedding-night. Is it a matter of chance and of

no further significance that we have arrived precisely at the intimacies

of sexual life? No doubt it might be the result of the choice I have

made  on  this  occasion.  Do  not  let  us  be  too  hasty  in  forming  our

judgement, and let us turn to my second example, which is of quite a

different  kind  -  a  sample  of  a  very  common  species,  a  sleep-

ceremonial.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3345

 

 

   A nineteen-year-old girl, well developed and gifted, was the only

child  of  parents  to  whom  she  was  superior  in  education  and

intellectual liveliness. As a child she had been wild and high spirited,

and  in  the  course  of  the  last  few  years  had  changed,  without  any

visible  cause,  into  a  neurotic.  She  was  very  irritable,  particularly

towards her mother, always dissatisfied and depressed, and inclined

to  indecisiveness  and  doubt;  finally  she  admitted  that  she  was  no

longer able to walk by herself across squares or along comparatively

wide  streets.  We  will  not  concern  ourselves  much  with  her

complicated  illness,  which  called  for  at  least  two  diagnoses  -

agoraphobia and obsessional neurosis - but will dwell only on the fact

that she also developed a sleep-ceremonial, with which she tormented

her  parents.  In  a  certain  sense  it  may  be  said  that  every  normal

person has his sleep-ceremonial or that he has established certain

necessary  conditions  the  non-fulfilment  of  which  interferes  with  his

going to sleep; he has imposed certain forms on the transition from

the waking to the sleeping state and repeats them in the same manner

every  evening.  But  everything  that  a  healthy  person  requires  as  a

necessary  condition  for  sleep  can  be  understood  rationally,  and  if

external  circumstances  call  for  a  change  he  will  comply  easily  and

without  waste  of  time.  A  pathological  ceremonial,  however,  is

unyielding and insists on being carried through, even at the cost of

great sacrifices; it too is screened by having a rational basis and at asuperficial glance seems to diverge from the normal only by a certain

exaggerated  meticulousness.  On  closer  examination,  nevertheless,

we  can  see  that  the  screen  is  insufficient,  that  the  ceremonial

comprises some stipulations which go far beyond its rational basis and

others  which  positively  run  counter  to  it.  Our  present  patient  put

forward as a pretext for her nightly precautions that she needed quiet

in order to sleep and must exclude every source of noise. With that

end in view she did two kinds of things. The big clock in her room was

stopped, all the other clocks or watches in the room were removed,

and  her  tiny  wrist-watch  was  not  allowed  even  to  be  inside  her

bedside table. Flower-pots and vases were collected on the writing-

table so that they might not fall over in the night and break, and disturb

her in her sleep. She was aware that these measures could find only

an ostensible justification in the rule in favour of quiet: the ticking of

the little watch would not have been audible even if it had been left

lying on the top of the bedside table, and we have all had experience

of the fact that the regular ticking of a pendulum-clock never disturbs

sleep but acts, rather, as a soporific. She admitted too that her fear

that flower-pots and vases, if they were left in their places, might fall

over and break of their own accord lacked all plausibility. In the case

of other stipulations made by the ceremonial the need for quiet was

dropped as a basis. Indeed, the requirement that the door between

her  room  and  her  parents’  bedroom  should  stay  half-open  -  the

fulfilment of which she ensured by placing various objects in the open

doorway - seemed on the contrary to act as a source of disturbing

noises. But the most important stipulations related to the bed itself.

The pillow at the top end of the bed must not touch the wooden back

of the bedstead. The small top pillow must lie on this large pillow in

one specific way only - namely, so as to form a diamond shape. Her

head had then to lie exactly along the long diameter of the diamond.

The eiderdown (or ‘Duchent’ as we call it in Austria) had to be shaken

before being laid on the bed so that its bottom end became very thick;

afterwards, however, she never failed to even out this accumulation of

feathers by pressing them apart.

   With your leave I will pass over the remaining, often very trivial,

details of the ceremonial; they would teach us nothing new, and would

lead us too far afield from our aims. But you must not overlook the factthat  all  this  was  not  carried  out  smoothly.  There  was  always  an

apprehension  that  things  might  not  have  been  done  properly.

Everything must be checked and repeated, doubts assailed first one

and then another of the safety measures, and the result was that one

or two hours were spent, during which the girl herself could not sleep

and would not allow her intimidated parents to sleep either.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3346

 

   The analysis of these torments did not proceed so simply as that of

our earlier patient’s obsessional action. I was obliged to give the girl

hints and propose interpretations, which were always rejected with a

decided ‘no’ or accepted with contemptuous doubt. But after this first

reaction of rejection there followed a time during which she occupied

herself with the possibilities put before her, collected associations to

them, produced recollections and made connections, until by her own

work she had accepted all the interpretations. In proportion as this

happened, she relaxed the performance of her obsessional measures,

and even before the end of the treatment she had given up the whole

ceremonial. You must understand, too, that the work of analysis as we

carry  it  out  to-day  quite  excludes  the  systematic  treatment  of  any

individual symptom till it has been entirely cleared up. We are, on the

contrary, obliged to keep on leaving any particular topic, in the certain

expectation  of  coming  back  to  it  again  in  other  connections.  The

interpretation  of  her  symptoms  which  I  am  about  to  give  you  is

accordingly a synthesis of findings which were arrived at, interrupted

by other work, over a period of weeks and months.

   Our patient gradually came to learn that it was as symbols of the

female genitals that clocks were banished from her equipment for the

night. Clocks and watches - though elsewhere we have found other

symbolic interpretations for them - have arrived at a genital role owing

to their relation to periodic processes and equal intervals of time. A

woman may boast that her menstruation behaves with the regularity of

clockwork. Our patient’s anxiety, however, was directed in particular

against  being  disturbed  in  her  sleep  by  the  ticking  of  a  clock.  Theticking of a clock may be compared with the knocking or throbbing in

the clitoris during sexual excitement. She had in fact been repeatedly

woken  from  her  sleep  by  this  sensation,  which  had  now  become

distressing to her; and she gave expression to this fear of an erection

in  the  rule  that  all  clocks  and  watches  that  were  going  should  be

removed from her neighbourhood at night. Flower-pots and vases, like

all vessels, are also female symbols. Taking precautions against their

falling and being broken at night was thus not without its good sense.

We  know  the  widespread  custom  of  breaking  a  vessel  or  plate  at

betrothal ceremonies. Each man present gets hold of a fragment, and

we may regard this as a sign of his resigning the claims he had upon

the  bride  in  virtue  of  a  marriage-regulation  dating  from  before  the

establishment  of  monogamy.  In  connection  with  this  part  of  her

ceremonial the girl produced a recollection and several associations.

Once  when  she  was  a  child  she  had  fallen  down  while  she  was

carrying  a  glass  or  china  vase  and  had  cut  her  finger  and  bled

profusely.  When  she  grew  up  and  came  to  know  the  facts  about

sexual intercourse she formed an anxious idea that on her wedding-

night she would not bleed and would thus fail to show that she was a

virgin.  Her  precautions  against  vases  being  broken  thus  meant  a

repudiation  of  the  whole  complex  concerned  with  virginity  and

bleeding at the first intercourse - a repudiation equally of the fear of

bleeding and of the contrary fear of not bleeding. These precautions,

which she subsumed under her avoidance of noise, had only a remote

connection with it.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3347

 

   She found out the central meaning of her ceremonial one day when

she suddenly understood the meaning of the rule that the pillow must

not touch the back of the bedstead. The pillow, she said, had always

been a woman to her and the upright wooden back a man. Thus she

wanted - by magic, we must interpolate - to keep the man and woman

apart - that is, to separate her parents from each other, not to allow

them  to  have  sexual  intercourse.  In  earlier  years,  before  she  hadestablished the ceremonial, she had tried to achieve the same aim in

a  more  direct  way.  She  had  simulated  fear  (or  had  exploited  a

tendency  to  fear  which  was  already  present)  in  order  that  the

connecting  doors  between  her  parents’  bedroom  and  the  nursery

should not be shut. This rule had, indeed, been retained in her present

ceremonial. In that way she gave herself the opportunity of listening to

her parents, but in making use of it she brought on an insomnia which

lasted  for  months.  Not  satisfied  with  disturbing  her  parents  by  this

means, she contrived to be allowed from time to time to sleep in her

parents’ bed between them. The ‘pillow’ and the ‘wooden back’ were

thus really unable to come together. Finally, when she was so big that

it  became  physically  uncomfortable  for  her  to  find  room  in  the  bed

between  her  parents,  she  managed,  by  a  conscious  simulation  of

anxiety, to arrange for her mother to exchange places with her for the

night and to leave her own place so that the patient could sleep beside

her  father.  This  situation  no  doubt  became  the  starting-point  of

phantasies whose after-effect was to be seen in the ceremonial.

   If a pillow was a woman, then the shaking of the eiderdown till all the

feathers were at the bottom and caused a swelling there had a sense

as well. It meant making a woman pregnant; but she never failed to

smooth away the pregnancy again, for she had for years been afraid

that  her  parents’  intercourse  would  result  in  another  child  and  so

present her with a competitor. On the other hand, if the big pillow was

a woman, the mother, then the small top-pillow could only stand for

the daughter. Why did this pillow have to be placed diamond-wise and

her head precisely along its centre line? It was easy to re call to her

that this diamond shape is the inscription scribbled on every wall to

represent the open female genitals. If so, she herself was playing the

man and replacing the male organ by her head. (Cf. the symbolism of

beheading for castrating.)

   Wild thoughts, you will say, to be running through an unmarried girl’s

head. I admit that is so. But you must not forget that I did not make

these things but only interpreted them. A sleep-ceremonial like this is

a strange thing too, and you will not fail to see how the ceremonial

corresponds  to  the  phantasies  which  are  revealed  by  the

interpretation. But I attach more importance to your noticing that what

was seen in the ceremonial was a precipitate not of a single phantasybut of a number of them, though they had a nodal point somewhere,

and, further, that the rules laid down by the ceremonial reproduced the

patient’s  sexual  wishes  at  one  point  positively  and  at  another

negatively - in part they represented them, but in part they served as a

defence against them.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3348

 

   More could be made, too, of the analysis of this ceremonial if it could

be properly linked up with the patient’s other symptoms. But our path

does not lead in that direction. You must be content with a hint that the

girl  was  in  the  grip  of  an  erotic  attachment  to  her  father  whose

beginnings went back to her childhood. Perhaps that was why she

behaved  in  such  an  unfriendly  way  to  her  mother.  Nor  can  we

overlook the fact that the analysis of this symptom has once again

taken  us  back  to  a  patient’s  sexual  life.  We  shall  perhaps  be  less

surprised at this the more often we gain an insight into the sense and

intention of neurotic symptoms.

 

   I have shown you, then, on the basis of two chosen examples, that

neurotic symptoms have a sense, like parapraxes and dreams, and

that they have an intimate connection with the patient’s experiences.

Can  I  expect  you  to  believe  this  extremely  important  thesis  on  the

evidence  of  two  examples?  No.  But  can  you  require  me  to  go  on

giving you further examples till you declare yourselves convinced? No,

once more. For, in view of the detailed fashion in which I deal with

each  single  case,  I  should  have  to  devote  a  five-hour  course  of

lectures to settling this one point in the theory of the neuroses. So I

must be content with having given you a trial proof of my assertion

and, for the rest, I refer you to the reports given in the literature of the

subject - to the classical interpretations of symptoms in Breuer’s first

case (of hysteria), to the striking light thrown upon the most obscure

symptoms of what is known as dementia praecox by C. G. Jung, at a

time when he was merely a psycho-analyst and had not yet aspired to

be a prophet, and all the other papers that have since than filled ourperiodicals.  There  has  been  no  lack  of  investigations  precisely  on

these  lines.  The  analysis,  interpretation  and  translation  of  neurotic

symptoms proved so attractive to psycho-analysts that for a time they

neglected the other problems of neurosis.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3349

 

   If any of you undertakes exertions of this kind, he will certainly gain

a powerful impression of the wealth of evidential material. But he will

also come up against a difficulty. The sense of a symptom lies, as we

have  found,  in  some  connection  with  the  patient’s  experience.  The

more individual is the form of the symptom the more reason we shall

have for expecting to be able to establish this connection. The task is

then simply to discover, in respect to a senseless idea and a pointless

action, the past situation in which the idea was justified and the action

served a purpose. The obsessional action of our patient who ran to

the table and rang for the housemaid is a perfect model of this kind of

symptom.  But  there  are  -  and  they  are  very  frequent  symptoms  of

quite  another  character.  They  must  be  described  as  ‘typical’

symptoms of an illness; they are approximately the same in all cases,

individual distinctions disappear in them or at least shrink up to such

an  extent  that  it  is  difficult  to  bring  them  into  connection  with  the

patients’  individual  experience  and  to  relate  them  to  particular

situations  they  have  experienced.  Let  us  look  once  more  at

obsessional  neurosis.  the  sleep-ceremonial  of  our  second  patient

already has much that is typical about it, though at the same time it

has  enough  individual  traits  to  make  what  I  might  call  a  ‘historical’

interpretation  possible.  But  all  these  obsessional  patients  have  a

tendency  to  repeat,  to  make  their  performances  rhythmical  and  to

keep them isolated from other actions. The majority of them wash too

much. Patients who suffer from agoraphobia (topophobia or fear of

spaces),  which  we  no  longer  regard  as  obsessional  neurosis  but

describe as ‘anxiety hysteria’, often repeat the same features in their

symptoms  with  wearisome  monotony:  they  are  afraid  of  en  closed

spaces, of large open squares, of lengthy roads and streets. They feelprotected if they are accompanied by an acquaintance or followed by

a vehicle, and so on. On this similar background, however, different

patients  nevertheless  display  their  individual  requirements  -  whims,

one is inclined to say - which in some cases contradict one another

directly. One patient avoids only narrow streets and another only wide

ones; one can go out only if there are few people in the street, another

only if there are many. In the same way, hysteria, in spite of its wealth

of  individual  traits,  has  a  superfluity  of  common,  typical  symptoms,

which seem to resist any easy historical derivation. And we must not

forget  that  it  is  these  typical  symptoms,  indeed,  which  give  us  our

bearings  when  we  make  our  diagnosis.  Suppose,  in  a  case  of

hysteria,  we  have  really  traced  a  typical  symptom  back  to  an

experience  or  a  chain  of  similar  experiences  -  a  case  of  hysterical

vomiting, for instance, to a series of disgusting impressions - then we

are at a loss when the analysis in a similar case of vomiting reveals a

series of a quite different kind of ostensibly effective experiences. It

looks,  then,  as  though  for  unknown  reasons  hysterical  patients  are

bound to produce vomiting and as though the historical precipitating

causes revealed by analysis were only pretexts which, if they happen

to be there, are exploited by this internal necessity.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3350

 

   So we are now faced by the depressing discovery that, though we

can give a satisfactory explanation of the individual neurotic symptoms

by their connection with experiences, our skill leaves us in the lurch

when  we  come  to  the  far  more  frequent  typical  symptoms.

Furthermore, I am far from having made you acquainted with all the

difficulties  that  arise  when  consistently  pursuing  the  historical

interpretation of symptoms. Nor do I intend to do so; for, though it is

my intention not to gloss things over to you or conceal them, I cannot

throw you into perplexity and confusion at the very beginning of our

common studies. It is true that we have only made a beginning with

our efforts at understanding the significance of symptoms; but we will

hold fast to what we have achieved and pursue our way step by stepto a mastery of what we have not yet understood. I will try to console

you,  therefore,  with  the  reflection  that  any  fundamental  distinction

between  one  kind  of  symptom  and  the  other  is  scarcely  to  be

assumed. If the individual symptoms are so unmistakably dependent

on  the  patient’s  experience,  it  re  mains  possible  that  the  typical

symptoms may go back to an experience which is in itself typical -

common to all human beings. Other features which recur regularly in

neuroses may be general reactions which are imposed on the patients

by  the  nature  of  their  pathological  change,  like  the  repetitions  or

doubts  in  obsessional  neurosis.  In  short,  we  have  no  grounds  for

premature despair; we shall see what remains to be seen.

   A quite similar difficulty faces us in the theory of dreams. I could not

deal with it in our earlier discussions on dreams. The manifest content

of dreams is of the greatest diversity and individual variety, and we

have shown in detail what one derives from this content by means of

analysis.  But  alongside  of  these  there  are  dreams  which  equally

deserve to be called ‘typical’, which happen in everyone in the same

way, dreams with a uniform content, which offer the same difficulties

to interpretation. They are dreams of falling, flying, floating, swimming,

of being inhibited, of being naked and certain other anxiety dreams -

which  lead,  in  different  people,  now  to  this  and  now  to  that

interpretation, without any light being thrown on their monotony and

typical  occurrence.  But  in  these  dreams  too  we  observe  that  this

common background is enlivened by additions that vary individually;

and it is probable that, with a widening of our knowledge, it will be

possible,  without  constraint,  to  include  these  dreams  too  in  the

understanding  of  dream-life  which  we  have  acquired  from  other

dreams.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3351

 

                                      LECTURE XVIII

 

            FIXATION TO TRAUMAS - THE UNCONSCIOUS

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - In my last lecture I expressed a desire that ourwork  should  go  forward  on  the  basis  not  of  our  doubts  but  of  our

discoveries. We have not yet had any discussion of two of the most

interesting implications that follow from our two sample analyses.

 

   To take the first of these. Both patients give us an impression of

having been ‘fixated’ to a particular portion of their past, as though

they could not manage to free themselves from it and were for that

reason alienated from the present and the future. They then remained

lodged in their illness in the sort of way in which in earlier days people

retreated into a monastery in order to bear the burden there of their ill-

fated lives. What had brought this fate upon our first patient was the

marriage  which  she  had  in  real  life  abandoned.  By  means  of  her

symptoms she continued to carry on her dealings with her husband.

We learnt to understand the voices that pleaded for him, that excused

him, that put him on a pedestal and that lamented his loss. Although

she  was  young  and  desirable  to  other  men,  she  had  taken  every

precaution, real and imaginary (magical), to remain faithful to him. She

did  not  show  herself  to  strangers  and  she  neglected  her  personal

appearance; furthermore, once she had sat down in a chair she was

unable to get out of it quickly, she refused to sign her name, and she

could  not  make  any  presents,  on  the  ground  that  no  one  ought  to

receive anything from her.

   The same effect was produced on the life of our second patient, the

young girl, by an erotic attachment to her father which had started

during the years before her puberty. The conclusion she herself drew

was that she could not marry as long as she was so ill. We, however,

may suspect that she had become so ill in order not to have to marry

and in order to remain with her father.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3352

 

   We cannot dismiss the question of why, in what way and for what

motive a person can arrive at such a remarkable attitude to life and

one that is so inexpedient - assuming that this attitude is a general

characteristic of neuroses and not a special peculiarity of these twopatients.  And  in  fact  it  is  a  general  feature,  of  great  practical

importance,  in  every  neurosis.  Breuer’s  first  hysterical  patient  was

similarly fixated to the period when she was nursing her father in a

serious  illness.  In  spite  of  her  recovery,  in  a  certain  respect  she

remained  cut  off  from  life;  she  remained  healthy  and  efficient  but

avoided  the  normal  course  of  a  woman’s  life.  In  every  one  of  our

patients, analysis shows us that they have been carried back to some

particular period of their past by the symptoms of their illness or their

consequences. In the majority of cases, indeed, a very early phase of

life is chosen for the purpose - a period of their childhood or even,

laughable as this may sound, of their existence as an infant at the

breast.

   The closest analogy to this behaviour of our neurotics is afforded by

illnesses which are being produced with special frequency precisely at

the  present  time  by  the  war  -  what  are  described  as  traumatic

neuroses. Similar cases, of course, appeared before the war as well,

after  railway  collisions  and  other  alarming  accidents  involving  fatal

risks. Traumatic neuroses are not in their essence the same thing as

the spontaneous neuroses which we are in the habit of investigating

and treating by analysis; nor have we yet succeeded in bringing them

into harmony with our views, and I hope I shall be able at some time to

explain to you the reason for this limitation. But in one respect we may

insist  that  there  is  a  complete  agreement  between  them.  The

traumatic  neuroses  give  a  clear  indication  that  a  fixation  to  the

moment  of  the  traumatic  accident  lies  at  their  root.  These  patients

regularly  repeat  the  traumatic  situation  in  their  dreams;  where

hysteriform attacks occur that admit of an analysis, we find that the

attack corresponds to a complete transplanting of the patient into the

traumatic situation. It is as though these patients had not finished with

the  traumatic  situation,  as  though  they  were  still  faced  by  it  as  al

immediate task which has not been dealt with; and we take this view

quite seriously. It shows us the way to what we may call an economic

view of mental processes. Indeed, the term ‘traumatic’ has no other

sense  than  an  economic  one.  We  apply  it  to  an  experience  which

within a short period of time presents the mind with an increase of

stimulus too powerful to be dealt with or worked off in the normal way,

and this must result in permanent disturbances of the manner in whichthe energy operates.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3353

 

   This analogy is bound to tempt us to describe as traumatic those

experiences  too  to  which  our  neurotic  patients  seem  to  be  fixated.

This would promise to offer us a simple determinant for the onset of

neurosis. Neurosis could then be equated with a traumatic illness and

would come about owing to inability to deal with an experience whose

affective  colouring  was  excessively  powerful.  And  this  indeed  was

actually the first formula in which (in 1893 and 1895) Breuer and I

accounted theoretically for our new observations. A case like that of

the  first  of  the  two  patients  in  my  last  lecture  -  the  young  married

woman separated from her husband - fits in very well with this view.

She  had  not  got  over  the  failure  of  her  marriage  and  remained

attached to that trauma. But our second case - that of the girl with a

fixation  upon  her  father  -  shows  us  already  that  the  formula  is  not

sufficiently comprehensive. On the one hand, a little girl’s being in love

like this with her father is something so common and so frequently

surmounted  that  the  term  ‘traumatic’  applied  to  it  would  lose  all  its

meaning; and, on the other hand, the patient’s history showed us that

in the first instance her erotic fixation appeared to have passed off

without doing any damage, and it was only several years later that it

reappeared in the symptoms of the obsessional neurosis. Here, then,

we  foresee  complications,  a  greater  wealth  of  determinants  for  the

onset of illness; but we may also suspect that there is no need to

abandon the traumatic line of approach as being erroneous: it must be

possible to fit it in and subsume it somewhere else.

      Here  once  more,  then,  we  must  break  off  the  course  we  have

started on. For the moment it leads no further and we shall have to

learn  all  kinds  of  other  things  before  we  can  find  its  proper

continuation. But on the subject of fixation to a particular phase in the

past we may add that such behaviour is far more widespread than

neurosis. Every neurosis includes a fixation of that kind, but not every

fixation leads to a neurosis, coincides with a neurosis or arises owingto a neurosis. A perfect model of an affective fixation to something that

is  past  is  provided  by  mourning,  which  actually  involves  the  most

complete  alienation  from  the  present  and  the  future.  But  even  the

judgement of a layman will distinguish sharply between mourning and

neurosis.  There  are,  on  the  other  hand,  neuroses  which  may  be

described as a pathological form of mourning.

   It may happen, too, that a person is brought so completely to a stop

by a traumatic event which shatters the foundations of his life that he

abandons  all  interest  in  the  present  and  future  and  remains

permanently absorbed in mental concentration upon the past. But an

unfortunate such as this need not on that account become a neurotic.

We will not attach too much value to this one feature, therefore, in

characterizing  neurosis,  however  regularly  present  and  however

important it may usually be.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3354

 

 

   Let us turn now to the second of the discoveries which follow from

our  analyses;  in  its  case  we  need  not  fear  having  to  make  a

subsequent qualification of our views. I have described to you how our

first patient carried out a senseless obsessional action and how she

reported  an  intimate  memory  from  her  past  life  as  having  some

connection  with  it:  and  how  afterwards  I  examined  the  connection

between  the  two  and  discovered  the  intention  of  the  obsessional

action from its relation to the memory. But there is one factor which I

have  entirely  neglected,  though  it  deserves  our  fullest  attention.

However often the patient repeated her obsessional action, she knew

nothing of its being derived from the experience she had had. The

connection between the two was hidden from her; she could only quite

truthfully reply that she did not know what it was that was making her

carry out her action. Then suddenly one day, under the influence of

the  treatment,  she  succeeded  in  discovering  the  connection  and

reported it to me. But she still knew nothing of the intention with which

she was performing the obsessional action - the intention of correctinga distressing portion of the past and of putting her beloved husband in

a  better  light.  It  took  a  fairly  long  time  and  called  for  much  labour

before she understood and admitted to me that such a motive alone

could have been the driving force of her obsessional action.

   The link with the scene after her unhappy wedding-night and the

patient’s affectionate motive constituted, taken together, what we have

called  the  ‘sense’  of  the  obsessional  action.  But  while  she  was

carrying out the obsessional action this sense had been unknown to

her  in  both  directions  -  both  its  ‘whence’  and  its  ‘whither’.  Mental

processes  had  therefore  been  at  work  in  her  and  the  obsessional

action was the effect of them; she had been aware of this effect in a

normal mental fashion, but none of the mental predeterminants of this

effect came to the knowledge of her consciousness. She behaved in

precisely the same way as a hypnotized subject whom Bernheim had

ordered to open an umbrella in the hospital ward five minutes after he

woke up. The man carried out this instruction when he was awake, but

he could produce no motive for his action. It is a state of affairs of this

sort that we have before our eyes when we speak of the existence of

unconscious mental processes. We can challenge anyone in the world

to give a more correct scientific account of this state of affairs, and if

he does we will gladly renounce our hypothesis of unconscious mental

processes.  Till  that  happens,  however,  we  will  hold  fast  to  the

hypothesis;  and  if  someone  objects  that  here  the  unconscious  is

nothing real in a scientific sense, is a makeshift, une façon de parler,

we can only shrug our shoulders resignedly and dismiss what he says

as unintelligible. Something not real, which produces effects of such

tangible reality as an obsessional action!

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3355

 

   And we meet with what is in essence the same thing in our second

patient. She had made a rule that the pillow must not touch the back

of the bedstead, and she had to obey this rule though she did not

know where it came from, what it meant or to what motives it owed its

power.  Whether  she  herself  regarded  the  rule  as  a  matter  ofindifference, or whether she struggled against it or raged against it or

decided  to  transgress  it  -  none  of  this  made  any  difference  to  her

carrying it out. It had to be obeyed, and she asked herself vainly why.

We  must  recognize,  however,  that  these  symptoms  of  obsessional

neurosis,  these  ideas  and  impulses  which  emerge  one  knows  not

whence, which prove so resistant to every influence from an otherwise

normal mind, which give the patient himself the impression of being

all-powerful guests from an alien world, immortal beings intruding into

the turmoil of mortal life - these symptoms offer the plainest indication

of there being a special region of the mind, shut off from the rest. They

lead, by a path that cannot be missed, to a conviction of the existence

of  the  unconscious  in  the  mind;  and  that  is  precisely  why  clinical

psychiatry,  which  is  acquainted  only  with  a  psychology  of

consciousness, can deal with these symptoms in no other way than by

declaring  them  to  be  signs  of  a  special  sort  of  degeneracy.

Obsessional  ideas  and  obsessional  impulses  are  not,  of  course,

themselves  unconscious,  any  more  than  the  performance  of

obsessional  actions  escapes  conscious  perception.  They  would  not

have  become  symptoms  if  they  had  not  forced  their  way  into

consciousness. But their psychical predeterminants which we infer by

means  of  analysis,  the  connections  into  which  we  insert  them  by

interpretation,  are  unconscious,  at  least  until  we  have  made  them

conscious to the patient by the work of analysis.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3356

 

   If, now, you consider further that the state of affairs which we have

established in our two cases is confirmed for every symptom of every

neurotic  illness  -  that  always  and  everywhere  the  sense  of  the

symptoms is unknown to the patient and that analysis regularly shows

that  these  symptoms  are  derivatives  of  unconscious  processes  but

can,  subject  to  a  variety  of  favourable  circumstances,  be  made

conscious - if you consider this, you will understand that in psycho-

analysis we cannot do without what is at the same time unconscious

and mental, and are accustomed to operate with it as though it weresomething palpable to the senses. But you will understand as well,

perhaps, how incapable of forming a judgement on this question are

all those other people, who are only acquainted with the unconscious

as a concept, who have never carried out an analysis and have never

interpreted  dreams  or  found  a  sense  and  intention  in  neurotic

symptoms. To say it for our ends once again: the possibility of giving a

sense  to  neurotic  symptoms  by  analytic  interpretation  is  an

unshakeable  proof  of  the  existence  -  or,  if  you  prefer  it,  of  the

necessity for the hypothesis - of unconscious mental processes.

   But that is not all. Thanks to a second discovery of Breuer’s, which

seems  to  me  even  more  significant  than  the  other  and  which  he

shared with no one, we learn still more of the connection between

neurotic symptoms and the unconscious. Not only is the sense of the

symptoms regularly unconscious, but there is an inseparable relation

between  this  fact  of  the  symptoms  being  unconscious  and  the

possibility  of  their  existing.  You  will  understand  me  in  a  moment.  I

follow Breuer in asserting that every time we come upon a symptom

we can infer that there are certain definite unconscious processes in

the  patient  which  contain  the  sense  of  the  symptom.  But  it  is  also

necessary for that sense to be unconscious in order that the symptom

can  come  about.  Symptoms  are  never  constructed  from  conscious

processes; as soon as the unconscious processes concerned have

become  conscious,  the  symptom  must  disappear.  Here  you  will  at

once  perceive  a  means  of  approach  to  therapy,  a  way  of  making

symptoms disappear. And in this way Breuer did in fact restore his

hysterical patient - that is, freed her from her symptoms; he found a

technique  for  bringing  to  her  consciousness  the  unconscious

processes  which  contained  the  sense  of  the  symptoms,  and  the

symptoms disappeared.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3357

 

   This discovery of Breuer’s was not the result of speculation but of a

fortunate observation made possible by the patient’s co-operation. Nor

should you torment yourselves with attempts at understanding it bytracing it back to something already known; you should recognize in it

a  new  fundamental  fact,  by  whose  help  much  else  will  become

explicable. Allow me, therefore, to repeat the same thing to you in

another way.

   The construction of a symptom is a substitute for something else

that  did  not  happen.  Some  particular  mental  processes  should

normally have developed to a point at which consciousness received

information of them. This, however, did not take place, and instead -

out of the interrupted processes, which had been somehow disturbed

and  were  obliged  to  remain  unconscious  -  the  symptom  emerged.

Thus something in the nature of an exchange has taken place; if this

can  be  reversed  the  therapy  of  the  neurotic  symptoms  will  have

achieved its task.

   This discovery of Breuer’s is still the foundation of psycho-analytic

therapy. The thesis that symptoms disappear when we have made

their unconscious predeterminants conscious has been confirmed by

all  subsequent  research,  although  we  meet  with  the  strangest  and

most unexpected complications when we attempt to carry it through in

practice. Our therapy works by transforming what is unconscious into

what is conscious, and it works only in so far as it is in a position to

effect that transformation.

   And now I must quickly make a short digression, to avoid the risk of

your imagining that this therapeutic work is accomplished too easily.

From what I have so far said a neurosis would seem to be the result of

a  kind  of  ignorance  -  a  not  knowing  about  mental  events  that  one

ought to know of. This would be a close approximation to some well-

known Socratic doctrines, according to which even vices are based on

ignorance.  Now  it  would  as  a  rule  be  very  easy  for  a  doctor

experienced in analysis to guess what mental impulses had remained

unconscious in a particular patient. So it ought not to be very difficult,

either, for him to restore the patient by communicating his knowledge

to  him  and  so  remedying  his  ignorance.  One  part  at  least  of  the

symptom’s unconscious sense could be easily dealt with in this way,

though it is true that the doctor cannot guess much about the other

part  -  the  connection  between  the  symptoms  and  the  patient’s

experiences -, since he himself does not know those experiences but

must wait till the patient remembers them and tells them to him. Buteven for this a substitute can in some instances be found. One can

make enquiries about these experiences from the patient’s relatives

and they will often be able to recognize which of them had a traumatic

effect, and they can even sometimes report experiences of which the

patient himself knows nothing because they occurred at a very early

period of his life. Thus, by combining these two methods, we should

have a prospect of relieving the patient of his pathogenic ignorance

with little expense of time or trouble.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3358

 

   If only that was how things happened! We came upon discoveries in

this connection for which we were at first unprepared. Knowledge is

not  always  the  same  as  knowledge:  there  are  different  sorts  of

knowledge, which are far from equivalent psychologically. ‘Il y a fagots

et  fagots’,  as  Molière  has  said.  The  doctor’s  knowledge  is  not  the

same  as  the  patient’s  and  cannot  produce  the  same  effects.  If  the

doctor transfers his knowledge to the patient as a piece of information,

it has no result. No, it would be wrong to say that. It does not have the

result of removing the symptoms, but it has another one - of setting

the analysis in motion, of which the first signs are often expressions of

denial. The patient knows after this what he did not know before - the

sense of his symptom; yet he knows it just as little as he did. Thus we

learn that there is more than one kind of ignorance. We shall need to

have a somewhat deeper understanding of psychology to show us in

what  these  differences  consist.  But  our  thesis  that  the  symptoms

vanish when their sense is known remains true in spite of this. All we

have to add is that the knowledge must rest on an internal change in

the patient such as can only be brought about by a piece of psychical

work with a particular aim. We are faced here by problems which will

presently be brought together into the dynamics of the construction of

symptoms.

   I must ask now, Gentlemen, whether what I am saying to you is not

too  obscure  and  complicated.  Am  I  not  confusing  you  by  so  often

taking back what I have said or qualifying it by starting up trains ofthought and then dropping them? I should be sorry if that were so. But

I  have  a  strong  dislike  of  simplifying  things  at  the  expense  of

truthfulness. I have no objection to your receiving the full impact of the

many-sidedness and complexity of our subject; and I think, too, that it

does no harm if I tell you more on every point than you can at the

moment  make  use  of.  I  am  aware,  after  all,  that  every  listener  or

reader puts what is presented to him into shape in his mind, shortens

it and simplifies it, and selects from it what he would like to retain. Up

to a certain point it is no doubt true that the more there is at one’s

disposal the more one is left with. Permit me to hope that, in spite of

all the trimmings, you have clearly grasped the essential part of what I

have told you - about the sense of symptoms, about the unconscious

and  about  the  relation  between  them.  No  doubt  you  have  also

understood  that  our  further  efforts  will  lead  in  two  directions:  first

towards  discovering  how  people  fall  ill  and  how  they  can  come  to

adopt the neurotic attitude to life - which is a clinical problem; and

secondly  towards  learning  how  the  pathological  symptoms  develop

from  the  determinants  of  the  neurosis  which  remains  a  problem  of

mental  dynamics.  There  must  moreover  be  a  point  somewhere  at

which the two problems converge.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3359

 

 

   I will not go into this any further to-day. But since we still have some

time  to  spare,  I  should  like  to  direct  your  attention  to  another

characteristic of our two analyses, which, once again, it will only be

possible  to  appreciate  fully  later  on  -  to  the  gaps  in  the  patients’

memories, their amnesias. As you have heard, the task of a psycho-

analytic treatment can be expressed in this formula: its task is to make

conscious  everything  that  is  pathogenically  unconscious.  You  will

perhaps be surprised to learn, then, that this formula can be replaced

by  another  one:  its  task  is  to  fill  up  all  the  gaps  in  the  patient’s

memory, to remove his amnesias. This would amount to the same

thing.  We  are  thus  implying  that  the  amnesias  of  neurotic  patientshave  an  important  connection  with  the  origin  of  their  symptoms.  If,

however, you consider the case of our first analysis you will not find

this view of amnesia justified. The patient had not forgotten the scene

from which her obsessive action was derived; on the contrary, she had

a vivid recollection of it; nor did anything else forgotten play a part in

the origin of the symptom. The position with our second patient (the

girl with the obsessional ceremonial), though less clear, was on the

whole analogous. She had not really forgotten her behaviour in earlier

years - the fact that she had insisted on the door between her parents’

bedroom and her own being left open and that she had driven her

mother out of her place in her parents’ bed; she remembered this very

plainly, even though with hesitation and unwillingly. The only thing we

can  consider  striking  is  that  the  first  patient,  in  carrying  out  her

obsessional action on countless occasions, had never once noticed its

resemblance  to  her  experience  on  her  wedding-night,  and  that  the

memory of it did not occur to her when she was directly asked to look

for the motives of her obsessional action. And the same thing applies

to  the  girl,  whose  ceremonial  and  its  causes  were  moreover

connected  with  a  situation  which  was  identically  repeated  every

evening. In both these cases there was no true amnesia, no missing

memory; but a connection had been broken which ought to have led to

the reproduction or re-emergence of the memory.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3360

 

   A disturbance of memory of this kind is enough for obsessional

neurosis; but the case is different with hysteria. As a rule the latter

neurosis is marked by amnesias on a really large scale. In analysing

each separate hysterical symptom one is usually led to a whole chain

of  impressions  of  events,  which,  when  they  recur,  are  expressly

described by the patient as having been till then forgotten. On the one

hand, this chain reaches back to the earliest years of life, so that the

hysterical amnesia can be recognized as an immediate continuation of

the  infantile  amnesia  which,  for  us  normal  people,  conceals  the

beginnings  of  our  mental  life.  On  the  other  hand,  we  learn  withastonishment that even the patient’s most recent experiences can be

subject  to  forgetting,  and  that  the  occasions  which  precipitated  the

outbreak  of  the  illness  or  led  to  its  intensification  are  in  particular

encroached  upon,  if  not  completely  swallowed  up,  by  amnesia.  It

regularly happens that important details have disappeared from the

total picture of a recent recollection of this sort or that they have been

replaced by falsifications of memory. Indeed it happens with almost

equal  regularity  that  certain  memories  of  recent  experiences  only

emerge shortly before the end of an analysis memories which had

been held back till that late moment and had left perceptible gaps in

the continuity of the case.

   Such restrictions upon the faculty of memory are, as I have said,

characteristic  of  hysteria,  in  which,  indeed,  states  also  arise  as

symptoms  -  hysterical  attacks  -  which  need  leave  no  trace  behind

them in the memory. If things are different in obsessional neurosis,

you may conclude that what we are dealing with in these amnesias is

a  psychological  characteristic  of  the  change  that  occurs  in  hysteria

and is not a universal feature of neuroses in general. The importance

of this distinction is reduced by the following consideration. We have

comprised two things as the ‘sense’ of a symptom: its ‘whence’ and its

‘whither’ or ‘what for’ - that is, the impressions and experiences from

which it arose and the intentions which it serves. Thus the ‘whence’ of

a symptom resolves itself into impressions which came from outside,

which were necessarily once conscious and may have since become

unconscious  through  forgetting.  The  ‘whither’  of  a  symptom,  its

purpose, is invariably, however, an endopsychic process, which may

possibly have been conscious at first but may equally well never have

been conscious and may have remained in the unconscious from the

very start. Thus it is not of great importance whether the amnesia has

laid  hold  on  the  ‘whence’  as  well  -  the  experiences  on  which  the

symptom is supported - as happens in hysteria; it is on the ‘whither’,

the purpose of the symptom, which may have been unconscious from

the beginning, that its dependence on the unconscious is founded -

and no less firmly in obsessional neurosis than in hysteria.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis                                                                                      3361

 

 

   But in thus emphasizing the unconscious in mental life we have

conjured up the most evil spirits of criticism against psycho-analysis.

Do not be surprised at this, and do not suppose that the resistance to

us rests only on the understandable difficulty of the unconscious or

the- relative inaccessibility of the experiences which provide evidence

of it. Its source, I think, lies deeper. In the course of centuries the

naïve self-love of men has had to submit to two major blows at the

hands of science. The first was when they learnt that our earth was

not the centre of the universe but only a tiny fragment of a cosmic

system  0;  scarcely  imaginable  vastness.  This  is  associated  in  our

mind:  with  the  name  of  Copernicus,  though  something  similar  had

already been asserted by Alexandrian science. The second blow fell

when biological research destroyed man’s supposedly privileged place

in creation and proved his descent from the animal kingdom and his

ineradicable animal nature. This revaluation has been accomplished in

our own days by Darwin, Wallace and their predecessors, though not

without  the  most  violent  contemporary  opposition.  But  human

megalomania will have suffered its third and most wounding blow from

the psychological research of the present time which seeks to prove to

the ego that it is not even master in its own house, but must content

itself with scanty information of what is going on unconsciously in its

mind. We psycho-analysts were not the first and not the only ones to

utter this call to introspection; but it seems to be our fate to give it its

most  forcible  expression  and  to  support  it  with  empirical  material

which affects every individual. Hence arises the general revolt against

our science, the disregard of all considerations of academic civility and

the releasing of the opposition from every restraint of impartial logic.

And beyond all this we have yet to disturb the peace of this world in

still another way, as you will shortly hear.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3362

 

                                      LECTURE XIX 

                      RESISTANCE AND REPRESSION

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - Before we can make any further progress in

our understanding of the neuroses, we stand in need of some fresh

observations.  Here  we  have  two  such,  both  of  which  are  very

remarkable  and  at  the  time  when  they  were  made  were  very

surprising. Our discussions of last year will, it is true, have prepared

you for both of them.

 

   In the first place, then, when we undertake to restore a patient to

health, to relieve him of the symptoms of his illness, he meets us with

a  violent  and  tenacious  resistance,  which  persists  throughout  the

whole  length  of  the  treatment.  This  is  such  a  strange  fact  that  we

cannot expect it to find much credence. It is best to say nothing about

it to the patient’s relatives, for they invariably regard it as an excuse on

our part for the length or failure of our treatment. The patient, too,

produces all the phenomena of this resistance without recognizing it

as such, and if we can induce him to take our view of it and to reckon

with its existence, that already counts as a great success. Only think

of it! The patient, who is suffering so much from his symptoms and is

causing  those  about  him  to  share  his  sufferings,  who  is  ready  to

undertake so many sacrifices in time, money, effort and self-discipline

in order to be freed from those symptoms we are to believe that this

same patient puts up a struggle in the interest of his illness against the

person who is helping him. How improbable such an assertion must

sound! Yet it is true; and when its improbability is pointed out to us, we

need only reply that it is not without analogies. A man who has gone

to the dentist because of an unbearable toothache will nevertheless

try to hold the dentist back when he approaches the sick tooth with a

pair of forceps.

   The patient’s resistance is of very many sorts, extremely subtle and

often hard to detect; and it exhibits protean changes in the forms in

which it manifests itself. The doctor must be distrustful and remain on

his guard against it.

   In psycho-analytic therapy we make use of the same technique that

is familiar to you from dream-interpretation. We instruct the patient toput himself into a state of quiet, unreflecting self-observation, and to

report  to  us  whatever  internal  perceptions  he  is  able  to  make  -

feelings, thoughts, memories in the order in which they occur to him.

At the same time we warn him expressly against giving way to any

motive  which  would  lead  him  to  make  a  selection  among  these

associations or to exclude any of them, whether on the ground that it

is too disagreeable or too indiscreet to say, or that it is too unimportant

or irrelevant, or that it is nonsensical and need not be said. We urge

him  always  to  follow  only  the  surface  of  his  consciousness  and  to

leave  aside  any  criticism  of  what  he  finds,  whatever  shape  that

criticism  may  take;  and  we  assure  him  that  the  success  of  the

treatment,  and  above  all  its  duration,  depends  on  the

conscientiousness with which he obeys this fundamental technical rule

of  analysis.  We  already  know  from  the  technique  of  dream-

interpretation  that  the  associations  giving  rise  to  the  doubts  and

objections  I  have  just  enumerated  are  precisely  the  ones  that

invariably contain the material which leads to the uncovering of the

unconscious.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3363

 

   The first thing we achieve by setting up this fundamental technical

rule is that it becomes the target for the attacks of the resistance. The

patient endeavours in every sort of way to extricate himself from its

provisions. At one moment he declares that nothing occurs to him, at

the next that so many things are crowding in on him that he cannot get

hold of anything. Presently we observe with pained astonishment that

he has given way first to one and then to another critical objection: he

betrays  this  to  us  by  the  long  pauses  that  he  introduces  into  his

remarks. He then admits that there is something he really cannot say -

he would be ashamed to; and he allows this reason to prevail against

his promise. Or he says that something has occurred to him, but it

concerns another person and not himself and is therefore exempt from

being  reported.  Or,  what  has  now  occurred  to  him  is  really  too

unimportant,  too  silly  and  senseless:  I  cannot  possibly  have  meanthim  to  enter  into  thoughts  like  that.  So  it  goes  on  in  innumerable

variations, and one can only reply that ‘to say everything’ really does

mean ‘to say everything’.

   One hardly comes across a single patient who does not make an

attempt at reserving some region or other for himself so as to prevent

the  treatment  from  having  access  to  it.  A  man,  whom  I  can  only

describe  as  of  the  highest  intelligence,  kept  silence  in  this  way  for

weeks on end about an intimate love-affair, and, when he was called

to account for having broken the sacred rule, defended himself with

the  argument  that  he  thought  this  particular  story  was  his  private

business. Analytic treatment does not, of course, recognize any such

right of asylum. Suppose that in a town like Vienna the experiment

was made of treating a square such as the Hohe Markt, or a church

like St. Stephen’s, as places where no arrests might be made, and

suppose we then wanted to catch a particular criminal. We could be

quite sure of finding him in the sanctuary. I once decided to allow a

man, on whose efficiency much depended in the external world, the

right to make an exception of this kind because he was bound under

his oath of office not to make communications about certain things to

another person. He, it is true, was satisfied with the outcome; but I

was not. I determined not to repeat an attempt under such conditions.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3364

 

      Obsessional  neurotics  understand  perfectly  how  to  make  the

technical rule almost useless by applying their over-conscientiousness

and doubts to it. Patients suffering from anxiety hysteria occasionally

succeed  in  carrying  the  rule ad  absurdum  by  producing  only

associations which are so remote from what we are in search of that

they contribute nothing to the analysis. But it is not my intention to

induct you into the handling of these technical difficulties. It is enough

to  say  that  in  the  end,  through  resolution  and  perseverance,  we

succeed in extorting a certain amount of obedience to the fundamental

technical rule from the resistance - which thereupon jumps over to

another sphere.   It now appears as an intellectual resistance, it fights by means of

arguments  and  exploits  all  the  difficulties  and  improbabilities  which

normal but uninstructed thinking finds in the theories of analysis. It is

now  our  fate  to  hear  from  this  single  voice  all  the  criticisms  and

objections which assail our ears in a chorus in the scientific literature

of the subject. And for this reason none of the shouts that reach us

from outside sound unfamiliar. It is a regular storm in a tea-cup. But

the  patient  is  willing  to  be  argued  with;  he  is  anxious  to  get  us  to

instruct him, teach him, contradict him, introduce him to the literature,

so that he can find further instruction. He is quite ready to become an

adherent of psycho-analysis - on condition that analysis spares him

personally.  But  we  recognize  this  curiosity  as  a  resistance,  as  a

diversion from our particular tasks, and we repel it. In the case of an

obsessional neurotic we have to expect special tactics of resistance.

He will often allow the analysis to proceed on its way uninhibited, so

that it is able to shed an ever-increasing light upon the riddle of his

illness.  We  begin  to  wonder  in  the  end,  however,  why  this

enlightenment is accompanied by no practical advance, no diminution

of  the  symptoms.  We  are  then  able  to  realize  that  resistance  has

withdrawn on to the doubt belonging to the obsessional neurosis and

from that position is successfully defying us. It is as though the patient

were saying: ‘Yes, that’s all very nice and interesting, and I’II be very

glad to go on with it further. It would change my illness a not if it were

true. But I don’t in the least believe that it is true; and, so long as I

don’t  believe  it,  it  makes  no  difference  to  my  illness.’  Things  can

proceed like this for a long time, till finally one comes up against this

uncommitted attitude itself, and the decisive struggle then breaks out.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3365

 

      Intellectual  resistances  are  not  the  worst;  one  always  remains

superior  to  them.  But  the  patient  also  knows  how  to  put  up

resistances, without going outside the framework of the analysis, the

overcoming of which is among the most difficult of technical problems.

Instead of remembering, he repeats attitudes and emotional impulsesfrom  his  early  life  which  can  be  used  as  a  resistance  against  the

doctor and the treatment by means of what is known as ‘transference’.

If  the  patient  is  a  man,  he  usually  extracts  this  material  from  his

relation to his father, into whose place he fits the doctor, and in that

way he makes resistances out of his efforts to become independent in

himself  and  in  his  judgements,  out  of  his  ambition,  the  first  aim  of

which was to do things as well as his father or to get the better of him,

or out of his unwillingness to burden himself for the second time in his

life with a load of gratitude. Thus at times one has an impression that

the patient has entirely replaced his better intention of making an end

to his illness by the alternative one of putting the doctor in the wrong,

of  making  him  realize  his  impotence  and  of  triumphing  over  him.

Women have a masterly gift for exploiting an affectionate, erotically

tinged transference to the doctor for the purposes of resistance. If this

attachment reaches a certain height, all their interest in the immediate

situation in the treatment and all the obligations they undertook at its

commencement  vanish;  their  jealousy,  which  is  never  absent,  and

their exasperation at their inevitable rejection, however considerately

expressed, are bound to have a damaging effect on their personal

understanding with the doctor and so to put out of operation one of the

most powerful motive forces of the analysis.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3366

 

      Resistances  of  this  kind  should  not  be  one-sidedly  condemned.

They include so much of the most important material from the patient’s

past and bring it back in so convincing a fashion that they become

some of the best supports of the analysis if a skilful technique knows

how to give them the right turn. Nevertheless, it remains a remarkable

fact that this material is always in the service of the resistance to begin

with and brings to the fore a façade that is hostile to the treatment. It

may also be said that what is being mobilized for fighting against the

alterations we are striving for are character-traits, attitudes of the ego.

In this connection we discover that these character-traits were formed

in relation to the determinants of the neurosis and in reaction againstits demands, and we come upon traits which cannot normally emerge,

or not to the same extent, and which may be described as latent. Nor

must you get an impression that we regard the appearance of these

resistances as an unforeseen risk to analytic influence. No, we are

aware that these resistances are bound to come to light; in fact we are

dissatisfied if we cannot provoke them clearly enough and are unable

to  demonstrate  them  to  the  patient.  Indeed  we  come  finally  to

understand that the overcoming of these resistances is the essential

function of analysis and is the only part of our work which gives us an

assurance that we have achieved something with the patient.

   If you further consider that the patient makes all the chance events

that occur during his analysis into interferences with it, that he uses as

reasons for slackening his efforts every diversion outside the analysis,

every comment by a person of authority in his environment who is

hostile to analysis, any chance organic illness or any that complicates

his neurosis and, even, indeed, every improvement in his condition - if

you consider all this, you will have obtained an approximate, though

still in complete, picture of the forms and methods of the resistance,

the struggle against which accompanies every analysis.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3367

 

   I have treated this point in such great detail because I must now

inform you that this experience of ours with the resistance of neurotics

to the removal of their symptoms became the basis of our dynamic

view  of  the  neuroses.  Originally  Breuer  and  I  myself  carried  out

psychotherapy  by  means  of  hypnosis;  Breuer’s  first  patient  was

treated  throughout  under  hypnotic  influence,  and  to  begin  with  I

followed him in this. I admit that at that period the work proceeded

more  easily  and  pleasantly,  and  also  in  a  much  shorter  time.  But

results were capricious and not lasting; and for that reason I finally

dropped  hypnosis.  And  I  then  understood  that  an  insight  into  the

dynamics  of  these  illnesses  had  not  been  possible  so  long  as

hypnosis was employed. That state was precisely able to withhold the

existence of the resistance from the doctor’s perception. It pushed theresistance  back,  making  a  certain  area  free  for  analytic  work,  and

dammed it up at the frontiers of that area in such a way as to be

impenetrable,  just  as  doubt  does  in  obsessional  neurosis.  For  that

reason I have been able to say that psycho-analysis proper began

when I dispensed with the help of hypnosis.

   If, however, the recognition of resistance has become so important,

we should do well to find room for a cautious doubt whether we have

not  been  too  light-heartedly  assuming  resistances.  Perhaps  there

really  are  cases  of  neurosis  in  which  associations  fail  for  other

reasons,  perhaps  the  arguments  against  our  hypotheses  really

deserve to have their content examined, and perhaps we are doing

patients an injustice in so conveniently setting aside their intellectual

criticisms  as  resistance.  But,  Gentlemen,  we  did  not  arrive  at  this

judgement lightly. We have had occasion to observe all these critical

patients at the moment of the emergence of a resistance and after its

disappearance. For resistance is constantly altering its intensity during

the  course  of  a  treatment;  it  always  increases  when  we  are

approaching a new topic, it is at its most intense while we are at the

climax of dealing with that topic, and it dies away when the topic has

been  disposed  of.  Nor  do  we  ever,  unless  we  have  been  guilty  of

special clumsiness in our technique, have to meet the full amount of

resistance of which a patient is capable. We have therefore been able

to convince ourselves that on countless occasions in the course of his

analysis the same man will abandon his critical attitude and then take

it up again. If we are on the point of bringing a specially distressing

piece of unconscious material to his consciousness, he is extremely

critical;  he  may  previously  have  understood  and  accepted  a  great

deal, but now it is just as though those acquisitions have been swept

away;  in  his  efforts  for  opposition  at  any  price,  he  may  offer  a

complete picture of someone who is an emotional imbecile. But if we

succeed in helping him to overcome this new resistance, he recovers

his  insight  and  understanding.  Thus  his  critical  faculty  is  not  an

independent  function,  to  be  respected  as  such,  it  is  the  tool  of  his

emotional  attitudes  and  is  directed  by  his  resistance.  If  there  is

something he does not like, he can put up a shrewd fight against it

and appear highly critical; but if something suits his book, he can, on

the contrary, show himself most credulous. Perhaps none of us arevery  different;  a  man  who  is  being  analysed  only  reveals  this

dependence of the intellect upon emotional life so clearly because in

analysis we are putting such great pressure on him.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3368

 

   How, then, do we account for our observation that the patient fights

with such energy against the removal of his symptoms and the setting

of his mental processes on a normal course? We tell ourselves that

we have succeeded in discovering powerful forces here which oppose

any alteration of the patient’s condition; they must be the same ones

which in the past brought this condition about. During the construction

of his symptoms something must have taken place which we can now

reconstruct  from  our  experiences  during  the resolution  of  his

symptoms. We already know from Breuer’s observation that there is a

precondition for the existence of a symptom: some mental process

must  not  have  been  brought  to  an  end  normally  -  so  that  it  could

become  conscious.  The  symptom  is  a  substitute  for  what  did  not

happen at that point. We now know the point at which we must locate

the  operation  of  the  force  which  we  have  surmised.  A  violent

opposition must have started against the entry into consciousness of

the  questionable  mental  process,  and  for  that  reason  it  remained

unconscious. As being something unconscious, it had the power to

construct a symptom. This same opposition, during psycho. analytic

treatment, sets itself up once more against our effort to transform what

is unconscious into what is conscious. This is what we perceive as

resistance. We have proposed to give the pathogenic process which is

demonstrated by the resistance the name of repression.

 

      We  must  now  form  more  definite  ideas  about  this  process  of

repression. It is the precondition for the construction of symptoms; but

it is also something to which we know nothing similar. Let us take as

our model an impulse, a mental process that endeavours to turn itself

into an action. We know that it can be repelled by what we term a

rejection  or  condemnation.  When  this  happens,  the  energy  at  itsdisposal  is  withdrawn  from  it;  it  becomes  powerless,  though  it  can

persist  as  a  memory.  The  whole  process  of  coming  to  a  decision

about it runs its course within the knowledge of the ego. It is a very

different matter if we suppose that the same impulse is subjected to

repression. In that case it would retain its energy and no memory of it

would remain behind; moreover the process of repression would be

accomplished  unnoticed  by  the  ego.  This  comparison,  therefore,

brings us no nearer to the essential nature of repression.

   I will put before you the only theoretical ideas which have proved of

service for giving a more definite shape to the concept of repression. It

is above all essential for this purpose that we should proceed from the

purely descriptive meaning of the word ‘unconscious’ to the systematic

meaning of the same word. That is, we will decide to say that the fact

of a psychical process being conscious or unconscious is only one of

its attributes and not necessarily an unambiguous one. If a process of

this  kind  has  remained  unconscious,  its  being  kept  away  from

consciousness may perhaps only be an indication of some vicissitude

it has gone through, and not that vicissitude itself. In order to form a

picture of this vicissitude, let us assume that every mental process -

we must admit one exception, which we shall mention at a later stage

exists to begin with in an unconscious stage or phase and that it is

only  from  there  that  the  process  passes  over  into  the  conscious

phase, just as a photographic picture begins as a negative and only

becomes  a  picture  after  being  turned  into  a  positive.  Not  every

negative, however, necessarily becomes a positive; nor is it necessary

that every unconscious mental process should turn into a conscious

one.  This  may  be  advantageously  expressed  by  saying  that  an

individual  process  belongs  to  begin  with  to  the  system  of  the

unconscious and can then, in certain circumstances, pass over into

the system of the conscious.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3369

 

   The crudest idea of these systems is the most convenient for us - a

spatial one. Let us therefore compare the system of the unconsciousto  a  large  entrance  hall,  in  which  the  mental  impulses  jostle  one

another like separate individuals. Adjoining this entrance hall there is a

second,  narrower,  room  -  a  kind  of  drawing-room  -  in  which

consciousness, too, resides. But on the threshold between these two

rooms a watchman performs his function: he examines the different

mental impulses, acts as a censor, and will not admit them into the

drawing-room if they displease him. You will see at once that it does

not  make  much  difference  if  the  watchman  turns  away  a  particular

impulse  at  the  threshold  itself  or  if  he  pushes  it  back  across  the

threshold  after  it  has  entered  the  drawing-room.  This  is  merely  a

question of the degree of his watchfulness and of how early he carries

out his act of recognition. If we keep to this picture, we shall be able to

extend our nomenclature further. The impulses in the entrance hall of

the unconscious are out of sight of the conscious, which is in the other

room;  to  begin  with  they  must  remain  unconscious.  If  they  have

already  pushed  their  way  forward  to  the  threshold  and  have  been

turned  back  by  the  watchman,  then  they  are  inadmissible  to

consciousness;  we  speak  of  them  as repressed.  But  even  the

impulses which the watchman has allowed to cross the threshold are

not  on  that  account  necessarily  conscious  as  well;  they  can  only

become so if they succeed in catching the eye of consciousness. We

are therefore justified in calling this second room the system of the

preconscious.  In  that  case  becoming  conscious  retains  its  purely

descriptive sense. For any particular impulse, however, the vicissitude

of repression consists in its not being allowed by the watchman to

pass from the system of the unconscious into that of the preconscious.

It is the same watchman whom we get to know as resistance when we

try to lift the repression by means of the analytic treatment.

      Now  I  know  you  will  say  that  these  ideas  are  both  crude  and

fantastic and quite impermissible in a scientific account. I know that

they are crude: and, more than that, I know that they are incorrect,

and, if I am not very much mistaken, I already have something better

to  take  their  place.  Whether  it  will  seem  to  you  equally  fantastic  I

cannot tell. They are preliminary working hypotheses, like Ampère’s

manikin  swimming  in  the  electric  current,  and  they  are  not  to  be

despised in so far as they are of service in making our observations

intelligible. I should like to assure you that these crude hypotheses ofthe  two  rooms,  the  watchman  at  the  threshold  between  them  and

consciousness as a spectator at the end of the second room, must

nevertheless  be  very  far-reaching  approximations  to  the  real  facts.

And  I  should  like  to  hear  you  admit  that  our  terms,  ‘unconscious’,

‘preconscious’ and ‘conscious’, prejudge things far less and are far

easier to justify than others which have been proposed or are in use,

such as ‘subconscious’, ‘paraconscious’, ‘intraconscious’ and the like.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3370

 

   It will therefore be of greater importance to me if you warn me that

an  arrangement  of  the  mental  apparatus,  such  as  I  have  here

assumed  in  order  to  explain  neurotic  symptoms,  must  necessarily

claim  general  validity  and  must  give  us  information  about  normal

functioning as well. You will, of course, be quite right in this. At the

moment we cannot pursue this implication further; but our interest in

the psychology of the forming of symptoms cannot but be increased to

an  extraordinary  extent  if  there  is  a  prospect,  through  the  study  of

pathological  conditions,  of  obtaining  access  to  the  normal  mental

events which are so well concealed.

      Perhaps  you  recognize,  moreover,  what  it  is  that  supports  our

hypotheses of the two systems, and their relation to each other and to

consciousness? After all, the watchman between the unconscious and

the preconscious is nothing else than the censorship, to which, as we

found,  the  form  taken  by  the  manifest  dream  is  subject.  The  day’s

residues, which we recognized as the instigators of the dream, were

preconscious material which, at night-time and in the state of sleep,

had been under the influence of unconscious and repressed wishful

impulses; they had been able, in combination with those impulses and

thanks  to  their  energy,  to  construct  the  latent  dream.  Under  the

dominance of the unconscious system this material had been worked

over  (by  condensation  and  displacement)  in  a  manner  which  is

unknown or only exceptionally permissible in normal mental life - that

is, in the preconscious system. We came to regard this difference in

their manner of operating as what characterizes the two systems; therelation which the preconscious has to consciousness was regarded

by  us  merely  as  an  indication  of  its  belonging  to  one  of  the  two

systems. Dreams are not pathological phenomena; they can appear in

any  healthy  person  under  the  conditions  of  a  state  of  sleep.  Our

hypothesis about the structure of the mental apparatus, which allows

us  to  understand  the  formation  alike  of  dreams  and  of  neurotic

symptoms, has an incontrovertible claim to being taken into account in

regard to normal mental life as well.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3371

 

   That much is what we have to say for the moment about repression.

But  it  is  only  the precondition  for  the  construction  of  symptoms.

Symptoms, as we know, are a substitute for something that is held

back by repression. It is a long step further, however, from repression

to an understanding of this substitutive structure. On this other side of

the  problem,  these  questions  arise  out  of  our  observation  of

repression: what kind of mental impulses are subject to repression? by

what forces is it accomplished? and for what motives? So far we have

only  one  piece  of  information  on  these  points.  In  investigating

resistance we have learnt that it emanates from forces of the ego,

from known and latent character traits. It is these too, therefore, that

are responsible for repression, or at any rate they have a share in it.

We know nothing more at present.

 

   At this point the second of the two observations which I mentioned

to you earlier comes to our help. It is quite generally the case that

analysis allows us to arrive at the intention of neurotic symptoms. This

again will be nothing new to you. I have already demonstrated it to you

in two cases of neurosis. But, after all, what do two cases amount to?

You are right to insist on its being demonstrated to you in two hundred

cases - in countless cases. The only trouble is that I cannot do that.

Once again, your own experience must serve instead, or your belief,

which on this point can appeal to the unanimous reports of all psycho-

analysts.      You  will  recollect  that,  in  the  two  cases  whose  symptoms  we

submitted  to  a  detailed  investigation,  the  analysis  initiated  us  into

these patients’ most intimate sexual life. In the first case we further

recognized  with  particular  clarity  the  intention  or  purpose  of  the

symptom we were examining; in the second case this was perhaps

somewhat concealed by a factor which will be mentioned later Well,

every other case that we submit to analysis would show us the same

thing that we have found in these two examples. In every instance we

should  be  introduced  by  the  analysis  into  the  patient’s  sexual

experiences and wishes; and in every instance we should be bound to

see that the symptoms served the same intention. We find that this

intention is the satisfaction of sexual wishes; the symptoms serve for

the patients’ sexual satisfaction; they are a substitute for satisfaction

of this kind, which the patients are without in their lives.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3372

 

      Think  of  our  first  patient’s  obsessional  action.  The  woman  was

without her husband, whom she loved intensely but with whom she

could  not  share  her  life  on  account  of  his  deficiencies  and

weaknesses.  She  had  to  remain  faithful  to  him;  she  could  not  put

anyone else in his place. Her obsessional symptom gave her what she

longed for, set her husband on a pedestal, denied and corrected his

weaknesses  and  above  all  his  impotence.  This  symptom  was

fundamentally a wish-fulfilment, just like a dream-and moreover, what

is not always true of a dream, an erotic wish-fulfilment. In the case of

our  second  patient  you  could  at  least  gather  that  her  ceremonial

sought to obstruct intercourse between her parents or prevent it from

producing a new baby. You will also probably have guessed that it

was at bottom endeavouring to put her herself in her mother’s place.

Once  again,  therefore,  a  setting-aside  of  interferences  with  sexual

satisfaction and a fulfilment of the patient’s own sexual wishes. I shall

soon come to the complication I have hinted at.

   I should like to anticipate, Gentlemen, the qualifications which I shall

have to make later in the universal validity of these statements. I willtherefore point out to you that all I have said here about repression

and the formation and meaning of symptoms was derived from three

forms  of  neurosis  -  anxiety  hysteria,  conversion  hysteria  and

obsessional neurosis - and that in the first instance it is also valid only

for these forms. These three disorders, which we are accustomed to

group  together  as  ‘transference  neuroses’,  also  circumscribe  the

region  in  which  psycho-analytic  therapy  can  function.  The  other

neuroses have been far less thoroughly studied by psycho-analysis; in

one group of them the impossibility of therapeutic influence has been

a reason for this neglect. Nor should you forget that psycho-analysis is

still a very young science, that preparing for it costs much trouble and

time, and that not at all long ago it was being practised single-handed.

Nevertheless, we are every where on the point of penetrating to an

understanding  of  these  other  disorders  which  are  not  transference

neuroses. I hope later to be able to introduce you to the extensions of

our hypotheses and findings which result from adaptation to this new

material, and to show you that these further studies have not led to

contradictions  but  to  the  establishment  of  higher  unities.  If,  then,

everything I am saying here applies to the transference neuroses, let

me first increase the value of symptoms by a new piece of information.

For a comparative study of the determining causes of falling ill leads to

a result which can be expressed in a formula: these people fall ill in

one way or another of frustration,  when  reality  prevents  them  from

satisfying  their  sexual  wishes.  You  see  how  excellently  these  two

findings tally with each other. It is only thus that symptoms can be

properly viewed as substitutive satisfactions for what is missed in life.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3373

 

   No doubt all kinds of objections can still be raised to the assertion

that neurotic symptoms are substitutes for sexual satisfactions. I will

mention two of them to-day. When you yourselves have carried out

analytic examinations of a considerable number of neurotics, you will

perhaps tell me, shaking your head, that in a lot of cases my assertion

is simply not true; the symptoms seem rather to have the contrarypurpose  of  excluding  or  of  stopping  sexual  satisfaction.  I  will  not

dispute  the  correctness  of  your  interpretation.  The  facts  in  psycho-

analysis have a habit of being rather more complicated than we like. If

they were as simple as all that, perhaps it might not have needed

psycho-analysis to bring them to light. Indeed, some of the features of

our second patient’s ceremonial show signs of this ascetic character

with its hostility to sexual satisfaction: when, for instance, she got rid

of the clocks and watches, which had the magical meaning of avoiding

erections during the night, or when she tried to guard against flower-

pots  falling  and  breaking,  which  was  equivalent  to  protecting  her

virginity. In some other cases of bed ceremonials, which I have been

able to analyse, this negative character was far more outspoken; the

ceremonial might consist exclusively of defensive measures against

sexual memories and temptations. However, we have already found

often enough that in psycho-analysis opposites imply no contradiction.

We might extend our thesis and say that symptoms aim either at a

sexual  satisfaction  or  at  fending  it  off,  and  that  on  the  whole  the

positive, wish-fulfilling character prevails in hysteria and the negative,

ascetic  one  in  obsessional  neurosis.  If  symptoms  can  serve  the

purpose both of sexual satisfaction and of its opposite, there is an

excellent basis for this double-sidedness or polarity in a part of their

mechanism which I have so far not been able to mention. For, as we

shall hear, they are the products of a compromise and arise from the

mutual  interference  between  two  opposing  currents;  they  represent

not only the repressed but also the repressing force which had a share

in  their  origin.  One  side  or  the  other  may  be  more  strongly

represented; but it is rarely that one influence is entirely absent. In

hysteria  a  convergence  of  both  intentions  in  the  same  symptom  is

usually achieved. In obsessional neurosis the two portions are often

separated; the symptom then becomes diphasic and consists in two

actions, one after the other, which cancel each other out.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3374

 

   We shall not be able to dismiss a second objection so easily. If yousurvey  a  fairly  long  series  of  interpretations  of  symptoms,  you  will

probably  start  by  judging  that  the  concept  of  a  substitutive  sexual

satisfaction has been stretched to its extreme limits in them. You will

not fail to emphasize the fact that these symptoms offer nothing real in

the way of satisfaction, that often enough they are restricted to the

revival of a sensation or the representation of a phantasy derived from

a sexual complex. And you will further point out that these supposed

sexual satisfactions often take on a childish and discreditable form,

approximate to an act of masturbation perhaps, or recall dirty kinds of

naughtiness which are forbidden even to children - habits of which

they have been broken. And, going on from this, you will also express

surprise that we are representing as a sexual satisfaction what would

rather have to be described as the satisfaction of lusts that are cruel or

horrible or would even have to be called unnatural. We shall come to

no  agreement,  Gentlemen,  on  this  latter  point  till  we  have  made  a

thorough investigation of the sexual life of human beings and till, in

doing so, we have decided what it is that we are justified in calling

‘sexual’.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3375

 

                                      LECTURE XX

 

                  THE SEXUAL LIFE OF HUMAN BEINGS

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - One would certainly have supposed that there

could be no doubt as to what is to be understood by ‘sexual’. First and

foremost, what is sexual is something improper, something one ought

not  to  talk  about.  I  have  been  told  that  the  pupils  of  a  celebrated

psychiatrist made an attempt once to convince their teacher of how

frequently the symptoms of hysterical patients represent sexual things.

For this purpose they took him to the bedside of a female hysteric,

whose  attacks  were  an  unmistakable  imitation  of  the  process  of

childbirth. But with a shake of his head he remarked: ‘Well, there’s

nothing  sexual  about  childbirth.’  Quite  right.  Childbirth  need  not  in

every case be something improper.   I see that you take offence at my joking about such serious things.

But it is not altogether a joke. Seriously, it is not easy to decide what is

covered by the concept ‘sexual’. Perhaps the only suitable definition

would be ‘everything that is related to the distinction between the two

sexes’. But you will regard that as colourless and too comprehensive.

If  you  take  the  fact  of  the  sexual  act  as  the  central  point,  you  will

perhaps define as sexual everything which, with a view to obtaining

pleasure, is concerned with the body, and in particular with the sexual

organs, of someone of the opposite sex, and which in the last resort

aims at the union of the genitals and the performance of the sexual

act. But if so you will really not be very far from the equation of what is

sexual with what is improper, and childbirth will really not be anything

sexual. If, on the other hand, you take the reproductive function as the

nucleus  of  sexuality,  you  risk  excluding  a  whole  number  of  things

which are not aimed at reproduction but which are certainly sexual,

such as masturbation and perhaps even kissing. But we are already

prepared to find that attempts at a definition always lead to difficulties;

so let us renounce the idea of doing better in this particular case. We

may  suspect  that  in  the  course  of  the  development  of  the  concept

‘sexual’ something has happened which has resulted in what Silberer

has aptly called an ‘error of superimposition’.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3376

 

 

   On the whole, indeed, when we come to think of it, we are not quite

at a loss in regard to what it is that people call sexual. Something

which combines a reference to the contrast between the sexes, to the

search  for  pleasure,  to  the  reproductive  function  and  to  the

characteristic of something that is improper and must be kept secret -

some  such  combination  will  serve  for  all  practical  purposes  in

everyday life. But for science that is not enough. By means of careful

investigations  (only  made  possible,  indeed,  by  disinterested  self-

discipline) we have come to know groups of individuals whose ‘sexual

life’ deviates in the most striking way from the usual picture of theaverage. Some of these ‘perverse’ people have, we might say, struck

the distinction between the sexes off their programme. Only members

of their own sex can rouse their sexual wishes; those of the other sex,

and especially their sexual parts, are not a sexual object for them at

all, and in extreme cases are an object of disgust. This implies, of

course, that they have abandoned any share in reproduction. We call

such people homosexuals or inverts. They are men and women who

are  often,  though  not  always,  irreproachably  fashioned  in  other

respects, of high intellectual and ethical development, the victims only

of  this  one  fatal  deviation.  Through  the  mouth  of  their  scientific

spokesmen  they  represent  themselves  as  a  special  variety  of  the

human species - a ‘third sex’ which has a right to stand on an equal

rooting beside the other two. We shall perhaps have an opportunity of

examining their claims critically. Of course they are not, as they also

like to assert, an ‘elite’ of mankind; there are at least as many inferior

and useless individuals among them as there are among those of a

different sexual kind.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3377

 

   This class of perverts at any rate behave to their sexual objects in

approximately the same way as normal people do to theirs. But we

now come to a long series of abnormal people whose sexual activity

diverges  more  and  more  widely  from  what  seems  desirable  to  a

sensible person. In their multiplicity and strangeness they can only be

compared  to  the  grotesque  monsters  painted  by  Breughel  for  the

temptation of St. Anthony or to the long procession of vanished gods

and believers which Flaubert heads past, before the eyes of his pious

penitent. Such a medley calls for some kind of arrangement if it is not

to  confuse  our  senses.  We  accordingly  divide  them  into  those  in

whom, like the homosexuals, the sexual object has been changed,

and others in whom the sexual aim is what has primarily been altered.

The first group includes those who have renounced the union of the

two  genitals  and  who  replace  the  genitals  of  one  of  the  couple

engaged in the sexual act by some other part or region of the body; inthis they disregard the lack of suitable organic arrangements as well

as any impediment offered by feelings of disgust. (They replace the

vulva, for instance, by the mouth or anus.) Others follow, who, it is

true, still retain the genitals as an object - not, however, on account of

their sexual function but of other functions in which the genital plays a

part either for anatomical reasons or because of its propinquity. We

find from them that the excretory functions, which have been put aside

as  improper  during  the  upbringing  of  children,  retain  the  ability  to

attract  the  whole  of  sexual  interest.  Then  come  others  again,  who

have abandoned the genital as an object altogether, and have taken

some other part of the body as the object they desire - a woman’s

breast, a foot or a plait of hair. After them come others for whom parts

of the body are of no importance but whose every wish is satisfied by

a piece of clothing, a shoe, a piece of underclothing - the fetishists.

Later  in  the  procession  come  people  who  require  the  whole  object

indeed, but make quite definite demands of it - strange or horrible -

even that it must have become a defenceless corpse, and who, using

criminal  violence,  make  it  into  one  so  that  they  may  enjoy  it.  But

enough of this kind of horror!

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3378

 

      The  second  group  is  led  by  perverts  who  have  made  what  is

normally only an introductory or preparatory act into the aim of their

sexual wishes. They are people whose desire it is to look at the other

person  or  to  feel  him  or  to  watch  him  in  the  performance  of  his

intimate  actions,  or  who  expose  parts  of  their  own  bodies  which

should  be  covered,  in  the  obscure  expectation  that  they  may  be

rewarded by a corresponding action in return. Next come the sadists,

puzzling people whose tender endeavours have no other aim than to

cause  pain  and  torment  to  their  object,  ranging  from  humiliation  to

severe physical injuries; and, as though to counterbalance them, their

counterparts,  the  masochists,  whose  only  pleasure  it  is  to  suffer

humiliations and torments of every kind from their loved object either

symbolically  or  in  reality.  There  are  still  others  in  whom  several  ofthese abnormal preconditions are united and intertwined; and lastly,

we must learn that each of these groups is to be found in two forms:

alongside  of  those  who  seek  their  sexual  satisfaction  in  reality  are

those who are content merely to imagine that satisfaction, who need

no real object at all, but can replace it by their phantasies.

      Now  there  cannot  be  the  slightest  doubt  that  all  these  crazy,

eccentric  and  horrible  things  really  constitute  the  sexual  activity  of

these people. Not only do they themselves regard them as such and

are aware that they are substitutes for each other, but we must admit

that they play the same part in their lives as normal sexual satisfaction

does in ours; they make the same, often excessive sacrifices for them,

and we can trace both in the rough and in finer detail the points at

which these abnormalities are based on what is normal and the points

at which they diverge from it. Nor can you fail to notice that here once

again you find the characteristic of being improper, which clings to

sexual activity, though here it is for the most part intensified to the

point of being abominable.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3379

 

 

   Well, Ladies and Gentlemen, what attitude are we to adopt to these

unusual kinds of sexual satisfaction? Indignation, an expression of our

personal  repugnance  and  an  assurance  that  we  ourselves  do  not

share these lusts will obviously be of no help. Indeed, that is not what

we have been asked for. When all is said and done, what we have

here is a field of phenomena like any other. A denial in the form of an

evasive suggestion that after all these are only rarities and curiosities

would be easy to refute. On the contrary, we are dealing with quite

common and widespread phenomena. If, however, it is argued that we

need not allow our views of sexual life to be misled by them because

they are one and all aberrations and deviations of the sexual instinct,

a  serious  answer  is  called  for.  Unless  we  can  understand  these

pathological forms of sexuality and can co-ordinate them with normal

sexual life, we cannot understand normal sexuality either. In short, itremains an unavoidable task to give a complete theoretical account of

how it is that these perversions can occur and of their connection with

what is described as normal sexuality.

   We shall be helped in this by a piece of information and two fresh

observations. We owe the former to Iwan BIoch. It corrects the view

that all these perversions are ‘signs of degeneracy’ by showing that

aberrations of this kind from the sexual aim, loosenings like these of

the tie with the sexual object, have occurred from time immemorial, in

all periods known to us, among all peoples, the most primitive and the

most civilized, and have occasionally obtained toleration and general

recognition.  The  two  observations  were  derived  from  the  psycho-

analytic investigation of neurotics; they are bound to have a decisive

influence on our view of the sexual perversions.

 

      I  have  said  that  neurotic  symptoms  are  substitutes  for  sexual

satisfaction,  and  I  indicated  to  you  that  the  confirmation  of  this

assertion  by  the  analysis  of  symptoms  would  come  up  against  a

number  of  difficulties.  For  it  can  only  be  justified  if  under  ‘sexual

satisfaction’ we include the satisfaction of what are called perverse

sexual  needs,  since  an  interpretation  of  symptoms  of  that  kind  is

forced  upon  us  with  surprising  frequency.  The  claim  made  by

homosexuals or inverts to being exceptions collapses at once when

we learn that homosexual impulses are invariably discovered in every

single neurotic, and that a fair number of symptoms give expression to

this latent inversion. Those who call themselves homosexuals are only

the  conscious  and  manifest  inverts,  whose  number  is  nothing

compared  to  that  of  the latent  homosexuals.  We  are  compelled,

however,  to  regard  choice  of  an  object  of  one’s  own  sex  as  a

divergence in erotic life which is of positively habitual occurrence, and

we  are  learning  more  and  more  to  ascribe  an  especially  high

importance to it. No doubt this does not do away with the differences

between manifest homosexuality and a normal attitude; their practical

significance remains, but their theoretical value is greatly diminished.

We have even found that a particular disease, paranoia, which is not

to be counted among the transference neuroses, regularly arises from

an attempt to fend off excessively strong homosexual impulses. You

will perhaps recall that one of our patients (p. 3343) behaved in herobsessional action like a man, her own husband whom she had left;

neurotic women very commonly produce symptoms in this way in the

character  of  a  man.  Even  if  this  is  not  actually  to  be  regarded  as

homosexuality, it is closely related to its preconditions.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3380

 

      As  you  probably  know,  the  hysterical  neurosis  can  produce  its

symptoms  in  any  system  of  organs  and  so  disturb  any  function.

Analysis shows that in this way all the so-called perverse impulses

which  seek  to  replace  the  genital  by  some  other  organ  manifest

themselves: these organs are then behaving like substitutive genitals.

The symptoms of hysteria have actually led us to the view that the

bodily  organs,  besides  the  functional  part  they  play,  must  be

recognized as having a sexual (erotogenic) significance, and that the

execution of the first of these tasks is disturbed if the second of them

makes too many claims. Countless sensations and innervations which

we  come  across  as  symptoms  of  hysteria  in  organs  that  have  no

apparent connection with sexuality are in this way revealed to us as

being  in  the  nature  of  fulfilments  of  perverse  sexual  impulses  in

relation to which other organs have acquired the significance of the

sexual parts. We learn too to what a large extent the organs for the

intake of nourishment and for excretion can in particular become the

vehicles of sexual excitation. Here, then, we have the same thing that

we were shown by the perversions; only in their case it was visible

easily  and  unmistakably,  whereas  in  hysteria  we  have  to  take  a

circuitous path by way of the interpretation of symptoms, and do not

then ascribe the perverse sexual impulses concerned to the subject’s

consciousness but locate them in his unconscious.

   Of the many symptomatic pictures in which obsessional neurosis

appears,  the  most  important  turn  out  to  be  those  provoked  by  the

pressure  of  excessively  strong  sadistic  sexual  impulses  (perverse,

therefore, in their aim). The symptoms, indeed, in accordance with the

structure  of  an  obsessional  neurosis,  serve  predominantly  as  a

defence  against  these  wishes  or  give  expression  to  the  strugglebetween satisfaction and defence. But satisfaction does not come off

too badly either; it succeeds in roundabout ways in putting itself into

effect  in  the  patients’  behaviour  and  is  preferably  directed  against

themselves and makes them into self-tormentors. Other forms of the

neurosis,  the  brooding  kinds,  correspond  to  an  excessive

sexualization of actions which ordinarily have their place on the path

to normal sexual satisfaction - an excessive sexualization of wanting

to look or to touch or to explore. Here we have the explanation of the

great  importance  of  the  fear  of  touching  and  of  the  obsession  for

washing.  An  unsuspectedly  large  proportion  of  obsessional  actions

may  be  traced  back  to  masturbation,  of  which  they  are  disguised

repetitions  and  modifications;  it  is  a  familiar  fact  that  masturbation,

though  a  single  and  uniform  action,  accompanies  the  most  various

forms of sexual phantasying.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3381

 

   I should not have much difficulty in giving you a far more intimate

picture of the relations between perversion and neurosis; but I think

what I have already said will serve our purpose. We must however

guard against being misled by what I have told you of the meaning of

symptoms into over-estimating the frequency and intensity of people’s

perverse inclinations. It is possible, as you have heard, to fall ill of a

neurosis as a result of a frustration of normal sexual satisfaction. But

when a real frustration like this occurs, the need moves over on to

abnormal methods of sexual excitation. You will later learn the way in

which this happens. But in any case you will realize that as a result of

this  ‘collateral’  damming-back  the  perverse  impulses  must  emerge

more strongly than they would have if normal sexual satisfaction had

met with no obstacle in the real world. More over a similar influence is

to be recognized also as affecting the manifest perversions. In some

cases they are provoked or made active if the normal satisfaction of

the  sexual  instinct  encounters  too  great  difficulties  for  temporary

reasons or because of permanent social regulations. In other cases, it

is  true,  the  inclination  to  perversions  is  quite  independent  of  suchfavouring conditions; they are, we might say, the normal species of

sexual life for those particular individuals.

   For the moment, perhaps, you may have an impression that I have

confused  rather  than  explained  the  relation  between  normal  and

perverse sexuality. But you must bear the following consideration in

mind. If it is true that increased difficulty in obtaining normal sexual

satisfaction in real life, or deprivation of that satisfaction, brings out

perverse inclinations in people who had not shown any previously, we

must suppose that there was something in these people which came

half-way to meet the perversions; or, if you prefer it, the perversions

must have been present in them in a latent form.

 

   And this brings us to the second novelty that I announced to you.

For psycho-analytic research has had to concern itself, too, with the

sexual  life  of  children,  and  this  is  because  the  memories  and

associations  arising  during  the  analysis  of  symptoms  regularly  led

back  to  the  early  years  of  childhood.  What  we  inferred  from  these

analyses was later confirmed point by point by direct observations of

children. And it then turned out that all these inclinations to perversion

had their roots in childhood, that children have a predisposition to all

of  them  and  carry  them  out  to  an  extent  corresponding  to  their

immaturity - in short, that perverse sexuality is nothing else than a

magnified infantile sexuality split up into its separate impulses.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3382

 

   At all events you will now see the perversions in a new light and no

longer  fail  to  realize  their  connection  with  the  sexual  life  of  human

beings:  but  at  the  price  of  what  surprises  and  of  what  feelings  of

distress over these incongruities! No doubt you will feel inclined at first

to deny the whole business: the fact that children have anything that

can be described as sexual life, the correctness of our observations

and the justification for finding any kinship between the behaviour of

children and what is later condemned as perversion. So allow me to

begin by explaining to you the motives for your opposition, and then topresent  you  with  the  sum  of  our  observations.  To  suppose  that

children have no sexual life - sexual excitations and needs and a kind

of satisfaction - but suddenly acquire it between the ages of twelve

and  fourteen,  would  (quite  apart  from  any  observations)  be  as

improbable,  and  indeed  senseless,  biologic  ally  as  to  suppose  that

they brought no genitals with them into the world and only grew them

at the time of puberty. What does awaken in them at this time is the

reproductive function, which makes use for its purposes of physical

and mental material already present. You are committing the error of

con  fusing  sexuality  and  reproduction  and  by  doing  so  you  are

blocking your path to an understanding of sexuality, the perversions

and the neuroses. This error is, however, a tendentious one. Strangely

enough, it has its source in the fact that you yourselves were once

children and, while you were children, came under the influence of

education. For society must undertake as one of its most important

educative tasks to tame and restrict the sexual instinct when it breaks

out as an urge to reproduction, and to subject it to an individual will

which is identical with the bidding of society. It is also concerned to

postpone the full development of the instinct till the child shall have

reached a certain degree of intellectual maturity, for, with the complete

irruption of the sexual instinct, educability is for practical purposes at

an  end.  Otherwise,  the  instinct  would  break  down  every  dam  and

wash away the laboriously erected work of civilization. Nor is the task

of taming it ever an easy one; its success is sometimes too small,

sometimes too great. The motive of human society is in the last resort

an  economic  one;  since  it  does  not  possess  enough  provisions  to

keep its members alive unless they work, it must restrict the number of

its members and divert their energies from sexual activity to work. It is

faced, in short, by the eternal, primaeval exigencies of life, which are

with us to this day.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3383

 

   Experience must no doubt have taught the educators that the task of

making the sexual will of the new generation tractable could only becarried out if they began to exercise their influence very early, if they

did  not  wait  for  the  storm  of  puberty  but  intervened  already  in  the

sexual life of children which is preparatory to it. For this reason almost

all infantile sexual activities were forbidden to children and frowned

upon; an ideal was set up of making the life of children asexual, and in

course of time things came to the point at which people really believed

they  were  asexual  and  thereafter  science  pronounced  this  as  its

doctrine. To avoid contradicting their belief and their intentions, people

since  then  overlook  the  sexual  activities  of  children  (no  mean

achievement)  or  are  content  in  science  to  take  a  different  view  of

them.  Children  are  pure  and  innocent,  and  anyone  who  describes

them otherwise can be charged with being an infamous blasphemer

against the tender and sacred feelings of mankind.

   Children are alone in not falling in with these conventions. They

assert  their  animal  rights  with  complete naïveté  and  give  constant

evidence  that  they  have  still  to  travel  the  road  to  purity.  Strangely

enough, the people who deny the existence of sexuality in children do

not  on  that  account  become  milder  in  their  educational  efforts  but

pursue the manifestations of what they deny exists with the utmost

severity - describing them as ‘childish naughtinesses’. It is also of the

highest theoretical interest that the period of life which contradicts the

prejudice  of  an  asexual  childhood  most  glaringly  -  the  years  of  a

child’s life up to the age of five or six - is afterwards covered in most

people by the veil of amnesia which is only completely torn away by

an  analytic  enquiry,  though  it  has  been  permeable  earlier  for  the

construction of a few dreams.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3384

 

 

   I will now set out before you what is most definitely known about the

sexual life of children. Let me at the same time, for convenience sake,

introduce the concept of ‘libido’. On the exact analogy of ‘hunger’, we

use ‘libido’ as the name of the force (in this case that of the sexual

instinct, as in the case of hunger that of the nutritive instinct) by whichthe instinct manifests itself. Other concepts, such as sexual ‘excitation’

and ‘satisfaction’, call for no explanation. You yourselves will easily

perceive  that  the  sexual  activities  of  infants  in  arms  are  mostly  a

matter of interpretation, or you will probably use that as a ground of

objection. These interpretations are arrived at on the basis of analytic

examinations made by tracing from the symptoms backwards. In an

infant the first impulses of sexuality make their appearance attached

to other vital functions. His main interest is, as you know, directed to

the intake of nourishment; when children fall asleep after being sated

at the breast, they show an expression of blissful satisfaction which

will be repeated later in life after the experience of a sexual orgasm.

This would be too little on which to base an inference. But we observe

how an infant will repeat the action of taking in nourishment without

making a demand for further food; here, then, he is not actuated by

hunger.  We  describe  this  as  sensual  sucking,  and  the  fact  that  in

doing this he falls asleep once more with a blissful expression shows

us  that  the  act  of  sensual  sucking  has  in  itself  alone  brought  him

satisfaction. Soon, as we know, things come to a point at which he

cannot  go  to  sleep  without  having  sucked.  A  paediatrician  in

Budapest, Dr. Lindner, was the first to point out long ago the sexual

nature of this activity. Those who are in charge of children, and who

have  no  theoretical  views  on  the  subject,  seem  to  form  a  similar

judgement of sucking. They have no doubt of its only purpose being to

obtain  pleasure,  class  it  as  one  of  a  child’s  ‘naughtinesses’  and

compel him to abandon it by causing him distress, if he will not give it

up of his own accord. Thus we learn that infants perform actions which

have no purpose other than obtaining pleasure. It is our belief that

they  first  experience  this  pleasure  in  connection  with  taking

nourishment  but  that  they  soon  learn  to  separate  it  from  that

accompanying  condition.  We  can  only  refer  this  pleasure  to  an

excitation of the areas of the mouth and lips; we call those parts of the

body  ‘erotogenic  zones’  and  describe  the  pleasure  derived  from

sucking as a sexual one. We shall no doubt have to discuss further

whether this description is justifiable.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis                                                                                      3385

 

   If an infant could speak, he would no doubt pronounce the act of

sucking at his mother’s breast by far the most important in his life. He

is not far wrong in this, for in this single act he is satisfying at once the

two great vital needs. We are therefore not surprised to learn from

psycho-analysis  how  such  psychical  importance  the  act  retains  all

through life. Sucking at the mother’s breast is the starting-point of the

whole of sexual life, the unmatched prototype of every later sexual

satisfaction, to which phantasy often enough recurs in times of need.

This sucking involves making the mother’s breast the first object of the

sexual instinct. I can give you no idea of the important bearing of this

first  object  upon  the  choice  of  every  later  object,  of  the  profound

effects  it  has  in  its  transformations  and  substitutions  in  even  the

remotest regions of our sexual life. But at first the infant, in his sucking

activity, gives up this object and replaces it by a part of his own body.

He begins to suck his thumbs or his own tongue. In this way he makes

himself independent of the consent of the external world as regards

gaining  pleasure,  and  besides  this  he  increases  it  by  adding  the

excitation of a second area of his body. The erotogenic zones are not

all equally generous in yielding pleasure; it is therefore an important

experience  when  the  infant,  as  Lindner  reports,  discovers,  in  the

course of feeling around, the specially excitable regions afforded by

his genitals and so finds his way from sucking to masturbation.

   In forming this opinion of sensual sucking we have already become

acquainted  with  two  decisive  characteristics  of  infantile  sexuality.  It

makes its appearance attached to the satisfaction of the major organic

needs, and it behaves auto-erotically - that is, it seeks and finds its

objects in the infant’s own body. What has been shown most clearly in

connection with the intake of nourishment is repeated in part with the

excretions. We conclude that infants have feelings of pleasure in the

process of evacuating urine and faeces and that they soon contrive to

arrange those actions in such a way as to bring them the greatest

possible yield of pleasure through the corresponding excitations of the

erotogenic zones of the mucous membrane. It is here for the first time

(as Lou Andreas-Salomé has subtly perceived) that they encounter

the external world as an inhibiting power, hostile to their desire forpleasure,  and  have  a  glimpse  of  later  conflicts  both  external  and

internal. An infant must not produce his excreta at whatever moment

he chooses, but when other people decide that he shall. In order to

induce  him  to  forgo  these  sources  of  pleasure,  he  is  told  that

everything that has to do with these functions is improper and must be

kept secret. This is where he is first obliged to exchange pleasure for

social  respectability.  To  begin  with,  his  attitude  to  his  excreta

themselves is quite different. He feels no disgust at his faeces, values

them as a portion of his own body with which he will not readily part,

and makes use of them as his first ‘gift’, to distinguish people whom

he values especially highly. Even after education has succeeded in its

aim of making these inclinations alien to him, he carries on his high

valuation of faeces in his estimate of ‘gifts’ and ‘money’. On the other

hand he seems to regard his achievements in urinating with peculiar

pride.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3386

 

   I know you have been wanting for a long time to interrupt me and

exclaim: ‘Enough of these atrocities! You tell us that defaecating is a

source  of  sexual  satisfaction,  and  already  exploited  in  infancy!  that

faeces is a valuable substance and that the anus is a kind of genital!

We don’t believe all that but we do understand why paediatricians and

educationists  have  given  a  wide  berth  to  psycho-analysis  and  its

findings.’ No, Gentlemen. You have merely forgotten that I have been

trying to introduce the facts of infantile sexual life to you in connection

with the facts of the sexual perversions. Why should you not be aware

that for a large number of adults, homosexual and heterosexual alike,

the  anus  does  really  take  over  the  role  of  the  vagina  in  sexual

intercourse? And that there are many people who retain a voluptuous

feeling in defaecating all through their lives and describe it as being far

from  small?  As  regards  interest  in  the  act  of  defaecation  and

enjoyment  ill  watching  someone  else  defaecating,  you  can  get

children themselves to confirm the fact when they are a few years

older  and  able  to  tell  you  about  it.  Of  course,  you  must  not  havesystematically  intimidated  them  beforehand,  or  they  will  quite

understand that they must be silent on the subject. And as to the other

things  that  you  are  anxious  not  to  believe,  I  will  refer  you  to  the

findings of analysis and of the direct observation of children and will

add  that  it  calls  for  real  ingenuity  not  to  see  all  this  or  to  see  it

differently. Nor do I complain if you find the kinship between infantile

sexual activity and sexual perversions something very striking. But it is

in fact self-evident: if a child has a sexual life at all it is bound to be of

a  perverse  kind;  for,  except  for  a  few  obscure  hints,  children  are

without what makes sexuality into the reproductive function. On the

other  hand,  the  abandonment  of  the  reproductive  function  is  the

common  feature  of  all  perversions.  We  actually  describe  a  sexual

activity  as  perverse  if  it  has  given  up  the  aim  of  reproduction  and

pursues the attainment of pleasure as an aim independent of it. So, as

you  will  see,  the  breach  and  turning-point  in  the  development  of

sexual  life  lies  in  its  becoming  subordinate  to  the  purposes  of

reproduction. Everything that happens before this turn of events and

equally everything that disregards it and that aims solely at obtaining

pleasure  is  given  the  uncomplimentary  name  of  ‘perverse’  and  as

such is proscribed.

   Allow me, therefore, to proceed with my brief account of infantile

sexuality.  What  I  have  already  reported  of  two  systems  of  organs

might be confirmed in reference to the others. A child’s sexual life is

indeed made up entirely of the activities of a number of component

instincts which seek, independently of one another, to obtain pleasure,

in  part  from  the  subject’s  own  body  and  in  part  already  from  an

external  object.  Among  these  organs  the  genitals  come  into

prominence very soon. There are people in whom obtaining pleasure

from their own genitals, without the assistance of any other genitals or

of an object, continues uninterruptedly from infantile masturbation to

the unavoidable masturbation of puberty and persists for an indefinite

length of time afterwards. Incidentally, the topic of masturbation is not

one that can be so easily disposed of: it is something that calls for

examination from many angles.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis                                                                                      3387

 

   Though I am anxious to cut short this discussion still further, I must

nevertheless tell you a little about the sexual researches of children:

they  are  too  characteristic  of  infantile  sexuality  and  of  too  great

significance  for  the  symptomatology  of  the  neuroses  to  be  passed

over. Infantile sexual researches begin very early, sometimes before

the third year of life. They do not relate to the distinction between the

sexes, for this means nothing to children, since they (or at any rate

boys) attribute the same male genital to both sexes. If, afterwards, a

boy makes the discovery of the vagina from seeing his little sister or a

girl playmate, he tries, to begin with, to disavow the evidence of his

senses, for he cannot imagine a human creature like himself who is

without  such  a  precious  portion.  Later  on,  he  takes  fright  at  the

possibility thus presented to him; and any threats that may have been

made to him earlier, because he took too intense an interest in his

little organ, now produce a deferred effect. He comes under the sway

of the castration complex, the form taken by which plays a great part

in  the  construction  of  his  character  if  he  remains  normal,  in  his

neurosis if he falls ill, and in his resistances if he comes into analytic

treatment. As regards little girls, we can say of them that they feel

greatly at a disadvantage owing to their lack of a big, visible penis,

that they envy boys for possessing one and that, in the main for this

reason, they develop a wish to be a man - a wish that re-emerges

later on, in any neurosis that may arise if they meet with a mishap in

playing  a  feminine  part.  In  her  childhood,  moreover,  a  girl’s  clitoris

takes  on  the  role  of  a  penis  entirely:  it  is  characterized  by  special

excitability and is the area in which auto-erotic satisfaction is obtained.

The process of a girl’s becoming a woman depends very much on the

clitoris passing on this sensitivity to the vaginal orifice in good time

and completely. In cases of what is known as sexual anaesthesia in

women the clitoris has obstinately retained its sensitivity.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3388

 

      The  sexual  interest  of  children  begins  by  turning,  rather,  to  theproblem  of  where  babies  come  from  -  the  same  problem  which

underlies the question put by the Theban Sphinx - and it is most often

raised by egoistic fears on the arrival of a new baby. The reply which

is ready to hand in the nursery, that babies are brought by the stork,

comes  up  against  disbelief  on  the  part  even  of  small  children  far

oftener than we are aware. The sense of being defrauded of the truth

by the grown-ups contributes much to making children feel lonely and

to developing their independence. But a child is not in a position to

solve  this  problem  by  his  own  means.  His  undeveloped  sexual

constitution sets definite limits to his power of perception. He begins

by  supposing  that  babies  come  from  people  taking  in  something

special in their food, nor does he know that only women can have

babies.  Later  he  becomes  aware  of  this  limitation  and  ceases  to

regard eating as the origin of babies - though the theory persists in

fairy tales. When the child has grown bigger, he soon notices that his

father  must  play  some  part  in  getting  babies,  but  he  cannot  guess

what.  If  he  happens  to  witness  a  sexual  act,  he  regards  it  as  an

attempt  at  subjugation,  a  struggle,  and  this  is  the  sadistic

misunderstanding of coition. But at first he does not connect this act

with the coming into being of a baby. So, too, if he finds traces of

blood on his mother’s bed or on her underclothes, he takes it as a sign

that she has been injured by his father. Still later in childhood, he no

doubt suspects that the man’s sexual organ has an essential share in

producing babies, but the only function he can attribute to that part of

the body is micturition.

   From the very first, children are at one in thinking that babies must

be  born  through  the  bowel;  they  must  make  their  appearance  like

lumps of faeces. This theory is not abandoned until all anal interests

have  been  deprived  of  their  value,  and  it  is  then  replaced  by  the

hypothesis that the navel comes open or that the area of the breast

between the nipples is where birth takes place. In this way the child in

the course of his researches comes nearer to the facts about sex, or,

feeling at a loss owing to his ignorance, he passes them by till, usually

in  the  years  before  puberty,  he  is  given  what  is  as  a  rule  a

depreciatory  and  incomplete  explanation,  which  often  produces

traumatic effects.

    You will no doubt have heard, Gentlemen, that in psycho-analysis

the concept of what is sexual has been unduly extended in order to

support the theses of the sexual causation of the neuroses and the

sexual meaning of symptoms. You are now in a position to judge for

yourselves  whether  this  extension  is  unjustified.  We  have  only

extended the concept of sexuality far enough to be able to comprise

the sexual life of perverts and of children. We have, that is to say,

given  it  back  its  true  compass.  What  is  called  sexuality  outside

psycho-analysis relates only to a restricted sexual life, which serves

the purpose of reproduction and is described as normal.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3389

 

                                      LECTURE XXI

 

      THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LIBIDO AND THE SEXUAL

                                  ORGANIZATIONS

 

GENTLEMEN, - I am under the impression that I have not succeeded in

bringing  home  to  you  quite  convincingly  the  importance  of  the

perversions for our view of sexuality, and I should therefore like so far

as I can to improve and supplement what I have said.

   It is not the case that the perversions alone would have obliged us to

make the change in the concept of sexuality which has brought such

violent contradictions down on us. The study of infantile sexuality had

even more to do with it and it was the concurrence of the two which

was  decisive  for  us.  But  the  manifestations  of  infantile  sexuality,

however unmistakable they may be in later childhood, seem to melt

into indefiniteness towards their beginnings. Anyone who chooses to

disregard the history of their development and their analytic context

will deny that they are of a sexual character and will attribute some

undifferentiated character to them instead. You must not forget that at

the  moment  we  are  not  in  possession  of  any  generally  recognized

criterion of the sexual nature of a process, apart, once again, from a

connection  with  the  reproductive  function  which  we  must  reject  as

being  too  narrow-minded.  The  biological  criteria,  such  as  theperiodicities  of  twenty-three  and  twenty-eight  days  postulated  by

Wilhelm Fliess, are still highly debatable; the chemical characteristics

of  the  sexual  process,  which  we  may  suspect,  are  still  awaiting

discovery. On the other hand, the sexual perversions of adults are

something  tangible  and  unambiguous.  As  is  already  shown  by  the

name by which they are universally known, they are unquestionably

sexual. Whether they are described as indications of degeneracy or in

any  other  way,  no  one  has  yet  had  the  courage  to  class  them  as

anything but phenomena of sexual life. On their account alone we are

justified in asserting that sexuality and reproduction do not coincide,

for it is obvious that all of them disavow the aim of reproduction.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3390

 

   I find a parallel here which is not uninteresting. Whereas for most

people  ‘conscious’  and  ‘psychical’  are  the  same,  we  have  been

obliged  to  extend  the  concept  of  ‘psychical’  and  to  recognize

something ‘psychical’ that is not ‘conscious’. And in just the same way,

whereas  other  people  declare  that  ‘sexual’  and  ‘connected  with

reproduction’  (or,  if  you  prefer  to  put  it  more  shortly,  ‘genital’)  are

identical, we cannot avoid postulating something ‘sexual’ that is not

‘genital’ - has nothing to do with reproduction. The similarity here is

only a formal one, but it is not without a deeper foundation.

      But  if  the  existence  of  sexual  perversions  is  such  a  decisive

argument in this question, why has it not long since had its effect and

settled the matter? I really cannot say. I think it is connected with the

fact that these sexual perversions are subject to a quite special ban,

which  has  even  affected  theory  and  has  stood  in  the  way  of  the

scientific consideration of them. It is as though no one could forget

that  they  are  not  only  something  disgusting  but  also  something

monstrous and dangerous - as though people felt them as seductive,

and had at bottom to fight down a secret envy of those who were

enjoying  them.  One  is  reminded  of  the  admission  made  by  the

condemnatory Landgraf in the famous Tannhäuser parody:

 

                                                ‘ Im Venusberg vergass er Ehr und Pflicht!                                                   - Merkwürdig, unser einem passiert

                                                                                                so etwas nicht.’¹

 

In  reality  perverts  are  poor  wretches,  rather,  who  have  to  pay

extremely dear for their hard-won satisfaction.

   What makes the activity of perverts so unmistakably sexual in spite

of all the strangeness of its objects and aims is the fact that as a rule

an act of perverse satisfaction nevertheless ends in complete orgasm

and voidance of the genital products. This is of course only the result

of the people concerned being adults. In children orgasm and genital

excretion are scarcely possible; their place is taken by hints which are

once more not recognized as being clearly sexual.

 

   ¹ [‘The Venusberg made him forget

       Honour and Duty thus! -
       Strange how these things don’t happen
       To people such as us.’]
 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3391

 

   There is something else that I must add in order to complete our

view of sexual perversions. However infamous they may be, however

sharply  they  may  be  contrasted  with  normal  sexual  activity,  quiet

consideration will show that some perverse trait or other is seldom

absent from the sexual life of normal people. Even a kiss can claim to

be  described  as  a  perverse  act,  since  it  consists  in  the  bringing

together of two oral erotogenic zones instead of the two genitals. Yet

no  one  rejects  it  as  perverse;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  permitted  in

theatrical  performances  as  a  softened  hint  at  the  sexual  act.  But

precisely kissing can easily turn into a complete perversion - if, that is

to say, it becomes so intense that a genital discharge and orgasm

follow upon it directly, an event that is far from rare. We can learn, too,

that for one person feeling and looking at the object are indispensable

preconditions of sexual enjoyment, that another person will pinch or

bite  at  the  climax  of  sexual  excitation,  that  the  highest  pitch  of

excitement  in  lovers  is  not  always  provoked  by  the  genitals  but  by

some other region of the object’s body, and any number of similarthings besides. There is no sense in excluding people with individual

traits of this kind from the class of the normal and putting them among

the  perverts.  On  the  contrary,  we  shall  recognize  more  and  more

clearly that the essence of the perversions lies not in the extension of

the sexual aim, not in the replacement of the genitals, not even always

in the variant choice of the object, but solely in the exclusiveness with

which these deviations are carried out and as a result of which the

sexual act serving the purpose of reproduction is put on one side. In

so far as the perverse actions are inserted in the performance of the

normal sexual act as preparatory or intensifying contributions, they are

in reality not perversions at all. The gulf between normal and perverse

sexuality is of course very much narrowed by facts of this kind. It is an

easy conclusion that normal sexuality has emerged out of something

that was in existence before it, by weeding out certain features of that

material as unserviceable and collecting together the rest in order to

subordinate them to a new aim, that of reproduction.

  Before we make use of our familiarity with the perversions to plunge

once again into the study of infantile sexuality on the basis of clearer

premisses,  I  must  draw  your  attention  to  an  important  difference

between them. Perverse sexuality is as a rule excellently centred: all

its  actions  are  directed  to  an  aim  -  usually  to  a  single  one;  one

component instinct has gained the upper hand in it and is either the

only one observable or has subjected the others to its purposes. In

that  respect  there  is  no  distinction  between  perverse  and  normal

sexuality other than the fact that their dominating component instincts

and consequently their sexual aims are different. In both of them, one

might say, a well-organized tyranny has been established, but in each

of the two a different family has seized the reins of power. Infantile

sexuality,  on  the  other  hand,  lacks,  speaking  generally,  any  such

centring  and  organization;  its  separate  component  instincts  have

equal rights, each of them goes its own way to obtaining pleasure.

Both  the  absence  and  the  presence  of  centring  harmonize  well,  of

course,  with  the  fact  that  both  perverse  and  normal  sexuality  have

arisen out of infantile sexuality. Incidentally, there are also cases of

perverse  sexuality  which  have  a  much  greater  resemblance  to  the

infantile kind, since in them numerous component instincts have put

through  (or,  more  correctly,  have  persisted  in)  their  aimsindependently of one another. It is better in such cases to speak of

infantilism in sexual life rather than of a perversion.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3392

 

 

      Thus  forearmed  we  can  proceed  to  the  consideration  of  a

suggestion which we shall certainly not be spared. ‘Why’, we shall be

asked, ‘are you so obstinate in describing as being already sexuality

what  on  your  own  evidence  are  indefinable  manifestations  in

childhood out of which sexual life will later develop? Why should you

not be content instead with giving them a physiological description and

simply say that in an infant at the breast we already observe activities,

such as sensual sucking or holding back the excreta, which show us

that he is striving for "organ-pleasure"? In that way you would have

avoided the hypothesis, so repugnant to every feeling, of the smallest

babies having a sexual life.’ - Indeed, Gentlemen, I have no objection

at all to organ-pleasure. I know that even the supreme pleasure of

sexual union is only an organ-pleasure attached to the activity of the

genitals.  But  can  you  tell  me  when  this  originally  indifferent  organ-

pleasure  acquires  the  sexual  character  which  it  undoubtedly

possesses in the later phases of development? Do we know any more

about  ‘organ-pleasure’  than  about  sexuality?  You  will  reply  that  it

gains its sexual character precisely when the genitals begin to play

their  part;  ‘sexual’  coincides  with  ‘genital’.  You  will  even  reject  the

objection raised by the perversions by pointing out to me that in the

majority of perversions a genital orgasm is after all aimed at, even if it

is arrived at by a method other than the union of the genitals. You are

certainly  taking  up  a  much  stronger  position  in  determining  the

characteristics of what is sexual if you knock out of it the relation to

reproduction  which  is  made  untenable  by  the  perversions  and  put

genital activity in its place. But, if so, we are no longer far apart: it is

only a question of the genital organs versus the other organs. What

are you going to do, however, about the numerous experiences which

show you that the genitals can be represented as regards their yield ofpleasure by other organs, as in the case of kissing or of the perverse

practices  of  voluptuaries  or  of  the  symptoms  of  hysteria?  In  that

neurosis  it  is  quite  usual  for  signs  of  stimulation,  sensations  and

innervations,  and  even  the  processes  of  erection,  which  belong

properly to the genitals, to be displaced on to other, remote regions of

the body - as, for instance, by transposition upwards, to the head and

face. Being thus convinced that you have nothing to catch hold of for

your  characterization  of  what  is  sexual,  you  will  no  doubt  have  to

make up your minds to follow my example and extend the description

of being ‘sexual’ to the activities of early childhood, too, which strive

for organ-pleasure.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3393

 

   And now, for my justification, there are two other considerations

which I must ask you to take into account. As you know, we call the

dubious  and  indefinable  pleasurable  activities  of  earliest  childhood

sexual because, in the course of analysis, we arrive at them from the

symptoms  after  passing  through  indisputably  sexual  material.  They

need not necessarily themselves be sexual on that account - agreed!

But take an analogous case. Suppose we had no means of observing

the  development  from  their  seed  of  two  dicotyledonous  plants,  the

apple-tree and the bean, but that it was possible in both cases for us

to  trace  their  development  backwards  from  the  fully  developed

individual  plant  to  the  first  seedling  with  two  seed-leaves.  The  two

seed leaves have a neutral appearance; they are just alike in both

cases. Am I then to suppose that they are really alike, and that the

specific  difference  between  an  apple-tree  and  a  bean  is  only

introduced into the plants later? Or is it biologically more correct to

believe that this difference is already there in the seedling, although I

cannot observe any distinction in the seed leaves? But we are doing

the same thing when we call the pleasure in the activities of an infant-

in-arms a sexual one. I cannot discuss here whether each and every

organ-pleasure should be called a sexual one or whether, alongside of

the  sexual  one,  there  is  another  which  does  not  deserve  to  be  socalled.  I  know  too  little  about  organ-pleasure  and  its  determinants;

and, in view of the retrogressive character of analysis in general, I

cannot feel surprised if at the very end I arrive at what are for the time

being indefinable factors.

   And one thing more! On the whole you will have gained very little for

what you want to assert - the sexual purity of children - even if you

succeed  in  convincing  me  that  it  would  be  better  to  regard  the

activities  of  infants-in-arms  as  non-sexual.  For  the  sexual  life  of

children is already free from all these doubts from the third year of life

onwards: at about that time the genitals already begin to stir, a period

of infantile masturbation - of genital satisfaction, therefore - sets in,

regularly perhaps. The mental and social phenomena of sexual life

need no longer be absent; the choice of an object, an affectionate

preference for particular people, a decision, even, in favour of one of

the two sexes, jealousy - all these have been established by impartial

observations made independently of psycho-analysis and before its

time, and they can be confirmed by any observer who cares to see

them.  You  will  object  that  you  have  never  doubted  the  early

awakening of affection; you have only doubted whether this affection

bears a ‘sexual’ character. It is true that children have already learnt to

conceal  this  between  the  ages  of  three  and  eight.  But  if  you  are

attentive you will be able nevertheless to collect enough evidence of

the ‘sensual’ aims of this affection, and whatever you still lack after

that can easily be supplied in plenty by the investigations of analysis.

The sexual aims at this period of life are intimately connected with the

child’s  contemporary  sexual  researches,  of  which  I  have  given  you

some in stances. The perverse character of some of these aims is of

course dependent on the child’s constitutional immaturity, for he has

not yet discovered the aim that consists in the act of copulation.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3394

 

 

   From about the sixth to the eighth year of life onwards, we can

observe  a  halt  and  retrogression  in  sexual  development,  which,  incases where it is most propitious culturally, deserves to be called a

period of latency. The latency period may also be absent: it need not

bring  with  it  any  interruption  of  sexual  activity  and  sexual  interests

along the whole line. The majority of experiences and mental impulses

before  the  start  of  the  latency  period  now  fall  victim  to  infantile

amnesia  -  the  forgetting  (already  discussed  by  us)  which  veils  our

earliest youth from us and makes us strangers to it. The task is set us

in  every  psycho-analysis  of  bringing  this  forgotten  period  back  into

memory. It is impossible to avoid a suspicion that the beginnings of

sexual life which are included in that period have provided the motive

for its being forgotten - that this forgetting, in fact, is an outcome of

repression.

      From  the  third  year  of  life  a  child’s  sexual  life  shows  much

agreement  with  an  adult’s.  It  differs  from  the  latter,  as  we  already

know, in lacking a firm organization under the primacy of the genitals,

in its inevitable traits of perversion and also, of course, in the far lesser

intensity of the whole trend. But from the point of view of theory the

most  interesting  phases  of  sexual,  or,  as  we  will  say,  of  libidinal,

development  lie  earlier  than  this  point  of  time.  This  course  of

development  takes  place  so  rapidly  that  we  should  probably  never

have succeeded in getting a firm hold of its fleeting pictures by direct

observation.  It  was  only  with  the  help  of  the  psycho-analytic

investigation of the neuroses that it became possible to discern the

still earlier phases of the development of the libido. These are nothing

but constructions, to be sure, but, if you carry out psycho-analyses in

practice,  you  will  find  that  they  are  necessary  and  useful

constructions. You will soon learn how it comes about that pathology

can here put us in possession of conditions which we should inevitably

overlook in a normal subject.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3395

 

   Accordingly, I can now describe to you the form taken by a child’s

sexual  life  before  the  establishment  of  the  primacy  of  the  genitals,

preparations  for  which  are  made  in  the  first  period  of  infancypreceding the latency period and which is permanently organized from

puberty onwards. A kind of loose organization which may be called

‘pregenital’  exists  during  this  early  period.  During  this  phase  what

stand in the forefront are not the genital component instincts but the

sadistic  and  anal  ones.  The  contrast  between  ‘masculine’  and

‘feminine’ plays no part here as yet. Its place is taken by the contrast

between ‘active’ and ‘passive’, which may be described as a precursor

of the sexual polarity and which later on is soldered to that polarity,

what appears to us as masculine in the activities of this phase, when

we look at it from the point of view of the genital phase, turns out to be

an expression of an instinct for mastery which easily passes over into

cruelty. Trends with a passive aim are attached to the erotogenic zone

of the anal orifice, which is very important at this period. The instincts

for  looking  and  for  gaining  knowledge  are  powerfully  at  work;  the

genitals  actually  play  a  part  in  sexual  life  only  as  organs  for  the

excretion  of  urine.  The  component  instincts  of  this  phase  are  not

without objects, but those objects do not necessarily converge into a

single  object.  The  sadistic  anal  organization  is  the  immediate

forerunner of the phase of genital primacy. Detailed study shows how

much of it is retained in the later definitive shape of things and shows

too the way in which its component instincts are compelled to take

their place in the new genital organization. Behind the sadistic-anal

phase of libidinal development we get a glimpse of a still earlier and

more primitive stage of organization, in which the erotogenic zone of

the mouth plays the chief part. As you will guess, the sexual activity of

sensual sucking belongs to it. We must admire the understanding of

the Ancient Egyptians who, in their art, represented children, including

the God Horus, with a finger in their mouth. Only recently Abraham

has  given  examples  of  the  traces  which  this  primitive  oral  phase

leaves behind it in later sexual life.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3396

 

   I can well suppose, Gentlemen, that this last account of the sexual

organizations has obstructed rather than instructed you, and it may bethat I have once more entered too much into details. But you must

have patience. What you have just heard will derive increased value

for  you  from  its  later  application.  For  the  present  you  should  keep

firmly in mind that sexual life (or, as we put it, the libidinal function)

does  not  emerge  as  something  ready-made  and  does  not  even

develop  further  in  its  own  likeness,  but  passes  through  a  series  of

successive  phases  which  do  not  resemble  one  another;  its

development is thus several times repeated - like that of a caterpillar

into  a  butterfly.  The  turning-point  of  this  development  is  the

subordination of all the component sexual instincts under the primacy

of the genitals and along with this the subjection of sexuality to the

reproductive function. This is preceded by a sexual life that might be

described  as  distracted  -  the  independent  activity  of  the  different

component  instincts  striving  for  organ-pleasure.  This  anarchy  is

mitigated  by  abortive  beginnings  of  ‘pregenital’  organizations  -  a

sadistic-anal phase preceded by an oral one, which is perhaps the

most  primitive.  In  addition,  there  are  the  various,  still  incompletely

known, processes which lead one stage of organization over to the

subsequent  and  next  higher  one.  We  shall  learn  later  what  an

important light is thrown on the neuroses by the fact that the libido

passes through such a long course of development and one which

has so many breaks in it.

 

   To-day we will follow yet another side of this development namely

the relation of the component sexual instincts to their object. Or rather,

we will make a hasty survey of this development and dwell somewhat

longer  on  one  of  its  rather  late  consequences.  A  few  of  the

components of the sexual instinct, there, have an object from the first

and hold fast to it - for instance, the instinct for mastery (sadism) and

the  scopophilic  and  epistemophilic  instincts.  Others,  more  definitely

linked to particular erotogenic zones of the body, have one to begin

with  only,  so  long  as  they  are  still  attached  to  the  non-sexual

functions,  and  give  it  up  when  they  become  separated  from  them.

Thus the first object of the oral component of the sexual instinct is the

mother’s breast which satisfies the infant’s need for nourishment. The

erotic  component,  which  is  satisfied  simultaneously  during  the

sucking,  makes  itself  independent  with  the  act  of sensual  sucking[lutschen]; it gives up the outside object and replaces it by an area of

the subject’s own body. The oral instinct becomes auto-erotic, as are

the  anal  and  other  erotogenic  instincts  from  the  first.  Further

development,  to  put  the  matter  as  concisely  as  possible,  has  two

aims: firstly, the abandonment of auto-erotism, the replacement of the

subject’s own body once more by an outside object, and secondly, the

unification of the various objects of the separate instincts and their

replacement by a single object. This can, of course, only be achieved

if the object is again a whole body, similar to the subject’s own. Nor

can  it  be  effected  unless  a  number  of  the  auto-erotic  instinctual

impulses are left behind as being unserviceable.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3397

 

      The  processes  of  finding  an  object  are  fairly  complex  and  no

comprehensive  account  has  hitherto  been  given  of  them.  For  our

purposes it may be specially pointed out that when, in the years of

childhood before puberty, the process has in some respects reached a

conclusion,  the  object  that  has  been  found  turns  out  to  be  almost

identical with the first object of the oral pleasure-instinct, which was

reached by attachment. Though it is not actually the mother’s breast,

at least it is the mother. We call the mother the first love-object. For we

speak of love when we bring the mental side of the sexual trends into

the  foreground  and  want  to  force  back  the  underlying  physical  or

‘sensual’ instinctual demands or to forget them for a moment. At the

time at which the child’s mother becomes his love-object the psychical

work of repression has already begun in him, which is withdrawing

from his knowledge awareness of a part of his sexual aims. To his

choice of his mother as a love-object everything becomes attached

which,  under  the  name  of  the  ‘Oedipus  complex’,  has  attained  so

much importance in the psycho-analytic explanation of the neuroses

and has played no less a part, perhaps, in the resistance to psycho-

analysis.

   Listen to this episode which occurred in the course of the present

war. One of the stout disciples of psycho-analysis was stationed asmedical  officer  on  the  German  front  somewhere  in  Poland.  He

attracted  his  colleagues’  attention  by  the  fact  that  he  occasionally

exercised  an  unexpected  influence  on  a  patient.  When  he  was

questioned, he acknowledged that he was employing the methods of

psycho-analysis and declared his readiness to convey his knowledge

to his colleagues. Every evening there after the medical officers of the

corps,  his  colleagues  and  his  superiors,  came  together  in  order  to

learn the secret doctrines of analysis. All went well for a while; but

when he spoke to his audience about the Oedipus complex, one of his

superiors rose, declared he did not believe it, that it was a vile act on

the part of the lecturer to speak of such things to them, honest men

who were fighting for their country and fathers of a family, and that he

forbade  the  continuance  of  the  lectures.  That  was  the  end  of  the

matter. The analyst got himself transferred to another part of the front.

It seems to me a bad thing, however, if a German victory requires that

science shall be ‘organized’ in this way, and German science will not

respond well to organization of such a kind.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3398

 

 

      And  now  you  will  be  eager  to  hear  what  this  terrible  Oedipus

complex contains. Its name tells you. You all know the Greek legend

of King Oedipus, who was destined by fate to kill his father and take

his mother to wife, who did everything possible to escape the oracle’s

decree and punished himself by blinding when he learned that he had

none the less unwittingly committed both these crimes. I hope many of

you may yourselves have felt the shattering effect of the tragedy in

which  Sophocles  has  treated  the  story.  The  work  of  the  Athenian

dramatist exhibits the way in which the long-past deed of Oedipus is

gradually  brought  to  light  by  an  investigation  ingeniously  protracted

and fanned into life by ever fresh relays of evidence. To this extent it

has a certain resemblance to the progress of a psycho-analysis. In the

course of the dialogue Jocasta, the deluded mother and wife, declares

herself opposed to the continuance of the enquiry. She appeals to thefact that many people have dreamt of lying with their mothers, but that

dreams should be despised. We do not despise dreams - least of all,

typical dreams which occur to many people; and we do not doubt that

the dream referred to by Jocasta has an intimate connection with the

strange and terrifying content of the legend.

   It is a surprising thing that the tragedy of Sophocles does not call up

indignant repudiation in his audience - a reaction similar to that of our

simple-minded army doctor but far better justified. For fundamentally it

is an amoral work: it absolves men from moral responsibility, exhibits

the gods as promoters of crime and shows the impotence of the moral

impulses  of  men  which  struggle  against  crime.  It  might  easily  be

supposed that the material of the legend had in view an indictment of

the  gods  and  of  fate;  and  in  the  hands  of  Euripides,  the  critic  and

enemy  of  the  gods,  it  would  probably  have  become  such  an

indictment. But with the devout Sophocles there is no question of an

application  of  that  kind.  The  difficulty  is  overcome  by  the  pious

sophistry that to bow to the will of the gods is the highest morality

even  when  it  promotes  crime.  I  cannot  think  that  this  morality  is  a

strong point of the play, but it has no influence on its effect. It is not to

it that the auditor reacts but to the secret sense and content of the

legend. He reacts as though by self analysis he had recognized the

Oedipus complex in himself and had unveiled the will of the gods and

the oracle as exalted disguises of his own unconscious. It is as though

he was obliged to remember the two wishes - to do away with his

father  and  in  place  of  him  to  take  his  mother  to  wife  -  and  to  be

horrified at them. And he understands the dramatist’s voice as though

it  were  saying  to  him:  ‘You  are  struggling  in  vain  against  your

responsibility  and  are  protesting  in  vain  of  what  you  have  done  in

opposition to these criminal intentions. You are guilty, for you have not

been able to destroy them; they still persist in you unconsciously.’ And

there  is  psychological  truth  contained  in  this.  Even  if  a  man  has

repressed his evil impulses into the unconscious and would like to tell

himself  afterwards  that  he  is  not  responsible  for  them,  he  is

nevertheless bound to be aware of this responsibility as a sense of

guilt whose basis is unknown to him.

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3399

 

   There can be no doubt that the Oedipus complex may be looked

upon as one of the most important sources of the sense of guilt by

which neurotics are so often tormented. But more than this: in a study

of the beginnings of human religion and morality which I published in

1913 under the title of Totem and Taboo I put forward a suggestion

that man kind as a whole may have acquired its sense of guilt, the

ultimate source of religion and morality, at the beginning of its history,

in connection with the Oedipus complex. I should be very glad to tell

you more about this, but I had better leave it on one side. Once one

has begun on that topic it is hard to break off; and we must go back to

individual psychology.

 

   What, then, can be gathered about the Oedipus complex from the

direct observation of children at the time of their making their choice of

an object before the latency period? Well, it is easy to see that the

little man wants to have his mother all to himself, that he feels the

presence of his father as a nuisance, that he is resentful if his father

indulges  in  any  signs  of  affection  towards  his  mother  and  that  he

shows satisfaction when his father has gone on a journey or is absent.

He will often express his feelings directly in words and promise his

mother  to  marry  her.  It  will  be  thought  that  this  amounts  to  little

compared to the deeds of Oedipus; but in fact it is enough, it is the

same thing at root. Observation is often obscured by the circumstance

that  on  other  occasions  the  same  child  will  simultaneously  give

evidence of great affection for his father. But contrary - or, as it is

better to say, ‘ambivalent’ - emotional attitudes, which in adults would

lead to a conflict, remain compatible with each other for a long time in

children, just as later they find a permanent place beside each other in

the unconscious. It will also be objected that the little boy’s conduct

arises from egoistic motives and gives no grounds for postulating an

erotic complex: the child’s mother attends to all his needs, so that he

has an interest in preventing her from looking after anyone else. This

also is true; but it will soon become clear that in this situation as in

similar ones the egoistic interest is merely affording a point of supportto which the erotic trend is attached. The little boy may show the most

undisguised  sexual  curiosity  about  his  mother,  he  may  insist  upon

sleeping beside her at night, he may force his presence on her while

she is dressing or may even make actual attempts at seducing her, as

his mother will often notice and report with amusement - all of which

puts beyond doubt the erotic nature of his tie with his mother. Nor

must it be forgotten that the mother devotes the same attention to a

little daughter without producing the same result and that the father

often competes with her in looking after the boy and yet fails to gain

the  same  significance  as  she  does.  In  short,  the  factor  of  sexual

preference cannot be eliminated from the situation by any criticism.

From the standpoint of egoistic interest it would be simply foolish of

the little man not to prefer to put up with having two people in his

service rather than only one of them.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3400

 

   As you see, I have only described the relation of a boy to his father

and mother. Things happen in just the same way with little girls, with

the necessary changes: an affectionate attachment to her father, a

need to get rid of her mother as superfluous and to take her place, a

coquetry which already employs the methods of later womanhood -

these offer a charming picture, especially in small girls, which makes

us forget the possibly grave consequences lying behind this infantile

situation. We must not omit to add that the parents themselves often

exercise  a  determining  influence  on  the  awakening  of  a  child’s

Oedipus attitude by themselves obeying the pull of sexual attraction,

and  that  where  there  are  several  children  the  father  will  give  the

plainest evidence of his greater affection for his little daughter and the

mother  for  her  son.  But  the  spontaneous  nature  of  the  Oedipus

complex in children cannot be seriously shaken even by this factor.

   When other children appear on the scene the Oedipus complex is

enlarged  into  a  family  complex.  This,  with  fresh  support  from  the

egoistic sense of injury, gives grounds for receiving the new brothers

or sisters with repugnance and for unhesitatingly getting rid of them bya wish. It is even true that as a rule children are far readier to give

verbal expression to these feelings of hate than to those arising from

the  parental  complex.  If  a  wish  of  this  kind  is  fulfilled  and  the

undesired addition to the family is removed again shortly afterwards

by death, we can discover from a later analysis what an important

experience this death has been to the child, even though it need not

have remained fixed in his memory. A child who has been put into

second place by the birth of a brother or sister, and who is now for the

first time almost isolated from his mother, does not easily forgive her

this loss of place; feelings which in an adult would be described as

greatly embittered arise in him and are often the basis of a permanent

estrangement.  We  have  already  mentioned  that  the  child’s  sexual

researches, with all their consequences, usually follow from this vital

experience of his. As these brothers and sisters grow up, the boy’s

attitude to them undergoes very significant transformations. He may

take his sister as a love-object by way of substitute for his faithless

mother.  Where  there  are  several  brothers,  all  of  them  courting  a

younger sister, situations of hostile rivalry, which are so important for

later life, arise already in the nursery. A little girl may find in her elder

brother a substitute for her father who no longer takes an affectionate

interest  in  her  as  he  did  in  her  earliest  years.  Or  she  may  take  a

younger sister as a substitute for the baby she has vainly wished for

from her father.

   This and very much else of a similar nature will be shown to you by

the direct observation of children and by the consideration of clearly

retained memories from childhood uninfluenced by analysis. From this

you will conclude among other things that the position of a child in the

family  order  is  a  factor  of  extreme  importance  in  determining  the

shape of his later life and should deserve consideration in every life-

history. But, what is more important, in view of this information which

can be so easily obtained, you will not be able to recall without a smile

the  pronouncements  of  science  in  explanation  of  the  prohibition  of

incest. There is no end to what has been invented on the subject. It

has been said that sexual inclination is diverted from members of the

same family who are of the opposite sex by the fact of having lived

together  from  childhood;  or,  again,  that  a  biological  purpose  of

avoiding inbreeding is represented psychically by an innate horror ofincest. In all this the fact is entirely overlooked that such an inexorable

prohibition of it in law and custom would not be needed if there were

any reliable natural barriers against the temptation to incest. The truth

is  just  the  opposite.  A  human  being’s  first  choice  of  an  object  is

regularly an incestuous one, aimed, in the case of the male, at his

mother and sister; and it calls for the severest prohibitions to deter this

persistent  infantile  tendency  from  realization.  Among  the  primitive

races still living to-day, among savages, the prohibitions against incest

are even very much stricter than among ourselves, and Theodor Reik

has only recently shown in a brilliant work that the puberty rites of

savages, which represent a re-birth, have the sense of releasing the

boy from his incestuous bond with his mother and of reconciling him

with his father.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3401

 

   Mythology will teach you that incest, which is supposed to be so

much detested by humans, is unhesitatingly allowed to the gods. And

you  may  learn  from  ancient  history  that  incestuous  sister  marriage

was a sanctified injunction upon the person of the Ruler (among the

Egyptian Pharaohs and the Incas of Peru). What was in question was

thus a privilege forbidden to the common herd.

   Mother-incest was one of the crimes of Oedipus, parricide was the

other. It may be remarked in passing that they are also the two great

crimes proscribed by totemism, the first socio-religious institution of

mankind.

 

   But let us now turn from the direct observation of children to the

analytic examination of adults who have become neurotic. What help

does  analysis  give  towards  a  further  knowledge  of  the  Oedipus

complex? That can be answered in a word. Analysis confirms all that

the  legend  describes.  It  shows  that  each  of  these  neurotics  has

himself been an Oedipus or, what comes to the same thing, has, as a

reaction to the complex, become a Hamlet. The analytic account of

the Oedipus complex is, of course, a magnification and coarsening ofthe infantile sketch. The hatred of the father, the death-wishes against

him, are no longer hinted at timidly, the affection for the mother admits

that its aim is to possess her as a woman. Should we really attribute

such blatant and extreme emotional impulses to the tender years of

childhood, or is analysis deceiving us by an admixture of some new

factor? It is not hard to find one. Whenever someone gives an account

of a past event, even if he is a historian, we must take into account

what he unintentionally puts back into the past from the present or

from some intermediate time, thus falsifying his picture of it. In the

case of a neurotic it is even a question whether this putting back is an

entirely unintentional one; later on we shall have to discover reasons

for this and have to do justice in general to the fact of ‘retrospective

phantasying’.  We  can  easily  see,  too,  that  hatred  of  the  father  is

reinforced  by  a  number  of  factors  arising  from  later  times  and

circumstances  and  that  the  sexual  desires  towards  the  mother  are

cast into forms which must have been alien as yet to a child. But it

would be a vain effort to seek to explain the whole Oedipus complex

by retrospective phantasying and to attach it to later times. Its infantile

core  and  more  or  less  of  its  accessories  remain  as  they  were

confirmed by the direct observation of children.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3402

 

   The clinical fact which meets us behind the form of the Oedipus

complex  as  it  is  established  by  analysis  is  of  the  highest  practical

significance. We learn that at puberty, when the sexual instinct first

makes its demands in full strength, the old familiar incestuous objects

are  taken  up  again  and  freshly  cathected  with  libido.  The  infantile

object-choice was only a feeble one, but it was a prelude, pointing the

direction  for  the  object-choice  at  puberty.  At  this  point,  then,  very

intense emotional processes come into play, following the direction of

the  Oedipus  complex  or  reacting  against  it,  processes  which,

however, since their premisses have become intolerable, must to a

large  extent  remain  apart  from  consciousness.  From  this  time

onwards, the human individual has to devote himself to the great taskof  detaching  himself  from  his  parents,  and  not  until  that  task  is

achieved can he cease to be a child and become a member of the

social  community.  For  the  son  this  task  consists  in  detaching  his

libidinal wishes from his mother and employing them for the choice of

a real outside love-object, and in reconciling himself with his father if

he has remained in opposition to him, or in freeing himself from his

pressure  if,  as  a  reaction  to  his  infantile  rebelliousness,  he  has

become subservient to him. These tasks are set to everyone; and it is

remarkable how seldom they are dealt with in an ideal manner - that

is,  in  one  which  is  correct  both  psychologically  and  socially.  By

neurotics, however, no solution at all is arrived at: the son remains all

his  life  bowed  beneath  his  father’s  authority  and  he  is  unable  to

transfer his libido to an outside sexual object. With the relationship

changed round, the same fate can await the daughter. In this sense

the Oedipus complex may justly be regarded as the nucleus of the

neuroses.

 

   As you may imagine, Gentlemen, I have passed very cursorily over

a  great  number  of  considerations  of  both  practical  and  theoretical

importance connected with the Oedipus complex. Nor shall I enter into

its variations or its possible reversal. Among its remoter connections I

will only give you a further hint that it has turned out to have a highly

important effect on literary production. In a valuable work Otto Rank

has shown that dramatists of every period have chosen their material

in the main from the Oedipus and incest complex and its variations

and disguises. Nor should it be allowed to pass unnoticed that the two

criminal wishes of the Oedipus complex were recognized as the true

representatives of the uninhibited life of the instincts long before the

time  of  psycho-analysis.  Among  the  writings  of  the  Encyclopaedist

Diderot you will find a celebrated dialogue, Le neveu Rameau, which

was rendered into German by no less a person than Goethe. There

you  may  read  this  remarkable  sentence:  ‘Si  le  petit  sauvage  était

abandonné à lui-même, qu’il conservât toute son imbécillité, et qu’il

réunît  au  peu  de  raison  de  l’enfant  au  berceau  la  violence  des

passions de l’homme de trente ans, il tordrait le col à son père et

coucherait avec sa mère.’¹

    But there is something else that I cannot pass by. The reminder of

dreams given to us by the mother and wife of Oedipus must not be

allowed to remain fruitless. Do you recall the out come of our dream-

analyses - how the wishes that construct dreams are so often of a

perverse or incestuous nature or reveal an unsuspected hostility to

those who are nearest and dearest to the dreamer? At that time we

gave no explanation of the origin of these evil impulses. Now you can

find it for yourselves. They are allocations of the libido and object-

cathexes  which  date  from  early  infancy  and  have  long  since  been

abandoned as far as conscious life is concerned, but which prove still

to  be  present  at  night-time  and  to  be  capable  of  functioning  in  a

certain  sense.  Since,  however,  everyone,  and  not  only  neurotics,

experiences these perverse, incestuous and murderous dreams, we

may conclude that people who are normal to-day have passed along a

path of development that has led through the perversions and object-

cathexes  of  the  Oedipus  complex,  that  that  is  the  path  of  normal

development and that neurotics merely exhibit to us in a magnified

and  coarsened  form  what  the  analysis  of  dreams  reveals  to  us  in

healthy people as well. And this is one of the reasons why I dealt with

the study of dreams before that of neurotic symptoms.

 

   ¹ [’If the little savage were left to himself, preserving all his foolishness and adding to the

small sense of a child in the cradle the violent passions of a man of thirty, he would strangle
his father and lie with his mother.’]
 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3403

 

                                      LECTURE XXII

 

  SOME THOUGHTS ON DEVELOPMENT AND REGRESSION -

                                      AETIOLOGY

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - You have heard that the libidinal function goes

through a lengthy development before it can, in what is described as

the normal manner, be enlisted in the service of reproduction. I should

now like to bring to your attention the significance of this fact in thecausation of the neuroses.

   We are, I think, in agreement with the theories of general pathology

in assuming that a development of this kind involves two dangers -

first, of inhibition, and secondly, of regression. That is to say, in view

of the general tendency of biological processes to variation, it is bound

to  be  the  case  that  not  every  preparatory  phase  will  be  passed

through with equal success and completely superseded: portions of

the function will be permanently held back at these early stages, and

the total picture of development will be qualified by some amount of

developmental inhibition.

   Let us look for some analogies to these processes in other fields of

knowledge.  When,  as  often  happened  at  early  periods  of  human

history, a whole people left their place of domicile and sought a new

one, we may be certain that the whole of them did not arrive at the

new  location.  Apart  from  other  losses,  it  must  regularly  have

happened that small groups or bands of the migrants halted on the

way and settled at these stopping places while the main body went

further. Or, as you know, to turn to a nearer comparison, in the highest

mammals the male sex-glands, which are originally situated deep in

the abdominal cavity, start upon a migration at a particular stage of

intra-uterine life, which brings them almost directly under the skin of

the pelvic extremity. As a consequence of this migration, we find in a

number  of  male  individuals  that  one  of  these  paired  organs  has

remained  behind  in  the  pelvic  cavity,  or  that  it  has  become

permanently lodged in what is known as the inguinal canal, through

which both organs must pass in the course of their migration, or at

least  that  this  canal  has  remained  open,  though  it  should  normally

close  up  after  the  sex-glands  have  completed  their  change  of

situation. Or again, when as a young student I was engaged under

von  Brücke’s  direction  on  my  first  piece  of  scientific  work,  I  was

concerned  with  the  origin  of  the  posterior  nerve-roots  in  the  spinal

cord of a small fish of very archaic structure; I found that the nerve-

fibres of these roots have their origin in large cells in the posterior horn

of the grey matter, which is no longer the case in other vertebrates.

But I also discovered soon afterwards that nerve-cells of this kind are

present outside the grey matter the whole way to what is known as the

spinal ganglion of the posterior root; and from this I inferred that thecells of these masses of ganglia had migrated from the spinal cord

along the roots of the nerves. This is also shown by their evolutionary

history. But in this small fish the whole path of their migration was

demonstrated by the cells that had remained behind.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3404

 

   If you go into the matter more closely, you will have no difficulty in

detecting  the  weak  points  in  these  comparisons.  I  will  therefore

declare without more ado that I regard it as possible in the case of

every  particular  sexual  trend  that  some  portions  of  it  have  stayed

behind  at  earlier  stages  of  its  development,  even  though  other

portions may have reached their final goal. You will recognize here

that we are picturing every such trend as a current which has been

continuous since the beginning of life but which we have divided up, to

some  extent  artificially,  into  separate  successive  advances.  Your

impression that these ideas stand in need of greater clarification is

justified; but to attempt it would take us too far afield. Let me further

make it clear that we propose to describe the lagging behind of a part

trend at an earlier stage as a fixation - a fixation, that is, of the instinct.

   The second danger in a development by stages of this sort lies in

the  fact  that  the  portions  which  have  proceeded  further  may  also

easily return retrogressively to one of these earlier stages - what we

describe as a regression. The trend will find itself led into a regression

of this kind if the exercise of its function - that is, the attainment of its

aim of satisfaction - is met, in its later or more highly developed form,

by powerful external obstacles. It is plausible to suppose that fixation

and regression are not independent of each other. The stronger the

fixations on its path of development, the more readily will the function

evade  external  difficulties  by  regressing  to  the  fixations  -  the  more

incapable, therefore, does the developed function turn out to be of

resisting external obstacles in its course. Consider that, if a people

which  is  in  movement  has  left  strong  detachments  behind  at  the

stopping-places on its migration, it is likely that the more advanced

parties will be inclined to retreat to these stopping-places if they havebeen defeated or have come up against a superior enemy. But they

will also be in the greater danger of being defeated the more of their

number they have left behind on their migration.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3405

 

      It  is  important  for  your  understanding  of  the  neuroses  that  you

should not leave this relation between fixation and regression out of

sight. This will give you a firmer footing in facing the question of how

the  neuroses  are  caused  -  the  question  of  the  aetiology  of  the

neuroses which we shall shortly have to meet.

   For the moment we will dwell a little longer on regression. After what

you have learnt of the development of the libidinal function, you will be

prepared to hear that there are regressions of two sorts: a return to

the objects first cathected by the libido, which, as we know, are of an

incestuous nature, and a return of the sexual organization as a whole

to earlier stages. Both sorts are found in the transference neuroses

and play a great part in their mechanism. In particular, a return to the

first  incestuous  objects  of  the  libido  is  a  feature  that  is  found  in

neurotics with positively fatiguing regularity. There is much more to be

said about regressions of the libido itself when we take into account as

well another group of neuroses, the narcissistic ones, which for the

time being we do not intend to do. These disorders give us access to

other developmental processes of the libidinal function which we have

not  yet  mentioned,  and  show  us  correspondingly  new  sorts  of

regression as well. But above all I think I ought to warn you now not to

confuse regression with repression and help you to form a clear idea

of the relations between the two processes. Repression, as you will

recall,  is  the  process  by  which  an  act  which  is  admissible  to

consciousness, one, therefore, which belongs to the system Pcs., is

made unconscious - is pushed back, therefore, into the system Ucs.

And we equally speak of repression if the unconscious mental act is

altogether forbidden access to the neighbouring preconscious system

and  is  turned  back  at  the  threshold  by  the  censorship.  Thus  the

concept of repression involves no relation to sexuality: I must ask youto take special note of that. It indicates a purely psychological process,

which we can characterize still better if we call it a ‘topographical’ one.

By this we intend to say that it is concerned with the psychical regions

which we have assumed to exist, or, if we drop this clumsy working

hypothesis,  with  the  construction  of  the  mental  apparatus  out  of

distinct psychical systems.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3406

 

   The comparison we have proposed has drawn our attention for the

first time to the fact that we have not hitherto been using the word

‘regression’ in its general sense but in a quite special one. If we give it

its  general  sense  -  of  a  return  from  a  higher  to  a  lower  stage  of

development  -  then  repression  too  can  be  subsumed  under  the

concept of regression, for it too can be described as a return to an

earlier and deeper stage in the development of a psychical act. In the

case of repression, however, this retrogressive movement does not

concern us, since we also speak of repression, in the dynamic sense,

when a psychical act is held back at the lower, unconscious, stage.

The fact is that repression is a topographico-dynamic concept, while

regression is a purely descriptive one. What we have hitherto spoken

of as regression, however, and have related to fixation, has meant

exclusively  a  return  of  the  libido  to  earlier  stopping  places  in  its

development - something, that is, entirely different in its nature from

repression and entirely independent of it. Nor can we call regression

of the libido a purely psychical process and we cannot tell where we

should localize it in the mental apparatus. And though it is true that it

exercises  the  most  powerful  influence  on  mental  life,  yet  the  most

prominent factor in it is the organic one.

 

   Discussions like this, Gentlemen, are bound to become some what

arid. So let us turn to clinical material in order to find applications of it

that will be a little more impressive. Hysteria and obsessional neurosis

are,  as  you  know,  the  two  chief  representatives  of  the  group  of

transference  neuroses.  Now  it  is  true  that  in  hysteria  there  is  aregression of the libido to the primary incestuous sexual objects and

that this occurs quite regularly; but there is as good as no regression

to an earlier stage of the sexual organization. To offset this, the chief

part in the mechanism of hysteria is played by repression. If I might

venture  to  complete  what  we  already  know  for  certain  about  this

neurosis by making a construction, I might explain the position thus.

The unification of the component instincts under the primacy of the

genitals has been accomplished; but its results come up against the

resistance  of  the  preconscious  system  which  is  linked  with

consciousness.  Thus  the  genital  organization  holds  good  for  the

unconscious, but not in the same way for the preconscious; and this

rejection on the part of the preconscious brings about a picture which

has certain resemblances to the state of things before genital primacy.

But it is nevertheless something quite different.

   Of the two kinds of regression of the libido, that to an earlier phase

of  the  sexual  organization  is  by  far  the  more  striking.  Since  this  is

absent in hysteria, and since our whole view of the neuroses is still far

too  much  under  the  influence  of  the  study  of  hysteria,  which  was

chronologically  the  first,  the  significance  of  libidinal  regression  also

became  clear  to  us  far  later  than  that  of  repression.  We  must  be

prepared  to  find  that  our  views  will  be  subjected  to  still  further

extensions  and  revaluations  when  we  are  able  to  take  into

consideration not only hysteria and obsessional neurosis but also the

other, narcissistic neuroses.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3407

 

   In obsessional neurosis, on the contrary, it is the regression of the

libido to the preliminary stage of the sadistic-anal organization that is

the  most  striking  fact  and  the  one  which  is  decisive  for  what  is

manifested in symptoms. The love-impulse is obliged, when this has

happened, to disguise itself as a sadistic impulse. The obsessional

idea  ‘I  should  like  to  kill  you’,  when  it  has  been  freed  from  certain

additions  which  are  not  a  matter  of  chance  but  are  indispensable,

means at bottom nothing other than ‘I should like to enjoy you in love’.If you consider further that there has been a simultaneous regression

in regard to the object, so that these impulses apply only to those who

are nearest and dearest to the patient, you can form some idea of the

horror which these obsessions arouse in him and at the same time of

the alien appearance which they present to his conscious perception.

But  repression,  too,  plays  a  great  part  in  the  mechanism  of  these

neuroses, though in a cursory introduction like ours this is not easily

demonstrated.  A  regression  of  the  libido  without  repression  would

never produce a neurosis but would lead to a perversion. From this

you can see that repression is the process which is most peculiar to

neuroses and is most characteristic of them. Perhaps I may have an

opportunity later of telling you what we know of the mechanism of the

perversions, and you will see that in their case too things are not so

simple as we should be glad to make them out.

 

   I think, Gentlemen, that you will best come to terms with what you

have just been told about fixation and regression of the libido if you

will regard it as a preparation for research into the aetiology of the

neuroses.  Hitherto  I  have  only  given  you  one  piece  of  information

about this: namely that people fall ill of a neurosis if they are deprived

of the possibility of satisfying their libido - that they fall ill owing to

‘frustration’,  as  I  put  it  -  and  that  their  symptoms  are  precisely  a

substitute  for  their  frustrated  satisfaction.  This  is  not  supposed  to

mean, of course, that every frustration of a libidinal satisfaction makes

the person it affects neurotic, but merely that the factor of frustration

could be discerned in every case of neurosis that has been examined.

Thus the proposition is not convertible. No doubt, too, you will have

understood  that  this  assertion  does  not  claim  to  reveal  the  whole

secret  of  the  aetiology  of  neuroses  but  is  only  bringing  into

prominence one important and indispensable determinant.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3408

 

   In further pursuing the discussion of this thesis, are we to consider

the nature of the frustration or the peculiar character of those who areaffected  by  it?  It  is  extremely  seldom,  after  all,  that  frustration  is

universal and absolute. In order to operate pathogenically it must no

doubt affect the mode of satisfaction which alone the subject desires,

of which alone he is capable. There are in general very many ways of

tolerating  deprivation  of  libidinal  satisfaction  without  falling  ill  as  a

result. In the first place, we know people who are able to put up with a

deprivation of this kind without being injured: they are not happy, they

suffer from longing, but they do not fall ill. Next, we must bear in mind

that  the  sexual  instinctual  impulses  in  particular  are  extraordinarily

plastic,  if  I  may  so  express  it.  One  of  them  can  take  the  place  of

another,  one  of  them  can  take  over  another’s  intensity;  if  the

satisfaction of one of them is frustrated by reality, the satisfaction of

another can afford complete compensation. They are related to one

another  like  a  network  of  intercommunicating  channels  filled  with  a

liquid; and this is so in spite of their being subject to the primacy of the

genitals - a state of affairs that is not at all easily combined in a single

picture. Further, the component instincts of sexuality, as well as the

sexual  current  which  is  compounded  from  them,  exhibit  a  large

capacity for changing their object, for taking another in its place - and

one, therefore, that is more easily attainable. This displaceability and

readiness to accept a substitute must operate powerfully against the

pathogenic effect of a frustration. Among these protective processes

against falling ill owing to deprivation there is one which has gained

special cultural significance. It consists in the sexual trend abandoning

its aim of obtaining a component or a reproductive pleasure and taking

on another which is related genetically to the abandoned one but is

itself no longer sexual and must be described as social. We call this

process  ‘sublimation’,  in  accordance  with  the  general  estimate  that

places social aims higher than the sexual ones, which are at bottom

self-interested. Sublimation is, incidentally, only a special case of the

way in which sexual trends are attached to other, non-sexual ones.

We shall have to discuss it again in another connection.

      You  may  now  have  an  impression  that  deprivation  has  been

reduced to insignificance owing to all these methods of tolerating it.

But no, it retains its pathogenic power. The counter-measures are on

the  whole  insufficient.  There  is  a  limit  to  the  amount  of  unsatisfied

libido that human beings on the average can put up with. The plasticityor  free  mobility  of  the  libido  is  by  no  means  fully  preserved  in

everyone,  and  sublimation  is  never  able  to  deal  with  more  than  a

certain fraction of libido, quite apart from the fact that many people are

gifted with only a small amount of capacity to sublimate. The most

important of these limitations is evidently that upon the mobility of the

libido, since it makes a person’s satisfaction depend on the attainment

of only a very small number of aims and objects. You have only to

recall that an imperfect development of the libido leaves behind it very

fertile  and  perhaps,  too,  very  numerous  libidinal  fixations  to  early

phases of the organization and of the finding of objects, which are for

the most part incapable of real satisfaction, and you will recognize in

libidinal  fixation  the  second  powerful  factor  which  combines  with

frustration as the cause of illness. You can declare, as a schematic

abbreviation, that libidinal fixation represents the predisposing, internal

factor in the aetiology of the neuroses, while frustration represents the

accidental, external one.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3409

 

   I take the opportunity here of warning you against taking sides in a

quite unnecessary dispute. In scientific matters people are very fond

of selecting one portion of the truth, putting it in the place of the whole

and of then disputing the rest, which is no less true, in favour of this

one  portion.  In  just  this  way  a  number  of  schools  of  opinion  have

already split off from the psycho-analytic movement, some of which

recognize the egoistic instincts while disavowing the sexual ones, and

others  attribute  importance  to  the  influence  of  the  real  tasks  of  life

while overlooking the individual’s past - and others besides. Now here

we  have  a  similar  occasion  for  pointing  a  contrast  and  starting  a

controversy. Are neuroses exogenous or endogenous illnesses? Are

they the inevitable result of a particular constitution or the product of

certain detrimental (traumatic) experiences in life? More particularly,

are they brought about by fixation of the libido (and the other features

of  the  sexual  constitution)  or  by  the  pressure  of  frustration?  This

dilemma seems to me no more sensible on the whole than anotherthat  I  might  put  to  you:  does  a  baby  come  about  through  being

begotten by its father or conceived by its mother? Both determinants

are equally in dispensable, as you will justly reply. In the matter of the

causation of the neuroses the relation, if not precisely the same, is

very similar. As regards their causation, instances of neurotic illness

fall into a series within which the two factors - sexual constitution and

experience, or, if you prefer it, fixation of the libido and frustration - are

represented in such a manner that if there is more of the one there is

less of the other. At one end of the series are the extreme cases of

which you could say with conviction: these people, in consequence of

the singular development of their libido, would have fallen ill in any

case, whatever they had experienced and however carefully their lives

had been sheltered. At the other end there are the cases, as to which,

on the contrary, you would have had to judge that they would certainly

have escaped falling ill if their lives had not brought them into this or

that situation. In the cases lying within the series a greater or lesser

amount of predisposition in the sexual constitution is combined with a

lesser or greater amount of detrimental experience in their lives. Their

sexual constitution would not have led them into a neurosis if they had

not  had  these  experiences,  and  these  experiences  would  not  have

had  a  traumatic  effect  on  them  if  their  libido  had  been  otherwise

disposed. In this series I can perhaps allow a certain preponderance

in significance to the predisposing factors; but even that admission

depends on how far you choose to extend the frontiers of neurotic

illness.

   I propose, Gentlemen, that we should name a series of this kind a

‘complemental series’, and I forewarn you that we shall have occasion

to construct others of the same kind.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3410

 

   The tenacity with which the libido adheres to particular trends and

objects - what may be described as the ‘adhesiveness’ of the libido -

makes  its  appearance  as  an  independent  factor,  varying  from

individual to individual, whose determinants are quite unknown to us,but  whose  significance  for  the  aetiology  of  the  neuroses  we  shall

certainly no longer underestimate. We should not, on the other hand,

over-estimate  the  intimacy  of  this  connection.  For  a  similar

‘adhesiveness’  of  the  libido  occurs  (for  unknown  reasons)  under

numerous  conditions  in  normal  people,  and  it  is  found  as  a

determining  factor  in  people  who  are  in  one  sense  the  contrary  of

neurotics - in perverts. It was known even before the days of psycho-

analysis  (cf.  Binet)  that  in  the  anamnesis  of  perverts  a  very  early

impression of an abnormal instinctual trend or choice of object was

quite often found, to which the subject’s libido remained attached all

through his life. It is often impossible to say what it is that enabled this

impression to exercise such an intense attraction on the libido. I will

describe a case of this sort which I myself observed.

   The subject was a man who is to-day quite indifferent to the genitals

and  other  attractions  of  women,  but  who  can  be  plunged  into

irresistible  sexual  excitement  only  by  a  foot  of  a  particular  form

wearing a shoe. He can recall an event from his sixth year which was

decisive for the fixation of his libido. He was sitting on a stool beside

the  governess  who  was  to  give  him  lessons  in  English.  The

governess, who was an elderly, dried-up, plain-looking spinster, with

pale-blue eyes and a snub nose, had something wrong with her foot

that  day,  and  on  that  account  kept  it,  wearing  a  velvet  slipper,

stretched  out  on  a  cushion.  Her  leg  itself  was  most  decently

concealed.  A  thin,  scraggy  foot,  like  the  one  he  had  then  seen

belonging to his governess, thereupon became (after a timid attempt

at normal sexual activity at puberty) his only sexual object; and the

man was irresistibly attracted if a foot of this kind was associated with

other  features  besides  which  recalled  the  type  of  the  English

governess. This fixation of his libido, however, made him, not into a

neurotic, but into a pervert - what we call a foot-fetishist. You see,

then, that although an excessive, and moreover premature, fixation of

the libido is indispensable for the causation of neuroses, the area of its

effects extends far beyond the field of the neuroses. This determinant,

too, is as little decisive in itself as is the frustration which we have

already talked about.

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3411

 

 

   Thus the problem of the causation of the neuroses seems to grow

more  complicated.  In  fact,  psycho-analytic  investigation  makes  us

acquainted with a fresh factor, which is not taken into account in our

aetiological series and which we can recognize easiest in cases in

which  what  has  hitherto  been  a  healthy  condition  is  suddenly

disturbed by an onset of neurotic illness. In such people we regularly

and indications of a contention between wishful impulses or, as we are

in the habit of saying, a psychical conflict. One part of the personality

champions certain wishes while another part opposes them and fends

them off. Without such a conflict there is no neurosis. There would not

seem to be anything peculiar in this. Our mental life is, as you know,

perpetually agitated by conflicts which we have to settle. No doubt,

therefore, special conditions must be fulfilled if such a conflict is to

become pathogenic. We must ask what these conditions are, between

what mental powers these pathogenic conflicts are played out, and

what  the  relation  is  between  the  conflict  and  the  other  causative

factors.

   I hope to be able to give you adequate replies to these questions,

even  though  the  replies  may  be  reduced  to  schematic  dimensions.

The  conflict  is  conjured  up  by  frustration,  as  a  result  of  which  the

libido, deprived of satisfaction, is driven to look for other objects and

paths. The necessary precondition of the conflict is that these other

paths and objects arouse displeasure in one part of the personality, so

that a veto is imposed which makes the new method of satisfaction

impossible as it stands. From this point the construction of symptoms

pursues its course, which we shall follow later. The repudiated libidinal

trends  nevertheless  succeed  in  getting  their  way  by  certain

roundabout paths, though not, it is true, without taking the objection

into account by submitting to some distortions and mitigations. The

roundabout paths are those taken by the construction of symptoms;

the  symptoms  are  the  fresh  or  substitute  satisfaction  which  has

become necessary owing to the fact of frustration.

   The meaning of psychical conflict can be adequately expressed inanother  way  by  saying  that  for  an external  frustration  to  become

pathogenic an internal frustration must be added to it. In that case, of

course, the external and internal frustration relate to different paths

and  objects.  The  external  frustration  removes  one  possibility  of

satisfaction  and  the  internal  frustration  seeks  to  exclude another

possibility, about which the conflict then breaks out. I prefer this way of

representing the matter because it has a secret content. For it hints at

the probability that the internal impediments arose from real external

obstacles during the prehistoric periods of human development.

   But what are the powers from which the objection to the libidinal

trend arises? What is the other party to the pathogenic conflict? These

powers, to put it quite generally, are the non sexual instinctual forces.

We class them together as the ‘ego instincts’. The psycho-analysis of

the  transference-neuroses  gives  us  no  easy  access  to  a  further

dissecting of them; at most we come to know them to some extent by

the resistances which oppose analysis. The pathogenic conflict is thus

one  between  the  ego-instincts  and  the  sexual  instincts.  In  a  whole

number  of  cases,  it  looks  as  though  there  might  also  be  a  conflict

between  different  purely  sexual  trends.  But  in  essence  that  is  the

same thing; for, of the two sexual trends that are in conflict, one is

always, as we might say, ‘ego-syntonic’, while the other provokes the

ego’s defence. It therefore still remains a conflict between the ego and

sexuality.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3412

 

      Over  and  over  again,  Gentlemen,  when  psycho-analysis  has

claimed that some mental event is the product of the sexual instincts,

it has been angrily pointed out to it by way of defence that human

beings do not consist only of sexuality, that there are instincts and

interests  in  mental  life  other  than  sexual  ones,  that  it  ought  not  to

derive ‘everything’ from sexuality, and so on. Well, it is most gratifying

for once in a way to find ourselves in agreement with our opponents.

Psycho-analysis has never forgotten that there are instinctual forces

as  well  which  are  not  sexual.  It  was  based  on  a  sharp  distinctionbetween the sexual instincts and the ego-instincts, and, in spite of all

objections, it has maintained not that the neuroses are derived from

sexuality but that their origin is due to a conflict between the ego and

sexuality.  Nor  has  it  any  conceivable  reason  for  disputing  the

existence or significance of the ego-instincts while it pursues the part

played  by  the  sexual  instincts  in  illness  and  in  ordinary  life.  It  has

simply  been  its  fate  to  begin  by  concerning  itself  with  the  sexual

instincts  because  the  transference  neuroses  made  them  the  most

easily accessible to examination and because it was incumbent on it

to study what other people had neglected.

   Nor is it a fact that psycho-analysis has paid no attention whatever

to the non-sexual part of the personality. It is precisely the distinction

between the ego and sexuality which has enabled us to recognize with

special clarity that the ego instincts pass through an important process

of  development  a  development  which  is  neither  completely

independent  of  the  libido  nor  without  a  counter-effect  upon  it.

Nevertheless, we are far less well acquainted with the development of

the ego than of the libido, since it is only the study of the narcissistic

neuroses that promises to give us an insight into the structure of the

ego.  We  already  have  before  us,  however,  a  notable  attempt  by

Ferenczi  to  make  a  theoretical  construction  of  the  stages  of

development of the ego, and there are at least two points at which we

have a solid basis for judging that development. It is not our belief that

a person’s libidinal interests are from the first in opposition to his self-

preservative interests; on the contrary, the ego endeavours at every

stage to remain in harmony with its sexual organization as it is at the

time and to fit itself into it. The succession of the different phases of

libidinal development probably follows a prescribed programme. But

the possibility cannot be rejected that this course of events can be

influenced by the ego, and we may expect equally to find a certain

parallelism,  a  certain  correspondence,  between  the  developmental

phases  of  the  ego  and  the  libido;  indeed  a  disturbance  of  that

correspondence might provide a pathogenic factor. We are now faced

by  the  important  consideration  of  how  the  ego  behaves  if  its  libido

leaves  a  strong  fixation  behind  at  some  point  in  its  (the  libido’s)

development. The ego may accept this and consequently become to

that  extent  perverse  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  infantile.  It  may,however, adopt a non compliant attitude to the libido’s settling down in

this position, in which case the ego experiences a repression where

the libido has experienced a fixation.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3413

 

      Thus  we  discover  that  the  third  factor  in  the  aetiology  of  the

neuroses,  the tendency  to  conflict,  is  as  much  dependent  on  the

development of the ego as on that of the libido. Our insight into the

causation of the neuroses is thus made more complete. First there is

the most general precondition - frustration; next, fixation of the libido

which forces it into particular directions; and thirdly, the tendency to

conflict, arising from the development of the ego, which rejects these

libidinal  impulses.  The  situation,  then,  is  not  so  very  confused  and

hard to penetrate as it probably seemed to you during the course of

my remarks. It is true, however, that we shall find we have not yet

finished with it. There is something new to be added and something

already familiar to be further examined.

 

   In order to demonstrate to you the influence which the development

of  the  ego  has  upon  the  construction  of  conflicts  and  upon  the

causation of neuroses, I should like to put an example before you -

one which, it is true, is a complete invention but which is nowhere

divorced from probability. I shall describe it (on the basis of the title of

one of Nestroy’s farces) as ‘In the Basement and on the First Floor’.

The care taker of the house inhabits the basement and its landlord, a

wealthy and respectable gentleman, the first floor. Both have children,

and we may suppose that the landlord’s little daughter is allowed to

play, without any supervision, with the proletarian girl. It might very

easily  happen,  then,  that  the  children’s  games  would  take  on  a

‘naughty’ - that is to say, a sexual - character, that they would play at

‘father and mother’, that they would watch each other at their most

private business and excite each other’s genitals. The caretaker’s girl,

though only five or six years old, would have had an opportunity of

observing a good deal of adult sexuality, and she might well play thepart of seductress in all this. These experiences, even If they were not

continued over a long period, would be enough to set certain sexual

impulses to work in the two children; and, after their games together

had ceased, these impulses would for several years- afterwards find

expression  in  masturbation.  So  much  for  their  experiences  in

common; the final outcome in the two children will be very different.

The caretaker’s daughter will continue her masturbation, perhaps, till

her  menstrual  periods  begin  and  she  will  then  give  it  up  with  no

difficulty. A few years later she will find a lover and perhaps have a

baby. She will take up some occupation or other, possibly become a

popular figure on the stage and end up as an aristocrat. Her career is

more likely to be less brilliant, but in any case she will go through her

life undamaged by the early exercise of her sexuality and free from

neurosis. With the landlord’s little girl things will be different. At an

early stage and while she is still a child she will get an idea that she

has done something wrong; after a short time, but perhaps only after a

severe struggle, she will give up her masturbatory satisfaction, but she

will nevertheless still have some sense of oppression about her. When

in her later girlhood she is in a position to learn something of human

sexual intercourse, she will turn away from it with unexplained disgust

and  prefer  to  remain  in  ignorance.  And  now  she  will  probably  be

subject to a fresh emergence of an irresistible pressure to masturbate

of which she will not dare to complain. During the years in which she

should  exercise  a  feminine  attraction  upon  some  man,  a  neurosis

breaks out in her which cheats her of marriage and her hopes in life. If

after this an analysis succeeds in gaining an insight into her neurosis,

it will turn out that the well-brought-up, intelligent and high-minded girl

has  completely  repressed  her  sexual  impulses,  but  that  these,

unconscious to her, are still attached to her petty experiences with her

childhood friend.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3414

 

  The difference between the lives of these two, in spite of their having

had the same experience, rests on the fact that the ego of one of themunderwent  a  development  with  which  the  other  never  met.  Sexual

activity  seemed  to  the  caretaker’s  daughter  just  as  natural  and

harmless in later life as it had in childhood. The landlord’s daughter

came  under  the  influence  of  education  and  accepted  its  demands.

From  the  suggestions  offered  to  it,  her  ego  constructed  ideals  of

feminine  purity  and  abstinence  which  are  incompatible  with  sexual

activity; her intellectual education reduced her interest in the feminine

part which she was destined to play. Owing to this higher moral and

intellectual  development  of  her  ego  she  came  into  conflict  with  the

demands of her sexuality.

 

  I will dwell for a little to-day on yet another point in ego development,

partly because I have some remoter aims in view, but also because

what  follows  is  precisely  calculated  to  justify  the  sharp  separation

between the ego-instincts and the sexual instincts which we favour but

which is not self-evident. In forming our judgement of the two courses

of  development  both  of  the  ego  and  of  the  libido  -  we  must  lay

emphasis on a consideration which has not often hitherto been taken

into account. For both of them are at bottom heritages, abbreviated

recapitulations  of  the  development  which  all  mankind  has  passed

through from its primaeval days over long periods of time. In the case

of the development of the libido, this phylogenetic origin is, I venture to

think, immediately obvious. Consider how in one class of animals the

genital  apparatus  is  brought  into  the  closest  relation  to  the  mouth,

while  in  another  it  cannot  be  distinguished  from  the  excretory

apparatus, and in yet others it is linked to the motor organs - all of

which you will find attractively set out in W. Bölsche’s valuable book.

Among  animals  one  can  find,  so  to  speak  in  petrified  form,  every

species of perversion of the sexual organization. In the case of human

beings, however, this phylogenetic point of view is partly veiled by the

fact that what is at bottom inherited is nevertheless freshly acquired in

the  development  of  the  individual,  probably  because  the  same

conditions  which  originally  necessitated  its  acquisition  persist  and

continue  to  operate  upon  each  individual.  I  should  like  to  add  that

origin ally the operation of these conditions was creative but that it is

now  evocative.  Besides  this,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  prescribed

course of development can be disturbed and altered in each individualby recent external influences. But we know the power which forced a

development of this kind upon humanity and maintains its pressure in

the same direction to-day. It is, once again, frustration by reality, or, if

we are to give it its true, grand name, the pressure of vital needs -

Necessity (Άνάγκη).  She  has  been  a  strict  educator  and  has  made

much  out  of  us.  The  neurotics  are  among  those  of  her  children  to

whom her strictness has brought evil results; but that is a risk with all

education.  This  appreciation  of  the  necessities  of  life  heed  not,

incidentally, weigh against the importance, of `internal developmental

trends’, if such can be shown to be present.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3415

 

   Now it is a very noteworthy fact that the sexual instincts and the self-

preservative instincts do not behave in the same way towards real

necessity. The self-preservative instincts, and everything to do with

them,  are  much  easier  to  educate:  they  learn  early  to  comply  with

necessity and to arrange their developments in accordance with the

instructions of reality. This is intelligible, since they could not obtain

the objects they need in any other way; and without those objects the

individual would inevitably perish. The sexual instincts are harder to

educate, for at first they have no need of an object. Since they are

attached like parasites, as it were, to the other bodily functions, and

find their satisfaction auto-erotically on the subject’s own body, they

are  to  begin  with  withdrawn  from  the  educative  influence  of  real

necessity, and they retain this characteristic of being self-willed and

inaccessible to influence (what we describe as being ‘unreasonable’)

in most people in some respect all through their lives. Moreover, as a

rule  the  educability  of  a  youthful  individual  is  at  an  end  when  his

sexual needs arise in their full strength. Educators are aware of this

and act accordingly; but the findings of psycho-analysis may perhaps

also  induce  them  to  shift  the  main  impact  of  education  on  to  the

earliest years of childhood, from infancy onwards. The little creature is

often completed by the fourth or fifth year of life, and after that merely

brings gradually to light what is already within him.   In order to appreciate the full significance of the difference which I

have pointed out between the two groups of instincts, we shall have to

go back a long way and introduce one of those considerations which

deserve to be described as economic. This leads us to one of the

most important, but unluckily also one of the most obscure, regions of

psycho-analysis. We may ask whether in the operation of our mental

apparatus a main purpose can be detected, and we may reply as a

first approximation that that purpose is directed to obtaining pleasure.

It  seems  as  though  our  total  mental  activity  is  directed  towards

achieving pleasure and avoiding unpleasure - that it is automatically

regulated  by  the pleasure principle.  We  should  of  all  things  like  to

know,  then,  what  determines  the  generation  of  pleasure  and

unpleasure;  but  that  is  just  what  we  are  ignorant  of.  We  can  only

venture to say this much: that pleasure is in some way connected with

the  diminution,  reduction  or  extinction  of  the  amounts  of  stimulus

prevailing  in  the  mental  apparatus,  and  that  similarly  unpleasure  is

connected  with  their  increase.  An  examination  of  the  most  intense

pleasure  which  is  accessible  to  human  beings,  the  pleasure  of

accomplishing the sexual act, leaves little doubt on this point. Since in

such processes related to pleasure it is a question of what happens to

quantities of mental excitation or energy, we call considerations of this

kind economic. It will be noticed that we can describe the tasks and

achievements of the mental apparatus in another and more general

way than by stressing the acquisition of pleasure. We can say that the

mental apparatus serves the purpose of mastering and disposing of

the amounts of stimulus and sums of excitation that impinge on it from

outside and inside. It is immediately obvious that the sexual instincts,

from beginning to end of their development, work towards obtaining

pleasure;  they  retain  their  original  function  unaltered.  The  other

instincts, the ego-instincts, have the same aim to start with. But under

the influence of the instructress Necessity, they soon learn to replace

the  pleasure  principle  by  a  modification  of  it.  For  them  the  task  of

avoiding unpleasure turns out to be almost as important as that of

obtaining  pleasure.  The  ego  discovers  that  it  is  inevitable  for  it  to

renounce  immediate  satisfaction,  to  postpone  the  obtaining  of

pleasure,  to  put  up  with  a  little  unpleasure  and  to  abandon  certain

sources of pleasure altogether. An ego thus educated has become‘reasonable’;  it  no  longer  lets  itself  be  governed  by  the  pleasure

principle, but obeys the reality principle, which also at bottom seeks to

obtain pleasure, but pleasure which is assured through taking account

of reality, even though it is pleasure postponed and diminished.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3416

 

   The transition from the pleasure principle to the reality principle is

one of the most important steps forward in the ego’s development. We

know already that it is only late and unwillingly that the sexual instincts

join  in  this  piece  of  development,  and  we  shall  hear  later  the

consequences  for  human  beings  of  the  fact  that  their  sexuality  is

content with such a loose connection with external reality. And now in

conclusion  one  last  remark  on  this  subject.  If  man’s  ego  has  its

process of development like the libido, you will not be surprised to

hear  that  there  are  also  ‘regressions  of  the  ego’,  and  you  will  be

anxious to know too what part may be played in neurotic illnesses by

this return of the ego to earlier phases of its development.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3417

 

                                      LECTURE XXIII

 

          THE PATHS TO THE FORMATION OF SYMPTOMS

 

LADIES  AND  GENTLEMEN,  -  For  laymen  the  symptoms  constitute  the

essence  of  a  disease  and  its  cure  consists  in  the  removal  of  the

symptoms.  Physicians  attach  importance  to  distinguishing  the

symptoms  from  the  disease  and  declare  that  getting  rid  of  the

symptoms  does  not  amount  to  curing  the  disease.  But  the  only

tangible thing left of the disease after the symptoms have been got rid

of is the capacity to form new symptoms. For that reason we will for

the moment adopt the layman’s position and assume that to unravel

the symptoms means the same thing as to understand the disease.   Symptoms - and of course we are dealing now with psychical (or

psychogenic) symptoms and psychical illness - are acts detrimental,

or at least useless, to the subject’s life as a whole, often complained of

by him as unwelcome and bringing unpleasure or suffering to him. The

main damage they do resides in the mental expenditure which they

themselves  involve  and  in  the  further  expenditure  that  becomes

necessary  for  fighting  against  them.  Where  there  is  an  extensive

formation of symptoms, these two sorts of expenditure can result in an

extraordinary impoverishment of the subject in regard to the mental

energy available to him and so in paralysing him for all the important

tasks of life. Since this outcome depends mainly on the quantity of the

energy which is thus absorbed, you will easily see that ‘being ill’ is in

its essence a practical concept. But if you take up a theoretical point of

view and disregard this matter of quantity, you may quite well say that

we  are all  ill  -  that  is,  neurotic  -  since  the  preconditions  for  the

formation of symptoms can also be observed in normal people.

 

      We  already  know  that  neurotic  symptoms  are  the  outcome  of  a

conflict which arises over a new method of satisfying the libido. The

two forces which have fallen out meet once again in the symptom and

are reconciled, as it were, by the compromise of the symptom that has

been constructed. It is for that reason, too, that the symptom is so

resistant: it is supported from both sides. We also know that one of the

two partners to the conflict is the unsatisfied libido which has been

repulsed  by  reality  and  must  now  seek  for  other  paths  to  its

satisfaction.  If  reality  remains  relentless  even  though  the  libido  is

ready to take another object in place of the one that has been refused

to it, then it will finally be compelled to take the path of regression and

strive to find satisfaction either in one of the organizations which it has

already  outgrown  or  from  one  of  the  objects  which  it  has  earlier

abandoned.  The  libido  is  lured  into  the  path  of  regression  by  the

fixation which it has left behind it at these points in its development.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3418

    The path to perversion branches off sharply from that to neurosis. If

these regressions rouse no objection from the ego, no neurosis will

come about either; and the libido will arrive at some real, even though

no  longer  normal,  satisfaction.  But  if  the  ego,  which  has  under  its

control  not  only  consciousness  but  also  the  approaches  to  motor

innervation and accordingly to the realization of mental desires, does

not agree with these regressions, conflict will follow. The libido is, as it

were,  cut  off  and  must  try  to  escape  in  some  direction  where,  in

accordance with the requirements of the pleasure principle, it can find

a discharge for its cathexis of energy. It must withdraw from the ego.

An escape of this kind is offered it by the fixations on the path of its

development which it has now entered on regressively - fixations from

which  the  ego  had  protected  itself  in  the  past  by  repressions.  By

cathecting these repressed positions as it flows backward, the libido

has withdrawn from the ego and its laws, and has at the same time

renounced all the education it has acquired under the ego’s influence.

It  was  docile  so  long  as  satisfaction  beckoned  to  it;  but  under  the

double  pressure  of  external  and  internal  frustration  it  becomes

refractory,  and  recalls  earlier  and  better  times.  Such  is  the  libido’s

fundamentally  unchangeable  character.  The  ideas  to  which  it  now

transfers  its  energy  as  a  cathexis  belong  to  the  system  of  the

unconscious  and  are  subject  to  the  processes  which  are  possible

there,  particularly  to  condensation  and  displacement.  In  this  way

conditions are established which completely resemble those in dream-

construction.  The  dream  proper,  which  has  been  completed  in  the

unconscious and is the fulfilment of an unconscious wishful phantasy,

is  brought  up  against  a  portion  of  (pre)conscious  activity  which

exercises  the  office  of  censorship  and  which,  when  it  has  been

indemnified,  permits  the  formation  of  the  manifest  dream  as  a

compromise.  In  the  same  way,  what  represents  the  libido  in  the

unconscious has to reckon with the power of the preconscious ego.

The opposition which had been raised against it in the ego pursues it

as an ‘anticathexis’ and compels it to choose a form of expression

which can at the same time become an expression of the opposition

itself.  Thus  the  symptom  emerges  as  a  many-times-distorted

derivative of the unconscious libidinal wish-fulfilment, an ingeniously

chosen  piece  of  ambiguity  with  two  meanings  in  complete  mutualcontradiction.  In  this  last  respect,  however,  there  is  a  distinction

between the construction of a dream and of a symptom. For in dream-

formation the preconscious purpose is merely concerned to preserve

sleep,  to  allow  nothing  that  would  disturb  it  to  make  its  way  into

consciousness; it does not insist upon calling out sharply ‘No! on the

contrary!’ to the unconscious wishful impulse. It can afford to be more

tolerant because the situation of someone sleeping is less perilous.

The state of sleep in itself bars any outlet into reality.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3419

 

   You see, then, that the libido’s escape under conditions of conflict is

made possible by the presence of fixations. The regressive cathexis of

these fixations leads to the circumvention of the repression and to a

discharge (or satisfaction) of the libido, subject to the conditions of a

compromise  being  observed.  By  the  roundabout  path viâ  the

unconscious and the old fixations, the libido finally succeeds in forcing

its way through to real satisfaction - though to one which is extremely

restricted  and  scarcely  recognizable  as  such.  Let  me  add  two

comments  to  this  conclusion.  First,  I  should  like  you  to  notice  how

closely here the libido and the unconscious on one side and the ego,

consciousness and reality on the other are shown to be interlinked,

although  to  begin  with  they  did  not  belong  together  at  all.  And

secondly, I must ask you to bear in mind that everything I have said

about this and what is still to follow relates only to the formation of

symptoms in the neurosis of hysteria.

 

   Where, then, does the libido find the fixations which it requires in

order  to  break  through  the  repressions?  In  the  activities  and

experiences  of  infantile  sexuality,  in  the  abandoned  component

trends, in the objects of childhood which have been given up. It is to

them,  accordingly,  that  the  libido  returns.  The  significance  of  this

period of childhood is twofold: on the one hand, during it the instinctual

trends  which  the  child  has  inherited  with  his  innate  disposition  first

become manifest, and secondly, others of his instincts are for the firsttime  awakened  and  made  active  by  external  impressions  and

accidental experiences. There is no doubt, I think, that we are justified

in  making  this  twofold  division.  The  manifestation  of  the  innate

disposition  is  indeed  not  open  to  any  critical  doubts,  but  analytic

experience  actually  compels  us  to  assume  that  purely  chance

experiences  in  childhood  are  able  to  leave  fixations  of  the  libido

behind  them.  Nor  do  I  see  any  theoretical  difficulty  in  this.

Constitutional  dispositions  are  also  undoubtedly  after-effects  of

experiences by ancestors in the past; they too were once acquired.

Without  such  acquisition  there  would  be  no  heredity.  And  is  it

conceivable that acquisition such as this, leading to inheritance, would

come to an end precisely with the generation we are considering? The

significance of infantile experiences should not be totally neglected, as

people like doing, in comparison with the experiences of the subject’s

ancestors  and  of  his  own  maturity;  on  the  contrary,  they  call  for

particular consideration. They are all the more momentous because

they occur in times of incomplete development and are for that very

reason liable to have traumatic effects. The studies on developmental

mechanics by Roux and others have shown that the prick of a needle

into an embryonic germinal layer in the act of cell-division results in a

severe  disturbance  of  development.  The  same  injury  inflicted  on  a

larval or fully grown animal would do no damage.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3420

 

   Thus fixation of the libido in the adult, which we introduced into the

aetiological  equation  of  neurosis  as  representing  the  constitutional

factor, now falls, for our purposes, into two further parts: the inherited

constitution and the disposition acquired in early childhood. As we all

know, a diagram is certain of a sympathetic reception from students.

So I will summarize the position diagrammatically:

 

    Causation  of  neurosis  =  Disposition  due  to  Fixation  of  Libido  +  Accidental  Experience

(Traumatic)


                                                   Sexual Constitution                                          Infantile Experience
                   (Prehistoric Experience)

 

The hereditary sexual constitution presents us with a great variety of

dispositions, according as one component instinct or another, alone or

in  combination  with  others,  is  inherited  in  particular  strength.  The

sexual  constitution  forms  once  again,  together  with  the  factor  of

infantile experience, a ‘complemental series’ exactly similar to the one

we  first  came  to  know  between  disposition  and  the  accidental

experience of the adult. In both of them we find the same extreme

cases and the same relations between the two factors concerned. And

here the question suggests itself of whether the most striking kinds of

libidinal regressions - those to earlier stages of the sexual organization

-  may  not  be  predominantly  determined  by  the  hereditary

constitutional factor. But it is best to postpone answering this question

till we have been able to take a wider range of forms of neurotic illness

into account.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3421

 

 

   Let us dwell now on the fact that analytic research shows the libido

of  neurotics  tied  to  their  infantile  sexual  experiences.  It  thus  lends

these  the  appearance  of  an  enormous  importance  for  the  life  and

illness of human beings. They retain this importance undiminished so

far as the work of therapeutics is concerned. But if we turn away from

that task we can nevertheless easily see that there is a danger here of

a misunderstanding which might mislead us into basing our view of life

too one-sidedly on the neurotic situation. We must after all subtract

from the importance of infantile experiences the fact that the libido has

returned  to  them regressively,  after  being  driven  out  of  its  later

positions. In that case the contrary conclusion becomes very tempting

- that these libidinal experiences had no importance at all at the time

they occurred but only acquired it regressively. You will recall that we

have already considered a similar alternative in our discussion of the

Oedipus complex.      Once  again  we  shall  not  find  it  hard  to  reach  a  decision.  The

assertion  that  the  libidinal  cathexis  (and  therefore  the  pathogenic

significance) of the infantile experiences has been largely intensified

by the regression of the libido is undoubtedly correct, but it would lead

to error if we were to regard it alone as decisive. Other considerations

must be allowed weight as well.

   In the first place observation shows, in a manner that excludes all

doubt, that the infantile experiences have an importance of their own

and give evidence of it already in childhood. Children too have their

neuroses, in which the factor of displacement backwards in time is

necessarily very much reduced or is even completely absent, since

the onset of the illness follows the traumatic experiences immediately.

The study of these infantile neuroses protects us from more than one

dangerous  misunderstanding  of  the  neuroses  of  adults,  just  as  the

dreams of children gave the key to an understanding of adult dreams.

Children’s  neuroses  are  very  common,  much  commoner  than  is

supposed. They are often overlooked, regarded as signs of a bad or

naughty child, often, too, kept under by the nursery authorities; but

they  can  always  be  easily  recognized  in  retrospect.  They  usually

appear  in  the  form  of anxiety  hysteria.  We  shall  learn  on  a  later

occasion  what  that  means.  If  a  neurosis  breaks  out  in  later  life,

analysis  regularly  reveals  it  as  a  direct  continuation  of  the  infantile

illness which may have emerged as no more than a veiled hint. As I

have said, however, there are cases in which these signs of neurosis

in childhood proceed uninterruptedly into a lifelong illness. We have

been able to analyse a few examples of these children’s neuroses in

childhood itself - when they were actually present; but far more often

we have had to be content with someone who has fallen ill in adult life

enabling us to obtain a deferred insight into his childhood neurosis. In

such  cases  we  must  not  fail  to  make  certain  corrections  and  take

certain precautions.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3422

 

   In the second place, we must reflect that it would be inconceivablefor the libido to regress so regularly to the period of childhood unless

there were something there to exercise an attraction on it. The fixation

which  we  have  supposed  to  be  present  at  particular  points  in  the

course of development can only have a meaning if we regard it as

consisting in the retention of a certain quota of libidinal energy. And

finally I may point out to you that between the intensity and pathogenic

importance  of  infantile  and  of  later  experiences  a  complemental

relationship exists similar to the series we have already discussed.

There are cases in which the whole weight of causation falls on the

sexual experiences of childhood, cases in which those impressions

exert a definitely traumatic effect and call for no other support than

can be afforded them by an average sexual constitution and the fact of

its incomplete development. Alongside of these cases there are others

in which the whole accent lies on the later conflicts and the emphasis

we find in the analysis laid on the impressions of childhood appears

entirely  as  the  work  of  regression.  Thus  we  have  extremes  of

‘developmental  inhibition’  and  ‘regression’  and  between  them  every

degree of co-operation between the two factors.

      These  facts  have  a  certain  interest  from  the  point  of  view  of

education, which plans the prevention of neuroses by intervening at

an  early  stage  in  children’s  sexual  development.  So  long  as  one

focuses attention principally on infantile sexual experiences, one must

suppose that one has done everything for the prophylaxis of nervous

illnesses by taking care that the child’s development is delayed and

that it is spared experiences of the sort. We already know, however,

that the preconditions for the causation of neuroses are complex and

cannot be influenced in general if we take account of only a single

factor.  Strict  protection  of  the  young  loses  value  because  it  is

powerless against the constitutional factor. Besides, it is more difficult

to carry out than educationists imagine and it brings with it two fresh

dangers  which  must  not  be  underestimated:  the  fact  that  it  may

achieve  too  much  -  that  it  may  encourage  an  excess  of  sexual

repression, with damaging results, and the fact that it may send the

child out into life without any defence against the onrush of sexual

demands that is to be looked for at puberty. Thus it remains extremely

doubtful  how  far  prophylaxis  in  childhood  can  be  carried  with

advantage and whether an altered attitude to the immediate situationmay  not  offer  a  better  angle  of  approach  for  the  prevention  of

neuroses.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3423

 

 

   Let us now go back to the symptoms. They create a substitute, then,

for the frustrated satisfaction by means of a regression of the libido to

earlier times, with which a return to earlier stages of object-choice or

of the organization is inseparably bound up. We discovered some time

ago that neurotics are anchored somewhere in their past; we know

now that it is at a period of their past in which their libido did not lack

satisfaction,  in  which  they  were  happy.  They  search  about  in  the

history of their life till they find a period of that sort, even if they have

to go back as far as the time when they were infants in arms - as they

remember it or as they imagine it from later hints. In some way the

symptom repeats this early infantile kind of satisfaction, distorted by

the censorship arising from the conflict, turned as a rule to a feeling of

suffering, and mingled with elements from the precipitating cause of

the  illness.  The  kind  of  satisfaction  which  the  symptom  brings  has

much that is strange about it.

   We may disregard the fact that it is unrecognizable to the subject,

who, on the contrary, feels the alleged satisfaction as suffering and

complains  of  it.  This  transformation  is  a  function  of  the  psychical

conflict under pressure of which the symptom had to be formed. What

was once a satisfaction to the subject is, indeed, bound to arouse his

resistance  or  his  disgust  to-day.  We  are  familiar  with  a  trivial  but

instructive model of this change of mind. The same child who once

eagerly sucked the milk from his mother’s breast is likely a few years

later to display a strong dislike to drinking milk, which his upbringing

has difficulties in overcoming. This dislike increases to disgust if a skin

forms on the milk or the drink containing it. We cannot exclude the

possibility,  perhaps,  that  the  skin  conjures  up  a  memory  of  the

mother’s breast, once so ardently desired. Between the two situations,

however,  there  lies  the  experience  of  weaning,  with  its  traumaticeffects.

   It is something else besides that makes symptoms seem strange to

us and incomprehensible as a means of libidinal satisfaction. They do

not remind us in the very least of anything from which we are in the

habit of normally expecting satisfaction. Usually they disregard objects

and in so doing abandon their relation to external reality. We can see

that this is a consequence of turning away from the reality principle

and of returning to the pleasure principle. But it is also a return to a

kind  of  extended  auto-erotism,  of  the  sort  that  offered  the  sexual

instinct its first satisfactions. In place of a change in the external world

these  substitute  a  change  in  the  subject’s  own  body:  they  set  an

internal act in place of an external one, an adaptation in place of an

action - once again, something that corresponds, phylogenetically, to

a  highly  significant  regression.  We  shall  only  understand  this  in

connection with something new that we have still to learn from the

analytic researches into the formation of symptoms. We must further

remember that the same processes belonging to the unconscious play

a part in the formation of symptoms as in the formation of dreams -

namely, condensation and displacement. A symptom, like a dream,

represents something as fulfilled: a satisfaction in the infantile manner.

But  by  means  of  extreme  condensation  that  satisfaction  can  be

compressed into a single sensation or innervation, and by means of

extreme displacement it can be restricted to one small detail of the

entire libidinal complex. It is not to be wondered at if we, too, often

have  difficulty  in  recognizing  in  a  symptom  the  libidinal  satisfaction

whose presence we suspect and which is invariably confirmed.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3424

 

 

   I have warned you that we still have something new to learn; it is

indeed something surprising and perplexing. By means of analysis, as

you know, starting from the symptoms, we arrive at a knowledge of

the infantile experiences to which the libido is fixated and out of which

the symptoms are made. Well, the surprise lies in the fact that thesescenes from infancy are not always true. Indeed, they are not true in

the majority of cases, and in a few of them they are the direct opposite

of the historical truth. As you will see, this discovery is calculated more

than any other to discredit either analysis, which has led to this result,

or  the  patients,  on  whose  statements  the  analysis  and  our  whole

understanding of the neuroses are founded. But there is something

else  remarkably  perplexing  about  it.  If  the  infantile  experiences

brought to light by analysis were invariably real, we should feel that we

were  standing  on  firm  ground;  if  they  were  regularly  falsified  and

revealed as inventions, as phantasies of the patient, we should be

obliged  to  abandon  this  shaky  ground  and  look  for  salvation

elsewhere. But neither of these things is the case: the position can be

shown  to  be  that  the  childhood  experiences  constructed  or

remembered  in  analysis  are  sometimes  indisputably  false  and

sometimes equally certainly correct, and in most cases compounded

of truth and falsehood. Sometimes, then, symptoms represent events

which really took place and to which we may attribute an influence on

the fixation of the libido, and sometimes they represent phantasies of

the patient’s which are not, of course, suited to playing an aetiological

role. It is difficult to find one’s way about in this. We can make a first

start,  perhaps,  with  a  similar  discovery  -  namely,  that  the  isolated

childhood  memories  that  people  have  possessed  consciously  from

time immemorial and before there was any such thing as analysis may

equally be falsified or at least may combine truth and falsehood in

plenty.  In  their  case  there  is  seldom  any  difficulty  in  showing  their

incorrectness; so we at least have the reassurance of knowing that the

responsibility  for  this  unexpected  disappointment  lies,  not  with

analysis, but in some way with the patients.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3425

 

   After a little reflection we shall easily understand what it is about this

state of things that perplexes us so much. It is the low valuation of

reality, the neglect of the distinction between it and phantasy. We are

tempted to feel offended at the patient’s having taken up our time withinvented  stories.  Reality  seems  to  us  something  worlds  apart  from

invention, and we set a very different value on it. Moreover the patient,

too, looks at things in this light in his normal thinking. When he brings

up the material which leads from behind his symptoms to the wishful

situations modelled on his infantile experiences, we are in doubt to

begin with whether we are dealing with reality or phantasies. Later, we

are enabled by certain indications to come to a decision and we are

faced  by  the  task  of  conveying  it  to  the  patient.  This,  however,

invariably gives rise to difficulties. If we begin by telling him straight

away that he is now engaged in bringing to light the phantasies with

which  he  has  disguised  the  history  of  his  childhood  just  as  every

nation disguises its forgotten prehistory by constructing legends), we

observe  that  his  interest  in  pursuing  the  subject  further  suddenly

diminishes  in  an  undesirable  fashion.  He  too  wants  to  experience

realities  and  despises  everything  that  is  merely  ‘imaginary’.  If;

however, we leave him, till this piece of work is finished, in the belief

that we are occupied in investigating the real events of his childhood,

we  run  the  risk  of  his  later  on  accusing  us  of  being  mistaken  and

laughing at us for our apparent credulity. It will be a long time before

he  can  take  in  our  proposal  that  we  should  equate  phantasy  and

reality and not bother to begin with whether the childhood experiences

under examination are the one or the other. Yet this is clearly the only

correct attitude to adopt towards these mental productions. They too

possess  a  reality  of  a  sort.  It  remains  a  fact  that  the  patient  has

created these phantasies for himself, and this fact is of scarcely less

importance for his neurosis than if he had really experienced what the

phantasies contain. The phantasies possess psychical as contrasted

with material reality, and we gradually learn to understand that in the

world of the neuroses it is psychical reality which is the decisive kind.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3426

 

 

   Among the occurrences which recur again and again in the youthful

history of neurotics - which are scarcely ever absent - there are a fewof particular importance, which also deserve, on that account, I think,

to be brought into greater prominence than the rest. As specimens of

this class I will enumerate these: observation of parental intercourse,

seduction  by  an  adult  and  threat  of  being  castrated.  It  would  be  a

mistake  to  suppose  that  they  are  never  characterized  by  material

reality; on the contrary, this is often established incontestably through

enquiries from older members of the patient’s family. It is by no means

a rare thing, for instance, for a little boy, who is beginning to play with

his penis in a naughty way and is not yet aware that one must conceal

such activities, to be threatened by a parent or nurse with having his

penis or his sinful hand cut off. Parents will often admit this when they

are  asked,  since  they  think  they  have  done  something  useful  in

making such a threat; a number of people have a correct conscious

memory of such a threat, especially if it was made at a somewhat later

period. If the threat is delivered by the mother or some other female

she usually shifts its performance on to the father or the doctor. In

Struwwelpeter,  the  famous  work  of  the  Frankfurt  paediatrician

Hoffmann (which owes its popularity precisely to an understanding of

the sexual and other complexes of childhood), you will find castration

softened into a cutting-off of the thumbs as a punishment for obstinate

sucking. But it is highly improbable that children are threatened with

castration as often as it appears in the analyses of neurotics. We shall

be satisfied by realizing that the child puts a threat of this kind together

in his imagination on the basis of hints, helped out by a knowledge

that auto-erotic satisfaction is forbidden and under the impression of

his  discovery  of  the  female  genitals.  Nor  is  it  only  in  proletarian

families  that  it  is  perfectly  possible  for  a  child,  while  he  is  not  yet

credited  with  possessing  an  understanding  or  a  memory,  to  be  a

witness  of  the  sexual  act  between  his  parents  or  other  grown-up

people; and the possibility cannot be rejected that he will be able to

understand and react to the impression in retrospect. If, however, the

intercourse is described with the most minute details, which would be

difficult to observe, or if, as happens most frequently, it turns out to

have been intercourse from behind more ferarum [in the manner of

animals], there can be no remaining doubt that the phantasy is based

on an observation of intercourse between animals (such as dogs) and

that its motive was the child’s unsatisfied scopophilia during puberty.The extreme achievement on these lines is a phantasy of observing

parental intercourse while one is still an unborn baby in the womb.

Phantasies  of  being  seduced  are  of  particular  interest,  because  so

often  they  are  not  phantasies  but  real  memories.  Fortunately,

however, they are nevertheless not real as often as seemed at first to

be shown by the findings of analysis. Seduction by an older child or by

one of the same age is even more frequent than by an adult; and if in

the  case  of  girls  who  produce  such  an  event  in  the  story  of  their

childhood their father figures fairly regularly as the seducer, there can

be no doubt either of the imaginary nature of the accusation or of the

motive  that  has  led  to  it.  A  phantasy  of  being  seduced  when  no

seduction has occurred is usually employed by a child to screen the

auto-erotic  period  of  his  sexual  activity.  He  spares  himself  shame

about  masturbation  by  retrospectively  phantasying  a  desired  object

into these earliest times. You must not suppose, however, that sexual

abuse of a child by its nearest male relatives belongs entirely to the

realm  of  phantasy.  Most  analysts  will  have  treated  cases  in  which

such events were real and could be unimpeachably established; but

even so they related to the later years of childhood and had been

transposed into earlier times.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3427

 

   The only impression we gain is that these events of childhood are

somehow  demanded  as  a  necessity,  that  they  are  among  the

essential elements of a neurosis. If they have occurred in reality, so

much to the good; but if they have been withheld by reality, they are

put together from hints and supplemented by phantasy. The outcome

is the same, and up to the present we have not succeeded in pointing

to any difference in the consequences, whether phantasy or reality

has  had  the  greater  share  in  these  events  of  childhood.  Here  we

simply have once again one of the complemental relations that I have

so often mentioned; moreover it is the strangest of all we have met

with. Whence comes the need for these phantasies and the material

for them? There can be no doubt that their sources lie in the instincts;but it has still to be explained why the same phantasies with the same

content are created on every occasion. I am prepared with an answer

which  I  know  will  seem  daring  to  you.  I  believe  these primal

phantasies, as I should like to call them, and no doubt a few others as

well, are a phylogenetic endowment. In them the individual reaches

beyond his own experience into primaeval experience at points where

his own experience as been too rudimentary. It seems to me quite

possible that all the things that are told to us to-day in analysis as

phantasy  -  the  seduction  of  children,  the  inflaming  of  sexual

excitement by observing parental intercourse, the threat of castration

(or  rather  castration  itself)  -  were  once  real  occurrences  in  the

primaeval  times  of  the  human  family,  and  that  children  in  their

phantasies  are  simply  filling  in  the  gaps  in  individual  truth  with

prehistoric  truth.  I  have  repeatedly  been  led  to  suspect  that  the

psychology of the neuroses has stored up in it more of the antiquities

of human development than any other source.

 

   The things I have just been discussing, Gentlemen, compel me to

enter  more  closely  into  the  origin  and  significance  of  the  mental

activity which is described as ‘phantasy’. As you are aware, it enjoys a

universally high reputation, without its position in mental life having

become  clear.  I  have  the  following  remarks  to  make  about  it.  The

human  ego  is,  as  you  know,  slowly  educated  by  the  pressure  of

external necessity to appreciate reality and obey the reality principle;

in the course of this process it is obliged to renounce, temporarily or

permanently, a variety of the objects and aims at which its striving for

pleasure, and not only for sexual pleasure, is directed. But men have

always  found  it  hard  to  renounce  pleasure;  they  cannot  bring

themselves to do it without some kind of compensation. They have

therefore  retained  a  mental  activity  in  which  all  these  abandoned

sources of pleasure and methods of achieving pleasure are granted a

further existence - a form of existence in which they are left free from

the claims of reality and of what we call ‘reality-testing’. Every desire

takes before long the form of picturing its own fulfilment; there is no

doubt that dwelling upon imaginary wish-fulfilments brings satisfaction

with it, although it does not interfere with a knowledge that what is

concerned is not real. Thus in the activity of phantasy human beingscontinue to enjoy the freedom from external compulsion which they

have long since renounced in reality. They have contrived to alternate

between  remaining  an  animal  of  pleasure  and  being  once  more  a

creature  of  reason.  Indeed,  they  cannot  subsist  on  the  scanty

satisfaction which they can extort from reality. ‘We cannot do without

auxiliary constructions’, as Theodor Fontane once said. The creation

of  the  mental  realm  of  phantasy  finds  a  perfect  parallel  in  the

establishment of ‘reservations’ or ‘nature reserves’ in places where the

requirements of agriculture, communications and industry threaten to

bring about changes in the original face of the earth which will quickly

make it unrecognizable. A nature reserve preserves its original state

which everywhere else has to our regret been sacrificed to necessity.

Everything, including what is useless and even what is noxious, can

grow and proliferate there as it pleases. The mental realm of phantasy

is just such a reservation withdrawn from the reality principle.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3428

 

      The  best-known  productions  of  phantasy  are  the  so-called  ‘day-

dreams’, which we have already come across, imagined satisfactions

of ambitious, megalomanic, erotic wishes, which flourish all the more

exuberantly  the  more  reality  counsels  modesty  and  restraint.  The

essence  of  the  happiness  of  phantasy  -  making  the  obtaining  of

pleasure free once more from the assent of reality - is shown in them

unmistakably. We know that such day-dreams are the nucleus and

prototype of night-dreams. A night-dream is at bottom nothing other

than a day-dream that has been made utilizable owing the liberation of

the instinctual impulses at night, and that has been distorted by the

form assumed by mental activity at night. We have already become

familiar  with  the  idea  that  even  a  day-dream  is  not  necessarily

conscious  -  that  there  are  unconscious  day-dreams,  as  well.  Such

unconscious day-dreams are thus the source not only of night-dreams

but also of neurotic symptoms.

   The importance of the part played by phantasy in the formation of

symptoms will be made clear to you by what I have to tell you. I haveexplained  how  in  the  case  of  frustration  the  libido  cathects

regressively the positions which it has given up but to which some

quotas  of  it  have  remained  adhering.  I  shall  not  withdraw  this  or

correct it, but I have to insert a connecting link. How does the libido

find its way to these points of fixation? All the objects and trends which

the libido has given up have not yet been given up in every sense.

They or their derivatives are still retained with a certain intensity in

phantasies. Thus the libido need only withdraw on to phantasies in

order  to  find  the  path  open  to  every  repressed  fixation.  These

phantasies have enjoyed a certain amount of toleration: they have not

come into conflict with the ego, however sharp the contrasts between

them may have been, so long as a particular condition is observed.

This condition is of a quantitative nature and it is now upset by the

backward  flow  of  libido  on  to  the  phantasies.  As  a  result  of  this

surplus, the energic cathexis of the phantasies is so much increased

that they begin to raise claims, that they develop a pressure in the

direction of becoming realized. But this makes a conflict between them

and the ego inevitable. Whether they were previously preconscious or

conscious, they are now subjected to repression from the direction of

the ego and are at the mercy of attraction from the direction of the

unconscious. From what are now unconscious phantasies the libido

travels back to their origins in the unconscious - to its own points of

fixation.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3429

 

   The libido’s retreat to phantasy is an intermediate stage on the path

to the formation of symptoms and it seem to call for a special name.

C. G. Jung coined the very appropriate one of ‘introversion’, but then

most inexpediently gave it another meaning as well. We will continue

to take it that introversion denotes the turning away of the libido from

the  possibilities  of  real  satisfaction  and  the  hypercathexis  of

phantasies  which  have  hitherto  been  tolerated  as  innocent.  An

introvert is not yet a neurotic, but he is in an unstable situation: he is

sure to develop symptoms at the next shift of forces, unless he findssome other outlets for his dammed-up libido. The unreal character of

neurotic  satisfaction  and  the  neglect  of  the  distinction  between

phantasy and reality are on the other hand already determined by the

fact of lingering at the stage of introversion.

   You will no doubt have observed that in these last discussions I

have  introduced  a  fresh  factor  into  the  structure  of  the  aetiological

chain  -  namely  the  quantity,  the  magnitude,  of  the  energies

concerned. We have still to take this factor into account everywhere. A

purely  qualitative  analysis  of  the  aetiological  determinants  is  not

enough. Or, to put it another way, a merely dynamic view of these

mental processes is insufficient; an economic line of approach is also

needed. We must tell ourselves that the conflict between two trends

does  not  break  out  till  certain  intensities  of  cathexis  have  been

reached, even though the determinants for it have long been present

so  far  as  their  subject-matter  is  concerned.  In  the  same  way,  the

pathogenic significance of the constitutional factors must be weighed

according  to  how  much more  of  one  component  instinct  than  of

another  is  present  in  the  inherited  disposition.  It  may  even  be

supposed that the disposition of all human beings is qualitatively alike

and that they differ only owing to these quantitative conditions. The

quantitative  factor  is  no  less  decisive  as  regards  capacity  to  resist

neurotic illness. It is a matter of what quota of unemployed libido a

person is able to hold in suspension and of how large a fraction of his

libido he is able to divert from sexual to sublimated aims. The ultimate

aim  of  mental  activity,  which  may  be  described  qualitatively  as  an

endeavour to obtain pleasure and avoid unpleasure, emerges, looked

at  from  the  economic  point  of  view,  as  the  task  of  mastering  the

amounts  of  excitation  (mass  of  stimuli)  operating  in  the  mental

apparatus  and  of  keeping  down  their  accumulation  which  creates

unpleasure.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3430

 

 

      This,  then,  is  what  I  wanted  to  tell  you  about  the  formation  ofsymptoms  in  the  neuroses.  But  I  must  not  fail  to  lay  emphasis

expressly  once  again  on  the  fact  that  everything  I  have  said  here

applies  only  to  the  formation  of  symptoms  in  hysteria.  Even  in

obsessional neurosis there is much - apart from fundamentals, which

remain  unaltered  -  that  will  be  found  different.  The  anticathexes

opposing the demands of the instincts (which we have already spoken

of in the case of hysteria as well) become prominent in obsessional

neurosis  and  dominate  the  clinical  picture  in  the  form  of  what  are

known as ‘reaction formations’. We discover similar and even more

far-reaching divergences in the other neuroses, where our researches

into the mechanisms of symptom-formation are not yet concluded at

any point.

 

   Before I let you go to-day, however, I should like to direct your

attention a little longer to a side of the life of phantasy which deserves

the most general interest. For there is a path that leads back from

phantasy to reality - the pat, that is, of art. An artist is once more in

rudiments  an  introvert,  not  far  removed  from  neurosis.  He  is

oppressed by excessively powerful instinctual needs. He desires to

win honour, power, wealth, fame and the love of women; but he lacks

the means for achieving these satisfactions. Consequently, like any

other unsatisfied man, he turns away from reality and transfers all his

interest, and his libido too, to the wishful constructions of his life of

phantasy, whence the path might lead to neurosis. There must be, no

doubt,  a  convergence  of  all  kinds  of  things  if  this  is  not  to  be  the

complete outcome of his development; it is well known, indeed, how

often  artists  in  particular  suffer  from  a  partial  inhibition  of  their

efficiency  owing  to  neurosis.  Their  constitution  probably  includes  a

strong capacity for sublimation and a certain degree of laxity in the

repressions which are decisive for a conflict. An artist, however, finds

a path back to reality in the following manner. To be sure, he is not the

only on who leads a life of phantasy. Access to the half-way region of

phantasy  is  permitted  by  the  universal  assent  of  mankind,  and

everyone  suffering  from  privation  expects  to  derive  alleviation  and

consolation  from  it.  But  for  those  who  are  not  artists  the  yield  of

pleasure to be derived from the sources of phantasy is very limited.

The ruthlessness of their repressions force them to be content withsuch meagre day-dreams as are allowed to become conscious. A man

who is a true artist has more at his disposal. In the first place, he

understands how to work over his day-dreams in such a way as to

make them lose what is too personal about them and repels strangers,

and to make it possible for others to share in the enjoyment of them.

He  understands,  too,  how  to  tone  them  down  so  that  they  do  not

easily  betray  their  origin  from  proscribed  sources.  Furthermore,  he

possesses the mysterious power of shaping some particular material

until it has become a faithful image of his phantasy; and he knows,

moreover,  how  to  link  so  large  a  yield  of  pleasure  to  this

representation of his unconscious phantasy that, for the time being at

least,  repressions  are  outweighed  and  lifted  by  it.  If  he  is  able  to

accomplish all this, he makes it possible for other people once more to

derive consolation and alleviation from their own sources of pleasure

in  their  unconscious  which  have  become  inaccessible  to  them;  he

earns their gratitude an admiration and he has thus achieved through

his phantasy what originally he had achieved only in his phantasy -

honour, power and the love of women.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3431

 

                                      LECTURE XXIV

 

                      THE COMMON NEUROTIC STATE

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - Now that we have disposed of such a difficult

piece of work in our last discussions, I propose for a time to leave the

subject and turn to you yourselves.

      For  I  am  aware  that  you  are  dissatisfied.  You  pictured  an

‘Introduction to Psycho-Analysis’ very differently. What you expected

to hear were lively examples, not the theory. On one occasion, you

say, when I told you the parable of ‘In the Basement and on the First

Floor’,  you  grasped  something  of  the  way  in  which  neuroses  are

caused; the observations should have been real ones, however, and

not made-up stories. Or when at the start I described two symptoms to

you  (not  invented  ones  this  time,  let  us  hope)  and  described  theirsolution  and  their  relation  to  the  patients’  lives,  the  ‘sense’  of

symptoms dawned on you. You hoped I should go on along those

lines.  But  instead  I  gave  you  long-winded  theories,  hard  to  grasp,

which were never complete but were always having something fresh

added to them; I worked with concepts which I had not yet explained

to you; I went from a descriptive account of things to a dynamic one

and from that to what I called an ‘economic’ one; I made it hard for you

to understand how many of the technical terms I used meant the same

thing and were merely being interchanged for reasons of euphony; I

brought  up  such  far-reaching  conceptions  as  those  of  the  pleasure

and reality principles and of phylogenetically inherited endowments;

and, far from introducing you to anything, I paraded something before

your eyes which constantly grew more and more remote from you.

   Why did I not begin my introduction to the theory of neuroses with

what you yourselves know of the neurotic state and what has long

aroused  your  interest  -  with  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  neurotic

people,  their  incomprehensible  reactions  to  human  intercourse  and

external influences, their irritability, their incalculable and inexpedient

behaviour? Why did I not lead you step by step from an understanding

of the simpler, everyday forms of the neurotic state to the problems of

its enigmatic, extreme manifestations?

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3432

 

   Indeed, Gentlemen, I cannot even disagree with you. I am not so

enamoured  of  my  skill  in  exposition  that  I  can  declare  each  of  its

artistic faults to be a peculiar charm. I think myself that it might have

been more to your advantage if I had proceeded otherwise; and that

was,  indeed,  my  intention.  But  one  cannot  always  carry  out  one’s

reasonable intentions. There is often something in the material itself

which takes charge of one and diverts one from one’s first intentions.

Even such a trivial achievement as the arrangement of a familiar piece

of material is not entirely subject to an author’s own choice; it takes

what line it likes and all one can do is to ask oneself after the event

why it has happened in this way and no other.      One  reason  is  probably  that  the  title  ‘Introduction  to  Psycho-

Analysis’  is  no  longer  applicable  to  the  present  section,  which  is

supposed  to  deal  with  the  neuroses.  An  introduction  to  psycho-

analysis  is  provided  by  the  study  of  parapraxes  and  dreams;  the

theory of the neuroses is psycho-analysis itself. It would not, I believe

have been possible to give you a knowledge of the subject-matter of

the  theory  of  the  neuroses  in  so  short  a  time  except  in  this

concentrated  form.  It  was  a  question  of  presenting  you  with  a

connected account of the sense and significance of symptoms and of

the  external  and  internal  determinants  and  mechanism  of  their

formation. That is what I have tried to do; it is more or less the nucleus

of what psycho-analysis has to teach to-day. It involved saying a great

deal about the libido and its development and a little, too, about that of

the ego. Our introduction had already prepared you in advance for the

premisses of our technique and for the major considerations of the

unconscious and of repression (of resistance). You will discover from

one of the next lectures the points from which the work of psycho-

analysis makes its further organic advance. For the time being I have

made no secret of the fact that everything I have said is derived from

the study of a single group of nervous disorders what are termed the

‘transference  neuroses’.  Indeed,  I  have  traced  the  mechanism  of

symptom-formation in the case only of the hysterical neurosis. Even if

you  have  acquired  no  thorough  knowledge  and  have  not  retained

every  detail,  yet  I  hope  that  you  have  formed  some  picture  of  the

methods  by  which  psycho-analysis  works,  of  the  problems  which  it

attacks and of the results at which it has arrived.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3433

 

      I  have  credited  you  with  a  wish  that  I  might  have  started  my

description  of  the  neuroses  from  the  behaviour  of  neurotic  people,

from  an  account  of  the  manner  in  which  they  suffer  under  their

neurosis,  of  how  they  defend  themselves  against  it  and  how  they

come  to  terms  with  it.  No  doubt  that  is  an  interesting  topic,  worth

investigating; nor would it be very difficult to handle. But it would be of