achievement  or  sought  to  deny  their  importance,  but  because  it

followed a particular path, which had not yet led so far. And finally,

when it has reached them, things have a different look to it from what

they have to others.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3947

 

                                            I

 

            CONSCIOUSNESS AND WHAT IS UNCONSCIOUS

 

In this introductory chapter there is nothing new to be said and it will

not be possible to avoid repeating what has often been said before.

   The division of the psychical into what is conscious and what is

unconscious  is  the  fundamental  premiss  of  psycho-analysis;  and  it

alone  makes  it  possible  for  psycho-analysis  to  understand  the

pathological processes in mental life, which are as common as they

are  important,  and  to  find  a  place  for  them  in  the  framework  of

science.  To  put  it  once  more,  in  a  different  way:  psycho-analysis

cannot situate the essence of the psychical in consciousness, but is

obliged to regard consciousness as a quality of the psychical, which

may be present in addition to other qualities or may be absent.

   If I could suppose that everyone interested in psychology would read

this book, I should also be prepared to find that at this point some of

my readers would already stop short and would go no further; for here

we have the first shibboleth of psycho-analysis. To most people who

have  been  educated  in  philosophy  the  idea  of  anything  psychical

which is not also conscious is so inconceivable that it seems to them

absurd and refutable simply by logic. I believe this is only because

they  have  never  studied  the  relevant  phenomena  of  hypnosis  and

dreams,  which  -  quite  apart  from  pathological  manifestations  -

necessitate this view. Their psychology of consciousness is incapable

of solving the problems of dreams and hypnosis.

                                   The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3948

 

      ‘Being  conscious’  is  in  the  first  place  a  purely  descriptive  term,

resting on perception of the most immediate and certain character.

Experience goes on to show that a psychical element (for instance, an

idea) is not as a rule conscious for a protracted length of time. On the

contrary, a state of consciousness is characteristically very transitory;

an idea that is conscious now is no longer so a moment later, although

it  can  become  so  again  under  certain  conditions  that  are  easily

brought about. In the interval the idea was - we do not know what. We

can say that it was latent, and by this we mean that it was capable of

becoming  conscious  at  any  time.  Or,  if  we  say  that  is  was

unconscious, we shall also be giving a correct description of it. Here

‘unconscious’  coincides  with  ‘latent  and  capable  of  becoming

conscious’.  The  philosophers  would  no  doubt  object:  ‘No,  the  term

"unconscious" is not applicable here; so long as the idea was in a

state of latency it was not anything psychical at all.’ To contradict them

at  this  point  would  lead  to  nothing  more  profitable  than  a  verbal

dispute. 

   But we have arrived at the term or concept of the unconscious along

another  path,  by  considering  certain  experiences  in  which  mental

dynamics play a part. We have found - that is, we have been obliged

to assume - that very powerful mental processes or ideas exist (and

here a quantitative or economic factor comes into question for the first

time)  which  can  produce  all  the  effects  in  mental  life  that  ordinary

ideas do (including effects that can in their turn become conscious as

ideas),  though  they  themselves  do  not  become  conscious.  It  is

unnecessary to repeat in detail here what has been explained so often

before. It is enough to say that at this point psycho-analytic theory

steps in and asserts that the reason why such ideas cannot become

conscious is that a certain force opposes them, that otherwise they

could become conscious, and that it would then be apparent how little

they differ from other elements which are admittedly psychical. The

fact that in the technique of psycho-analysis a means has been found

by  which  the  opposing  force  can  be  removed  and  the  ideas  in

question made conscious renders this theory irrefutable. The state inwhich the ideas existed before being made conscious is called by us

repression,  and  we  assert  that  the  force  which  instituted  the

repression and maintains it is perceived as resistance during the work

of analysis

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3949

 

   Thus we obtain our concept of the unconscious from the theory of

repression. The repressed is the prototype of the unconscious for us.

We see, however, that we have two kinds of unconscious - the one

which is latent but capable of becoming conscious, and the one which

is repressed and which is not, in itself and without more ado, capable

of becoming conscious. This piece of insight into psychical dynamics

cannot fail to affect terminology and description. The latent, which is

unconscious  only  descriptively,  not  in  the  dynamic  sense,  we  call

preconscious;  we  restrict  the  term unconscious  to  the  dynamically

unconscious repressed; so that now we have three terms, conscious

(Cs.), preconscious (Pcs.), and unconscious (Ucs.), whose sense is

no  longer  purely  descriptive.  The Pcs.  is  presumably  a  great  deal

closer to the Cs. than is the Ucs., and since we have called the Ucs.

psychical  we  shall  with  even  less  hesitation  call  the  latent Pcs.

psychical.  But  why  do  we  not  rather,  instead  of  this,  remain  in

agreement with the philosophers and, in a consistent way, distinguish

the Pcs.  as  well  as  the Ucs.  from  the  conscious  psychical?  The

philosophers would then propose that the Pcs. and the Ucs. should be

described as two species or stages of the ‘psychoid’, and harmony

would  be  established.  But  end  less  difficulties  in  exposition  would

follow; and the one important fact, that these two kinds of ‘psychoid’

coincide  in  almost  every  other  respect  with  what  is  admittedly

psychical, would be forced into the background in the interests of a

prejudice dating from a period in which these psychoids, or the most

important part of them, were still unknown.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3950 

   We can now play about comfortably with our three terms, Cs., Pcs.,

and Ucs., so long as we do not forget that in the descriptive sense

there are two kinds of unconscious, but in the dynamic sense only

one. For purposes of exposition this distinction can in some cases be

ignored, but in others it is of course indispensable. At the same time,

we have become more or less accustomed to this ambiguity of the

unconscious and have managed pretty well with it. As far as I can see,

it  is  impossible  to  avoid  this  ambiguity;  the  distinction  between

conscious  and  unconscious  is  in  the  last  resort  a  question  of

perception,  which  must  be  answered  ‘yes’  or  ‘no’,  and  the  act  of

perception itself tells us nothing of the reason why a thing is or is not

perceived.  No  one  has  a  right  to  complain  because  the  actual

phenomenon expresses the dynamic factor ambiguously.¹

 

   ¹ This may be compared so far with my ‘Note on the Unconscious in Psycho-Analysis’

(1912g). A new turn taken by criticisms of the unconscious deserves consideration at this
point. Some investigators, who do not refuse to recognize the facts of psycho-analysis but
who are unwilling to accept the unconscious, find a way out of the difficulty in the fact, which
no  one  contests,  that  in  consciousness  (regarded  as  a  phenomenon)  it  is  possible  to
distinguish a great variety of gradations in intensity or clarity. Just as there are processes
which are very vividly, glaringly, and tangibly conscious, so we also experience others which
are only faintly, hardly even noticeably conscious; those that are most faintly conscious are, it
is  argued,  the  ones  to  which  psycho-analysis  wishes  to  apply  the  unsuitable  name
‘unconscious’.  These  too,  however  (the  argument  proceeds),  are  conscious  or  ‘in
consciousness’, and can be made fully and intensely conscious if sufficient attention is paid to
them.
   In so far as it is possible to influence by arguments the decision of a question of this kind
which  depends  either  on  convention  or  on  emotional  factors,  we  may  make  the  following
comments. The reference to gradations of clarity in consciousness is in no way conclusive
and has no more evidential value than such analogous statements as: ‘There are so very
many gradations in illumination - from the most glaring and dazzling light to the dimmest
glimmer - therefore there is no such thing as darkness at all’; or, ‘There are varying degrees of
vitality, therefore there is no such thing as death.’ Such statements may in a certain way have
a meaning, but for practical purposes they are worthless. This will be seen if one tries to draw
particular conclusions from them, such as, ‘there is therefore no need to strike a light’, or,
‘therefore all organisms are immortal’. Further, to include ‘what is unnoticeable’ under the
concept of ‘what is conscious’ is simply to play havoc with the one and only piece of direct and
certain knowledge that we have about the mind. And after all, a consciousness of which one
knows  nothing  seems  to  me  a  good  deal  more  absurd  than  something  mental  that  is
unconscious. Finally, this attempt to equate what is unnoticed with what is unconscious is
obviously made without taking into account the dynamic conditions involved, which were the
decisive factors in forming the psycho-analytic view. For it ignores two facts: first, that it is
exceedingly  difficult  and  requires  very  great  effort  to  concentrate  enough  attention  on
something unnoticed of this kind; and secondly, that when this has been achieved the thoughtwhich was previously unnoticed is not recognized by consciousness, but often seems entirely
alien  and  opposed  to  it  and  is  promptly  disavowed  by  it.  Thus,  seeking  refuge  from  the
unconscious  in  what  is  scarcely  noticed  or  unnoticed  is  after  all  only  a  derivative  of  the
preconceived belief which regards the identity of the psychical and the conscious as settled
once and for all.
 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3951

 

   In the further course of psycho-analytic work, however, even these

distinctions have proved to be inadequate and, for practical purposes,

insufficient. This has become clear in more ways than one; but the

decisive instance is as follows. We have formed the idea that in each

individual there is a coherent organization of mental processes; and

we call this his ego. It is to this ego that consciousness is attached;

the ego controls the approaches to motility - that is, to the discharge of

excitations  into  the  external  world;  it  is  the  mental  agency  which

supervises all its own constituent processes, and which goes to sleep

at  night,  though  even  then  it  exercises  the  censorship  on  dreams.

From this ego proceed the repressions, too, by means of which it is

sought  to  exclude  certain  trends  in  the  mind  not  merely  from

consciousness but also from other forms of effectiveness and activity.

In analysis these trends which have been shut out stand in opposition

to the ego, and the analysis is faced with the task of removing the

resistances which the ego displays against concerning itself with the

repressed.  Now  we  find  during  analysis  that,  when  we  put  certain

tasks before the patient, he gets into difficulties; his associations fail

when they should be coming near the repressed. We then tell him that

he is dominated by a resistance; but he is quite unaware of the fact,

and,  even  if  he  guesses  from  his  unpleasurable  feelings  that  a

resistance is now at work in him, he does not know what it is or how to

describe  it.  Since,  however,  there  can  be  no  question  but  that  this

resistance emanates from his ego and belongs to it, we find ourselves

in an unforeseen situation. We have come upon something in the ego

itself  which  is  also  unconscious,  which  behaves  exactly  like  the

repressed  -  that  is,  which  produces  powerful  effects  without  itself

being  conscious  and  which  requires  special  work  before  it  can  be

made  conscious.  From  the  point  of  view  of  analytic  practice,  theconsequence of this discovery is that we land in endless obscurities

and difficulties if we keep to our habitual forms of expression and try,

for instance, to derive neuroses from a conflict between the conscious

and the unconscious. We shall have to substitute for this antithesis

another,  taken  from  our  insight  into  the  structural  conditions  of  the

mind  -  the  antithesis  between  the  coherent  ego  and  the  repressed

which is split off from it.¹

 

   ¹ Cf. Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920g).

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3952

 

   For our conception of the unconscious, however, the consequences

of  our  discovery  are  even  more  important.  Dynamic  considerations

caused us to make our first correction; our insight into the structure of

the mind leads to the second. We recognize that the Ucs. does not

coincide with the repressed; it is still true that all that is repressed is

Ucs., but not all that is Ucs. is repressed. A part of the ego, too - and

Heaven knows how important a part - may be Ucs., undoubtedly is

Ucs. And this Ucs. belonging to the ego is not latent like the Pcs.; for if

it  were,  it  could  not  be  activated  without  becoming Cs.,  and  the

process  of  making  it  conscious  would  not  encounter  such  great

difficulties. When we find ourselves thus confronted by the necessity

of postulating a third Ucs., which is not repressed, we must admit that

the characteristic of being unconscious begins to lose significance for

us. It becomes a quality which can have many meanings, a quality

which we are unable to make, as we should have hoped to do, the

basis  of  far-reaching  and  inevitable  conclusions.  Nevertheless  we

must beware of ignoring this characteristic, for the property of being

conscious  or  not  is  in  the  last  resort  our  one  beacon-light  in  the

darkness of depth-psychology.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3953

                                             II

 

                              THE EGO AND THE ID

 

Pathological research has directed our interest too exclusively to the

repressed. We should like to learn more about the ego, now that we

know that it, too, can be unconscious in the proper sense of the word.

Hitherto  the  only  guide  we  have  had  during  our  investigations  has

been the distinguishing mark of being conscious or unconscious; we

have finally come to see how ambiguous this can be.

   Now all our knowledge is invariably bound up with consciousness.

We can come to know even the Ucs, only by making it conscious. But

stop, how is that possible? What does it mean when we say ‘making

something conscious’? How can that come about?

      We  already  know  the  point  from  which  we  have  to  start  in  this

connection. We have said that consciousness is the surface of the

mental  apparatus;  that  is,  we  have  ascribed  it  as  a  function  to  a

system which is spatially the first one reached from the external world

- and spatially not only in the functional sense but, on this occasion,

also  in  the  sense  of  anatomical  dissection.¹  Our  investigations  too

must take this perceiving surface as a starting-point.

   All perceptions which are received from without (sense-perceptions)

and from within - what we call sensations and feelings - are Cs. from

the start. But what about those internal processes which we may -

roughly and inexactly - sum up under the name of thought-processes?

They  represent  displacements  of  mental  energy  which  are  effected

somewhere in the interior of the apparatus as this energy proceeds on

its way towards action. Do they advance to the surface, which causes

consciousness to be generated? Or does consciousness make its way

to  them?  This  is  clearly  one  of  the  difficulties  that  arise  when  one

begins  to  take  the  spatial  or  ‘topographical’  idea  of  mental  life

seriously.  Both  these  possibilities  are  equally  unimaginable,  there

must be a third alternative.

 

   ¹ Beyond the Pleasure Principle.

                                   The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3954

 

   I have already, in another place,¹ suggested that the real difference

between a Ucs. and a Pcs. idea (thought) consists in this: that the

former  is  carried  out  on  some  material  which  remains  unknown,

whereas the latter (the Pcs.) is in addition brought into connection with

word-presentations. This is the first attempt to indicate distinguishing

marks for the two systems, the Pcs. and the Ucs., other than their

relation to consciousness. The question, ‘How does a thing become

conscious?’ would thus be more advantageously stated: ‘How does a

thing  become  preconscious?’  And  the  answer  would  be:  ‘Through

becoming connected with the word-presentations corresponding to it.’

   These word-presentations are residues of memories; they were at

one time perceptions, and like all mnemic residues they can become

conscious  again.  Before  we  concern  ourselves  further  with  their

nature, it dawns upon us like a new discovery that only something

which has once been a Cs. perception can become conscious, and

that anything arising from within (apart from feelings) that seeks to

become  conscious  must  try  to  transform  itself  into  external

perceptions: this becomes possible by means of memory-traces.

   We think of the mnemic residues as being contained in systems

which  are  directly  adjacent  to  the  system Pcpt.-Cs.,  so  that  the

cathexes of those residues can readily extend from within on to the

elements  of  the  latter  system.  We  immediately  think  here  of

hallucinations, and of the fact that the most vivid memory is always

distinguishable  both  from  a  hallucination  and  from  an  external

perception; but it will also occur to us at once that when a memory is

revived  the  cathexis  remains  in  the  mnemic  system,  whereas  a

hallucination, which is not distinguishable from a perception, can arise

when  the  cathexis  does  not  merely  spread  over  from  the  memory-

trace on to the Pcpt. element, but passes over to it entirely.

 

   ¹ ‘The Unconscious’.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3955 

   Verbal residues are derived primarily from auditory perceptions, so

that the system Pcs. has, as it were, a special sensory source. The

visual  components  of  word-presentations  are  secondary,  acquired

through reading, and may to begin with be left on one side; so may the

motor images of words, which, except with deaf-mutes, play the part

of  auxiliary  indications.  In  essence  a  word  is  after  all  the  mnemic

residue of a word that has been heard.

   We must not be led, in the interests of simplification perhaps, to

forget the importance of optical mnemic residues, when they are of

things, or to deny that it is possible for thought-processes to become

conscious through a reversion to visual residues, and that in many

people this seems to be the favoured method. The study of dreams

and  of  preconscious  phantasies  as  shown  in  Varendonck’s

observations can give us an idea of the special character of this visual

thinking. We learn that what becomes conscious in it is as a rule only

the  concrete  subject-matter  of  the  thought,  and  that  the  relations

between  the  various  elements  of  this  subject-matter,  which  is  what

specially characterizes thoughts, cannot be given visual expression.

Thinking  in  pictures  is,  therefore,  only  a  very  incomplete  form  of

becoming  conscious.  In  some  way,  too,  it  stands  nearer  to

unconscious  processes  than  does  thinking  in  words,  and  it  is

unquestionably  older  than  the  latter  both  ontogenetically  and

phylogenetically.

   To return to our argument: if, therefore, this is the way in which

something  that  is  in  itself  unconscious  becomes  preconscious,  the

question  how  we  make  something  that  is  repressed  (pre)conscious

would  be  answered  as  follows.  It  is  done  by  supplying Pcs.

intermediate  links  through  the  work  of  analysis.  Consciousness

remains where it is, therefore; but, on the other hand, the Ucs. does

not rise into the Cs.

   Whereas the relation of external perceptions to the ego is quite

perspicuous, that of internal perceptions to the ego requires special

investigation. It gives rise once more to a doubt whether we are really

right in referring the whole of consciousness to the single superficial

system Pcpt-Cs.

                                   The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3956

 

      Internal  perceptions  yield  sensations  of  processes  arising  in  the

most diverse and certainly also in the deepest strata of the mental

apparatus. Very little is known about these sensations and feelings;

those  belonging  to  the  pleasure-unpleasure  series  may  still  be

regarded as the best examples of them. They are more primordial,

more  elementary,  than  perceptions  arising  externally  and  they  can

come about even when consciousness is clouded. I have elsewhere

expressed my views about their greater economic significance and the

metapsychological reasons for this. These sensations are multilocular,

like  external  perceptions;  they  may  come  from  different  places

simultaneously and may thus have different or even opposite qualities.

   Sensations of a pleasurable nature have not anything inherently

impelling  about  them,  whereas  unpleasurable  ones  have  it  in  the

highest degree. The latter impel towards change, towards discharge,

and that is why we interpret unpleasure as implying a heightening and

pleasure  a  lowering  of  energic  cathexis.  Let  us  call  what  becomes

conscious as pleasure and unpleasure a quantitative and qualitative

‘something’  in  the  course  of  mental  events;  the  question  then  is

whether this ‘something’ can become conscious in the place where it

is, or whether it must first be transmitted to the system Pcpt.

      Clinical  experience  decides  for  the  latter.  It  shows  us  that  this

‘something’  behaves  like  a  repressed  impulse.  It  can  exert  driving

force  without  the  ego  noticing  the  compulsion.  Not  until  there  is

resistance  to  the  compulsion,  a  hold-up  in  the  discharge-reaction,

does the ‘something’ at once become conscious as unpleasure. In the

same  way  that  tensions  arising  from  physical  needs  can  remain

unconscious, so also can pain - a thing intermediate between external

and  internal  perception,  which  behaves  like  an  internal  perception

even  when  its  source  is  in  the  external  world.  It  remains  true,

therefore, that sensations and feelings, too, only become conscious

through reaching the system Pcpt.; if the way forward is barred, they

do not come into being as sensations, although the ‘something’ that

corresponds to them in the course of excitation is the same as if they

did. We then come to speak, in a condensed and not entirely correctmanner,  of  ‘unconscious  feelings’,  keeping  up  an  analogy  with

unconscious  ideas  which  is  not  altogether  justifiable.  Actually  the

difference is that, whereas with Ucs ideas connecting links must be

created before they can be brought into the Cs., with feelings, which

are  themselves  transmitted  directly,  this  does  not  occur.  In  other

words: the distinction between Cs. and Pcs, has no meaning where

feelings are concerned; the Pcs. here drops out - and feelings are

either  conscious  or  unconscious.  Even  when  they  are  attached  to

word-presentations,  their  becoming  conscious  is  not  due  to  that

circumstance, but they become so directly.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3957

 

   The part played by word-presentations now becomes perfectly clear.

By  their  interposition  internal  thought-processes  are  made  into

perceptions.  It  is  like  a  demonstration  of  the  theorem  that  all

knowledge has its origin in external perception. When a hypercathexis

of the process of thinking takes place, thoughts are actually perceived

- as if they came from without and are consequently held to be true.

   After this clarifying of the relations between external and internal

perception and the superficial system Pcpt.-Cs., we can go on to work

out our idea of the ego. It starts out, as we see, from the system Pcpt.,

which  is  its  nucleus,  and  begins  by  embracing  the Pcs.,  which  is

adjacent to the mnemic residues. But, as we have learnt, the ego is

also unconscious.

   Now I think we shall gain a great deal by following the suggestion of

a writer who, from personal motives, vainly asserts that he has nothing

to  do  with  the  rigours  of  pure  science.  I  am  speaking  of  Georg

Groddeck, who is never tired of insisting that what we call our ego

behaves essentially passively in life, and that, as he expresses it, we

are ‘lived’ by unknown and uncontrollable forces.¹ We have all had

impressions  of  the  same  kind,  even  though  they  may  not  have

overwhelmed us to the exclusion of all others, and we need feel no

hesitation in finding a place for Groddeck’s discovery in the structure

of science. I propose to take it into account by calling the entity whichstarts out from the system Pcpt. and begins by being Pcs. the ‘ego’,

and by following Groddeck in calling the other part of the mind, into

which this entity extends and which behaves as though it were Ucs.,

the ‘id’.²

 

   ¹ Groddeck (1923)

   ² Groddeck himself no doubt followed the example of Nietzsche, who habitually used this

grammatical term for whatever in our nature is impersonal and, so to speak, subject to natural
law.
 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3958

 

   We shall soon see whether we can derive any advantage from this

view for purposes either of description or of understanding. We shall

now  look  upon  an  individual  as  a  psychical  id,  unknown  and

unconscious, upon whose surface rests the ego, developed from its

nucleus  the Pcpt.  system.  If  we  make  an  effort  to  represent  this

pictorially, we may add that the ego does not completely envelop the

id, but only does so to the extent to which the system Pcpt. forms its

surface, more or less as the germinal disc rests upon the ovum. The

ego is not sharply separated from the id; its lower portion merges into

it.

   But the repressed merges into the id as well, and is merely a part of

it.  The  repressed  is  only  cut  off  sharply  from  the  ego  by  the

resistances of repression; it can communicate with the ego through

the id. We at once realize that almost all the lines of demarcation we

have drawn at the instigation of pathology relate only to the superficial

strata of the mental apparatus - the only ones known to us. The state

of  things  which  we  have  been  describing  can  be  represented

diagrammatically (Fig. 1); though it must be remarked that the form

chosen has no pre tensions to any special applicability, but is merely

intended to serve for purposes of exposition.

  

                                          Fig. 1.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3959

 

   We might add, perhaps, that the ego wears a ‘cap of hearing’ - on

one side only, as we learn from cerebral anatomy. It might be said to

wear it awry.

   It is easy to see that the ego is that part of the id which has been

modified  by  the  direct  influence  of  the  external  world  through  the

medium of the Pcpt.-Cs.; in a sense it is an extension of the surface-

differentiation. Moreover, the ego seems to bring the influence of the

external world to bear upon the id and its tendencies, and endeavours

to substitute the reality principle for the pleasure principle which reigns

unrestrictedly in the id. For the ego, perception plays the part which in

the id falls to instinct. The ego represents what may be called reason

and common sense, in contrast to the id, which contains the passions.

All this falls into line with popular distinctions which we are all familiar

with; at the same time, however, it is only to be regarded as holding

good on the average or ‘ideally’.

   The functional importance of the ego is manifested in the fact that

normally  control  over  the  approaches  to  motility  devolves  upon  it.

Thus in its relation to the id it is like a man on horse back, who has to

hold in check the superior strength of the horse; with this difference,

that the rider tries to do so with his own strength while the ego uses

borrowed forces. The analogy may be carried a little further. Often arider, if he is not to be parted from his horse, is obliged to guide it

where it wants to go; so in the same way the ego is in the habit of

transforming the id’s will into action as if it were its own.

   Another factor, besides the influence of the system Pcpt., seems to

have played a part in bringing about the formation of the ego and its

differentiation  from  the  id.  A  person’s  own  body,  and  above  all  its

surface, is a place from which both external and internal perceptions

may spring. It is seen like any other object, but to the touch it yields

two kinds of sensations, one of which may be equivalent to an internal

perception.  Psycho-physiology  has  fully  discussed  the  manner  in

which a person’s own body attains its special position among other

objects in the world of perception. Pain, too, seems to play a part in

the  process,  and  the  way  in  which  we  gain  new  knowledge  of  our

organs during painful illnesses is perhaps a model of the way by which

in general we arrive at the idea of our body.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3960

 

   The ego is first and foremost a bodily ego; it is not merely a surface

entity, but is itself the projection of a surface. If we wish to find an

anatomical  analogy  for  it  we  can  best  identify  it  with  the  ‘cortical

homunculus’ of the anatomists, which stands on its head in the cortex,

sticks up its heels, faces backwards and, as we know, has its speech-

area on the left-hand side.

   The relation of the ego to consciousness has been entered into

repeatedly;  yet  there  are  some  important  facts  in  this  connection

which remain to be described here. Accustomed as we are to taking

our social or ethical scale of values along with us wherever we go, we

feel no surprise at hearing that the scene of the activities of the lower

passions is in the unconscious; we expect, moreover, that the higher

any mental function ranks in our scale of values the more easily it will

find access to consciousness assured to it. Here, however, psycho-

analytic  experience  disappoints  us.  On  the  one  hand,  we  have

evidence  that  even  subtle  and  difficult  intellectual  operations  which

ordinarily  require  strenuous  reflection  can  equally  be  carried  outpreconsciously and without coming into consciousness. Instances of

this are quite incontestable; they may occur, for example, during the

state of sleep, as is shown when someone finds, immediately after

waking, that he knows the solution to a difficult mathematical or other

problem with which he had been wrestling in vain the day before.¹

 

   ¹ I was quite recently told an instance of this which was, in fact, brought up as an objection

against my description of the ‘dream-work’.
 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3961

 

   There is another phenomenon, however, which is far stranger. In our

analyses we discover that there are people in whom the faculties of

self-criticism and conscience - mental activities, that is, that rank as

extremely  high  ones  -  are  unconscious  and  unconsciously  produce

effects  of  the  greatest  importance;  the  example  of  resistance

remaining  unconscious  during  analysis  is  therefore  by  no  means

unique.  But  this  new  discovery,  which  compels  us,  in  spite  of  our

better critical judgement, to speak of an ‘unconscious sense of guilt’,

bewilders  us  far  more  than  the  other  and  sets  us  fresh  problems,

especially when we gradually come to see that in a great number of

neuroses an unconscious sense of guilt of this kind plays a decisive

economic  part  and  puts  the  most  powerful  obstacles  in  the  way  of

recovery. If we come back once more to our scale of values, we shall

have to say that not only what is lowest but also what is highest in the

ego can be unconscious. It is as if we were thus supplied with a proof

of what we have just asserted of the conscious ego: that it is first and

foremost a body-ego.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3962

 

                                            III

 

            THE EGO AND THE SUPER-EGO (EGO IDEAL) 

If the ego were merely the part of the id modified by the influence of

the  perceptual  system,  the  representative  in  the  mind  of  the  real

external world, we should have a simple state of things to deal with.

But there is a further complication.

   The considerations that led us to assume the existence of a grade in

the ego, a differentiation within the ego, which may be called the ‘ego

ideal’  or  ‘super-ego’,  have  been  stated  elsewhere.¹They  still  hold

good.² The fact that this part of the ego is less firmly connected with

consciousness is the novelty which calls for explanation.

   At this point we must widen our range a little. We succeeded in

explaining the painful disorder of melancholia by supposing that an

object which was lost has been set up again inside the ego - that is,

that an object-cathexis has been replaced by an identification.³ At that

time,  however,  we  did  not  appreciate  the  full  significance  of  this

process and did not know how common and how typical it is. Since

then we have come to understand that this kind of substitution has a

great share in determining the form taken by the ego and that it makes

an  essential  contribution  towards  building  up  what  is  called  its

‘character’.

 

   ¹ Cf. ‘On Narcissism: an Introduction’ (1914c), and Group Psychology and the Analysis of

the Ego (1921c).

   ² Except that I seem to have been mistaken in ascribing the function of ‘reality-testing’ to

this super-ego - a point which needs correction. It would fit in perfectly with the relations of the
ego to the world of perception if reality-testing remained a task of the ego itself. Some earlier
suggestions about a ‘nucleus of the ego’, never very definitely formulated, also require to be
put right, since the system Pcpt.-Cs. alone can be regarded as the nucleus of the ego.

   ³ Mourning and Melancholia’ (1917e).

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3963

 

   At the very beginning, in the individual’s primitive oral phase, object-

cathexis and identification are no doubt indistinguishable from each

other.  We  can  only  suppose  that  later  on  object-cathexes  proceed

from the id, which feels erotic trends as needs. The ego, which to

begin with is still feeble, becomes aware of the object-cathexes, andeither acquiesces in them or tries to fend them off by the process of

repression.¹

   When it happens that a person has to give up a sexual object, there

quite  often  ensues  an  alteration  of  his  ego  which  can  only  be

described as a setting up of the object inside the ego, as it occurs in

melancholia; the exact nature of this substitution is as yet unknown to

us. It may be that by this introjection, which is a kind of regression to

the  mechanism  of  the  oral  phase,  the  ego  makes  it  easier  for  the

object to be given up or renders that process possible. It may be that

this identification is the sole condition under which the id can give up

its objects. At any rate the process, especially in the early phases of

development,  is  a  very  frequent  one,  and  it  makes  it  possible  to

suppose that the character of the ego is a precipitate of abandoned

object-cathexes  and  that  it  contains  the  history  of  those  object-

choices. It must, of course, be admitted from the outset that there are

varying degrees of capacity for resistance, which decide the extent to

which a person’s character fends off or accepts the influences of the

history  of  his  erotic  object-choices.  In  women  who  have  had  many

experiences in love there seems to be no difficulty in finding vestiges

of their object-cathexes in the traits of their character. We must also

take  into  consideration  cases  of  simultaneous  object-cathexis  and

identification  -  cases,  that  is,  in  which  the  alteration  in  character

occurs  before  the  object  has  been  given  up.  In  such  cases  the

alteration in character has been able to survive the object-relation and

in a certain sense to conserve it.

 

   ¹ An interesting parallel to the replacement of object-choice by identification is to be found

in the belief of primitive peoples, and in the prohibitions based upon it, that the attributes of
animals which are incorporated as nourishment persist as part of the character of those who
eat them. As is well known, this belief is one of the roots of cannibalism and its effects have
continued through the series of usages of the totem meal down to Holy Communion. The
consequences ascribed by this belief to oral mastery of the object do in fact follow in the case
of the later sexual object-choice.
 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3964

 

   From another point of view it may be said that this transformation ofan erotic object-choice into an alteration of the ego is also a method

by  which  the  ego  can  obtain  control  over  the  id  and  deepen  its

relations with it - at the cost, it is true, of acquiescing to a large extent

in the id’s experiences. When the ego assumes the features of the

object, it is forcing itself, so to speak, upon the id as a love-object and

is trying to make good the id’s loss by saying: ‘Look, you can love me

too - I am so like the object.’

   The transformation of object-libido into narcissistic libido which thus

takes  place  obviously  implies  an  abandonment  of  sexual  aims,  a

desexualization - a kind of sublimation, therefore. Indeed, the question

arises,  and  deserves  careful  consideration,  whether  this  is  not  the

universal road to sublimation, whether all sublimation does not take

place  though  the  mediation  of  the  ego,  which  begins  by  changing

sexual object-libido into narcissistic libido and then, perhaps, goes on

to give it another aim.¹ We shall later on have to consider whether

other  instinctual  vicissitudes  may  not  also  result  from  this

transformation,  whether,  for  instance,  it  may  not  bring  about  a

defusion of the various instincts that are fused together.

   Although it is a digression from our aim, we cannot avoid giving our

attention for a moment longer to the ego’s object-identifications. If they

obtain the upper hand and become too numerous, unduly powerful

and incompatible with one another, a pathological outcome will not be

far off. It may come to a disruption of the ego in consequence of the

different  identifications  becoming  cut  off  from  one  another  by

resistances; perhaps the secret of the cases of what is described as

‘multiple personality’ is that the different identifications seize hold of

consciousness  in  turn.  Even  when  things  do  not  go  so  far  as  this,

there  remains  the  question  of  conflicts  between  the  various

identifications into which the ego comes apart, conflicts which cannot

after all be described as entirely pathological.

 

   ¹ Now that we have distinguished between the ego and the id, we must recognize the id as

the great reservoir of libido indicated in my paper on narcissism (1914c). The libido which
flows into the ego owing to the identifications described above brings about its ‘secondary
narcissism’.
 


                                  The Ego And The Id                                                                                      3965

 

      But,  whatever  the  character’s  later  capacity  for  resisting  the

influences  of  abandoned  object-cathexes  may  turn  out  to  be,  the

effects  of  the  first  identifications  made  in  earliest  childhood  will  be

general and lasting. This leads us back to the origin of the ego ideal;

for behind it there lies hidden an individual’s first and most important

identification,  his  identification  with  the  father  in  his  own  personal

prehistory.¹  This  is  apparently  not  in  the  first  instance  the

consequence  or  outcome  of  an  object-cathexis;  it  is  a  direct  and

immediate  identification  and  takes  place  earlier  than  any  object-

cathexis. But the object-choices belonging to the first sexual period

and  relating  to  the  father  and  mother  seem  normally  to  find  their

outcome in an identification of this kind, and would thus reinforce the

primary one.

      The  whole  subject,  however,  is  so  complicated  that  it  will  be

necessary to go into it in greater detail. The intricacy of the problem is

due to two factors: the triangular character of the Oedipus situation

and the constitutional bisexuality of each individual.

   In its simplified form the case of a male child may be described as

follows. At a very early age the little boy develops an object-cathexis

for his mother, which originally related to the mother’s breast and is

the prototype of an object-choice on the anaclitic model; the boy deals

with his father by identifying himself with him. For a time these two

relationships proceed side by side, until the boy’s sexual wishes in

regard to his mother become more intense and his father is perceived

as an obstacle to them; from this the Oedipus complex originates.² His

identification  with  his  father  then  takes  on  a  hostile  colouring  and

changes into a wish to get rid of his father in order to take his place

with his mother. Henceforward his relation to his father is ambivalent;

it seems as if the ambivalence inherent in the identification from the

beginning had become manifest. An ambivalent attitude to his father

and an object-relation of a solely affectionate kind to his mother make

up the content of the simple positive Oedipus complex in a boy.

 

   ¹ Perhaps it would be safer to say ‘with the parents’; for before a child has arrived at definite

knowledge of the difference between the sexes, the lack of a penis, it does not distinguish in
value  between  its  father  and  its  mother.  I  recently  came  across  the  instance  of  a  youngmarried woman whose story showed that, after noticing the lack of a penis in herself, she had
supposed it to be absent not in all women, but only in those whom she regarded as inferior,
and had still supposed that her mother possessed one. In order to simplify my presentation I
shall discuss only identification with the father.

   ² Cf. Group Psychology (1921c), loc. cit.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3966

 

   Along with the demolition of the Oedipus complex, the boy’s object-

cathexis of his mother must be given up. Its place may be filled by one

of  two  things:  either  an  identification  with  his  mother  or  an

intensification of his identification with his father. We are accustomed

to  regard  the  latter  outcome  as  the  more  normal;  it  permits  the

affectionate relation to the mother to be in a measure retained. In this

way  the  dissolution  of  the  Oedipus  complex  would  consolidate  the

masculinity in a boy’s character. In a precisely analogous way, the

outcome of the Oedipus attitude in a little girl may be an intensification

of  her  identification  with  her  mother  (or  the  setting  up  of  such  an

identification  for  the  first  time)  -  a  result  which  will  fix  the  child’s

feminine character.

   These identifications are not what we should have expected, since

they  do  not  introduce  the  abandoned  object  into  the  ego;  but  this

alternative outcome may also occur, and is easier to observe in girls

than in boys. Analysis very often shows that a little girl, after she has

had to relinquish her father as a love-object, will bring her masculinity

into prominence and identify herself with her father (that is, with the

object  which  has  been  lost),  instead  of  with  her  mother.  This  will

clearly  depend  on  whether  the  masculinity  in  her  disposition  -

whatever that may consist in - is strong enough.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3967

 

   It would appear, therefore, that in both sexes the relative strength of

the  masculine  and  feminine  sexual  dispositions  is  what  determines

whether the outcome of the Oedipus situation shall be an identificationwith the father or with the mother. This is one of the ways in which

bisexuality takes a hand in the subsequent vicissitudes of the Oedipus

complex.  The  other  way  is  even  more  important.  For  one  gets  an

impression  that  the  simple  Oedipus  complex  is  by  no  means  its

commonest  form,  but  rather  represents  a  simplification  or

schematization which, to be sure, is often enough justified for practical

purposes. Closer study usually discloses the more complete Oedipus

complex, which is twofold, positive and negative, and is due to the

bisexuality originally present in children: that is to say, a boy has not

merely an ambivalent attitude towards his father and an affectionate

object-choice  towards  his  mother,  but  at  the  same  time  he  also

behaves like a girl and displays an affectionate feminine attitude to his

father and a corresponding jealousy and hostility towards his mother.

It is this complicating element introduced by bisexuality that makes it

so difficult to obtain a clear view of the facts in connection with the

earliest  object-choices  and  identifications,  and  still  more  difficult  to

describe  them  intelligibly.  It  may  even  be  that  the  ambivalence

displayed in the relations to the parents should be attributed entirely to

bisexuality and that it is not, as I have represented above, developed

out of identification in consequence of rivalry.

   In my opinion it is advisable in general, and quite especially where

neurotics  are  concerned,  to  assume  the  existence  of  the  complete

Oedipus complex. Analytic experience then shows that in a number of

cases  one  or  the  other  constituent  disappears,  except  for  barely

distinguishable traces; so that the result is a series with the normal

positive Oedipus complex at one end and the inverted negative one at

the other, while its intermediate members exhibit the complete form

with  one  or  other  of  its  two  components  preponderating.  At  the

dissolution of the Oedipus complex the four trends of which it consists

will  group  themselves  in  such  a  way  as  to  produce  a  father-

identification and a mother-identification. The father-identification will

preserve  the  object-relation  to  the  mother  which  belonged  to  the

positive complex and will at the same time replace the object-relation

to the father which belonged to the inverted complex: and the same

will be true, mutatis mutandis, of the mother-identification. The relative

intensity  of  the  two  identifications  in  any  individual  will  reflect  the

preponderance in him of one or other of the two sexual dispositions. 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3968

 

   The broad general outcome of the sexual phase dominated by the

Oedipus  complex  may,  therefore,  be  taken  to  be  the  forming  of  a

precipitate in the ego, consisting of these two identifications in some

way united with each other. This modification of the ego retains its

special position; it confronts the other contents of the ego as an ego

ideal or super-ego.

      The  super-ego  is,  however,  not  simply  a  residue  of  the  earliest

object-choices  of  the  id;  it  also  represents  an  energetic  reaction-

formation  against  those  choices.  Its  relation  to  the  ego  is  not

exhausted by the precept: ‘You ought to be like this (like your father).’

It also comprises the prohibition: ‘You may not be like this (like your

father) - that is, you may not do all that he does; some things are his

prerogative.’ This double aspect of the ego ideal derives from the fact

that the ego ideal had the task of repressing the Oedipus complex;

indeed,  it  is  to  that  revolutionary  event  that  it  owes  its  existence.

Clearly the repression of the Oedipus complex was no easy task. The

child’s  parents,  and  especially  his  father,  were  perceived  as  the

obstacle to a realization of his Oedipus wishes; so his infantile ego

fortified  itself  for  the  carrying  out  of  the  repression  by  erecting  this

same  obstacle  within  itself.  It  borrowed  strength  to  do  this,  so  to

speak,  from  the  father,  and  this  loan  was  an  extraordinarily

momentous  act.  The  super-ego  retains  the  character  of  the  father,

while  the  more  powerful  the  Oedipus  complex  was  and  the  more

rapidly it succumbed to repression (under the influence of authority,

religious  teaching,  schooling  and  reading),  the  stricter  will  be  the

domination of the super-ego over the ego later on - in the form of

conscience  or  perhaps  of  an  unconscious  sense  of  guilt.  I  shall

presently bring forward a suggestion about the source of its power to

dominate in this way - the source, that is, of its compulsive character

which manifests itself in the form of a categorical imperative.

                                   The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3969

 

   If we consider once more the origin of the super-ego as we have

described it, we shall recognize that it is the outcome of two highly

important  factors,  one  of  a  biological  and  the  other  of  a  historical

nature:  namely,  the  lengthy  duration  in  man  of  his  childhood

helplessness and dependence, and the fact of his Oedipus complex,

the  repression  of  which  we  have  shown  to  be  connected  with  the

interruption of libidinal development by the latency period and so with

the  diphasic  onset  of  man’s  sexual  life.  According  to  one  psycho-

analytic hypothesis, the last-mentioned phenomenon, which seems to

be  peculiar  to  man,  is  a  heritage  of  the  cultural  development

necessitated  by  the  glacial  epoch.  We  see,  then,  that  the

differentiation of the super-ego from the ego is no matter of chance; it

represents the most important characteristics of the development both

of  the  individual  and  of  the  species;  indeed,  by  giving  permanent

expression to the influence of the parents it perpetuates the existence

of the factors to which it owes its origin.

   Psycho-analysis has been reproached time after time with ignoring

the higher, moral, supra-personal side of human nature. The reproach

is doubly unjust, both historically and methodologically. For, in the first

place,  we  have  from  the  very  beginning  attributed  the  function  of

instigating repression to the moral and aesthetic trends in the ego, and

secondly, there has been a general refusal to recognize that psycho-

analytic  research  could  not,  like  a  philosophical  system,  produce  a

complete and ready-made theoretical structure, but had to find its way

step by step along the path towards understanding the intricacies of

the  mind  by  making  an  analytic  dissection  of  both  normal  and

abnormal phenomena. So long as we had to concern ourselves with

the study of what is repressed in mental life, there was no need for us

to share in any agitated apprehensions as to the whereabouts of the

higher side of man. But now that we have embarked upon the analysis

of the ego we can give an answer to all those whose moral sense has

been shocked and who have complained that there must surely be a

higher nature in man: ‘Very true,’ we can say, ‘and here we have that

higher nature, in this ego ideal or super-ego, the representative of ourrelation to our parents. When we were little children we knew these

higher natures, we admired them and feared them; and later we took

them into ourselves.’

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3970

 

   The ego ideal is therefore the heir of the Oedipus complex, and thus

it  is  also  the  expression  of  the  most  powerful  impulses  and  most

important libidinal vicissitudes of the id. By setting up this ego ideal,

the  ego  has  mastered  the  Oedipus  complex  and  at  the  same  time

placed itself in subjection to the id. Whereas the ego is essentially the

representative of the external world, of reality, the super-ego stands in

contrast  to  it  as  the  representative  of  the  internal  world,  of  the  id.

Conflicts between the ego and the ideal will, as we are now prepared

to find, ultimately reflect the contrast between what is real and what is

psychical, between the external world and the internal world.

   Through the forming of the ideal, what biology and the vicissitudes

of the human species have created in the id and left behind in it is

taken over by the ego and re-experienced in relation to itself as an

individual. Owing to the way in which the ego ideal is formed, it has

the  most  abundant  links  with  the  phylogenetic  acquisition  of  each

individual - his archaic heritage. What has belonged to the lowest part

of the mental life of each of us is changed, through the formation of

the  ideal,  into  what  is  highest  in  the  human  mind  by  our  scale  of

values. It would be vain, however, to attempt to localize the ego ideal,

even in the sense in which we have localized the ego, or to work it into

any of the analogies with the help of which we have tried to picture the

relation between the ego and the id.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3971

 

   It is easy to show that the ego ideal answers to everything that is

expected of the higher nature of man. As a substitute for a longing for

the father, it contains the germ from which all religions have evolved.The self-judgement which declares that the ego falls short of its ideal

produces the religious sense of humility to which the believer appeals

in his longing. As a child grows up, the role of father is carried on by

teachers  and  others  in  authority;  their  injunctions  and  prohibitions

remain  powerful  in  the  ego  ideal  and  continue,  in  the  form  of

conscience, to exercise the moral censorship. The tension between

the demands of conscience and the actual performances of the ego is

experienced as a sense of guilt. Social feelings rest on identifications

with other people, on the basis of having the same ego ideal.

   Religion, morality, and a social sense - the chief elements in the

higher  side  of  man¹  -  were  originally  one  and  the  same  thing.

According to the hypothesis which I put forward in Totem and Taboo

they were acquired phylogenetically out of the father-complex: religion

and  moral  restraint  through  the  process  of  mastering  the  Oedipus

complex itself, and social feeling through the necessity for overcoming

the rivalry that then remained between the members of the younger

generation. The male sex seems to have taken the lead in all these

moral acquisitions; and they seem to have then been transmitted to

women by cross-inheritance. Even to-day the social feelings arise in

the individual as a superstructure built upon impulses of jealous rivalry

against his brothers and sisters. Since the hostility cannot be satisfied,

an  identification  with  the  former  rival  develops.  The  study  of  mild

cases of homosexuality confirms the suspicion that in this instance,

too, the identification is a substitute for an affectionate object-choice

which has taken the place of the aggressive, hostile attitude.²

 

   ¹ I am at the moment putting science and art on one side.

   ² Cf. Group Psychology (1921c) and ‘Some Neurotic Mechanisms in Jealousy, Paranoia

and Homosexuality’ (1922b).
 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3972

 

   With the mention of phylogenesis, however, fresh problems arise,

from which one is tempted to draw cautiously back. But there is no

help for it, the attempt must be made - in spite of a fear that it will lay

bare the inadequacy of our whole effort. The question is: which was it,the ego of primitive man or his id, that acquired religion and morality in

those early days out of the father-complex? If it was his ego, why do

we not speak simply of these things being inherited by the ego? If it

was the id, how does that agree with the character of the id? Or are

we wrong in carrying the differentiation between ego, super-ego, and

id back into such early times? Or should we not honestly confess that

our  whole  conception  of  the  processes  in  the  ego  is  of  no  help  in

understanding phylogenesis and cannot be applied to it?

   Let us answer first what is easiest to answer. The differentiation

between ego and id must be attributed not only to primitive man but

even to much simpler organisms, for it is the inevitable expression of

the influence of the external world. The super-ego, according to our

hypothesis,  actually  originated  from  the  experiences  that  led  to

totemism.  The  question  whether  it  was  the  ego  or  the  id  that

experienced  and  acquired  these  things  soon  comes  to  nothing.

Reflection  at  once  shows  us  that  no  external  vicissitudes  can  be

experienced or undergone by the id, except by way of the ego, which

is the representative of the external world to the id. Nevertheless it is

not possible to speak of direct inheritance in the ego. It is here that the

gulf  between  an  actual  individual  and  the  concept  of  a  species

becomes  evident.  Moreover,  one  must  not  take  the  difference

between ego and id in too hard-and-fast a sense, nor forget that the

ego is a specially differentiated part of the id. The experiences of the

ego seem at first to be lost for inheritance; but, when they have been

repeated often enough and with sufficient strength in many individuals

in successive generations, they transform themselves, so to say, into

experiences  of  the  id,  the  impressions  of  which  are  preserved  by

heredity.  Thus  in  the  id,  which  is  capable  of  being  inherited,  are

harboured residues of the existences of countless egos; and, when

the  ego  forms  its  super-ego  out  of  the  id,  it  may  perhaps  only  be

reviving shapes of former egos and be bringing them to resurrection.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3973

 

   The way in which the super-ego came into being explains how it isthat the early conflicts of the ego with the object-cathexes of the id can

be continued in conflicts with their heir, the super-ego. If the ego has

not  succeeded  in  properly  mastering  the  Oedipus  complex,  the

energic  cathexis  of  the  latter,  springing  from  the  id,  will  come  into

operation once more in the reaction-formation of the ego ideal. The

abundant communication between the ideal and these Ucs. instinctual

impulses solves the puzzle of how it is that the ideal itself can to a

great  extent  remain  unconscious  and  inaccessible  to  the  ego.  The

struggle which once raged in the deepest strata of the mind, and was

not brought to an end by rapid sublimation and identification, is now

continued in a higher region, like the Battle of the Huns in Kaulbach’s

painting.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3974

 

                                            IV

 

                    THE TWO CLASSES OF INSTINCTS

 

We have already said that, if the differentiation we have made of the

mind into an id, an ego, and a super-ego represents any advance in

our knowledge, it ought to enable us to understand more thoroughly

the  dynamic  relations  within  the  mind  and  to  describe  them  more

clearly.  We  have  also  already  concluded  that  the  ego  is  especially

under  the  influence  of  perception,  and  that,  speaking  broadly,

perceptions may be said to have the same significance for the ego as

instincts have for the id. At the same time the ego is subject to the

influence of the instincts, too, like the id, of which it is, as we know,

only a specially modified part.

   I have lately developed a view of the instincts¹ which I shall here

hold to and take as the basis of my further discussions. According to

this view we have to distinguish two classes of instincts, one of which,

the  sexual  instincts  or  Eros,  is  by  far  the  more  conspicuous  and

accessible  to  study.  It  comprises  not  merely  the  uninhibited  sexual

instinct  proper  and  the  instinctual  impulses  of  an  aim-inhibited  orsublimated  nature  derived  from  it,  but  also  the  self-preservative

instinct,  which  must  be  assigned  to  the  ego  and  which  at  the

beginning of our analytic work we had good reason for contrasting

with the sexual object-instincts. The second class of instincts was not

so easy to point to; in the end we came to recognize sadism as its

representative. On the basis of theoretical considerations, supported

by biology, we put forward the hypothesis of a death instinct, the task

of which is to lead organic life back into the inanimate state; on the

other hand, we supposed that Eros, by bringing about a more and

more  far-reaching  combination  of  the  particles  into  which  living

substance  is  dispersed,  aims  at  complicating  life  and  at  the  same

time, of course, at preserving it. Acting in this way, both the instincts

would be conservative in the strictest sense of the word, since both

would  be  endeavouring  to  re-establish  a  state  of  things  that  was

disturbed by the emergence of life. The emergence of life would thus

be the cause of the continuance of life and also at the same time of

the  striving  towards  death;  and  life  itself  would  be  a  conflict  and

compromise between these two trends. The problem of the origin of

life would remain a cosmological one; and the problem of the goal and

purpose of life would be answered dualistically.

 

   ¹ Beyond the Pleasure Principle.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3975

 

      On  this  view,  a  special  physiological  process  (of  anabolism  of

catabolism)  would  be  associated  with  each  of  the  two  classes  of

instincts;  both  kinds  of  instinct  would  be  active  in  every  particle  of

living  substance,  though  in  unequal  proportions,  so  that  some  one

substance might be the principal representative of Eros.

   This hypothesis throws no light whatever upon the manner in which

the two classes of instincts are fused, blended, and alloyed with each

other; but that this takes place regularly and very extensively is an

assumption  indispensable  to  our  conception.  It  appears  that,  as  a

result  of  the  combination  of  unicellular  organisms  into  multicellular

forms of life, the death instinct of the single cell can successfully beneutralized and the destructive impulses be diverted on to the external

world  through  the  instrumentality  of  a  special  organ.  This  special

organ  would  seem  to  be  the  muscular  apparatus;  and  the  death

instinct would thus seem to express itself - though probably only in

part - as an instinct of destruction directed against the external world

and other organisms.

   Once we have admitted the idea of a fusion of the two classes of

instincts with each other, the possibility of a - more or less complete -

‘defusion’ of them forces itself upon us. The sadistic component of the

sexual  instinct  would  be  a  classical  example  of  a  serviceable

instinctual fusion; and the sadism which has made itself independent

as  a  perversion  would  be  typical  of  a  defusion,  though  not  of  one

carried  to  extremes.  From  this  point  we  obtain  a  view  of  a  great

domain of facts which has not before been considered in this light. We

perceive that for purposes of discharge the instinct of destruction is

habitually  brought  into  the  service  of  Eros;  we  suspect  that  the

epileptic fit is a product and indication of an instinctual defusion; and

we  come  to  understand  that  instinctual  defusion  and  the  marked

emergence of the death instinct call for particular consideration among

the effects of some severe neuroses - for instance, the obsessional

neuroses. Making a swift generalization, we might conjecture that the

essence of a regression of libido (e. g. from the genital to the sadistic-

anal  phase)  lies  in  a  defusion  of  instincts,  just  as,  conversely,  the

advance from the earlier phase to the definitive genital one would be

conditioned by an accession of erotic components. The question also

arises  whether  ordinary  ambivalence,  which  is  so  often  unusually

strong  in  the  constitutional  disposition  to  neurosis,  should  not  be

regarded as the product of a defusion; ambivalence, however, is such

a  fundamental  phenomenon  that  it  more  probably  represents  an

instinctual fusion that has not been completed.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3976

 

   It is natural that we should turn with interest to enquire whether there

may  not  be  instructive  connections  to  be  traced  between  thestructures we have assumed to exist - the ego, the super-ego and the

id - on the one hand and the two classes of instincts on the other; and,

further,  whether  the  pleasure  principle  which  dominates  mental

processes can be shown to have any constant relation both to the two

classes of instincts and to these differentiations which we have drawn

in the mind. But before we discuss this, we must clear away a doubt

which arises concerning the terms in which the problem itself is stated.

There  is,  it  is  true,  no  doubt  about  the  pleasure  principle,  and  the

differentiation  within  the  ego  has  good  clinical  justification;  but  the

distinction  between  the  two  classes  of  instincts  does  not  seem

sufficiently assured and it is possible that facts of clinical analysis may

be found which will do away with its pretension.

   One such fact there appears to be. For the opposition between the

two  classes  of  instincts  we  may  put  the  polarity  of  love  and  hate.

There is no difficulty in finding a representative of Eros; but we must

be  grateful  that  we  can  find  a  representative  of  the  elusive  death

instinct  in  the  instinct  of  destruction,  to  which  hate  points  the  way.

Now, clinical observation shows not only that love is with unexpected

regularity accompanied by hate (ambivalence), and not only that in

human relationships hate is frequently a forerunner of love, but also

that in a number of circumstances hate changes into love and love

into hate. If this change is more than a mere succession in time - if,

that  is,  one  of  them  actually  turns  into  the  other  -  then  clearly  the

ground is cut away from under a distinction so fundamental as that

between erotic instincts and death instincts, one which presupposes

physiological processes running in opposite directions.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3977

 

   Now the case in which someone first loves and then hates the same

person (or the reverse) because that person has given him cause for

doing so, has obviously nothing to do with our problem. Nor has the

other  case,  in  which  feelings  of  love  that  have  not  yet  become

manifest express themselves to begin with by hostility and aggressive

tendencies; for it may be that here the destructive component in theobject-cathexis has hurried on ahead and is only later on joined by the

erotic one. But we know of several instances in the psychology of the

neuroses in which it is more plausible to suppose that a transformation

does  take  place.  In  persecutory  paranoia  the  patient  fends  off  an

excessively strong homosexual attachment to some particular person

in a special way; and as a result this person whom he loved most

becomes  a  persecutor,  against  whom  the  patient  directs  an  often

dangerous  aggressiveness.  Here  we  have  a  right  to  interpolate  a

previous phase which has transformed the love into hate. In the case

of the origin of homosexuality, and of desexualized social feelings as

well, analytic investigation has only recently taught us to recognize

that violent feelings of rivalry are present which lead to aggressive

inclinations, and that it is only after these have been surmounted that

the formerly hated object becomes the loved one or gives rise to an

identification. The question arises whether in these instances we are

to assume a direct transformation of hate into love. It is clear that here

the changes are purely internal and an alteration in the behaviour of

the object plays no part in them.

      There  is  another  possible  mechanism,  however,  which  we  have

come to know of by analytic investigation of the processes concerned

in the change in paranoia. An ambivalent attitude is present from the

outset  and  the  transformation  is  effected  by  means  of  a  reactive

displacement  of  cathexis,  energy  being  withdrawn  from  the  erotic

impulse and added to the hostile one.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3978

 

   Not quite the same thing but something like it happens when the

hostile  rivalry  leading  to  homosexuality  is  overcome.  The  hostile

attitude has no prospect of satisfaction; consequently - for economic

reasons, that is - it is replaced by a loving attitude for which there is

more prospect of satisfaction - that is, possibility of discharge. So we

see that we are not obliged in any of these cases to assume a direct

transformation of hate into love, which would be incompatible with the

qualitative distinction between the two classes of instincts.   It will be noticed, however, that by introducing this other mechanism

of changing love into hate, we have tacitly made another assumption

which deserves to be stated explicitly. We have reckoned as though

there  existed  in  the  mind  -  whether  in  the  ego  or  in  the  id  -  a

displaceable  energy,  which,  neutral  in  itself,  can  be  added  to  a

qualitatively differentiated erotic or destructive impulse, and augment

its total cathexis. Without assuming the existence of a displaceable

energy of this kind we can make no headway. The only question is

where it comes from, what it belongs to, and what it signifies.

      The  problem  of  the  quality  of  instinctual  impulses  and  of  its

persistence throughout their various vicissitudes is still very obscure

and  has  hardly  been  attacked  up  to  the  present.  In  the  sexual

component instincts, which are especially accessible to observation, it

is  possible  to  perceive  a  few  processes  which  are  in  the  same

category as what we are discussing. We see, for instance, that some

degree of communication exists between the component instincts, that

an instinct deriving from one particular erotogenic source can make

over its intensity to reinforce another component instinct originating

from another source, that the satisfaction of one instinct can take the

place of the satisfaction of another, and more facts of the same nature

- which must encourage us to venture upon certain hypotheses.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3979

 

   In the present discussion, moreover, I am only putting forward a

hypothesis; I have no proof to offer. It seems a plausible view that this

displaceable and neutral energy, which is no doubt active in both in

the ego and in the id, proceeds from the narcissistic store of libido -

that  it  is  desexualized  Eros.  (The  erotic  instincts  appear  to  be

altogether more plastic, more readily diverted and displaced than the

destructive instincts.) From this we can easily go on to assume that

this  displaceable  libido  is  employed  in  the  service  of  the  pleasure

principle  to  obviate  blockages  and  to  facilitate  discharge.  In  this

connection it is easy to observe a certain indifference as to the path

along  which  the  discharge  takes  place,  so  long  as  it  takes  placesomehow.  We  know  this  trait;  it  is  characteristic  of  the  cathectic

processes in the id. It is found in erotic cathexes, where a peculiar

indifference in regard to the object displays itself; and it is especially

evident  in  the  transferences  arising  in  analysis,  which  develop

inevitably, irrespective of the persons who are their object. Not long

ago Rank published some good examples of the way in which neurotic

acts  of  revenge  can  be  directed  against  the  wrong  people.  Such

behaviour on the part of the unconscious reminds one of the comic

story  of  the  three  village  tailors,  one  of  whom  had  to  be  hanged

because the only village blacksmith had committed a capital offence.

Punishment must be exacted even if it does not fall upon the guilty. It

was in studying the dream-work that we first came upon this kind of

looseness in the displacements brought about by the primary process.

In that case it was the objects that were thus relegated to a position of

no more than secondary importance, just as in the case we are now

discussing it is the paths of discharge. It would be characteristic of the

ego to be more particular about the choice both of an object and of a

path of discharge.

   If this displaceable energy is desexualized libido, it may also be

described  as sublimated  energy;  for  it  would  still  retain  the  main

purpose of Eros - that of uniting and binding - in so far as it helps

towards  establishing  the  unity,  or  tendency  to  unity,  which  is

particularly characteristic of the ego. If thought processes in the wider

sense are to be included among these displacements, then the activity

of  thinking  is  also  supplied  from  the  sublimation  of  erotic  motive

forces.

      Here  we  arrive  again  at  the  possibility  which  has  already  been

discussed  that  sublimation  may  take  place  regularly,  through  the

mediation of the ego. The other case will be recollected, in which the

ego deals with the first object-cathexes of the id (and certainly with

later  ones  too)  by  taking  over  the  libido  from  them  into  itself  and

binding  it  to  the  alteration  of  the  ego  produced  by  means  of

identification. The transformation into ego-libido of course involves an

abandonment  of  sexual  aims,  a  desexualization.  In  any  case  this

throws light upon an important function of the ego in its relation to

Eros.  By  thus  getting  hold  of  the  libido  from  the  object-cathexes,

setting itself up as sole love-object, and desexualizing or sublimatingthe libido of the id, the ego is working in opposition to the purposes of

Eros  and  placing  itself  at  the  service  of  the  opposing  instinctual

impulses. It has to acquiesce in some of the other object-cathexes of

the id; it has, so to speak, to participate in them. We shall come back

later to another possible consequence of this activity of the ego.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3980

 

   This would seem to imply an important amplification of the theory of

narcissism. At the very beginning, all the libido is accumulated in the

id, while the ego is still in process of formation or is still feeble. The id

sends part of this libido out into erotic object-cathexes, whereupon the

ego, now grown stronger, tries to get hold of this object-libido and to

force itself on the id as a love-object. The narcissism of the ego is thus

a secondary one, which has been withdrawn from objects.

   Over and over again we find, when we are able to trace instinctual

impulses back, that they reveal themselves as derivatives of Eros. If it

were not for the considerations put forward in Beyond the Pleasure

Principle,  and  ultimately  for  the  sadistic  constituents  which  have

attached themselves to Eros, we should have difficulty in holding to

our fundamental dualistic point of view. But since we cannot escape

that view, we are driven to conclude that the death instincts are by

their nature mute and that the clamour of life proceeds for the most

part from Eros.¹

 

   ¹ In fact, on our view it is through the agency of Eros that the destructive instincts that are

directed towards the external world have been diverted from the self.
 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3981

 

   And from the struggle against Eros! It can hardly be doubted that the

pleasure principle serves the id as a compass in its struggle against

the libido - the force that introduces disturbances into the process of

life. If it is true that Fechner’s principle of constancy governs life, whichthus consists of a continuous descent towards death, it is the claims of

Eros, of the sexual instincts, which, in the form of instinctual needs,

hold up the falling level and introduce fresh tensions. The id, guided

by the pleasure principle - that is, by the perception of unpleasure -

fends off these tensions in various ways. It does so in the first place by

complying  as  swiftly  as  possible  with  the  demands  of  the  non-

desexualized  libido  -  by  striving  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  directly

sexual trends. But it does so in a far more comprehensive fashion in

relation to one particular form of satisfaction in which all component

demands converge - by discharge of the sexual substances, which are

saturated vehicles, so to speak, of the erotic tensions. The ejection of

the sexual substances in the sexual act corresponds in a sense to the

separation of soma and germ-plasm. This accounts for the likeness of

the condition that follows complete sexual satisfaction to dying, and for

the fact that death coincides with the act of copulation in some of the

lower animals. These creatures die in the act of reproduction because,

after Eros has been eliminated through the process of satisfaction, the

death instinct has a free hand for accomplishing its purposes. Finally,

as we have seen, the ego, by sublimating some of the libido for itself

and its purposes, assists the id in its work of mastering the tensions.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3982

 

                                            V

 

          THE DEPENDENT RELATIONSHIPS OF THE EGO

 

The complexity of our subject-matter must be an excuse for the fact

that none of the chapter-headings of this book quite correspond to

their contents, and that in turning to new aspects of the topic we are

constantly harking back to matters that have already been dealt with.

   Thus we have said repeatedly that the ego is formed to a great

extent  out  of  identifications  which  take  the  place  of  abandoned

cathexes by the id; that the first of these identifications always behave

as a special agency in the ego and stand apart from the ego in theform of a super-ego, while later on, as it grows stronger, the ego may

become more resistant to the influences of such identifications. The

super-ego owes its special position in the ego, or in relation to the

ego, to a factor which must be considered from two sides: on the one

hand it was the first identification and one which took place while the

ego was still feeble, and on the other hand it is the heir to the Oedipus

complex and has thus introduced the most momentous objects into

the ego. The super-ego’s relation to the later alterations of the ego is

roughly similar to that of the primary sexual phase of childhood to later

sexual  life  after  puberty.  Although  it  is  accessible  to  all  later

influences,  it  nevertheless  preserves  throughout  life  the  character

given  to  it  by  its  derivation  from  the  father-complex  -  namely,  the

capacity to stand apart from the ego and to master it. It is a memorial

of the former weakness and dependence of the ego, and the mature

ego remains subject to its domination. As the child was once under a

compulsion to obey its parents, so the ego submits to the categorical

imperative of its super-ego.

   But the derivation of the super-ego from the first object-cathexes of

the  id,  from  the  Oedipus  complex,  signifies  even  more  for  it.  This

derivation, as we have already shown, brings it into relation with the

phylogenetic  acquisitions  of  the  id  and  makes  it  a  reincarnation  of

former ego-structures which have left their precipitates behind in the

id. Thus the super-ego is always close to the id and can act as its

representative vis-à-vis the ego. It reaches deep down into the id and

for that reason is farther from consciousness than the ego is.¹

 

   ¹ It may be said that the psycho-analytic or metapsychological ego stands on its head no

less than the anatomical ego - the ‘cortical homunculus’.
 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3983

 

   We shall best appreciate these relations by turning to certain clinical

facts,  which  have  long  since  lost  their  novelty  but  which  still  await

theoretical discussion.

   There are certain people who behave in a quite peculiar fashion

during the work of analysis. When one speaks hopefully to them orexpresses satisfaction with the progress of the treatment, they show

signs of discontent and their condition invariably becomes worse. One

begins by regarding this as defiance and as an attempt to prove their

superiority to the physician, but later one comes to take a deeper and

juster  view.  One  becomes  convinced,  not  only  that  such  people

cannot endure any praise or appreciation, but that they react inversely

to the progress of the treatment. Every partial solution that ought to

result,  and  in  other  people  does  result,  in  an  improvement  or  a

temporary  suspension  of  symptoms  produces  in  them  for  the  time

being  an  exacerbation  of  their  illness;  they  get  worse  during  the

treatment instead of getting better. They exhibit what is known as a

‘negative therapeutic reaction’.

   There is no doubt that there is something in these people that sets

itself against their recovery, and its approach is dreaded as though it

were a danger. We are accustomed to say that the need for illness

has got the upper hand in them over the desire for recovery. If we

analyse this resistance in the usual way then, even after allowance

has been made for an attitude of defiance towards the physician and

for fixation to the various forms of gain from illness, the greater part of

it is still left over; and this reveals itself as the most powerful of all

obstacles  to  recovery,  more  powerful  than  the  familiar  ones  of

narcissistic inaccessibility, a negative attitude towards the physician

and clinging to the gain from illness.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3984

 

   In the end we come to see that we are dealing with what may be

called a ‘moral’ factor, a sense of guilt, which is finding its satisfaction

in the illness and refuses to give up the punishment of suffering. We

shall be right in regarding this disheartening explanation as final. But

as far as the patient is concerned this sense of guilt is dumb; it does

not tell him he is guilty; he does not feel guilty, he feels ill. This sense

of guilt expresses itself only as a resistance to recovery which it is

extremely  difficult  to  overcome.  It  is  also  particularly  difficult  to

convince the patient that this motive lies behind his continuing to be ill;he  holds  fast  to  the  more  obvious  explanation  that  treatment  by

analysis is not the right remedy for his case.¹

      The  description  we  have  given  applies  to  the  most  extreme

instances of this state of affairs, but in a lesser measure this factor has

to be reckoned with in very many cases, perhaps in all comparatively

severe cases of neurosis. In fact it may be precisely this element in

the situation, the attitude of the ego ideal, that determines the severity

of a neurotic illness. We shall not hesitate, therefore, to discuss rather

more fully the way in which the sense of guilt expresses itself under

different conditions.

 

   ¹ The battle with the obstacle of an unconscious sense of guilt is not made easy for the

analyst. Nothing can be done against it directly, and nothing indirectly but the slow procedure
of  unmasking  its  unconscious  repressed  roots,  and  of  thus  gradually  changing  it  into  a
conscious sense of guilt. One has a special opportunity for influencing it when this Ucs. sense
of guilt is a ‘borrowed’ one - when it is the product of an identification with some other person
who was once the object of an erotic cathexis. A sense of guilt that has been adopted in this
way is often the sole remaining trace of the abandoned love-relation and not at all easy to
recognize as such. (The likeness between this process and what happens in melancholia is
unmistakable.) If one can unmask this former object-cathexis behind the Ucs. sense of guilt,
the therapeutic success is often brilliant, but otherwise the outcome of one’s efforts is by no
means certain. It depends principally on the intensity of the sense of guilt; there is often no
counteracting  force  of  a  similar  order  of  strength  which  the  treatment  can  oppose  to  it.
Perhaps it may depend, too, on whether the personality of the analyst allows of the patient’s
putting him in the place of his ego ideal, and this involves a temptation for the analyst to play
the  part  of  prophet,  saviour  and  redeemer  to  the  patient.  Since  the  rules  of  analysis  are
diametrically opposed to the physician’s making use of his personality in any such manner, it
must  be  honestly  confessed  that  here  we  have  another  limitation  to  the  effectiveness  of
analysis; after all, analysis does not set out to make pathological reactions impossible, but to
give the patient’s ego freedom to decide one way or the other.
 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3985

 

      An  interpretation  of  the  normal,  conscious  sense  of  guilt

(conscience)  presents  no  difficulties;  it  is  based  on  the  tension

between  the  ego  and  the  ego  ideal  and  is  the  expression  of  a

condemnation  of  the  ego  by  its  critical  agency.  The  feelings  of

inferiority so well known in neurotics are presumably not far removed

from it. In two very familiar maladies the sense of guilt is over-strongly

conscious; in them the ego ideal displays particular severity and oftenrages against the ego in a cruel fashion. The attitude of the ego ideal

in  these  two  conditions,  obsessional  neurosis  and  melancholia,

presents,  alongside  of  this  similarity,  differences  that  are  no  less

significant.

   In certain forms of obsessional neurosis the sense of guilt is over-

noisy but cannot justify itself to the ego. Consequently the patient’s

ego rebels against the imputation of guilt and seeks the physician’s

support in repudiating it. It would be folly to acquiesce in this, for to do

so would have no effect. Analysis eventually shows that the super-ego

is being influenced by processes that have remained unknown to the

ego. It is possible to discover the repressed impulses which are really

at the bottom of the sense of guilt. Thus in this case the super-ego

knew more than the ego about the unconscious id.

   In melancholia the impression that the super-ego has obtained a

hold upon consciousness is even stronger. But here the ego ventures

no objection; it admits its guilt and submits to the punishment. We

understand  the  difference.  In  obsessional  neurosis  what  were  in

question  were  objectionable  impulses  which  remained  outside  the

ego, while in melancholic the object to which the super-ego’s wrath

applies has been taken into the ego through identification.

      It  is  certainly  not  clear  why  the  sense  of  guilt  reaches  such  an

extraordinary strength in these two neurotic disorders; but the main

problem presented in this state of affairs lies in another direction. We

shall postpone discussion of it until we have dealt with the other cases

in which the sense of guilt remains unconscious.

   It is essentially in hysteria and in states of a hysterical type that this

is found. Here the mechanism by which the sense of guilt remains

unconscious  is  easy  to  discover.  The  hysterical  ego  fends  off  a

distressing  perception  with  which  the  criticisms  of  its  super-ego

threaten it, in the same way in which it is in the habit of fending off an

unendurable object-cathexis - by an act of repression. It is the ego,

therefore,  that  is  responsible  for  the  sense  of  guilt  remaining

unconscious. We know that as a rule the ego carries out repressions

in the service and at the behest of its super-ego; but this is a case in

which it has turned the same weapon against its harsh taskmaster. In

obsessional  neurosis,  as  we  know,  the  phenomena  of  reaction-

formation predominate; but here the ego succeeds only in keeping ata distance the material to which the sense of guilt refers.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3986

 

   One may go further and venture the hypothesis that a great part of

the  sense  of  guilt  must  normally  remain  unconscious,  because  the

origin  of  conscience  is  intimately  connected  with  the  Oedipus

complex, which belongs to the unconscious. If anyone were inclined to

put forward the paradoxical proposition that the normal man is not only

far more immoral than he believes but also far more moral than he

knows,  psycho-analysis,  on  whose  findings  the  first  half  of  the

assertion rests, would have no objection to raise against the second

half.¹

   It was a surprise to find that an increase in this Ucs. sense of guilt

can turn people into criminals. But it is undoubtedly a fact. In many

criminals,  especially  youthful  ones,  it  is  possible  to  detect  a  very

powerful  sense  of  guilt  which  existed  before  the  crime,  and  is

therefore not its result but its motive. It is as if it was a relief to be able

to  fasten  this  unconscious  sense  of  guilt  on  to  something  real  and

immediate.

   In all these situations the super-ego displays its independence of the

conscious  ego  and  its  intimate  relations  with  the  unconscious  id.

Having  regard,  now,  to  the  importance  we  have  ascribed  to

preconscious verbal residues in the ego, the question arises whether it

can be the case that the super-ego, in so far as it is Ucs., consists in

such word-presentations and, if it does not, what else it consists in.

Our tentative answer will be that it is as impossible for the super-ego

as for the ego to disclaim its origin from things heard; for it is a part of

the ego and remains accessible to consciousness by way of these

word-presentations (concepts, abstractions). But the cathectic energy

does  not  reach  these  contents  of  the  super-ego  from  auditory

perception (instruction or reading) but from sources in the id.

 

   ¹ This proposition is only apparently a paradox; it simply states that human nature has a far

greater extent, both for good and for evil, than it thinks it has - i. e. than its ego is aware of
through conscious perception. 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3987

 

   The question which we put off answering runs as follows: How is it

that the super-ego manifests itself essentially as a sense of guilt (or

rather, as criticism - for the sense of guilt is the perception in the ego

answering to this criticism) and moreover develops such extraordinary

harshness and severity towards the ego? If we turn to melancholia

first, we find that the excessively strong super-ego which has obtained

a  hold  upon  consciousness  rages  against  the  ego  with  merciless

violence,  as  if  it  had  taken  possession  of  the  whole  of  the  sadism

available in the person concerned. Following our view of sadism, we

should say that the destructive component had entrenched itself in the

super-ego and turned against the ego. What is now holding sway in

the super-ego is, as it were, a pure culture of the death instinct, and in

fact it often enough succeeds in driving the ego into death, if the latter

does not fend off its tyrant in time by the change round into mania.

      The  reproaches  of  conscience  in  certain  forms  of  obsessional

neurosis are as distressing and tormenting, but here the situation is

less  perspicuous.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  obsessional  neurotic,  in

contrast  to  the  melancholic,  never  in  fact  takes  the  step  of  self-

destruction;  it  is  as  though  he  were  immune  against  the  danger  of

suicide, and he is far better protected from it than the hysteric. We can

see that what guarantees the safety of the ego is the fact that the

object  has  been  retained.  In  obsessional  neurosis  it  has  become

possible, through a regression to the pregenital organization, for the

love-impulses  to  transform  themselves  into  impulses  of  aggression

against the object. Here again the instinct of destruction has been set

free and it seeks to destroy the object, or at least it appears to have

that intention. These purposes have not been adopted by the ego and

it struggles against them with reaction-formations and precautionary

measures; they remain in the id. The super-ego, however, behaves as

if the ego were responsible for them and shows at the same time by

the  seriousness  with  which  it  chastises  these  destructive  intentions

that they are no mere semblance evoked by regression but an actual

substitution  of  hate  for  love.  Helpless  in  both  directions,  the  egodefends itself vainly, alike against the instigations of the murderous id

and against the reproaches of the punishing conscience. It succeeds

in holding in check at least the most brutal actions of both sides; the

first outcome is interminable self-torment, and eventually there follows

a systematic torturing of the object, in so far as it is within reach.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3988

 

   The dangerous death instincts are dealt with in the individual in

various ways: in part they are rendered harmless by being fused with

erotic components, in part they are diverted towards the external world

in the form of aggression, while to a large extent they undoubtedly

continue  their  internal  work  unhindered.  How  is  it  then  that  in

melancholia the super-ego can become a kind of gathering-place for

the death instincts?

   From the point of view of instinctual control, of morality, it may be

said of the id that it is totally non-moral, of the ego that it strives to be

moral,  and  of  the  super-ego  that  it  can  be  super-moral  and  then

become as cruel as only the id can be. It is remarkable that the more a

man checks his aggressiveness towards the exterior the more severe

- that is aggressive - he becomes in his ego ideal. The ordinary view

sees the situation the other way round: the standard set up by the ego

ideal seems to be the motive for the suppression of aggressiveness.

The  fact  remains,  however,  as  we  have  stated  it:  the  more  a  man

controls  his  aggressiveness,  the  more  intense  becomes  his  ideal’s

inclination to aggressiveness against his ego. It is like a displacement,

a turning round upon his own ego. But even ordinary normal morality

has  a  harshly  restraining,  cruelly  prohibiting  quality.  It  is  from  this,

indeed, that the conception arises of a higher being who deals out

punishment inexorably.

   I cannot go further in my consideration of these questions without

introducing  a  fresh  hypothesis.  The  super-ego  arises,  as  we  know,

from an identification with the father taken as a model. Every such

identification  is  in  the  nature  of  a  desexualization  or  even  of  a

sublimation. It now seems as though when a transformation of thiskind takes place, an instinctual defusion occurs at the same time. After

sublimation the erotic component no longer has the power to bind the

whole of the destructiveness that was combined with it, and this is

released in the form of an inclination to aggression and destruction.

This  defusion  would  be  the  source  of  the  general  character  of

harshness  and  cruelty  exhibited  by  the  ideal  -  its  dictatorial  ‘Thou

shalt’.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3989

 

   Let us again consider obsessional neurosis for a moment. The state

of affairs is different here. The defusion of love into aggressiveness

has not been effected by the work of the ego, but is the result of a

regression  which  has  come  about  in  the  id.  But  this  process  has

extended  beyond  the  id  to  the  super-ego,  which  now  increases  its

severity towards the innocent ego. It would seem, however, that in this

case,  no  less  than  in  that  of  melancholia,  the  ego,  having  gained

control over the libido by means of identification, is punished for doing

so by the super-ego through the instrumentality of the aggressiveness

which was mixed with the libido.

   Our ideas about the ego are beginning to clear, and its various

relationships  are  gaining  distinctness.  We  now  see  the  ego  in  its

strength  and  in  its  weaknesses.  It  is  entrusted  with  important

functions.  By  virtue  of  its  relation  to  the  perceptual  system  it  gives

mental  processes  an  order  in  time  and  submits  them  to  ‘reality-

testing’.  By  interposing  the  processes  of  thinking,  it  secures  a

postponement of motor discharges and controls the access to motility.

This last power is, to be sure, a question more of form than of fact; in

the matter of action the ego’s position is like that of a constitutional

monarch,  without  whose  sanction  no  law  can  be  passed  but  who

hesitates long before imposing his veto on any measure put forward

by Parliament. All the experiences of life that originate from without

enrich the ego; the id, however, is its second external world, which it

strives to bring into subjection to itself. It withdraws libido from the id

and transforms the object-cathexes of the id into ego-structures. Withthe aid of the super-ego, in a manner that is still obscure to us, it

draws upon the experiences of past ages stored in the id.

   There are two paths by which the contents of the id can penetrate

into the ego. The one is direct, the other leads by way of the ego ideal;

which of these two paths they take may, for some mental activities, be

of decisive importance. The ego develops from perceiving instincts to

controlling  them,  from  obeying  instincts  to  inhibiting  them.  In  this

achievement a large share is taken by the ego ideal, which indeed is

partly a reaction-formation against the instinctual processes of the id.

Psycho-analysis  is  an  instrument  to  enable  the  ego  to  achieve  a

progressive conquest of the id.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3990

 

   From the other point of view, however, we see this same ego as a

poor  creature  owing  service  to  three  masters  and  consequently

menaced by three dangers: from the external world, from the libido of

the id, and from the severity of the super-ego. Three kinds of anxiety

correspond to these three dangers, since anxiety is the expression of

a retreat from danger. As a frontier creature, the ego tries to mediate

between the world and the id, to make the id pliable to the world and,

by means of its muscular activity, to make the world fall in with the

wishes of the id. In point of fact it behaves like the physician during an

analytic treatment: it offers itself, with the attention it pays to the real

world, as a libidinal object to the id, and aims at attaching the id’s

libido to itself. It is not only a helper to the id; it is also a submissive

slave  who  courts  his  master’s  love.  Whenever  possible,  it  tries  to

remain on good terms with the id; it clothes the id’s Ucs. commands

with  its Pcs.  rationalizations;  it  pretends  that  the  id  is  showing

obedience  to  the  admonitions  of  reality,  even  when  in  fact  it  is

remaining obstinate and unyielding; it disguises the id’s conflicts with

reality  and,  if  possible,  its  conflicts  with  the  super-ego  too.  In  its

position midway between the id and reality, it only too often yields to

the temptation to become sycophantic, opportunist and lying, like a

politician who sees the truth but wants to keep his place in popularfavour.

      Towards  the  two  classes  of  instincts  the  ego’s  attitude  is  not

impartial. Through its work of identification and sublimation it gives the

death instincts in the id assistance in gaining control over the libido,

but in so doing it runs the risk of becoming the object of the death

instincts and of itself perishing. In order to be able to help in this way it

has had itself to become filled with libido; it thus itself becomes the

representative  of  Eros  and  henceforward  desires  to  live  and  to  be

loved.

   But since the ego’s work of sublimation results in a defusion of the

instincts and a liberation of the aggressive instincts in the super-ego,

its struggle against the libido exposes it to the danger of maltreatment

and death. In suffering under the attacks of the super-ego or perhaps

even succumbing to them, the ego is meeting with a fate like that of

the protista which are destroyed by the products of decomposition that

they themselves have created. From the economic point of view the

morality that functions in the super-ego seems to be a similar product

of decomposition.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3991

 

   Among the dependent relationships in which the ego stands, that to

the super-ego is perhaps the most interesting.

   The ego is the actual seat of anxiety. Threatened by dangers from

three  directions,  it  develops  the  flight-reflex  by  withdrawing  its  own

cathexis from the menacing perception or from the similarly regarded

process in the id, and emitting it as anxiety. This primitive reaction is

later  replaced  by  the  carrying-out  of  protective  cathexes  (the

mechanism  of  the  phobias).  What  it  is  that  the  ego  fears  from  the

external and from the libidinal danger cannot be specified; we know

that the fear is of being overwhelmed or annihilated, but it cannot be

grasped  analytically.  The  ego  is  simply  obeying  the  warning  of  the

pleasure  principle.  On  the  other  hand,  we  can  tell  what  is  hidden

behind the ego’s dread of the super-ego, the fear of conscience. The

superior  being,  which  turned  into  the  ego  ideal,  once  threatenedcastration, and this dread of castration is probably the nucleus round

which the subsequent fear of conscience has gathered; it is this dread

that persists as the fear of conscience.

      The  high-sounding  phrase,  ‘every  fear  is  ultimately  the  fear  of

death’, has hardly any meaning, and at any rate cannot be justified. It

seems to me, on the contrary, perfectly correct to distinguish the fear

of death from dread of an object (realistic anxiety) and from neurotic

libidinal anxiety. It presents a difficult problem to psycho-analysis, for

death  is  an  abstract  concept  with  a  negative  content  for  which  no

unconscious  correlative  can  be  found.  It  would  seem  that  the

mechanism of the fear of death can only be that the ego relinquishes

its narcissistic libidinal cathexis in a very large measure - that is, that it

gives up itself, just as it gives up some external object in other cases

in which it feels anxiety. I believe that the fear of death is something

that occurs between the ego and the super-ego.

 


                                  The Ego And The Id

                                                                                      3992

 

   We know that the fear of death makes its appearance under two

conditions  (which,  moreover,  are  entirely  analogous  to  situations  in

which  other  kinds  of  anxiety  develop),  namely,  as  a  reaction  to  an

external  danger  and  as  an  internal  process,  as  for  instance  in

melancholia.  Once  again  a  neurotic  manifestation  may  help  us  to

understand a normal one.

   The fear of death in melancholia only admits of one explanation: that

the ego gives itself up because it feels itself hated and persecuted by

the super-ego, instead of loved. To the ego, therefore, living means

the same as being loved - being loved by the super-ego, which here

again appears as the representative of the id. The super-ego fulfils the

same function of protecting and saving that was fulfilled in earlier days

by the father and later by Providence or Destiny. But, when the ego

finds itself in an excessive real danger which it believes itself unable to

overcome  by  its  own  strength,  it  is  bound  to  draw  the  same

conclusion. It sees itself deserted by all protecting forces and lets itself

die. Here, moreover, is once again the same situation as that whichunderlay the first great anxiety-state of birth and the infantile anxiety of

longing - the anxiety due to separation from the protecting mother.

   These considerations make it possible to regard the fear of death,

like the fear of conscience, as a development of the fear of castration.

The great significance which the sense of guilt has in the neuroses

makes it conceivable that common neurotic anxiety is reinforced in

severe cases by the generating of anxiety between the ego and the

super-ego (fear of castration, of conscience, of death).

   The id, to which we finally come back, has no means of showing the

ego either love or hate. It cannot say what it wants; it has achieved no

unified will. Eros and the death instinct struggle within it; we have seen

with what weapons the one group of instincts defends itself against

the  other.  It  would  be  possible  to  picture  the  id  as  under  the

domination of the mute but powerful death instincts, which desire to be

at peace and (prompted by the pleasure principle) to put Eros, the

mischief maker, to rest; but perhaps that might be to undervalue the

part played by Eros.

                                                                                       3993

 

    A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY DEMONOLOGICAL NEUROSIS

                                        (1923)

 


                                                                                      3994

 

  


                                                                                      3995

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3996 

    A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY DEMONOLOGICAL NEUROSIS

 

The neuroses of childhood have taught us that a number of things can

easily be seen in them with the naked eye which at a later age are

only to be discovered after a thorough investigation. We may expect

that the same will turn out to be true of neurotic illnesses in earlier

centuries,  provided  that  we  are  prepared  to  recognize  them  under

names other than those of our present-day neuroses. We need not be

surprised to find that, whereas the neuroses of our unpsychological

modern days take on a hypochondriacal aspect and appear disguised

as  organic  illnesses,  the  neuroses  of  those  early  times  emerge  in

demonological  trappings.  Several  authors,  foremost  among  them

Charcot, have, as we know, identified the manifestations of hysteria in

the portrayals of possession and ecstasy that have been preserved for

us in the productions of art. If more attention had been paid to the

histories of such cases at the time, it would not have been difficult to

retrace in them the subject-matter of a neurosis.

   The demonological theory of those dark times has won in the end

against  all  the  somatic  views  of  the  period  of  ‘exact’  science.  The

states of possession correspond to our neuroses, for the explanation

of  which  we  once  more  have  recourse  to  psychical  powers.  In  our

eyes, the demons are bad and reprehensible wishes, derivatives of

instinctual  impulses  that  have  been  repudiated  and  repressed.  We

merely  eliminate  the  projection  of  these  mental  entities  into  the

external world which the middle ages carried out; instead, we regard

them as having arisen in the patient’s internal life, where they have

their abode.

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      3997

 

                                            I

 

                THE STORY OF CHRISTOPH HAIZMANN

                                  THE PAINTER 

I  am  indebted  to  the  friendly  interest  of  Hofrat  Dr.  Payer-Thurn,

director of the former Imperial Fideikommissbibliothek of Vienna, for

the  opportunity  of  studying  a  seventeenth  century  demonological

neurosis of this kind. Payer-Thurn had discovered a manuscript in this

library which originated from the shrine of Mariazell and in which there

was a detailed account of a miraculous redemption from a pact with

the Devil through the grace of the Blessed Virgin Mary. His interest

was aroused by the resemblance of this story to the legend of Faust,

and has led him to undertake the exhaustive publication and editing of

the material. Finding, however, that the person whose redemption was

described  had  been  subject  to  convulsive  seizures  and  visions  he

approached me for a medical opinion on the case. We came to an

agreement to publish our investigations independently and separately.

I should like to take this opportunity of thanking him for his original

suggestion and for the many ways in which he has assisted me in the

study of the manuscript.

   This demonological case history leads to really valuable findings

which can be brought to light without much interpretation - much as a

vein of pure metal may sometimes be struck which must elsewhere be

laboriously smelted from the ore.

 

   The manuscript, an exact copy of which lies before me, falls into two

quite distinct sections. One is a report, written in Latin, by a monastic

scribe or compiler; the other is a fragment from the patient’s diary,

written  in  German.  The  first  succession  contains  a  preface  and  a

description of the actual miraculous cure. The second can scarcely

have been of any significance for the reverend Fathers but so much

the more is it of value for us. It serves in large part to confirm our

judgement of the case, which might otherwise have been hesitant, and

we have good cause to be grateful to the clergy for having preserved

the document although it added nothing to support the tenor of their

views and, indeed, may rather have weakened it.

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      3998 

 

   But before going further into the composition of this little manuscript

brochure, which bears the title Trophaeum Mariano-Cellense, I must

relate a part of its contents, which I take from the preface.

   On September 5, 1677, the painter Christoph Haizmann, a Bavarian,

was brought to Mariazell, with a letter of introduction from the village

priest of Pottenbrunn (in lower Austria) not far away.¹ The letter states

that  the  man  had  been  staying  in  Pottenbrunn  for  some  months,

pursuing his occupation of painting. On August 29, while in the church

there,  he  had  been  seized  with  frightful  convulsions.  As  these

convulsions  recurred  during  the  following  days,  he  had  been

examined by the Praefectus Dominii Pottenbrunnensis with a view to

discovering what it was that was oppressing him and whether perhaps

he had entered into illicit traffic with the Evil Spirit.² Upon this, the man

had  admitted  that  nine  years  before,  when  he  was  in  a  state  of

despondency  about  his  art  and  doubtful  whether  he  could  support

himself, he had yielded to the Devil, who had tempted him nine times,

and that he had given him his bond in writing to belong to him in body

and soul after a period of nine years. This period would expire on the

twenty-fourth day of the current month.³ The letter went on to say that

the unfortunate man had repented and was convinced that only the

grace of the Mother of God at Mariazell could save him, by compelling

the Evil One to deliver up the bond, which had been written in blood.

For  this  reason  the  village  priest  ventured  to  recommend miserum

hunc  hominem  omni  auxilio  destitutum  to  the  benevolence  of  the

Fathers of Mariazell.

      So  far  the  narrative  of  Leopoldus  Braun,  the  village  priest  of

Pottenbrunn, dated September 1, 1677.

 

   ¹ No mention is anywhere made of the painter’s age. The context suggests that he was a

man of between thirty and forty, probably nearer the lower figure. He died, as we shall see, in
1700.

   ² We will merely note in passing the possibility that this interrogation inspired in the sufferer

- ‘suggested’ to him - the phantasy of his pact with the Devil.

   ³ Quorum et finis 24 mensis hujus futurus appropinquat.

               A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      3999

 

 

   We can now proceed with the analysis of the manuscript. It consists

of three parts:

   (1) A coloured title-page representing the scene of the signing of the

pact and the scene of the redemption in the chapel of Mariazell. On

the  next  sheet  are  eight  pictures,  also  coloured,  representing  the

subsequent appearances of the Devil, with a short legend in German

attached to each. These pictures are not the originals; they are copies

- faithful copies, we are solemnly assured - of the original paintings by

Christoph Haizmann.

   (2) The actual Trophaeum Mariano-Cellense (in Latin), the work of a

clerical compiler who signs himself at the foot ‘P.A.E.’ and appends to

these  initials  four  lines  of  verse  containing  his  biography.  The

Trophaeum ends with a deposition by the Abbot Kilian of St. Lambert,

dated September 12, 1729, which is in a different handwriting from

that  of  the  compiler.  It  testifies  to  the  exact  correspondence  of  the

manuscript  and  the  pictures  with  the  originals  preserved  in  the

archives. There is no mention of the year in which the Trophaeum was

compiled. We are free to assume that it was done in the same year in

which the Abbot Kilian made his deposition - that is, in 1729; or, since

the  last  date  mentioned  in  the  text  is  1714  -,  we  may  put  the

compiler’s work somewhere between the years 1714 and 1729. The

miracle which was to be preserved from oblivion by this manuscript

occurred in 1677 - that is to say, between thirty-seven and fifty-two

years earlier.

   (3) The painter’s diary, written in German and covering the period

from his redemption in the chapel till January 13 of the following year,

1678. It is inserted in the text of the Trophaeum near the end.

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4000

 

   The core of the actual Trophaeum consists of two pieces of writing:

the  letter  of  introduction,  mentioned  above,  from  the  village  priest,Leopold  Braun  of  Pottenbrunn,  dated  September  1,  1677,  and  the

report  by  the  Abbot  Franciscus  of  Mariazell  and  St.  Lambert,

describing the miraculous cure. This is dated September 12, 1677,

that  is  to  say,  only  a  few  days  later.  The  activity  of  the  editor  or

compiler, P.A.E., has provided a preface which as it were fuses the

contents of these two documents; he has also added some connecting

passages  of  little  importance,  and,  at  the  end,  an  account  of  the

subsequent vicissitudes of the painter, based on enquiries made in the

year 1714.¹

   The painter’s previous history is thus told three times over in the

Trophaeum:  (1)  in  the  village  priest  of  Pottenbrunn’s  letter  of

introduction, (2) in the formal report by the Abbot Franciscus and (3) in

the editor’s preface. A comparison of these three sources discloses

certain discrepancies which it will be not unimportant for us to follow

up.

 

   I can now continue with the painter’s story. After he had undergone

a  prolonged  period  of  penance  and  prayer  at  Mariazell,  the  Devil

appeared to him in the sacred Chapel at midnight, on September 8,

the Nativity of the Virgin, in the form of a winged dragon, and gave him

back the pact, which was written in blood. We shall learn later, to our

surprise,  that two  bonds  with  the  Devil  appear  in  Christoph

Haizmann’s story - an earlier one, written in black ink, and a later one,

written in blood. The one referred to in the description of the scene of

exorcism, as can also he seen from the picture on the title-page, is the

one written in blood - that is, the later one.

 

   ¹ This would seem to suggest that the Trophaeum, too, dates from 1714.

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4001

 

   At this point a doubt as to the credibility of the clerical reporters may

well arise in our minds and warn us not to waste our labours on a

product  of  monastic  superstition.  We  are  told  that  several  clerics,

mentioned by name, assisted at the exorcism and were present in the

Chapel when the Devil appeared. If it had been asserted that they,too, saw the Devil appear in the form of a dragon and offer the painter

the paper written in red (Schedam sibi porrigentem conspexisset), we

should be faced by several unpleasant possibilities, among which that

of  a  collective  hallucination  would  be  the  mildest.  But  the  Abbot

Franciscus’s testimony dispels this doubt. Far from asserting that the

assisting clerics saw the Devil too, he only states in straightforward

and sober words that the painter suddenly tore himself away from the

Fathers who were holding him, rushed into the corner of the Chapel

where he saw the apparition, and then returned with the paper in his

hand.¹

   The miracle was great, and the victory of the Holy Mother over

Satan without question; but unfortunately the cure was not a lasting

one.  It  is  once  more  to  the  credit  of  the  clergy  that  they  have  not

concealed this. After a short time the painter left Mariazell in the best

of health and went to Vienna, where he lived with a married sister. On

October 11 fresh attacks began, some of them very severe, and these

are reported in the diary until January 13. They consisted in visions

and ‘absences’, in which he saw and experienced every kind of thing,

in convulsive seizures accompanied by the most painful sensations,

on  one  occasion  in  paralysis  of  the  legs,  and  so  on.  This  time,

however, it was not the Devil who tormented him; it was by sacred

figures  that  he  was  vexed  -  by  Christ  and  by  the  Blessed  Virgin

herself.  It  is  remarkable  that  he  suffered  no  less  through  these

heavenly  manifestations  and  the  punishments  they  inflicted  on  him

than he had formerly through his traffic with the Devil. In his diary,

indeed, he included these fresh experiences too as manifestations of

the  Devil;  and  when,  in  May,  1678,  he  returned  to  Mariazell,  he

complained of maligini Spiritûs manifestationes.

 

   ¹ . . . ipsumque Daemonem ad Aram Sac. Cellae per fenestrellam in cornu Epistolae,

Schedam  sibi  porrigentem  conspexisset,  eo  advolans  e  Religiosorum  manibus,  qui  eum
tenebant, ipsam Schedam ad manum obtinuit. . . .’
 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4002

 

   He told the reverend Fathers that his reason for returning was thathe had to require the Devil to give him back another, earlier bond,

which had been written in ink.¹ This time once more the Blessed Virgin

and  the  pious  Fathers  helped  him  to  obtain  the  fulfilment  of  his

request. As to how this came about, however, the report is silent. It

merely states shortly: quâ iuxta votum redditâ - he prayed once again

and received the pact back. After this he felt quite free and entered the

Order of the Brothers Hospitallers.

   We have occasion yet again to acknowledge that in spite of the

obvious purpose of his efforts, the compiler has not been tempted into

departing from the veracity required of a case history. For he does not

conceal the outcome of the enquiry that was made in 1714 from the

Superior of the Monastery of the Brothers Hospitallers concerning the

painter’s later history. The Reverend Pater Provincialis reported that

Brother Chrysostomus had again been repeatedly tempted by the Evil

Spirit, who tried to seduce him into making a fresh pact (though this

only happened ‘when he had drunk somewhat too much wine’). But by

the grace of God, it had always been possible to repel these attempts.

Brother Chrysostomus had died of a hectic fever ‘peacefully and of

good  comfort’  in  the  year  1700  in  the  Monastery  of  the  Order,  at

Neustatt on the Moldau.

 

   ¹ This bond had been signed in September, 1668, and by May, 1678, nine and a half years

later, it would long since have fallen due.
 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4003

 

                                            II

 

            THE MOTIVE FOR THE PACT WITH THE DEVIL

 

If we look at this bond with the Devil as if it were the case history of a

neurotic, our interest will turn in the first instance to the question of its

motivation, which is, of course, intimately connected with its exciting

cause. Why does anyone sign a bond with the Devil? Faust, it is true,

asked contemptuously: ‘Was willst du armer Teufel geben?’ But he

was wrong. In return for an immortal soul, the Devil has many thingsto offer which are highly prized by men: wealth, security from danger,

power over mankind and the forces of nature, even magical arts, and,

above all else, enjoyment - the enjoyment of beautiful women. These

services  performed  or  undertakings  made  by  the  Devil  are  usually

mentioned specifically in the agreement made with him.¹ What, then,

was the motive which induced Christoph Haizmann to make his pact?

   Curiously enough, it was none of these very natural wishes. To put

the  matter  beyond  doubt,  one  has  only  to  read  the  short  remarks

attached  by  the  painter  to  his  illustrations  of  the  apparitions  of  the

Devil. For example, the caption to the third vision runs: ‘On the third

occasion  within  a  year  and  a  half,  he  appeared  to  me  in  this

loathsome shape, with a book in his hand which was full of magic and

black arts . . .’ But from the legend attached to a later apparition we

learn  that  the  Devil  reproached  him  violently  for  having  ‘burnt  his

beforementioned book’, and threatened to tear him to pieces if he did

not give it back.

 

   ¹  Cf. Faust, Part I, Scene 4:

                Ich will mich hier zu deinem Dienst verbinden,
                Auf deinem Wink nicht rasten und nicht ruhn;
                Wenn wir uns drüuben wieder finden,
                So sollst du mir das Gleiche thun.
 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4004

 

      At  his  fourth  appearance  the  Devil  showed  him  a  large  yellow

money-bag and a great ducat and promised him to give him as many

of these as he wanted at any time. But the painter is able to boast that

he ‘had taken nothing whatever of the kind’.

      Another  time  the  Devil  asked  him  to  turn  to  enjoyment  and

entertainment, and the painter remarks that ‘this indeed came to pass

at his desire; but I did not continue for more than three days and it was

then brought to an end’.

   Since he rejected magical arts, money and pleasures when they

were offered him by the Devil, and still less made them conditions of

the pact, it becomes really imperative to know what the painter in fact

wanted from the Devil when he signed a bond with him. Some motivehe must have had for his dealings with the Devil.

      On  this  point,  too,  the Trophaeum  provides  us  with  reliable

information. He had become low-spirited, was unable or unwilling to

work properly and was worried about making a livelihood; that is to

say, he was suffering from melancholic depression, with an inhibition

in his work and (justified) fears about his future. We can see that what

we are dealing with really is a case history. We learn, too, the exciting

cause of the illness, which the painter himself, in the caption to one of

his pictures of the Devil, actually calls a melancholia (‘that I should

seek diversion and banish melancholy’). The first of our three sources

of information, the village priest’s letter of introduction, speaks, it is

true,  only  of  the  state  of  depression  (‘dum  artis  suae  progressum

emolumentumque  secuturum  pusillanimis  perpenderet’),  but  the

second source, the Abbot Franciscus’s report, tells us the cause of

this  despondency  or  depression  as  well.  He  says:  ‘acceptâ  aliquâ

pusillanimitate ex morte parentis’; and in the compiler’s preface the

same words are used, though in a reversed order: (‘ex morte parentis

acceptâ aliquâ pusillanimitate’). His father, then, had died and he had

in  consequence  fallen  into  a  state  of  melancholia;  whereupon  the

Devil had approached him and asked him why he was so downcast

and sad, and had promised ‘to help him in every way and to give him

support’. ¹

 

   ¹ The first picture on the title-page and its caption represent the Devil in the form of an

‘honest citizen’.
 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4005

 

   Here was a person, therefore, who signed a bond with the Devil in

order to be freed from a state of depression. Undoubtedly an excellent

motive, as anyone will agree who can have an understanding sense of

the  torments  of  such  a  state  and  who  knows  as  well  how  little

medicine can do to alleviate this ailment. Yet no one who has followed

the story so far as this would be able to guess what the wording of this

bond (or rather, of these two bonds)¹ with the Devil actually was.

   These bonds bring us two great surprises. In the first place, theymention  no undertaking  given  by  the  Devil  in  return  for  whose

fulfilment  the  painter  pledges  his  eternal  bliss,  but  only  a demand

made by the Devil which the painter must satisfy. It strikes us as quite

illogical  and  absurd  that  this  man  should  give  up  his  soul,  not  for

something he is to get from the Devil but for something he is to do for

him. But the undertaking given by the painter seems even stranger.

   The first ‘syngrapha’, written in ink, runs as follows: ‘Ich Christoph

Haizmann undterschreibe mich disen Herrn sein leibeigener Sohn auff

9. Jahr. 1669 Jahr.’ The second, written in blood, runs:-

 

            ‘Anno 1669.

   ‘Christoph Haizmann. Ich verschreibe mich disen Satan ich sein

leibeigner  Sohn  zu  sein,  und  in  9.  Jahr  ihm  mein  Leib  und  Seel

zuzugeheren.’

 

   ¹ Since there were two of them - the first written in ink, and the second written about a year

later in blood - both said still to be in the treasury of Mariazell and to be transcribed in the
Trophaeum.
 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4006

 

   All our astonishment vanishes, however, if we read the text of the

bonds in the sense that what is represented in them as a demand

made by the Devil is, on the contrary, a service performed by him -

that  is  to  say,  it  is  a  demand  made  by  the painter.  The

incomprehensible  pact  would  in  that  case  have  a  straightforward

meaning  and  could  be  paraphrased  thus.  The  Devil  undertakes  to

replace the painter’s lost father for nine years. At the end of that time

the painter becomes the property, body and soul, of the Devil, as was

the  usual  custom  in  such  bargains.  The  train  of  thought  which

motivated the painter in making the pact seems to have been this: his

father’s death had made him lose his spirits and his capacity to work;

if he could only obtain a father-substitute he might hope to regain what

he had lost.

   A man who has fallen into a melancholia on account of his father’s

death must really have been fond of him. But, if so, it is very strangethat such a man should have hit upon the idea of taking the Devil as a

substitute for the father whom he loved.

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4007

 

                                            III

 

                  THE DEVIL AS A FATHER-SUBSTITUTE

 

I fear that sober critics will not be prepared to admit that this fresh

interpretation has made the meaning of this pact with the Devil clear.

They will have two objections to make to it.

   In the first place they will say that it is not necessary to regard the

bond  as  a  contract  in  which  the  undertakings  of  both  parties  have

been  set  out.  On  the  contrary,  they  will  argue,  it  contains  only  the

painter’s undertaking; the Devil’s is omitted from the text, and is, as it

were, sousentendu: the painter gives two undertakings - firstly to be

the Devil’s son for nine years, and secondly to belong to him entirely

after death. In this way one of the premisses on which our conclusion

is built would be disposed of.

   The second objection will be that we are not justified in attaching

any special importance to the expression ‘the Devil’s bounden son’;

that this is no more than a common figure of speech, which anyone

could interpret in the same way as the reverend Fathers may have

done.  For  in  their  Latin  translation  they  did  not  mention  the

relationship  of  son  promised  in  the  bonds,  but  merely  say  that  the

painter ‘mancipavit’ himself - made himself a bondslave - to the Evil

One and had undertaken to lead a sinful life and to deny God and the

Holy  Trinity.  Why  depart  from  this  obvious  and  natural  view  of  the

matter?¹ The position would simply be that a man, in the torment and

perplexity of a melancholic depression, signs a bond with the Devil, to

whom  he  ascribes  the  greatest  therapeutic  power.  That  the

depression  was  occasioned  by  his  father’s  death  would  then  be

irrelevant; the occasion might quite as well have been something else.

    ¹ In point of fact, when we come to consider later at what time and for whom these bonds

were  drawn  up,  we  shall  realize  that  their  text  had  to  be  expressed  in  unobtrusive  and
generally comprehensible terms. It is enough for us, however, that it contains an ambiguity
which we can take as the starting-point of our discussion.
 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4008

 

      All  this  sounds  convincing  and  reasonable.  Psycho-analysis  has

once  more  to  meet  the  reproach  that  it  makes  hair-splitting

complications in the simplest things and sees mysteries and problems

where  none  exist,  and  that  it  does  this  by  laying  undue  stress  on

insignificant and irrelevant details, such as occur every where, and

making  them  the  basis  of  the  most  far-reaching  and  strangest

conclusions. It would be useless for us to point out that this rejection

of our interpretation would do away with many striking analogies and

break  a  number  of  subtle  connections  which  we  are  able  to

demonstrate in this case. Our opponents will say that those analogies

and connections do not in fact exist, but have been imported into the

case by us with quite uncalled-for ingenuity.

   I will not preface my reply with the words, ‘to be honest’ or ‘to be

candid’, for one must always be able to be these things without any

special preliminaries. I will instead say quite simply that I know very

well that no reader who does not already believe in the justifiability of

the psycho-analytic mode of thought will acquire that belief from the

case of the seventeenth-century painter, Christoph Haizmann. Nor is it

my intention to make use of this case as evidence of the validity of

psycho-analysis.  On  the  contrary,  I  presuppose  its  validity  and  am

employing it to throw light on the painter’s demonological illness. My

justification for doing so lies in the success of our investigations into

the nature of the neuroses in general. We may say in all modesty that

to-day  even  the  more  obtuse  among  our  colleagues  and

contemporaries  are  beginning  to  realize  that  no  understanding  of

neurotic states can be reached without the help of psycho-analysis.

 

                    ‘These shafts can conquer Troy, these shafts alone’

 

as Odysseus confesses in the Philoctetes of Sophocles.   If we are right in regarding our painter’s bond with the Devil as a

neurotic  phantasy,  there  is  no  need  for  any  further  apology  for

considering  it  psycho-analytically.  Even  small  indications  have  a

meaning and importance, and quite specially when they are related to

the conditions under which a neurosis originates. To be sure, it is as

possible  to  overvalue  as  to  undervalue  them,  and  it  is  a  matter  of

judgement how far one should go in exploiting them. But anyone who

does not believe in psycho-analysis - or, for the matter of that, even in

the Devil - must be left to make what he can of the painter’s case,

whether he is able to furnish an explanation of his own or whether he

sees nothing in it that needs explaining.

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4009

 

   We therefore come back to our hypothesis that the Devil with whom

the painter signed the bond was a direct substitute for his father. And

this is borne out by the shape in which the Devil first appeared to him -

as an honest elderly citizen with a brown beard, dressed in a red cloak

and leaning with his right hand on a stick, with a black dog beside him¹

(cf. the first picture). Later on his appearance grows more and more

terrifying  -  more  mythological,  one  might  say.  He  is  equipped  with

horns, eagle’s claws and bat’s wings. Finally he appears in the chapel

as a flying dragon. We shall have to come back later to a particular

detail of his bodily shape.

   It does indeed sound strange that the Devil should be chosen as a

substitute for a loved father. But this is only so at first sight, for we

know a good many things which lessen our surprise. To begin with,

we know that God is a father-substitute; or, more correctly, that he is

an exalted father; or, yet again, that he is a copy of a father as he is

seen  and  experienced  in  childhood  -  by  individuals  in  their  own

childhood  and  by  mankind  in  its  prehistory  as  the  father  of  the

primitive  and  primal  horde.  Later  on  in  life  the  individual  sees  his

father  as  something  different  and  lesser.  But  the  ideational  image

belonging to his childhood is preserved and becomes merged with the

inherited memory-traces of the primal father to form the individual’sidea of God. We also know, from the secret life of the individual which

analysis  uncovers,  that  his  relation  to  his  father  was  perhaps

ambivalent from the outset, or, at any rate, soon became so. That is to

say, it contained two sets of emotional impulses that were opposed to

each  other:  it  contained  not  only  impulses  of  an  affectionate  and

submissive nature, but also hostile and defiant ones. It is our view that

the same ambivalence governs the relations of mankind to its Deity.

The unresolved conflict between, on the one hand, a longing for the

father and, on the other, a fear of him and a son’s defiance of him, has

furnished us with an explanation of important characteristics of religion

and decisive vicissitudes in it.²

 

   ¹ In Goethe, a black dog like this turns into the Devil himself.

   ² Cf. Totem and Taboo (1912-13) and Reik (1919).

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4010

 

   Concerning the Evil Demon, we know that he is regarded as the

antithesis of God and yet is very close to him in his nature. His history

has not been so well studied as that of God; not all religions have

adopted the Evil Spirit, the opponent of God, and his prototype in the

life of the individual has so far remained obscure. One thing, however,

is certain: gods can turn into evil demons when new gods oust them.

When one people has been conquered by another, their fallen gods

not seldom turn into demons in the eyes of the conquerors. The evil

demon  of  the  Christian  faith  -  the  Devil  of  the  Middle  Ages  -  was,

according  to  Christian  mythology,  himself  a  fallen  angel  and  of  a

godlike nature. It does not need much analytic perspicacity to guess

that God and the Devil were originally identical - were a single figure

which was later split into two figures with opposite attributes.¹ In the

earliest ages of religion God himself still possessed all the terrifying

features  which  were  afterwards  combined  to  form  a  counterpart  of

him.

      We  have  here  an  example  of  the  process,  with  which  we  are

familiar, by which an idea that has a contradictory - an ambivalent -

content becomes divided into two sharply contrasted opposites. Thecontradictions in the original nature of God are, however, a reflection

of the ambivalence which governs the relation of the individual to his

personal father. If the benevolent and righteous God is a substitute for

his father, it is not to be wondered at that his hostile attitude to his

father,  too,  which  is  one  of  hating  and  fearing  him  and  of  making

complaints  against  him,  should  have  come  to  expression  in  the

creation of Satan. Thus the father, it seems, is the individual prototype

of both God and the Devil. But we should expect religions to bear

ineffaceable marks of the fact that the primitive primal father was a

being of unlimited evil - a being less like God than the Devil.

 

   ¹ Cf. Reik, 1923, Chapter VII.

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4011

 

   It is true that it is by no means easy to demonstrate the traces of this

satanic view of the father in the mental life of the individual. When a

boy draws grotesque faces and caricatures, we may no doubt be able

to show that he is jeering at his father in them; and when a person of

either sex is afraid of robbers and burglars at night, it is not hard to

recognize these as split off portions of the father.¹ The animals, too,

which  appear  in  children’s  animal  phobias  are  most  often  father-

substitutes, as were the totem animals of primaeval times. But that the

Devil is a duplicate of the father and can act as a substitute for him

has  not  been  shown  so  clearly  elsewhere  as  in  the  demonological

neurosis  of  this  seventeenth-century  painter.  That  is  why,  at  the

beginning of this paper, I foretold that a demonological case history of

this kind would yield in the form of pure metal material which, in the

neuroses of a later epoch (no longer superstitious but hypochondriacal

instead) has to be laboriously extracted by analytic work from the ore

of  free  associations  and  symptoms.²  A  deeper  penetration  into  the

analysis of our painter’s illness will probably bring stronger conviction.

It is no unusual thing for a man to acquire a melancholic depression

and an inhibition in his work as a result of his father’s death. When this

happens, we conclude that the man had been attached to his father

with an especially strong love, and we remember how often a severemelancholia appears as a neurotic form of mourning.

 

   ¹ In the familiar fairy tale of ‘The Seven Little Goats’, the Father Wolf appears as a burglar.

   ² The fact that in our analyses we so seldom succeed in finding the Devil as a father-

substitute may be an indication that for those who come to us for analysis this figure from
mediaeval mythology has long since played out its part. For the pious Christian of earlier
centuries belief in the Devil was no less a duty than belief in God. In point of fact, he needed
the Devil in order to be able to keep hold of God. The later decrease in faith has, for various
reasons, first and foremost affected the figure of the Devil.
   If we are bold enough to apply this idea of the Devil as a father substitute to cultural history,
we may also be able to see the witch-trials of the Middle Ages in a new light.
 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4012

 

   In this we are undoubtedly right. But we are not right if we conclude

further that this relation has been merely one of love. On the contrary,

his mourning over the loss of his father is the more likely to turn into

melancholia,  the  more  his  attitude  to  him  bore  the  stamp  of

ambivalence. This emphasis on ambivalence, however, prepares us

for the possibility of the father being subjected to a debasement, as

we see happening in the painter’s demonological neurosis. If we were

able to learn as much about Christoph Haizmann as about a patient

undergoing an analysis with us, it would be an easy matter to elicit this

ambivalence,  to  get  him  to  remember  when  and  under  what

provocations  he  was  given  cause  to  fear  and  hate  his  father;  and,

above  all,  to  discover  what  were  the  accidental  factors  that  were

added  to  the  typical  motives  for  a  hatred  of  the  father  which  are

necessarily  inherent  in  the  natural  relationship  of  son  to  father.

Perhaps  we  might  then  find  a  special  explanation  for  the  painter’s

inhibition in work. It is possible that his father had opposed his wish to

become a painter. If that was so, his inability to practise his art after

his  father’s  death  would  on  the  one  hand  be  an  expression  of  the

familiar phenomenon of ‘deferred obedience’; and, on the other hand,

by making him incapable of earning a livelihood, it would be bound to

increase his longing for his father as a protector from the cares of life.

In its aspect as deferred obedience it would also be an expression of

remorse and a successful self-punishment.   Since, however, we cannot carry out an analysis of this sort with

Christoph  Haizmann,  who  died  in  the  year  1700,  we  must  content

ourselves with bringing out those features of his case history which

may point to the typical exciting causes of a negative attitude to the

father. There are only a few such features, nor are they very striking,

but they are of great interest.

   Let us first consider the part played by the number nine. The pact

with the Evil One was for nine years. On this point the unquestionably

trustworthy report by the village priest of Pottenbrunn is quite clear:

pro  novem  annis  Syngraphen  scriptam  tradidit.  This  letter  of

introduction, dated September 1, 1677, is also able to inform us that

the appointed time was about to expire in a few days: quorum et finis

24 mensis hujus futurus appropinquat. The pact would therefore have

been signed on September 24, 1668.¹ In the same report, indeed, yet

another use is made of the number nine. The painter claims to have

withstood the temptations of the Evil One nine times - ‘nonies’ - before

he  yielded  to  him.  This  detail  is  no  longer  mentioned  in  the  later

reports. In the Abbot’s deposition the phrase ‘pos annos novem’ is

used, and the compiler repeats ‘ad novem annos’ in his summary - a

proof that this number was not regarded as indifferent.

 

   ¹ The contradictory fact that both the pacts as transcribed bear the date 1669 will be

considered later.
 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4013

 

   The number nine is well known to us from neurotic phantasies. It is

the number of the months of pregnancy, and wherever it appears it

directs our attention to a phantasy of pregnancy. In our painter’s case,

to  be  sure,  the  number  refers  to  years,  not  months;  and  it  will  be

objected that nine is a significant number in other ways as well. But

who  knows  whether  it  may  not  in  general  owe  a  good  deal  of  its

sanctity  to  the  part  it  plays  in  pregnancy?  Nor  need  we  be

disconcerted by the change from nine months to nine years. We know

from  dreams  what  liberties  ‘unconscious  mental  activity’  takes  with

numbers. If, for instance, the number five occurs in a dream, this caninvariably be traced back to a five that is important in waking life; but

whereas in waking life the five was a five years’ difference in age or a

company of five people, it appeared in the dream as five bank-notes

or five fruits. That is to say, the number is kept, but its denominator is

changed  according  to  the  requirements  of  condensation  and

displacement. Nine years in a dream could thus easily correspond to

nine months in real life. The dream-work plays about with the numbers

of waking life in another way, too, for it shows a sovereign disregard

for noughts and does not treat them as numbers at all. Five dollars in

a dream can stand for fifty or five hundred or five thousand dollars in

reality.

   Another detail in the painter’s relations to the Devil has once more a

sexual reference. On the first occasion, as I have mentioned, he saw

the Evil One in the shape of an honest citizen. But already on the

second occasion the Devil was naked and misshapen, and had two

pairs of female breasts. In none of his subsequent apparitions are the

breasts absent, either as a single or a double pair. Only in one of them

does the Devil exhibit, in addition to the breasts, a large penis ending

in  a  snake.  This  stressing  of  the  female  sexual  character  by

introducing large pendulous breasts (there is never any indication of

the  female  genitals)  is  bound  to  appear  to  us  as  a  striking

contradiction of our hypothesis that the Devil had the meaning of a

father-substitute  for  the  painter.  And,  indeed,  such  a  way  of

representing the Devil is in itself unusual. Where ‘devil’ is thought of in

a  generic  sense,  and  devils  appear  in  numbers,  there  is  nothing

strange  about  depicting  female  devils;  but  that the  Devil,  who  is  a

great individuality, the Lord of Hell and the Adversary of God, should

be represented otherwise than as a male, and, indeed, as a super-

male, with horns, tail and a big penis-snake - this, I believe, is never

found.

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4014

 

   These two slight indications give us an idea of what the typical factor

is which determines the negative side of the painter’s relation to hisfather.  What  he  is  rebelling  against  is  his  feminine  attitude  to  him

which culminates in a phantasy of bearing him a child (the nine years).

We have an accurate knowledge of this resistance from our analyses,

where it takes on very strange forms in the transference and gives us

a great deal of trouble. With the painter’s mourning for his lost father,

and the heightening of his longing for him, there also comes about in

him a re-activation of his long-since repressed phantasy of pregnancy,

and he is obliged to defend himself against it by a neurosis and by

debasing his father.

   But why should his father, after being reduced to the status of a

Devil, bear this physical mark of a woman? The feature seems at first

hard to interpret; but soon we find two explanations which compete

with  each  other  without  being  mutually  exclusive.  A  boy’s  feminine

attitude to his father undergoes repression as soon as he understands

that his rivalry with a woman for his father’s love has as a precondition

the  loss  of  his  own  male  genitals  -  in  other  words,  castration.

Repudiation  of  the  feminine  attitude  is  thus  the  result  of  a  revolt

against  castration.  It  regularly  finds  its  strongest  expression  in  the

converse  phantasy  of  castrating  the  father,  of  turning him  into  a

woman. Thus the Devil’s breasts would correspond to a projection of

the subject’s own femininity on to the father-substitute. The second

explanation of these female additions to the Devil’s body no longer

has a hostile meaning but an affectionate one. It sees in the adoption

of this shape an indication that the child’s tender feelings towards his

mother have been displaced on to his father; and this suggests that

there has previously been a strong fixation on the mother, which, in its

turn, is responsible for part of the child’s hostility towards his father.

Large  breasts  are  the  positive  sexual  characteristics  of  the  mother

even at a time when the negative characteristic of the female - her

lack of a penis - is as yet unknown to the child. ¹

 

   ¹ Cf. Leonardo da Vinci and a Memory of his Childhood (1910c).

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4015

 

      If  our  painter’s  repugnance  to  accepting  castration  made  itimpossible for him to appease his longing for his father, it is perfectly

understandable that he should have turned for help and salvation to

the image of his mother. This is why he declared that only the Holy

Mother of God of Mariazell could release him from his pact with the

Devil and why he obtained his freedom once more on the day of the

Mother’s Nativity (September 8). Whether the day on which the pact

was made - September 24 - was not also determined in some similar

way, we shall of course never know.

   Among the observations made by psycho-analysis of the mental life

of  children  there  is  scarcely  one  which  sounds  so  repugnant  and

unbelievable to a normal adult as that of a boy’s feminine attitude to

his father and the phantasy of pregnancy that arises from it. It is only

since Senatspräsident Daniel Paul Schreber, a judge presiding over a

division of the Appeal Court of Saxony, published the history of his

psychotic  illness  and  his  extensive  recovery  from  it,¹    that  we  can

discuss the subject without trepidation or apology. We learn from this

invaluable  book  that,  somewhere  about  the  age  of  fifty,  the

Senatspräsident became firmly convinced that God - who, incidentally,

exhibited distinct traits of his father, the worthy physician, Dr. Schreber

- had decided to emasculate him, to use him as a woman, and to

beget from him ‘a new race of men born from the spirit of Schreber’.

(His own marriage was childless.) In his revolt against this intention of

God’s, which seemed to him highly unjust and ‘contrary to the Order of

Things’,  he  fell  ill  with  symptoms  of  paranoia,  which,  however,

underwent a process of involution in the course of years, leaving only

a small residue behind. The gifted author of his own case history could

not have guessed that in it he had uncovered a typical pathogenic

factor.

 

   ¹ Denkwürdigkeiten eines Nervenkranken, 1903. See my analysis of his case (1911c).

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4016

 

   This revolt against castration or a feminine attitude has been torn

out of its organic context by Alfred Adler. He has linked it superficially

or  falsely  with  the  longing  for  power,  and  has  postulated  it  as  anindependent ‘masculine protest’. Since a neurosis can only arise from

a conflict between two trends, it is as justifiable to see the cause of

‘every’  neurosis  in  the  masculine  protest  as  it  is  to  see  it  in  the

feminine attitude against which the protest is being made. It is quite

true that this masculine protest plays a regular part in the formation of

character - in some types of people a very large part - and that we

meet  it  in  the  analysis  of  neurotic  men  as  a  vigorous  resistance.

Psycho-analysis  has  attached  due  importance  to  the  masculine

protest in connection with the castration complex, without being able

to accept its omnipotence or its omnipresence in neuroses. The most

marked case of a masculine protest with all its manifest reactions and

character-traits that I have met with in analysis was that of a patient

who came to me for treatment on account of an obsessional neurosis

in whose symptoms the unresolved conflict between a masculine and

a feminine attitude (fear of castration and desire for castration) found

clear expression. In addition, the patient had developed masochistic

phantasies  which  were  wholly  derived  from  a  wish  to  accept

castration; and he had even gone beyond these phantasies to real

satisfaction in perverse situations. The whole of his state rested - like

Adler’s theory itself - on the repression and denial of early infantile

fixations of love.

      Senatspräsident  Schreber  found  the  way  to  recovery  when  he

decided to give up his resistance to castration and to accommodate

himself to the feminine role cast for him by God. After this, he became

lucid and calm, was able to put through his own discharge from the

asylum and led a normal life - with the one exception that he devoted

some hours every day to the cultivation of his femaleness, of whose

gradual advance towards the goal determined by God he remained

convinced.

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4017

 

                                            IV

 

                                THE TWO BONDS 

   A remarkable detail in our painter’s story is the statement that he

signed two different bonds with the Devil. The first, written in black ink,

ran as follows:

   ‘I, Chr. H., subscribe myself to this Lord as his bounden son till the

ninth year.’

   The second, written in blood, ran:

   ‘Chr. H. I sign a bond with this Satan, to be his bounden son, and in

the ninth year to belong to him body and soul.’

      The  originals  of  both  are  said  to  have  been  in  the  archives  at

Mariazell when the Trophaeum was compiled, and both bear the same

date - 1669.

   I have already made a number of references to the two bonds; and I

now propose to deal with them in greater detail, although it is precisely

here that the danger of overvaluing trifles seems especially great.

   It is unusual for anyone to sign a bond with the Devil twice, in such a

way  that  the  first  document  is  replaced  by  the  second,  but  without

losing its own validity. Perhaps this occurrence is less surprising to

other people, who are more at home with demonological material. For

my part, I could only look on it as a special peculiarity of our case, and

my suspicions were aroused when I found that the reports were at

variance precisely on this point. Examination of these discrepancies

will  afford  us,  unexpectedly,  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  case

history.

   The village priest of Pottenbrunn’s letter of introduction describes a

very simple and clear situation. In it mention is only made of one bond,

which was written in blood by the painter nine years before and which

was due to expire in a few days’ time - on September 24. It must

therefore have been drawn up on September 24, 1668; unfortunately

this date, although it can be inferred with certainty, is not explicitly

stated.

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4018

 

   The Abbot Franciscus’s deposition, which was dated, as we know, afew  days  later  (September  12,  1677),  already  describes  a  more

complicated state of affairs. It is plausible to assume that the painter

had  given  more  precise  information  in  the  interval.  The  deposition

relates that the painter had signed two bonds: one in the year 1668 (a

date which should also be the correct one according to the letter of

introduction), written in black ink, and the other ‘sequenti anno 1669’,

written in blood. The bond that he received back on the day of the

Nativity of the Virgin was the one written in blood - viz. the later bond,

which  had  been  signed  in  1669.  This  does  not  emerge  from  the

Abbot’s deposition, for there it merely says later ‘schedam redderet’

and ‘schedam sibi porrigentem conspexisset’ as if there could only be

a single document in question. But it does follow from the subsequent

course  of  the  story,  and  also  from  the  coloured  title-page  of  the

Tropheaum, where what is clearly a red script can be seen on the

paper which the demon dragon is holding. The further course of the

story  is,  as  I  have  already  related,  that  the  painter  returned  to

Mariazell in May, 1678, after he had experienced further temptations

from  the  Evil  One  in  Vienna;  and  that  he  begged  that,  through  a

further act of Grace on the part of the Holy Mother, the first document,

written in ink, might also be given back to him. In what way this came

about is not so fully described as on the first occasion. We are merely

told: ‘quâ juxta votum redditâ’; and in another passage the compiler

says that this particular bond was thrown to the painter by the Devil

‘crumpled up and torn into four pieces’ on May 9, 1678, at about nine

o’clock in the evening.

   Both bonds, however, bear the date of the same year - 1669.

   This incompatibility is either of no significance or may put us on the

following track.

   If we take as a starting-point the Abbot’s account, as being the more

detailed one, we are confronted with a number of difficulties. When

Christoph  Haizmann  confessed  to  the  village  priest  of  Pottenbrunn

that he was hard pressed by the Devil and that the time-limit would

soon run out, he could only (in 1677) have been thinking of the bond

which he had signed in 1668 - namely, the first one, written in black

(which is referred to in the letter of introduction as the only one, but is

described  there  being  written  in  blood).  But  a  few  days  later,  at

Mariazell, he was only concerned to get back the later bond, in blood,which was not nearly due to expire then (1669-77), and allowed the

first one to become overdue. This latter was not reclaimed till 1678 -

that is, when it had run into its tenth year. Furthermore, why are both

the  bonds  dated  in  the  same  year  (1669),  when  one  of  them  is

explicitly attributed to the following year (‘anno subsequenti’)?

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4019

 

   The compiler must have noticed these difficulties, for he made an

attempt  to  remove  them.  In  his  preface  he  adopted  the  Abbot’s

version,  but  he  modified  it  in  one  particular.  The  painter,  he  says,

signed a bond with the Devil in 1669 in ink, but afterwards (‘deinde

vero’)  in  blood.  He  thus  overrode  the  express  statement  of  both

reports that one bond was signed in 1668, and he ignored the Abbot’s

remark in his deposition to the effect that there was a difference in the

year-number between the two bonds. This he did in order to keep in

harmony with the dating of the two documents that were given back by

the Devil.

   In the Abbot’s deposition a passage appears in brackets after the

words ‘sequenti vero anno 1669’. It runs: ‘sumitur hic alter annus pro

nondum  completo,  uti  saepe  in  loquendo  fieri  solet,  nam  eundem

annum  indicant  syngraphae,  quarum  atramento  scripta  ante

praesentem attestationem nondum habita fuit.’ This passage is clearly

an interpolation by the compiler; for the Abbot, who had only seen one

bond, could not have stated that both bore the same date. The placing

of the passage in brackets, moreover, must have been intended to

show that it was an addition to the text of the deposition. It represents

another attempt on the compiler’s part to reconcile the incompatible

evidence. He agrees that the first bond was signed in 1668; but he

thinks  that,  since  the  year  was  already  far  advanced  (it  was

September), the painter had post-dated it by a year so that both bonds

were able to show the same year. His invoking the fact that people

often do the same sort of thing in conversation seems to me to stamp

his whole attempt at an explanation as no more than a feeble evasion.

               A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4020

 

   I cannot tell whether my presentation of the case has made any

impression on the reader and whether it has put him in a position to

take  an  interest  in  these  minute  details.  I  myself  have  found  it

impossible to arrive with any certainty at the true state of affairs; but,

in studying this confused business, I hit upon a notion which has the

advantage of giving the most natural picture of the course of events,

even though once more the written evidence does not entirely fit in

with it.

   My view is that when the painter first came to Mariazell he spoke

only of one bond, written in the regular way in blood, which was about

to fall due and which had therefore been signed in September, 1668 -

all exactly as described in the village priest’s letter of introduction. In

Mariazell, too, he presented this bond in blood as the one which the

Demon  had  given  back  to  him  under  compulsion  from  the  Holy

Mother. We know what happened subsequently. The painter left the

shrine soon afterwards and went to Vienna, where he felt free till the

middle  of  October.  Then,  however,  he  began  once  more  to  be

subjected to sufferings and apparitions, in which he saw the work of

the Evil Spirit. He again felt in need of redemption, but was faced with

the difficulty of explaining why the exorcism in the holy Chapel had not

brought him a lasting deliverance. He would certainly not have been

welcome at Mariazell if he had returned there uncured and relapsed.

In this quandary, he invented an earlier, first bond, which, however,

was to be written in ink, so that its supersession in favour of a later

bond, written in blood, should seem more plausible. Having returned

to Mariazell, he had this alleged first bond given back to him too. After

this he was left in peace by the Evil One; but at the same time he did

something else, which will show us what lay in the background of his

neurosis.

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4021

 

      The  drawings  he  made  were  undoubtedly  executed  during  hissecond stay at Mariazell: the title-page, which is a single composition,

contains a representation of both the bond scenes. The attempt to

make his new story tally with his earlier one may well have caused

him  embarrassment.  It  was  unfortunate  for  him  that  his  additional

invention could only be of an earlier bond and not of a later one. Thus

he could not avoid the awkward result that he had redeemed one - the

blood bond - too soon (in the eighth year), and the other - the black

bond - too late (in the tenth year). And he betrayed the double editing

of  the  story  by  making  a  mistake  in  the  dating  of  the  bonds  and

attributing the earlier one as well as the later to the year 1669. This

mistake  has  the  significance  of  a  piece  of  unintentional  honesty:  it

enables us to guess that the supposedly earlier bond was fabricated

at the later date. The compiler, who certainly did not begin revising the

material before 1714, and perhaps not till 1729, had to do his best to

resolve  its  not  inconsiderable  contradictions.  Finding  that  both  the

bonds before him were dated 1669, he had recourse to the evasion

which he interpolated in the Abbot’s deposition.

   It is easy to see where the weak spot lies in this otherwise attractive

reconstruction.  Reference  is  already  made  to  the  existence  of  two

bonds,  one  in  black  and  one  in  blood,  in  the  Abbot’s  deposition.  I

therefore have the choice between accusing the compiler of having

also made an alteration in the deposition, an alteration closely related

to  his  interpolation,  or  confessing  that  I  am  unable  to  unravel  the

tangle.¹

 

   ¹ The compiler, it seems to me, was between two fires. On the one hand, he found, in the

village priest’s letter of introduction as well as in the Abbot’s deposition, the statement that the
bond (or at any rate the first bond) had been signed in 1668; on the other hand, both bonds,
which had been preserved in the archives, bore the date 1669. As he had two bonds before
him, it seemed certain to him that two bonds had been signed. If, as I believe, the Abbot’s
deposition mentioned only one bond, he was obliged to insert in the deposition a reference to
the other and then remove the contradiction by the hypothesis of the post-dating. The textual
alteration which he made occurs immediately before the interpolation, which can only have
been written by him. He was obliged to link the interpolation to the alteration with the words

‘sequenti  vero  anno  1669’,  since  the  painter  had  expressly  written  in  his  (very  much

damaged) caption to the title-page:
   ‘A year after He
   ... terrible threatenings in
   ... shape No. 2, was forced
   ... to sign a bond in blood.’
    The painter’s blunder in writing his Syngraphae - a blunder which I have been obliged to
assume in my attempted explanation - appears to me to be no less interesting than are the
actual bonds.
 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4022

 

      The  reader  will  long  ago  have  judged  this  whole  discussion

superfluous and the details concerned in it too unimportant. But the

matter gains a new interest if it is pursued in a certain direction.

      I  have  just  expressed  the  view  that,  when  the  painter  was

disagreeably surprised by the course taken by his illness, he invented

an earlier bond (the one in ink) in order to be able to maintain his

position with the reverend Fathers at Mariazell. Now I am writing for

readers who, although they believe in psycho-analysis, do not believe

in the Devil; and they might object that it was absurd for me to bring

such an accusation against the poor wretch - hunc miserum, as he is

called in the letter of introduction. For, they will say, the bond in blood

was just as much a product of his phantasy as the allegedly earlier

one in ink. In reality, no Devil appeared to him at all, and the whole

business of pacts with the Devil only existed in his imagination. I quite

realize this: the poor man cannot be denied the right to supplement his

original phantasy with a new one, if altered circumstances seem to

require it.

   But here, too, the matter goes further. After all, the two bonds were

not phantasies like the visions of the Devil. They were documents,

preserved,  according  to  the  assurances  of  the  copyist  and  the

deposition of the later Abbot Kilian, in the archives of Mariazell, for all

to  see  and  touch.  We  are  therefore  in  a  dilemma.  Either  we  must

assume  that  both  the  papers  which  were  supposed  to  have  been

given back to the painter through divine Grace were written by him at

the  time  when  he  needed  them;  or  else,  despite  all  the  solemn

assurances,  the  confirmatory  evidence  of  witnesses,  signed  and

sealed, and so on, we shall be obliged to deny the credibility of the

reverend Fathers of Mariazell and St. Lambert. I must admit that I am

unwilling to cast doubts on the Fathers. I am inclined to think, it is true,

that the compiler, in the interests of consistency, has falsified somethings  in  the  deposition  made  by  the  first  Abbot;  but  a  ‘secondary

revision’ such as this does not go much beyond what is carried out

even by modern lay historians, and at all events it was done in good

faith.  In  another  respect,  the  reverend  Fathers  have  established  a

good  claim  to  our  confidence.  As  I  have  said  already  there  was

nothing  to  prevent  them  from  suppressing  the  accounts  of  the

incompleteness of the cure and the continuance of the temptations.

And  even  the  description  of  the  scene  of  exorcism  in  the  Chapel,

which  one  might  have  viewed  with  some  apprehension,  is  soberly

written  and  inspires  belief.  So  there  is  nothing  for  it  but  to  lay  the

blame on the painter. No doubt he had the red bond with him when he

went to penitential prayer in the Chapel, and he produced it afterwards

as he came back to his spiritual assistants from his meeting with the

Demon.  Nor  need  it  have  been  the  same  paper  which  was  later

preserved in the archives, and, according to our construction, it may

have borne the date 1668 (nine years before the exorcism).

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4023

 

                                            V

 

              THE FURTHER COURSE OF THE NEUROSIS

 

But if this is so, we should be dealing not with a neurosis but with a

deception, and the painter would be a malingerer and forger instead of

a  sick  man  suffering  from  possession.  But  the  transitional  stages

between neurosis and malingering are, as we know, very fluid. Nor do

I see any difficulty in supposing that the painter wrote this paper and

the later one, and took them with him, in a peculiar state, similar to the

one in which he had his visions. Indeed there was no other course

open to him if he wished to carry into effect his phantasy of his pact

with the Devil and of his redemption.

   On the other hand, the diary written in Vienna, which he gave to the

clerics on his second visit to Mariazell, bears the stamp of veracity. It

undoubtedly affords us a deep insight into the motivation - or let usrather say, the exploitation - of the neurosis.

      The  entries  extend  from  the  time  of  the  successful  exorcism  till

January 13 of the following year, 1678.

   Until October 11 he felt very well in Vienna, where he lived with a

married  sister;  but  after  that  he  had  fresh  attacks,  with  visions,

convulsions, loss of consciousness and painful sensations, and these

finally led to his return to Mariazell in May, 1678.

   The story of his fresh illness falls into three phases. First, temptation

appeared  in  the  form  of  a  finely  dressed  cavalier,  who  tried  to

persuade him to throw away the document attesting his admission to

the  Brotherhood  of  the  Holy  Rosary.  He  resisted  this  temptation,

whereupon  the  same  thing  happened  next  day;  only  this  time  the

scene  was  laid  in  a  magnificently  decorated  hall  in  which  grand

gentlemen were dancing with beautiful ladies. The same cavalier who

had  tempted  him  before  made  a  proposal  to  him  connected  with

painting¹  and  promised  to  give  him  a  handsome  sum  of  money  in

return.  After  he  had  made  this  vision  disappear  by  prayer,  it  was

repeated once more a few days later, in a still more pressing form.

This time the cavalier sent one of the most beautiful of the ladies who

sat  at  the  banqueting  table  to  him  to  persuade  him  to  join  their

company,  and  he  had  difficulty  in  defending  himself  from  the

temptress.  Most  terrifying  of  all,  moreover,  was  the  vision  which

occurred soon after this. He saw a still more magnificent hall, in which

there was a ‘throne built up of gold pieces’. Cavaliers were standing

about awaiting the arrival of their King. The same person who had so

often  made  proposals  to  him  now  approached  him  and  summoned

him to ascend the throne, for they ‘wanted to have him for their King

and to honour him for ever’. This extravagant phantasy concluded the

first, perfectly transparent, phase of the story of his temptation.

 

   ¹ This passage is unintelligible to me.

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4024

 

   There was bound to be a revulsion against this. An ascetic reaction

reared its head. On October 20 a great light appeared, and a voicecame from it, making itself known as Christ, and commanded him to

forswear this wicked world and serve God in the wilderness for six

years. The painter clearly suffered more from these holy apparitions

than from the earlier demoniacal ones; it was only after two and a half

hours that he awoke from this attack. In the next attack the holy figure

surrounded  by  light  was  much  more  unfriendly.  He  issued  threats

against him for not having obeyed the divine behest and led him down

into  Hell  so  that  he  might  be  terrified  by  the  fate  of  the  damned.

Evidently, however, this failed in its effect, for the apparitions of the

figure  surrounded  by  light,  which  purported  to  be  Christ,  were

repeated  several  more  times.  Each  time  the  painter  underwent  an

absence and an ecstasy lasting for hours. In the grandest of these

ecstasies the figure surrounded by light took him first into a town in

whose streets people were perpetrating all the acts of darkness; and

then, in contrast, took him to a lovely meadow in which anchorites

were  leading  a  godly  life  and  were  receiving  tangible  evidence  of

God’s grace and care. There then appeared, instead of Christ, the

Holy  Mother  herself,  who,  reminding  him  of  what  she  had  already

done on his behalf, called on him to obey the command of her dear

Son. ‘Since he could not truly resolve so to do’, Christ appeared to him

again  the  next  day  and  upbraided  him  soundly  with  threats  and

promises. At last he gave way and made up his mind to leave the

world  and  to  do  what  was  required  of  him.  With  this  decision,  the

second phase ended. The painter states that from this time onwards

he had no more visions and no more temptations.

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4025

 

   Nevertheless, his resolution cannot have been firm enough or he

must have delayed its execution too long; for while he was in the midst

of his devotions, on December 26, in St. Stephen’s, catching sight of a

strapping  young  woman  accompanied  by  a  smartly  dressed

gentleman, he could not fend off the thought that he might himself be

in this gentleman’s place. This called for punishment, and that very

evening it over took him like a thunderbolt. He saw himself in brightflames and sank down in a swoon. Attempts were made to rouse him

but he rolled about in the room till blood flowed from his mouth and

nose. He felt that he was surrounded by heat and noisome smells,

and he heard a voice say that he had been condemned to this state as

a punishment for his vain and idle thoughts. Later he was scourged

with ropes by Evil Spirits, and was told that he would be tormented like

this every day until he had decided to enter the Order of Anchorites.

These experiences continued up to the last entry in his diary (January

13).

   We see how our unfortunate painter’s phantasies of temptation were

succeeded by ascetic ones and finally by phantasies of punishment.

The end of his tale of suffering we know already. In May he went to

Mariazell, told his story of an earlier bond written in black ink, to which

he explicitly attributed his continued torment by the Devil, received this

bond back, too, and was cured.

      During  his  second  stay  there  he  painted  the  pictures  which  are

copied in the Trophaeum. Then he took a step which was in keeping

with the demands of the ascetic phase of his diary. He did not, it is

true, go into the wilderness to become an anchorite, but he joined the

Order of the Brothers Hospitallers: religiosus factus est.

   Reading the diary, we gain insight into another part of the story. It

will  be  remembered  that  the  painter  signed  a  bond  with  the  Devil

because  after  his  father’s  death,  feeling  depressed  and  unable  to

work,  he  was  worried  about  making  a  livelihood.  These  factors  of

depression,  inhibition  in  his  work  and  mourning  for  his  father  are

somehow  connected  with  one  another,  whether  in  a  simple  or  a

complicated way. Perhaps the reason why the apparitions of the Devil

were so over-generously furnished with breasts was that the Evil One

was meant to become his foster father. This hope was not fulfilled,

and the painter continued to be in a bad state. He could not work

properly, or he was out of luck and could not find enough employment.

The  village  priest’s  letter  of  introduction  speaks  of  him  as  ‘hunc

miserum omni auxilio destitutum’. He was thus not only in moral straits

but was suffering material want. In the account of his later visions, we

find  remarks  here  and  there  indicating  -  as  do  the  contents  of  the

scenes  described  -  that  even  after  the  successful  first  exorcism,

nothing had been changed in his situation. We come to know him as aman who fails in everything and who is therefore trusted by no one. In

his first vision the cavalier asked him ‘what he is going to do, since he

has no one to stand by him’. The first series of visions in Vienna tallied

completely with the wishful phantasies of a poor man, who had come

down in the world and who hungered for enjoyment: magnificent halls,

high living, a silver dinner-service and beautiful women. Here we find

what was missing in his relations with the Devil made good. At that

time he had been in a melancholia which made him unable to enjoy

anything and obliged him to reject the most attractive offers. After the

exorcism the melancholia seems to have been overcome and all his

worldly-minded desires had once more become active.

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4026

 

   In one of the ascetic visions he complained to his guide (Christ) that

nobody had any faith in him, so that he was unable to carry out the

commands laid upon him. The reply he was given is, unfortunately,

obscure to us: ‘Although they will not believe me, yet I know well what

has happened, but I am not able to declare it.’ Especially illuminating,

however, are the experiences which his heavenly Guide made him

have among the anchorites. He came to a cave in which an old man

had been sitting for the last sixty years, and in answer to a question he

learnt that this old man had been fed every day by God’s angels. And

then  he  saw  for  himself  how  an  angel  brought  the  old  man  food:

‘Three dishes with food, a loaf, a dumpling and some drink.’ After the

anchorite  had  eaten,  the  angel  collected  everything  and  carried  it

away. We can see what the temptation was which the pious visions

offered the painter: they were meant to induce him to adopt a mode of

existence in which he need no longer worry about sustenance. The

utterances of Christ in the last vision are also worthy of note. After

threatening  that,  if  he  did  not  prove  amenable,  something  would

happen which would oblige him and the people to believe [in it], Christ

gave him a direct warning that ‘I should not heed the people; even if

they  were  to  persecute  me  or  give  me  no  help,  God  would  not

abandon me’.   Christoph Haizmann was enough of an artist and a child of the world

to find it difficult to renounce this sinful world. Nevertheless, in view of

his helpless position, he did so in the end. He entered a Holy Order.

With this, both his internal struggle and his material need came to an

end.  In  his  neurosis,  this  outcome  was  reflected  in  the  fact  of  his

seizures  and  visions  being  brought  to  an  end  by  the  return  of  an

alleged first bond. Actually, both portions of his demonological illness

had the same meaning. He wanted all along simply to make his life

secure. He tried first to achieve this with the help of the Devil at the

cost of his salvation; and when this failed and had to be given up, he

tried to achieve it with the help of the clergy at the cost of his freedom

and most of the possibilities of enjoyment in life. Perhaps he himself

was only a poor devil who simply had no luck; perhaps he was too

ineffective or too untalented to make a living, and was one of those

types of people who are known as ‘eternal sucklings’ - who cannot

tear themselves away from the blissful situation at the mother’s breast,

and who, all through their lives, persist in a demand to be nourished

by someone else. - And so it was that, in this history of his illness, he

followed the path which led from his father, by way of the Devil as a

father substitute, to the pious Fathers of the Church.

   To superficial observation Haizmann’s neurosis appears to be a

masquerade  which  overlays  a  part  of  the  serious,  if  commonplace,

struggle  for  existence.  This  is  not  always  the  case,  but  it  is  not

infrequently so. Analysts often discover how unprofitable it is to treat a

business man who ‘though otherwise in good health, has for some

time shown signs of a neurosis’. The business catastrophe with which

he feels himself threatened throws up the neurosis as a by-product;

and this gives him the advantage of being able to conceal his worries

about  his  real  life  behind  his  symptoms.  But  apart  from  this  the

neurosis serves no useful purpose whatever, since it uses up forces

which would have been more profitably employed in dealing rationally

with the dangerous situation.

 


              A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis

                                                                                      4027

    In a far greater number of cases the neurosis is more autonomous

and more independent of the interests of self-preservation and self-

maintenance. In the conflict which creates the neurosis, what are at

stake are either solely libidinal interests or libidinal interests in intimate

connections  with  self-preservative  ones.  In  all  three  instances  the

dynamics of the neurosis are the same. A dammed-up libido which

cannot be satisfied in reality succeeds, with the help of a regression to

old fixations, in finding discharge through the repressed unconscious.

The sick man’s ego, in so far as it can extract a ‘gain from illness’ out

of this process, countenances the neurosis, although there can be no

doubt of its injuriousness in its economic aspect.

   Nor would our painter’s wretched situation in life have provoked a

demonological neurosis in him if his material need had not intensified

his longing for his father. After his melancholia and the Devil had been

disposed  of,  however,  he  still  had  to  face  a  struggle  between  his

libidinal enjoyment of life and his realization that the interests of self-

preservation called imperatively for renunciation and asceticism. It is

interesting to see that the painter was very well aware of the unity of

the two portions of his illness, for he attributed both to the bonds which

he had signed with the Devil. On the other hand, he made no sharp

distinction between the operations of the Evil Spirit and those of the

Divine  Powers.  He  had  only  one  description  for  both:  they  were

manifestations of the Devil.

                                                                                       4028

 

        REMARKS ON THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF DREAM-

                                  INTERPRETATION

                                        (1923)

 


                                                                                      4029

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4030

 

        REMARKS ON THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF DREAM-

                                  INTERPRETATION

 

The accidental circumstance that the last editions of my Interpretation

of Dreams (1900a) have been printed from stereotype plates has led

me to issue the following remarks in an independent form, instead of

introducing them into the text as modifications or additions.

 

                                            I

 

   In interpreting a dream during an analysis a choice lies open to one

between several technical procedures.

   One can (a) proceed chronologically and get the dreamer to bring up

his associations to the elements of the dream in the order in which

those  elements  occurred  in  his  account  of  the  dream.  This  is  the

original,  classical  method,  which  I  still  regard  as  the  best  if  one  is

analysing one’s own dreams.

      Or  one  can  (b)  start  the  work  of  interpretation  from  some  one

particular element of the dream which one picks out from the middle of

it. For instance, one can choose the most striking piece of it, or the

piece which shows the greatest clarity or sensory intensity; or, again,

one  can  start  off  from  some  spoken  words  in  the  dream,  in  the

expectation  that  they  will  lead  to  the  recollection  of  some  spokenwords in waking life.

   Or one can (c) begin by entirely disregarding the manifest content

and  instead  ask  the  dreamer  what  events  of  the  previous  day  are

associated in his mind with the dream he has just described.

      Finally,  one  can  (d),  if  the  dreamer  is  already  familiar  with  the

technique of interpretation, avoid giving him any instructions and leave

it to him to decide with which associations to the dream he shall begin.

   I cannot lay it down that one or the other of these techniques is

preferable or in general yields better results.

 


      Remarks On The Theory And Practice Of Dream-Interpretation

                                                                                      4031

 

                                            II

 

   What is of far greater importance is the question of whether the work

of interpretation proceeds under a pressure of resistance which is high

or low - a point on which the analyst never remains long in doubt. If

the pressure is high, one may perhaps succeed in discovering what

the  things  are  with  which  the  dream  is  concerned,  but  one  cannot

make out what it says about these things. It is as though one were

trying to listen to a conversation taking place at a distance or in a very

low voice. In that case, one can feel confident that there is not much

prospect of collaborating with the dreamer, one decides not to bother

too much about it and not to give him much help, and one is content to

put before him a few translations of symbols that seem probable.

   The majority of dreams in a difficult analysis are of this kind; so that

one cannot learn much from them about the nature and mechanism of

dream-formation. Least of all can one learn anything from them upon

the  recurring  question  of  where  the  dream’s  wish-fulfilment  may  lie

hidden. When the pressure of resistance is quite extremely high, one

meets with the phenomenon of the dreamer’s associations broadening

instead  of  deepening.  In  place  of  the  desired  associations  to  the

dream  that  has  already  been  narrated,  there  appear  a  constant

succession  of  new  fragments  of  dream,  which  in  their  turn  remain

without associations.   It is only when the resistance is kept within moderate limits that the

familiar  picture  of  the  work  of  interpretation  comes  into  view:  the

dreamer’s associations begin by diverging widely from the manifest

elements, so that a great number of subjects and ranges of ideas are

touched  on,  after  which,  a  second  series  of  associations  quickly

converge from these on to the dream-thoughts that are being looked

for.  When  this  is  so,  collaboration  between  the  analyst  and  the

dreamer  becomes  possible;  whereas  under  a  high  pressure  of

resistance it would not even be of any advantage.

   A number of dreams which occur during analyses are untranslatable

even though they do not actually make much show of the resistance

that  is  there.  They  represent  free  renderings  of  the  latent  dream-

thoughts  behind  them  and  are  comparable  to  successful  creative

writings  which  have  been  artistically  worked  over  and  in  which  the

basic themes are still recognizable though they have been subjected

to any amount of re-arrangement and transformation. Dreams of this

kind  serve  in  the  treatment  as  an  introduction  to  thoughts  and

memories of the dreamer without their own actual content coming into

account.

 


      Remarks On The Theory And Practice Of Dream-Interpretation

                                                                                      4032

 

                                            III

 

   It is possible to distinguish between dreams from above and dreams

from below, provided the distinction is not made too sharply. Dreams

from  below  are  those  which  are  provoked  by  the  strength  of  an

unconscious  (repressed)  wish  which  has  found  a  means  of  being

represented in some of the day’s residues. They may be regarded as

inroads  of  the  repressed  into  waking  life.  Dreams  from  above

correspond  to  thoughts  or  intentions  of  the  day  before  which  have

contrived  during  the  night  to  obtain  reinforcement  from  repressed

material that is debarred from the ego. When this is so, analysis as a

rule  disregards  this  unconscious  ally  and  succeeds  in  inserting  the

latent  dream-thoughts  into  the  texture  of  waking  thought.  Thisdistinction calls for no modification in the theory of dreams.

 

                                            IV

 

   In some analyses, or in some periods of an analysis, a divorce may

become apparent between dream-life and waking life, like the divorce

between the activity of phantasy and waking life which is found in the

‘continued  story’  (a  novel  in  day-dreams).  In  that  case  one  dream

leads off from another, taking as its central point some element which

was lightly touched upon in its predecessor, and so on. But we find far

more frequently that dreams are not attached to one another but are

interpolated into a successive series of portions of waking thought.

 


      Remarks On The Theory And Practice Of Dream-Interpretation

                                                                                      4033

 

                                            V

 

   The interpretation of a dream falls into two phases: the phase in

which it is translated and the phase in which it is judged or has its

value assessed. During the first phase one must not allow oneself to

be influenced by any consideration whatever for the second phase. It

is  as  though  one  had  before  one  a  chapter  from  some  work  in  a

foreign language - by Livy, for instance. The first thing one wants to

know is what Livy says in the chapter; and it is only after this that the

discussion  arises  of  whether  what  one  has  read  is  a  historical

narrative or a legend or a digression on the part of the author.

   What conclusions can one draw from a correctly translated dream? I

have  an  impression  that  analytic  practice  has  not  always  avoided

errors  and  over-estimations  on  this  point,  partly  owing  to  an

exaggerated respect for the ‘mysterious unconscious’. It is only too

easy to forget that a dream is as a rule merely a thought like any

other,  made  possible  by  a  relaxation  of  the  censorship  and  by

unconscious  reinforcement,  and  distorted  by  the  operation  of  the

censorship and by unconscious revision.

   Let us take as an example the so-called dreams of recovery. If apatient has had a dream of this kind, in which he seems to abandon

the restrictions of his neurosis - if, for instance, he overcomes some

phobia or gives up some emotional attachment - we are inclined to

think that he has made a great step forward, that he is ready to take

his place in a new state of life, that he has begun to reckon on his

recovery, etc. This may often be true, but quite as often such dreams

of recovery only have the value of dreams of convenience: they signify

a wish to be well at last, in order to avoid another portion of the work

of analysis which is felt to lie ahead. In this sense, dreams of recovery

very frequently occur, for instance, when the patient is about to enter

upon  a  new  and  disagreeable  phase  of  the  transference.  He  is

behaving  in  this  just  like  some  neurotics  who  after  a  few  hours  of

analysis declare they have been cured - because they want to escape

all the unpleasantness that is bound to come up for discussion in the

analysis.  Sufferers  from  war  neuroses,  too,  who  gave  up  their

symptoms  because  the  therapy  adopted  by  the  army  doctors

succeeded in making being ill even more uncomfortable than serving

at the front - these sufferers, too, were following the same economic

laws  and  in  both  cases  alike  the  cures  have  proved  to  be  only

temporary.

 


      Remarks On The Theory And Practice Of Dream-Interpretation

                                                                                      4034

 

                                            VI

 

   It is by no means easy to arrive at general conclusions upon the

value of correctly translated dreams. If a conflict due to ambivalence is

taking  place  in  a  patient,  then  the  emergence  in  him  of  a  hostile

thought  certainly  does  not  imply  a  permanent  overcoming  of  his

affectionate impulse - that is to say, a resolution of the conflict: neither

does any such implication follow from a dream with a similarly hostile

content. During a conflict such as this arising from ambivalence, there

are  often  two  dreams  every  night,  each  of  them  representing  an

opposite  attitude.  In  that  case  the  progress  lies  in  the  fact  that  a

complete isolation of the two contrasted impulses has been achievedand  that  each  of  them,  with  the  help  of  its  unconscious

reinforcements, can be followed and understood to its extreme limits.

And if it sometimes happens that one of the two ambivalent dreams

has been forgotten, one must not be deceived into assuming that a

decision has been made in favour of the one side. The fact that one of

the dreams has been forgotten shows, it is true, that for the moment

one tendency is in the ascendant, but that is true only of the one day,

and may be changed. The next night may perhaps bring the opposite

expression into the foreground. The true state of the conflict can only

be  determined  by  taking  into  account  all  the  other  indications,

including those of waking life.

 


      Remarks On The Theory And Practice Of Dream-Interpretation

                                                                                      4035

 

                                          VII

 

   The question of the value to be assigned to dreams is intimately

related to the other question of their susceptibility to influence from

‘suggestion’ by the physician. Analysts may at first be alarmed at the

mention of this possibility. But on further reflection this alarm will give

place to the realization that the influencing of the patient’s dreams is

no more a blunder on the part of the analyst or disgrace to him than

the guiding of the patient’s conscious thoughts.

   The fact that the manifest content of dreams is influenced by the

analytic  treatment  stands  in  no  need  of  proof.  It  follows  from  our

knowledge that dreams take their start from waking life and work over

material derived from it. Occurrences during analytic treatment are of

course among the impressions of waking life and soon become some

of  the  most  powerful  of  these.  So  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that

patients should dream of things which the analyst has discussed with

them and of which he has aroused expectations in them. At least it is

no more to be wondered at than what is implied in the familiar fact of

‘experimental’ dreams.

   But from here our interest proceeds to the question whether the

latent dream-thoughts that have to be arrived at by interpretation canalso be influenced or suggested by the analyst. And to this the answer

must once more be that they obviously can be. For a portion of these

latent dream-thoughts correspond to preconscious thought-formations,

perfectly capable of being conscious, with which the dreamer might

quite well have reacted to the physician’s remarks in his waking state

too  -  whether  the  patient’s  reactions  were  in  harmony  with  those

remarks or in opposition to them. In fact, if we replace the dream by

the dream-thoughts which it contains, the question of how far one can

suggest dreams coincides with the more general question of how far a

patient in analysis is accessible to suggestion.

   On the mechanism of dream-formation itself, on the dream-work in

the strict sense of the word, one never exercises any influence: of that

one may be quite sure.

   Besides that portion of the dream which we have already discussed

-  the  preconscious  dream-thoughts  -  every  true  dream  contains

indications  of  the  repressed  wishful  impulses  to  which  it  owes  the

possibility of its formation. The doubter will reply that they appear in

the dream because the dreamer knows that he ought to produce them

- that they are expected by the analyst. The analyst himself will rightly

think otherwise.

 


      Remarks On The Theory And Practice Of Dream-Interpretation

                                                                                      4036

 

   If a dream brings up situations that can be interpreted as referring to

scenes from the dreamer’s past, it seems especially important to ask

whether the physician’s influence can also play a part in such contents

of the dream as these. And this question is most urgent of all in the

case of what are called ‘corroborative’ dreams, dreams which, as it

were, ‘tag along behind’ the analysis. With some patients these are

the  only  dreams  that  one  obtains.  Such  patients  reproduce  the

forgotten experiences of their childhood only after one has constructed

them  from  their  symptoms,  associations  and  other  signs  and  has

propounded  these  constructions  to  them.  Then  follow  the

corroborative  dreams,  concerning  which,  however,  the  doubt  arises

whether they may not be entirely without evidential value, since theymay have been imagined in compliance with the physician’s words

instead  of  having  been  brought  to  light  from  the  dreamer’s

unconscious.  This  ambiguous  position  cannot  be  escaped  in  the

analysis, since with these patients unless one interprets, constructs

and  propounds,  one  never  obtains  access  to  what  is  repressed  in

them.

      The  situation  takes  a  favourable  turn  if  the  analysis  of  a

corroborative  dream  of  this  sort,  which  ‘tags  along  behind’,  is

immediately  followed  by  feelings  of  remembering  what  has  hitherto

been  forgotten.  But  even  then  the  sceptic  can  fall  back  upon  an

assertion that the recollections are illusory. Moreover, such feelings

are for the most part absent. The repressed material is only allowed

through bit by bit; and every lack of completeness inhibits or delays

the  forming  of  a  sense  of  conviction.  Furthermore,  what  we  are

dealing with may not be the reproduction of a real and forgotten event

but the bringing forward of an unconscious phantasy, about which no

feeling of memory is ever to be expected, though the possibility may

sometimes remain of a sense of subjective conviction.

 


      Remarks On The Theory And Practice Of Dream-Interpretation

                                                                                      4037

 

   Is it possible, then, that corroborative dreams are really the result of

suggestion, that they are ‘obliging’ dreams? The patients who produce

only corroborative dreams are the same patients in whom doubt plays

the  principal  part  in  resistance.  One  makes  no  attempt  at  shouting

down  this  doubt  by  means  of  one’s  authority  or  at  reducing  it  by

arguments. It must persist until it is brought to an end in the further

course of the analysis. The analyst, too, may himself retain a doubt of

the same kind in some particular instances. What makes him certain

in the end is precisely the complication of the problem before him,

which  is  like  the  solution  of  a  jig-saw  puzzle.  A  coloured  picture,

pasted upon a thin sheet of wood and fitting exactly into a wooden

frame, is cut into a large number of pieces of the most irregular and

crooked shapes. If one succeeds in arranging the confused heap of

fragments,  each  of  which  bears  upon  it  an  unintelligible  piece  ofdrawing, so that the picture acquires a meaning, so that there is no

gap anywhere in the design and so that the whole fits into the frame -

if all these conditions are fulfilled, then one knows that one has solved

the puzzle and that there is no alternative solution.

   An analogy of this kind can of course have no meaning for a patient

while the work of analysis is still uncompleted. At this point I recall a

discussion  which  I  was  led  into  with  a  patient  whose  exceptionally

ambivalent  attitude  was  expressed  in  the  most  intense  compulsive

doubt. He did not dispute my interpretations of his dreams and was

very much struck by their agreement with the hypotheses which I put

forward. But he asked whether these corroborative dreams might not

be an expression of his compliance towards me. I pointed out that the

dreams had also brought up a quantity of details of which I could have

had no suspicion and that his behaviour in the treatment apart from

this had not been precisely characterized by compliance. Whereupon

he switched over to another theory and asked whether his narcissistic

wish to be cured might not have caused him to produce these dreams,

since, after all, I had held out to him a prospect of recovery if he were

able to accept my constructions. I could only reply that I had not yet

come across any such mechanism of dream-formation. But a decision

was reached by another road. He recollected some dreams which he

had  had  before  starting  analysis  and  indeed  before  he  had  known

anything about it; and the analysis of these dreams, which were free

from all suspicion of suggestion, led to the same interpretations as the

later ones. It is true that his obsession for contradiction once more

found a way out in the idea that the earlier dreams had been less clear

than those that occurred during the treatment; but I was satisfied with

their similarity. I think that in general it is a good plan occasionally to

bear in mind the fact that people were in the habit of dreaming before

there was such a thing as psycho-analysis.

 


      Remarks On The Theory And Practice Of Dream-Interpretation

                                                                                      4038

 

                                          VIII

       It  may  well  be  that  dreams  during  psycho-analysis  succeed  in

bringing to light what is repressed to a greater extent than dreams

outside that situation. But it cannot be proved, since the two situations

are  not  comparable;  the  employment  of  dreams  in  analysis  is

something very remote from their original purpose. On the other hand,

it cannot be doubted that within an analysis far more of the repressed

is  brought  to  light  in  connection  with  dreams  than  by  any  other

method.  In  order  to  account  for  this,  there  must  be  some  motive

power, some unconscious force, which is better able to lend support to

the purposes of analysis during the state of sleep than at other times.

What  is  here  in  question  cannot  well  be  any  factor  other  than  the

patient’s  compliance  towards  the  analyst  which  is  derived  from  his

parental complex - in other words, the positive portion of what we call

the transference; and in fact, in many dreams which recall what has

been forgotten and repressed, it is impossible to discover any other

unconscious wish to which the motive force for the formation of the

dream can be attributed. So that if anyone wishes to maintain that

most of the dreams that can be made use of in analysis are obliging

dreams  and  owe  their  origin  to  suggestion,  nothing  can  be  said

against that opinion from the point of view of analytic theory. In that

case  I  need  only  add  a  reference  to  what  I  have  said  in  my

Introductory Lectures, where I have dealt with the relation between

transference and suggestion and shown how little the trustworthiness

of  our  results  is  affected  by  a  recognition  of  the  operation  of

suggestion in our sense.

      In Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle (1920g)  I  have  dealt  with  the

economic  problem  of  how  what  are  in  every  respect  distressing

experiences of the early infantile sexual period can succeed in forcing

their  way  through  to  some  kind  of  reproduction.  I  was  obliged  to

ascribe to them an extraordinarily strong upward drive in the shape of

the ‘compulsion to repeat’ - a force able to overcome the repression

which, in obedience to the pleasure principle, weighs down upon them

- though not until ‘the work of treatment has gone half-way to meet it

and  has  loosened  the  repression’.  Here  we  may  add  that  it  is  the

positive transference that gives this assistance to the compulsion to

repeat. Thus an alliance has been made between the treatment and

the  compulsion  to  repeat,  an  alliance  which  is  directed  in  the  firstinstance  against  the  pleasure  principle  but  of  which  the  ultimate

purpose is the establishment of the dominion of the reality principle.

As I have shown in the passage to which I am referring, it happens

only too often that the compulsion to repeat throws over its obligations

under this alliance and is not content with the return of the repressed

merely in the form of dream-pictures.

 


      Remarks On The Theory And Practice Of Dream-Interpretation

                                                                                      4039

 

                                            IX

 

   So far as I can at present see, dreams that occur in a traumatic

neurosis are the only genuine exceptions, and punishment dreams are

the  only apparent  exceptions,  to  the  rule  that  dreams  are  directed

towards wish-fulfilment. In the latter class of dreams we are met by the

remarkable fact that actually nothing belonging to the latent dream-

thoughts  is  taken  up  into  the  manifest  content  of  the  dream.

Something quite different appears instead, which must be described

as a reaction-formation against the dream-thoughts, a rejection and

complete contradiction of them. Such offensive action as this against

the dream can only be ascribed to the critical agency of the ego and it

must  therefore  be  assumed  that  the  latter,  provoked  by  the

unconscious wish-fulfilment, has been temporarily re-established even

during  the  sleeping  state.  It  might  have  reacted  to  the  undesirable

content of the dream by waking up; but it has found a means, by the

construction of the punishment dream, of avoiding an interruption of

sleep.

      For  instance,  in  the  case  of  the  well-known  dreams  of  the  poet

Rosegger which I discussed in The Interpretation of Dreams, we must

suspect the existence of a suppressed version with an arrogant and

boastful  text,  whereas  the  actual  dream  said  to  him:  ‘You  are  an

incompetent journeyman tailor.’ It would, of course, be useless to look

for a repressed wishful impulse as the motive power for a manifest

dream such as this; one must be content with the fulfilment of the wish

for self-criticism. 


      Remarks On The Theory And Practice Of Dream-Interpretation

                                                                                      4040

 

   A dream-structure of this kind will excite less astonishment if one

considers how frequently dream-distortion, acting in the service of the

censorship, replaces a particular element by something that is in some

sense or other its opposite or contrary. It is only a short step from

there to the replacement of a characteristic portion of the content of

the dream by a defensive contradiction, and one further step will lead

to  the  whole  objectionable  dream-content  being  replaced  by  the

punishment  dream.  I  should  like  to  give  a  couple  of  characteristic

examples of the intermediate phase in the falsification of the manifest

content.

   Here is an extract from the dream of a girl with a strong fixation to

her father, who had difficulty in talking during the analysis. She was

sitting in a room with a girl friend, and dressed only in a kimono. A

gentleman came in and she felt embarrassed. But the gentleman said:

‘Why, this is the girl we saw once before dressed so nicely!’ - The

gentleman stood for me, and, further back, for her father. But we can

make nothing of the dream unless we make up our mind to replace

the most important element in the gentleman’s speech by its contrary:

‘This is the girl I saw once before undressed and who looked so nice

then!’ When she was a child of three or four she had for some time

slept in the same room as her father and everything goes to suggest

that she used then to throw back her clothes in her sleep to please her

father. The subsequent repression of her pleasure in exhibiting herself

was the motive for her secretiveness in the treatment, her dislike of

showing herself openly.

   And here is another scene from the same dream. She was reading

her own case history, which she had before her in print. In it was a

statement  that  ‘a  young  man  murdered  his fiancée  -  cocoa  -  that

comes under anal erotism.’ This last phrase was a thought that she

had in the dream at the mention of cocoa. - The interpretation of this

piece of the dream was even more difficult than the former one. It

emerged at last that before going to sleep she had been reading my‘History of an Infantile Neurosis’ (1918b), the central point of which is

the real or imagined observation by a patient of his parents copulating.

She had already once before related this case history to her own, and

this was not the only indication that in her case as well there was a

question  of  an  observation  of  the  same  kind.  The  young  man

murdering his fiancée was a clear reference to a sadistic view of the

scene of copulation. But the next element, the cocoa, was very remote

from it. Her only association to cocoa was that her mother used to say

that cocoa gave one a headache, and she maintained that she had

heard the same thing from other women. Moreover, she had at one

time identified herself with her mother by means of headaches like

hers. Now I could find no link between the two elements of the dream

except by supposing that she wanted to make a diversion from the

consequences of the observation of coitus. No, she was saying, coitus

had nothing to do with the procreation of children; children came from

something one ate (as they do in fairy tales); and the mention of anal

erotism,  which  looks  like  an  attempt  in  the  dream  at  interpretation,

supplemented the infantile theory which she had called to her help, by

adding anal birth to it.

 


      Remarks On The Theory And Practice Of Dream-Interpretation

                                                                                      4041

 

                                            X

 

   Astonishment is sometimes expressed at the fact that the dreamer’s

ego can appear two or more times in the manifest dream, once as

himself and again disguised behind the figures of other people. During

the course of the construction of the dream, the secondary revision

has  evidently  sought  to  obliterate  this  multiplicity  of  the  ego,  which

cannot fit in with any possible scenic situation; but it is re-established

by  the  work  of  interpretation.  In  itself  this  multiplicity  is  no  more

remarkable  than  the  multiple  appearance  of  the  ego  in  a  waking

thought, especially when the ego divides itself into subject and object,

puts one part of itself as an observing and critical agency in contrast to

the  other,  or  compares  its  present  nature  with  its  recollected  past,which was also ego once; for instance, in such sentences as ‘When I

think what I’ve done to this man’ or ‘When I think that I too was a child

once’. But I should reject as a meaningless and unjustifiable piece of

speculation the notion that all figures that appear in a dream are to be

regarded as fragmentations and representatives of the dreamer’s own

ego.  It  is  enough  that  we  should  keep  firmly  to  the  fact  that  the

separation of the ego from an observing, critical, punishing agency (an

ego ideal) must be taken into account in the interpretation of dreams

as well.

                                                                                       4042

 

    SOME ADDITIONAL NOTES ON DREAM-INTERPRETATION AS

                                      A WHOLE

                                        (1925)

 


                                                                                      4043

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4044

 

    SOME ADDITIONAL NOTES ON DREAM-INTERPRETATION AS

                                      A WHOLE

 

              (A) THE LIMITS TO THE POSSIBILITY OF INTERPRETATION

 

      It  may  be  asked  whether  it  is  possible  to  give  a  complete  and

assured  translation  into  the  language  of  waking  life  (that  is,  an

interpretation) of every product of dream-life. This question will not be

treated here in the abstract but with reference to the conditions under

which one works at interpreting dreams.

   Our mental activities pursue either a useful aim or an immediate

yield of pleasure. In the former case what we are dealing with are

intellectual judgements, preparations for action or the conveyance of

information  to  other  people.  In  the  latter  case  we  describe  these

activities as play or phantasy. What is useful is itself (as is well known)

only a circuitous path to pleasurable satisfaction. Now, dreaming is an

activity of the second kind, which is indeed, from the point of view of

evolution,  the  earlier  one.  It  is  misleading  to  say  that  dreams  are

concerned with the tasks of life before us or seek to find a solution for

the problems of our daily work. That is the business of preconscious

thought. Useful work of this kind is as remote from dreams as is any

intention of conveying information to another person. When a dream

deals with a problem of actual life, it solves it in the manner of anirrational wish and not in the manner of a reasonable reflection. There

is only one useful task, only one function, that can be ascribed to a

dream, and that is the guarding of sleep from interruption. A dream

may be described as a piece of phantasy working on behalf of the

maintenance of sleep.

 


        Some Additional Notes On Dream-Interpretation As A Whole

                                                                                      4045

 

   It follows from this that it is on the whole a matter of indifference to

the sleeping ego what may be dreamt during the night so long as the

dream performs its task, and that those dreams best fulfil their function

about which one knows nothing after waking. If it so often happens

otherwise, if we remember dreams - even after years and decades - it

always  means  that  there  has  been  an  irruption  of  the  repressed

unconscious  into  the  normal  ego.  Without  this  concession  to  it  the

repressed would not have consented to lend its help to the removal of

the threat of disturbance to sleep. We know that it is the fact of this

irruption that gives dreams their importance for psychopathology. If we

can uncover a dream’s motivating force, we shall obtain unsuspected

information about the repressed impulses in the unconscious; and on

the  other  hand,  if  we  can  undo  its  distortions,  we  shall  overhear

preconscious thought taking place in states of internal reflection which

would not have attracted consciousness to themselves during the day-

time.

   No one can practise the interpretation of dreams as an isolated

activity: it remains a part of the work of analysis. In analysis we direct

our interest according to necessity, now to the preconscious content of

the dream and now to the unconscious contribution to its formation;

and we often neglect the one element in favour of the other. Nor would

it be of any avail for anyone to endeavour to interpret dreams outside

analysis.  He  would  not  succeed  in  escaping  the  conditions  of  the

analytic situation; and if he worked at his own dreams, he would be

undertaking  a  self-analysis.  This  comment  would  not  apply  to

someone who did without the dreamer’s collaboration and sought to

interpret dreams by intuitive insight. But dream-interpretation of such akind,  without  reference  to  the  dreamer’s  associations,  would  in  the

most favourable case remain a piece of unscientific virtuosity of very

doubtful value.

   If one practises dream-interpretation according to the sole justifiable

technical procedure, one soon notices that success depends entirely

upon the tension of resistance between the awakened ego and the

repressed  unconscious.  Work  under  a  ‘high  pressure  of  resistance’

demands (as I have explained elsewhere) a different attitude on the

part of the analyst from work under a low pressure. In analysis one

has for long periods at a time to deal with strong resistances which are

still unknown to one and which it will in any case be impossible to

overcome so long as they remain unknown. It is therefore not to he

wondered at that only a certain portion of a patient’s dream-products

can  be  translated  and  made  use  of,  and,  even  at  that,  most  often

incompletely.  Even  if,  owing  to  one’s  own  experience,  one  is  in  a

position to understand many dreams to the interpretation of which the

dreamer  has  contributed  little,  one  must  always  remember  that  the

certainty of such interpretations remains in doubt and one hesitates to

press one’s conjectures upon the patient.

 


        Some Additional Notes On Dream-Interpretation As A Whole

                                                                                      4046

 

   Critical voices will now be raised. It will be objected that, since it is

not possible to interpret every dream that is dealt with, one should

cease asserting more than one can establish and should be content to

say  that some  dreams  can  be  shown  by  interpretation  to  have  a

meaning but that as to the rest we are in ignorance. But the very fact

that success in interpretation depends upon the resistance absolves

the analyst from the necessity for such modesty. He may have the

experience of a dream that was at first unintelligible becoming clear

during the very same hour after some fortunate remark has got rid of

one of the dreamer’s resistances. A portion of the dream which the

patient  had  hitherto  forgotten  may  suddenly  occur  to  him  and  may

bring the key to the interpretation; or a new association may emerge

which may throw light upon the darkness. It sometimes happens, too,that, after months or years of analytic labour, one returns to a dream

which  at  the  beginning  of  the  treatment  seemed  meaningless  and

incomprehensible but which is now, in the light of knowledge obtained

in the meantime, completely elucidated. And if one further takes into

consideration the argument from the theory of dreams that the model

dream-products of children invariably have a clear meaning and are

easy to interpret, then it will be justifiable to assert that dreams are

quite  generally  mental  structures  that  are  capable  of  interpretation,

though the situation may not always allow of an interpretation being

reached.

 


        Some Additional Notes On Dream-Interpretation As A Whole

                                                                                      4047

 

   When the interpretation of a dream has been discovered, it is not

always easy to decide whether it is a ‘complete’ one - that is, whether

further preconscious thoughts may not also have found expression in

the same dream. In that case we must consider the meaning proved

which is based on the dreamer’s associations and our estimate of the

situation,  without  on  that  account  feeling  bound  to  reject  the  other

meaning.  It  remains  possible,  though  unproven;  one  must  become

accustomed to a dream being thus capable of having many meanings.

Moreover,  the  blame  for  this  is  not  always  to  be  laid  upon

incompleteness of the work of interpretation; it may just as well be

inherent  in  the  latent  dream-thoughts  themselves.  Indeed  it  may

happen  in  waking  life,  quite  apart  from  the  situation  of  dream-

interpretation, that one is uncertain whether some remark that one has

heard or some piece of information that one has received is open to

construction this way or that, or whether it is hinting at something else

beyond its obvious meaning.

      One  interesting  occurrence  which  has  been  insufficiently

investigated is to be seen where the same manifest dream-content

gives simultaneous expression to a set of concrete ideas and to an

abstract line of thought based upon them. It is of course difficult for the

dream-work to find a means for representing abstract thoughts.

         Some Additional Notes On Dream-Interpretation As A Whole

                                                                                      4048

 

            (B) MORAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE CONTENT OF DREAMS

 

      In  the  introductory  chapter  of  this  book  (which  discusses  ‘The

Scientific  Literature  Dealing  with  the  Problem  of  Dreams’)  I  have

shown the way in which writers have reacted to what is felt as the

distressing  fact  that  the  unbridled  content  of  dreams  is  so  often  at

odds  with  the  moral  sense  of  the  dreamer.  (I  deliberately  avoid

speaking  of  ‘criminal’  dreams,  as  such  a  description,  which  would

overstep  the  limits  of  psychological  interest,  seems  to  me  quite

uncalled-for.) The immoral character of dreams has naturally provided

a fresh motive for denying them any psychical value: if dreams are the

meaningless product of disordered mental activity, then there can be

no ground for assuming responsibility for their apparent content.

   The problem of responsibility for the manifest content of dreams has

been  fundamentally  shifted  and  indeed  disposed  of  by  the

explanations given in my Interpretation of Dreams.

   We know now that the manifest content is a deception, a façade. It

is not worth while to submit it to an ethical examination or to take its

breaches of morality any more seriously than its breaches of logic or

mathematics. When the ‘content’ of the dream is spoken of, what must

be referred to can only be the content of the preconscious thoughts

and of the repressed wishful impulse which are revealed behind the

façade of the dream by the work of interpretation. Nevertheless, this

immoral façade has a question to put to us. We have heard that the

latent dream-thoughts have to submit to a severe censorship before

they are allowed access to the manifest content. How can it happen,

then, that this censorship, which makes difficulties over more trivial

things,  breaks  down  so  completely  over  these  manifestly  immoral

dreams?

 


        Some Additional Notes On Dream-Interpretation As A Whole

                                                                                      4049

 

   The answer is not easy to come by and may perhaps not seemcompletely satisfying. If, in the first place, one submits these dreams

to interpretation, one finds that some of them have given no offence to

the censorship because au fond the have no bad meaning. They are

innocent boastings or identifications that put up a mask of pretence;

they have not been censored because they do not tell the truth. But

others of them - and, it must be admitted, the majority - really mean

what they say and have undergone no distortion from the censorship.

They are an expression of immoral, incestuous and perverse impulses

or of murderous and sadistic lusts. The dreamer reacts to many of

these dreams by waking up in a fright, in which case the situation is no

longer obscure to us. The censorship has neglected its task, this has

been noticed too late, and the generation of anxiety is a substitute for

the distortion that has been omitted. In still other instances of such

dreams, even that expression of affect is absent. The objectionable

matter is carried along by the height of the sexual excitement that has

been reached during sleep, or it is viewed with the same tolerance

with which even a waking person can regard a fit of rage, an angry

mood or the indulgence in cruel phantasies.

   But our interest in the genesis of these manifestly immoral dreams is

greatly  reduced  when  we  find  from  analysis  that  the  majority  of

dreams - innocent dreams, dreams without affect and anxiety-dreams

-  are  revealed,  when  the  distortions  of  the  censorship  have  been

undone, as the fulfilments of immoral - egoistic, sadistic, perverse or

incestuous - wishful impulses. As in the world of waking life, these

masked  criminals  are  far  commoner  than  those  with  their  vizors

raised.  The  straightforward  dream  of  sexual  relations  with  one’s

mother, which Jocasta alludes to in the Oedipus Rex, is a rarity in

comparison with all the multiplicity of dreams which psycho-analysis

must interpret in the same sense.

 


        Some Additional Notes On Dream-Interpretation As A Whole

                                                                                      4050

 

   I have dealt so exhaustively in these pages with this characteristic of

dreams, which indeed provides the motive for their distortion, that I

can pass at once from this topic to the problem that lies before us:Must one assume responsibility for the content of one’s dreams? For

the sake of completeness, it should, however, be added that dreams

do  not  always  offer  immoral  wish-fulfilments,  but  often  energetic

reactions against them in the form of ‘punishment dreams’. In other

words, the dream-censorship cannot only express itself in distortions

and the generation of anxiety, but can go so far as to blot out the

immoral subject-matter completely and replace it by something else

that serves as an atonement, though it allows one to see what lies

behind. But the problem of responsibility for the immoral content of

dreams no longer exists for us as it formerly did for writers who knew

nothing of latent dream-thoughts and the repressed part of our mental

life. Obviously one must hold oneself responsible for the evil impulses

of  one’s  dreams.  What  else  is  one  to  do  with  them?  Unless  the

content of the dream (rightly understood) is inspired by alien spirits, it

is a part of my own being. If I seek to classify the impulses that are

present in me according to social standards into good and bad, I must

assume responsibility for both sorts; and if, in defence, I say that what

is unknown, unconscious and repressed in me is not my ‘ego’, then I

shall not be basing my position upon psycho-analysis, I shall not have

accepted its conclusions - and I shall perhaps be taught better by the

criticisms of my fellow-men, by the disturbances in my actions and the

confusion  of  my  feelings.  I  shall  perhaps  learn  that  what  I  am

disavowing not only ‘is’ in me but sometimes ‘acts’ from out of me as

well.

   It is true that in the metapsychological sense this bad repressed

content does not belong to my ‘ego’ - that is, assuming that I am a

morally  blameless  individual  -  but  to  an  ‘id’  upon  which  my  ego  is

seated. But this ego developed out of the id, it forms with it a single

biological unit, it is only a specially modified peripheral portion of it,

and it is subject to the influences and obeys the suggestions that arise

from the id. For any vital purpose, a separation of the ego from the id

would be a hopeless undertaking.

   Moreover, if I were to give way to my moral pride and tried to decree

that for purposes of moral valuation I might disregard the evil in the id

and need not make my ego responsible for it, what use would that be

to  me?  Experience  shows  me  that  I  nevertheless do  take  that

responsibility,  that  I  am  somehow  compelled  to  do  so.  Psycho-analysis  has  made  us  familiar  with  a  pathological  condition,

obsessional neurosis, in which the poor ego feels itself responsible for

all sorts of evil impulses of which it knows nothing, impulses which are

brought  up  against  it  in  consciousness  but  which  it  is  unable  to

acknowledge. Something of this is present in every normal person. It

is a remarkable fact that the more moral he is the more sensitive is his

‘conscience’. It is just as though we could say that the healthier a man

is, the more liable he is to contagions and to the effects of injuries.

This  is  no  doubt  because  conscience  is  itself  a  reaction-formation

against the evil that is perceived in the id. The more strongly the latter

is suppressed, the more active is the conscience.

 


        Some Additional Notes On Dream-Interpretation As A Whole

                                                                                      4051

 

      The  ethical  narcissism  of  humanity  should  rest  content  with  the

knowledge  that  the  fact  of  distortion  in  dreams,  as  well  as  the

existence of anxiety-dreams and punishment-dreams, afford just as

clear evidence of his moral nature as dream-interpretation gives of the

existence and strength of his evil nature. If anyone is dissatisfied with

this and would like to be ‘better’ than he was created, let him see

whether he can attain anything more in life than hypocrisy or inhibition.

      The  physician  will  leave  it  to  the  jurist  to  construct  for  social

purposes  a  responsibility  that  is  artificially  limited  to  the

metapsychological ego. It is notorious that the greatest difficulties are

encountered  by  the  attempts  to  derive  from  such  a  construction

practical  consequences  which  are  not  in  contradiction  to  human

feelings.

 


        Some Additional Notes On Dream-Interpretation As A Whole

                                                                                      4052

 

                    (C) THE OCCULT SIGNIFICANCE OF DREAMS

 

   There seems to be no end to the problems of dream-life. But this

can only be surprising if we forget that all the problems of mental liferecur in dreams with the addition of a few new ones arising from the

special nature of dreams. Many of the things that we study in dreams,

because we meet with them there, have nevertheless little or nothing

to do with the psychological peculiarity of dreams. Thus, for instance,

symbolism  is  not  a  dream-problem,  but  a  topic  connected  with  our

archaic thinking - our ‘basic language’, as it was aptly called by the

paranoic Schreber. It dominates myths and religious ritual no less than

dreams,  and  dream-symbolism  can  scarcely  even  claim  that  it  is

peculiar in that it conceals more particularly things that are important

sexually. Again, it is not to be expected that the explanation of anxiety-

dreams will be found in the theory of dreams. Anxiety is a problem

rather  of  neurosis,  and  all  that  remains  to  be  discussed  is  how  it

comes about that anxiety can arise under dream-conditions.

   The position is just the same, I think, in the matter of the relation of

dreams  to  the  alleged  facts  of  the  occult  world.  But,  since  dreams

themselves  have  always  been  mysterious  things,  they  have  been

brought into intimate connection with the other unknown mysteries. No

doubt,  too,  they  have  a  historic  claim  to  that  position,  since  in

primaeval  ages,  when  our  mythology  was  being  formed,  dream-

images may have played a part in the origin of ideas about spirits.

   There would seem to be two categories of dreams with a claim to

being  reckoned  as  occult  phenomena:  prophetic  dreams  and

telepathic ones. A countless multitude of witnesses speak in favour of

both  of  them,  while  against  both  of  them  there  is  the  obstinate

aversion, or maybe prejudice, of science.

 


        Some Additional Notes On Dream-Interpretation As A Whole

                                                                                      4053

 

      There  can,  indeed,  be  no  doubt  that  there  are  such  things  as

prophetic dreams, in the sense that their content gives some sort of

picture of the future; the only question is whether these predictions

coincide  to  any  noticeable  extent  with  what  really  happens

subsequently.  I  must  confess  that  upon  this  point  my  resolution  in

favour of impartiality deserts me. The notion that there is any mental

power, apart from acute calculation, which can foresee future eventsin  detail  is  on  the  one  hand  too  much  in  contradiction  to  all  the

expectations  and  presumptions  of  science  and  on  the  other  hand

corresponds too closely to certain ancient and familiar human desires

which criticism must reject as unjustifiable pretensions. I am therefore

of opinion that after one has taken into account the untrustworthiness,

credulity and unconvincingness of most of these reports, together with

the  possibility  of  falsifications  of  memory  facilitated  by  emotional

causes and the inevitability of a few lucky shots, it may be anticipated

that  the  spectre  of  veridical  prophetic  dreams  will  disappear  into

nothing. Personally, I have never experienced anything or learnt of

anything that could encourage a more favourable presumption.

   It is otherwise with telepathic dreams. But at this point it must be

made  quite  clear  that  no  one  has  yet  maintained  that  telepathic

phenomena - the reception of a mental process by one person from

another  by  means  other  than  sensory  perception  -  are  exclusively

related to dreams. Thus once again telepathy is not a dream-problem:

our judgement upon whether it exists or not need not be based on a

study of telepathic dreams.

   If reports of telepathic occurrences (or, to speak less exactly, of

thought-transference) are submitted to the same criticism as stories of

other occult events, there remains a considerable amount of material

which cannot be so easily neglected. Further, it is much more possible

to  collect  observations  and  experiences  of  one’s  own  in  this  field

which justify a favourable attitude to the problem of telepathy, even

though they may not be enough to carry an assured conviction. One

arrives at a provisional opinion that it may well be that telepathy really

exists and that it provides the kernel of truth in many other hypotheses

that would otherwise be incredible.

 


        Some Additional Notes On Dream-Interpretation As A Whole

                                                                                      4054

 

   It is certainly right in what concerns telepathy to adhere obstinately

to the same sceptical position and only to yield grudgingly to the force

of evidence. I believe I have found a class of material which is exempt

from  the  doubts  which  are  otherwise  justified  -  namely,  unfulfilledprophecies made by professional fortune-tellers. Unluckily, I have but

few  such  observations  at  my  disposal;  but  two  among  these  have

made a powerful impression on me. I am not in a position to describe

them  in  such  detail  as  would  produce  a  similar  effect  upon  other

people,  and  I  must  restrict  myself  to  bringing  out  a  few  essential

points.

   A prediction had been made, then, to the enquirers (at a strange

place  and  by  a  strange  fortune-teller,  who  was  at  the  same  time

carrying out some, presumably irrelevant, ritual) that something would

happen to them at a particular time, which in fact did not come true.

The date at which the prophecy should have been fulfilled was long

past. It was striking that those concerned reported their experience not

with derision or disappointment but with obvious satisfaction. Included

among  what  had  been  told  them  there  were  certain  quite  definite

details  which  seemed  capricious  and  unintelligible  and  would  only

have been justified if they had hit the mark. Thus, for instance, the

palmist  told  a  woman  who  was  twenty-seven  (though  she  looked

much  younger)  and  who  had  taken  off  her  wedding-ring,  that  she

would be married and have two children before she was thirty-two.

The woman was forty-three when, now seriously ill, she told me the

story  in  her  analysis:  she  had  remained  childless.  If  one  knew  her

private history (of which the ‘Professor’ in the lounge of the Paris hotel

was  certainly  ignorant)  one  could  understand  the  two  numbers

included  in  the  prophecy.  The  girl  had  married  after  an  unusually

intense  attachment  to  her  father  and  had  then  had  a  passionate

longing for children, so as to be able to put her husband in the place of

her father. After years of disappointment, when she was on the brink

of a neurosis, she obtained the prophecy, which promised her - the lot

of her mother. For it was a fact that the latter had had two children by

the time she was thirty-two. Thus it was only by the help of psycho-

analysis that it was possible to give a significant interpretation of the

peculiarities of this pretended message from without. But there was

then  no  better  explanation  of  the  whole,  unequivocally  determined

chain of events than to suppose that a strong wish on the part of the

questioner  -  the  strongest  unconscious  wish,  in  fact,  of  her  whole

emotional life and the motive force of her impending neurosis - had

made itself manifest to the fortune-teller by being directly transferredto him while his attention was being distracted by the performances he

was going through.

 


        Some Additional Notes On Dream-Interpretation As A Whole

                                                                                      4055

 

   I have often had an impression, in the course of experiments in my

private circle, that strongly emotionally coloured recollections can be

successfully transferred without much difficulty. If one has the courage

to subject to an analytic examination the associations of the person to

whom the thoughts are supposed to be transferred, correspondences

often  come  to  light  which  would  otherwise  have  remained

undiscovered. On the basis of a number of experiences I am inclined

to draw the conclusion that thought-transference of this kind comes

about particularly easily at the moment at which an idea emerges from

the unconscious, or, in theoretical terms, as it passes over from the

‘primary process’ to the ‘secondary process’.

   In spite of the caution which is prescribed by the importance, novelty

and  obscurity  of  the  subject,  I  feel  that  I  should  not  be  justified  in

holding  back  any  longer  these  considerations  upon  the  problem  of

telepathy. All of this has only this much to do with dreams: if there are

such  things  as  telepathic  messages,  the  possibility  cannot  be

dismissed of their reaching someone during sleep and coming to his

knowledge in a dream. Indeed, on the analogy of other perceptual and

intellectual  material,  the  further  possibility  arises  that  telepathic

messages received in the course of the day may only be dealt with

during a dream of the following night. There would then be nothing

contradictory  in  the  material  that  has  been  telepathically

communicated being modified and transformed in the dream like any

other  material.  It  would  be  satisfactory  if  with  the  help  of  psycho-

analysis we could obtain further and better authenticated knowledge

of telepathy.

                                                                                       4056

 

                  THE INFANTILE GENITAL ORGANIZATION

              (AN INTERPOLATION INTO THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY)

                                        (1923)

 


                                                                                      4057

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4058

 

                  THE INFANTILE GENITAL ORGANIZATION

              (AN INTERPOLATION INTO THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY)

 

The  difficulty  of  the  work  of  research  in  psycho-analysis  is  clearly

shown by the fact of its being possible, in spite of whole decades of

unremitting  observation,  to  overlook  features  that  are  of  general

occurrence  and  situations  that  are  characteristic,  until  at  last  they

confront  one  in  an  unmistakable  form.  The  remarks  that  follow  are

intended to make good a neglect of this sort in the field of infantile

sexual development.

   Readers of my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d) will

be aware that I have never undertaken any thorough remodelling of

that  work  in  its  later  editions,  but  have  retained  the  original

arrangement  and  have  kept  abreast  of  the  advances  made  in  our

knowledge by means of interpolations and alterations in the text. In

doing this, it may often have happened that what was old and what

was  more  recent  did  not  admit  of  being  merged  into  an  entirely

uncontradictory whole. Originally, as we know, the accent was on a

portrayal  of  the  fundamental  difference  between  the  sexual  life  of

children and of adults; later, the pregenital organizations of the libido

made  their  way  into  the  foreground,  and  also  the  remarkable  and

momentous fact of the diphasic onset of sexual development. Finally,

our interest was engaged by the sexual researches of children; andfrom this we were able to recognize the far-reaching approximation of

the final outcome of sexuality in childhood (in about the fifth year) to

the definitive form taken by it in the adult. This is the point at which I

left things in the last (1922) edition of my Three Essays.

   In that volume (p. 1400) I wrote that ‘the choice of an object, such as

we  have  shown  to  be  characteristic  of  the  pubertal  phase  of

development, has already frequently or habitually been effected during

the years of childhood: that is to say, the whole of the sexual currents

have become directed towards a single person in relation to whom

they seek to achieve their aims. This then is the closest approximation

possible  in  childhood  to  the  final  form  taken  by  sexual  life  after

puberty.  The  only  difference  lies  in  the  fact  that  in  childhood  the

combination of the component instincts and their subordination under

the primacy of the genitals have been effected only very incompletely

or not at all. Thus the establishment of that primacy in the service of

reproduction  is  the  last  phase  through  which  the  organization  of

sexuality passes.’

 


                        The Infantile Genital Organization

                                                                                      4059

 

   To-day I should no longer be satisfied with the statement that in the

early period of childhood the primacy of the genitals has been effected

only very incompletely or not at all. The approximation of the child’s

sexual life to that of the adult goes much further and is not limited

solely to the coming into being of the choice of an object. Even if a

proper combination of the component instincts under the primacy of

the genitals is not effected, nevertheless, at the height of the course of

development of infantile sexuality, interest in the genitals and in their

activity acquires a dominating significance which falls little short of that

reached in maturity. At the same time, the main characteristic of this

‘infantile  genital  organization’  is  its difference  from  the  final  genital

organization of the adult. This consists in the fact that, for both sexes,

only one genital, namely the male one, comes into account. What is

present, therefore, is not a primacy of the genitals, but a primacy of

the phallus.   Unfortunately we can describe this state of things only as it affects

the male child; the corresponding processes in the little girl are not

known  to  us.  The  small  boy  undoubtedly  perceives  the  distinction

between men and women, but to begin with he has no occasion to

connect it with a difference in their genitals. It is natural for him to

assume that all other living beings, humans and animals, possess a

genital  like  his  own;  indeed,  we  know  that  he  looks  for  an  organ

analogous to his own in inanimate things as well.¹ This part of the

body,  which  is  easily  excitable,  prone  to  changes  and  so  rich  in

sensations,  occupies  the  boy’s  interest  to  a  high  degree  and  is

constantly setting new tasks to his instinct for research. He wants to

see it in other people as well, so as to compare it with his own; and he

behaves as though he had a vague idea that this organ could and

should be bigger. The driving force which this male portion of the body

will develop later at puberty expresses itself at this period of life mainly

as  an  urge  to  investigate,  as  sexual  curiosity.  Many  of  the  acts  of

exhibitionism  and  aggression  which  children  commit,  and  which  in

later years would be judged without hesitation to be expressions of

lust, prove in analysis to be experiments undertaken in the service of

sexual research.

 

   ¹ It is, incidentally, remarkable what a small degree of attention the other part of the male

genitals, the little sac with its contents, attracts in children. From all one hears in analyses,
one would not guess that the male genitals consisted of anything more than the penis.
 


                        The Infantile Genital Organization

                                                                                      4060

 

   In the course of these researches the child arrives at the discovery

that the penis is not a possession which is common to all creatures

that are like himself. An accidental sight of the genitals of a little sister

or  playmate  provides  the  occasion  for  this  discovery.  In  unusually

intelligent children, the observation of girls urinating will even earlier

have aroused a suspicion that there is something different here. For

they will have seen a different posture and heard a different sound,

and  will  have  made  attempts  to  repeat  their  observations  so  as  to

obtain  enlightenment.  We  know  how  children  react  to  their  firstimpressions  of  the  absence  of  a  penis.  They  disavow  the  fact  and

believe that they do see a penis, all the same. They gloss over the

contradiction  between  observation  and  preconception  by  telling

themselves that the penis is still small and will grow bigger presently;

and they then slowly come to the emotionally significant conclusion

that after all the penis had at least been there before and been taken

away  afterwards.  The  lack  of  a  penis  is  regarded  as  a  result  of

castration, and so now the child is faced with the task of coming to

terms with castration in relation to himself. The further developments

are too well known generally to make it necessary to recapitulate them

here.  But  it  seems  to  me  that the  significance  of  the  castration

complex can only be rightly appreciated if its origin in the phase of

phallic primacy is also taken into account.¹

 

   ¹ It has been quite correctly pointed out that a child gets the idea of a narcissistic injury

through a bodily loss from the experience of losing his mother’s breast after sucking, from the
daily surrender of his faeces and, indeed, even from his separation from the womb at birth.
Nevertheless, one ought not to speak of a castration complex until this idea of a loss has
become connected with the male genitals.
 


                        The Infantile Genital Organization

                                                                                      4061

 

   We know, too, to what a degree depreciation of women, horror of

women, and a disposition to homosexuality are derived from the final

conviction that women have no penis. Ferenczi (1923) has recently,

with complete justice, traced back the mythological symbol of horror -

Medusa’s head - to the impression of the female genitals devoid of a

penis.¹

      It  should  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  the  child  quickly  and

readily makes a generalization from his observation that some women

have  no  penis.  He  is  in  any  case  debarred  from  doing  so  by  his

assumption  that  the  lack  of  a  penis  is  the  result  of  having  been

castrated as a punishment. On the contrary, the child believes that it is

only unworthy female persons that have lost their genitals - females

who, in all probability, were guilty of inadmissible impulses similar to

his own. Women whom he respects, like his mother, retain a penis for

a long time. For him, being a woman is not yet synonymous with beingwithout  a  penis.²  It  is  not  till  later,  when  the  child  takes  up  the

problems of the origin and birth of babies, and when he guesses that

only women can give birth to them - it is only then that the mother, too,

loses her penis. And, along with this, quite complicated theories are

built up to explain the exchange of the penis for a baby. In all this, the

female genitals never seem to be discovered. The baby, we know, is

supposed to live inside the mother’s body (in her bowel) and to be

born through the intestinal outlet. These last theories carry us beyond

the stretch of time covered by the infantile sexual period.

 

   ¹ I should like to add that what is indicated in the myth is the mother’s genitals. Athene, who

carries Medusa’s head on her armour, becomes in consequence the unapproachable woman,
the sight of whom extinguishes all thought of a sexual approach.

   ² I learnt from the analysis of a young married woman who had no father but several aunts

that she clung, until quite far on in the latency period, to the belief that her mother and her
aunts had a penis. One of her aunts, however, was feeble-minded; and she regarded this aunt
as castrated, as she felt herself to be.
 


                        The Infantile Genital Organization

                                                                                      4062

 

      It  is  not  unimportant  to  bear  in  mind  what  transformations  are

undergone,  during  the  sexual  development  of  childhood,  by  the

polarity  of  sex  with  which  we  are  familiar.  A  first  antithesis  is

introduced with the choice of object, which, of course, presupposes a

subject  and  an  object.  At  the  stage  of  the  pregenital  sadistic-anal

organization,  there  is  as  yet  no  question  of  male  and  female;  the

antithesis between active and passive is the dominant one.¹ At the

following stage of infantile genital organization, which we now know

about, maleness  exists,  but  not  femaleness.  The  antithesis  here  is

between  having a  male  genital  and  being castrated.  It  is  not  until

development has reached its completion at puberty that the sexual

polarity coincides with male and female. Maleness combines subject,

activity and possession of the penis; femaleness takes over object and

passivity. The vagina is now valued as a place of shelter for the penis;

it enters into the heritage of the womb.

 

   ¹ Cf. Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d).                                                                                       4063

 

                            NEUROSIS AND PSYCHOSIS

                                        (1924)

 


                                                                                      4064

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4065

 

                            NEUROSIS AND PSYCHOSIS

 

In my recently published work, The Ego and the Id (1923b), I have

proposed  a  differentiation  of  the  mental  apparatus,  on  the  basis  of

which a number of relationships can be represented in a simple and

perspicuous manner. As regards other points - for instance, in what

concerns  the  origin  and  role  of  the  super-ego  -  enough  remains

obscure  and  unelucidated.  Now  one  may  reasonably  expect  that  a

hypothesis  of  this  kind  should  prove  useful  and  helpful  in  other

directions as well, if only to enable us to see what we already know

from  another  angle,  to  group  it  differently  and  to  describe  it  more

convincingly. Such an application of the hypothesis might also bring

with it a profitable return from grey theory to the perpetual green of

experience.

   In the work I have mentioned I described the numerous dependent

relationships of the ego, its intermediate position between the external

world and the id and its efforts to humour all its masters at once. In

connection with a train of thought raised in other quarters, which was

concerned with the origin and prevention of the psychoses, a simple

formula has now occurred to me which deals with what is perhaps the

most  important  genetic  difference  between  a  neurosis  and  a

psychosis: neurosis is the result of a conflict between the ego and its

id,  whereas  psychosis  in  the  analogous  outcome  of  a  similar

disturbance in the relations between the ego and the external world. 


                                Neurosis And Psychosis

                                                                                      4066

 

      There  are  certainly  good  grounds  for  being  suspicious  of  such

simple solutions of a problem. Moreover, the most that we may expect

is that this formula will turn out to be correct in the roughest outline.

But even that would be something. One recalls at once, too, a whole

number of discoveries and findings which seem to support our thesis.

All our analyses go to show that the transference neuroses originate

from the ego’s refusing to accept a powerful instinctual impulse in the

id or to help it to find a motor outlet, or from the ego’s forbidding that

impulse  the  object  at  which  it  is  aiming.  In  such  a  case  the  ego

defends  itself  against  the  instinctual  impulse  by  the  mechanism  of

repression.  The  repressed  material  struggles  against  this  fate.  It

creates for itself, along paths over which the ego has no power, a

substitutive representation (which forces itself upon the ego by way of

a compromise) - the symptom. The ego finds its unity threatened and

impaired  by  this  intruder,  and  it  continues  to  struggle  against  the

symptom, just as it fended off the original instinctual impulse. All this

produces the picture of a neurosis. It is no contradiction to this that, in

undertaking  the  repression,  the  ego  is  at  bottom  following  the

commands of its super-ego - commands which, in their turn, originate

from influences in the external world that have found representation in

the super-ego. The fact remains that the ego has taken sides with

those powers, that in it their demands have more strength than the

instinctual demands of the id, and that the ego is the power which sets

the repression in motion against the portion of the id concerned and

which  fortifies  the  repression  by  means  of  the  anticathexis  of

resistance. The ego has come into conflict with the id in the service of

the super-ego and of reality; and this is the state of affairs in every

transference neurosis.

   On the other side, it is equally easy, from the knowledge we have so

far gained of the mechanism of the psychoses, to adduce examples

which point to a disturbance in the relationship between the ego and

the  external  world.  In  Meynert’s  amentia  -  an  acute  hallucinatoryconfusion  which  is  perhaps  the  most  extreme  and  striking  form  of

psychosis  -  either  the  external  world  is  not  perceived  at  all,  or  the

perception of it has no effect whatever. Normally, the external world

governs the ego in two ways: firstly, by current, present perceptions

which are always renewable, and secondly, by the store of memories

of earlier perceptions which, in the shape of an ‘internal world’, form a

possession of the ego and a constituent part of it. In amentia, not only

is the acceptance of new perceptions refused, but the internal world,

too, which, as a copy of the external world, has up till now represented

it, loses its significance (its cathexis) - The ego creates, autocratically,

a new external and internal world; and there can be no doubt of two

facts - that this new world is constructed in accordance with the id’s

wishful  impulses,  and  that  the  motive  of  this  dissociation  from  the

external world is some very serious frustration by reality of a wish - a

frustration which seems intolerable. The close affinity of this psychosis

to  normal  dreams  is  unmistakable.  A  precondition  of  dreaming,

moreover, is a state of sleep, and one of the features of sleep is a

complete turning away from perception and the external world.

 


                                Neurosis And Psychosis

                                                                                      4067

 

   We know that other forms of psychosis, the schizophrenias, are

inclined  to  end  in  affective  hebetude  -  that  is,  in  a  loss  of  all

participation  in  the  external  world.  In  regard  to  the  genesis  of

delusions, a fair number of analyses have taught us that the delusion

is found applied like a patch over the place where originally a rent had

appeared in the ego’s relation to the external world. If this precondition

of a conflict with the external world is not much more noticeable to us

than it now is, that is because, in the clinical picture of the psychosis,

the  manifestations  of  the  pathogenic  process  are  often  overlaid  by

manifestations of an attempt at a cure or a reconstruction.

   The aetiology common to the onset of a psychoneurosis and of a

psychosis always remains the same. It consists in a frustration, a non-

fulfilment  of  one  of  those  childhood  wishes  which  are  for  ever

undefeated  and  which  are  so  deeply  rooted  in  our  phylogeneticallydetermined organization. This frustration is in the last resort always an

external  one;  but  in  the  individual  case  it  may  proceed  from  the

internal  agency  (in  the  super-ego)  which  has  taken  over  the

representation  of  the  demands  of  reality.  The  pathogenic  effect

depends  on  whether,  in  a  conflictual  tension  of  this  kind,  the  ego

remains true to its dependence on the external world and attempts to

silence the id, or whether it lets itself be overcome by the id and thus

torn  away  from  reality.  A  complication  is  introduced  into  this

apparently simple situation, however, by the existence of the super-

ego, which, through a link that is not yet clear to us, unites in itself

influences coming from the id as well as from the external world, and

is to some extent an ideal model of what the whole endeavour of the

ego  is  aiming  at  -  a  reconciliation  between  its  various  dependent

relationships.  The  attitude  of  the  super-ego  should  be  taken  into

account  -  which  has  not  hitherto  been  done  -  in  every  form  of

psychical illness. We may provisionally assume that there must also

be illnesses which are based on a conflict between the ego and the

super-ego. Analysis gives us a right to suppose that melancholia is a

typical example of this group; and we would set aside the name of

‘narcissistic psychoneuroses’ for disorders of that kind. Nor will it clash

with  our  impressions  if  we  find  reasons  for  separating  states  like

melancholia  from  the  other  psychoses.  We  now  see  that  we  have

been able to make our simple genetic formula more complete, without

dropping it. Transference neuroses correspond to a conflict between

the ego and the id; narcissistic neuroses, to a conflict between the ego

and the super-ego; and psychoses, to one between the ego and the

external world. It is true that we cannot tell at once whether we have

really gained any new knowledge by this, or have only enriched our

store  of  formulas;  but  I  think  that  this  possible  application  of  the

proposed differentiation of the mental apparatus into an ego, a super-

ego and an id cannot fail to give us courage to keep that hypothesis

steadily in view.

 


                                Neurosis And Psychosis

                                                                                      4068

       The  thesis  that  neuroses  and  psychoses  originate  in  the  ego’s

conflicts with its various ruling agencies - that is, therefore, that they

reflect  a  failure  in  the  functioning  of  the  ego,  which  is  at  pains  to

reconcile all the various demands made on it - this thesis needs to be

supplemented in one further point. One would like to know in what

circumstances and by what means the ego can succeed in emerging

from such conflicts, which are certainly always present, without falling

ill. This is a new field of research, in which no doubt the most varied

factors will come up for examination. Two of them, however, can be

stressed at once. In the first place, the outcome of all such situations

will undoubtedly depend on economic considerations - on the relative

magnitudes of the trends which are struggling with one another. In the

second place, it will be possible for the ego to avoid a rupture in any

direction by deforming itself, by submitting to encroachments on its

own  unity  and  even  perhaps  by  effecting  a  cleavage  or  division  of

itself. In this way the inconsistencies, eccentricities and follies of men

would appear in a similar light to their sexual perversions, though the

acceptance of which they spare themselves repressions.

   In conclusion, there remains to be considered the question of what

the mechanism, analogous to repression, can be by means of which

the ego detaches itself from the external world. This cannot, I think, be

answered without fresh investigations; but such a mechanism, it would

seem,  must,  like  repression,  comprise  a  withdrawal  of  the  cathexis

sent out by the ego.

                                                                                       4069

 

                THE ECONOMIC PROBLEM OF MASOCHISM

                                        (1924)

 


                                                                                      4070

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4071

 

                THE ECONOMIC PROBLEM OF MASOCHISM

 

The existence of a masochistic trend in the instinctual life of human

beings may justly be described as mysterious from the economic point

of  view.  For  if  mental  processes  are  governed  by  the  pleasure

principle  in  such  a  way  that  their  first  aim  is  the  avoidance  of

unpleasure  and  the  obtaining  of  pleasure,  masochism  is

incomprehensible. If pain and unpleasure can be not simply warnings

but actually aims, the pleasure principle is paralysed - it is as though

the watchman over our mental life were put out of action by a drug.

   Thus masochism appears to us in the light of a great danger, which

is in no way true of its counterpart, sadism. We are tempted to call the

pleasure principle the watchman over our life rather than merely over

our  mental  life.  But  in  that  case  we  are  faced  with  the  task  of

investigating  the  relationship  of  the  pleasure  principle  to  the  two

classes of instincts which we have distinguished - the death instincts

and the erotic (libidinal) life instincts; and we cannot proceed further in

our  consideration  of  the  problem  of  masochism  till  we  have

accomplished that task.

 

   It will be remembered that we have taken the view that the principle

which governs all mental processes is a special case of Fechner’s

‘tendency  towards  stability’,¹  and  have  accordingly  attributed  to  the

mental apparatus the purpose of reducing to nothing, or at least ofkeeping as low as possible, the sums of excitation which flow in upon

it. Barbara Low has suggested the name of ‘Nirvana principle’ for this

supposed tendency, and we have accepted the term. But we have

unhesitatingly  identified  the  pleasure-unpleasure  principle  with  this

Nirvana  principle.  Every  unpleasure  ought  thus  to  coincide  with  a

heightening,  and  every  pleasure  with  a  lowering,  of  mental  tension

due  to  stimulus;  the  Nirvana  principle  (and  the  pleasure  principle

which is supposedly identical with it) would be entirely in the service of

the death instincts, whose aim is to conduct the restlessness of life

into the stability of the inorganic state, and it would have the function

of giving warnings against the demands of the life instincts - the libido

-  which  try  to  disturb  the  intended  course  of  life.  But  such  a  view

cannot be correct. It seems that in the series of feelings of tension we

have  a  direct  sense  of  the  increase  and  decrease  of  amounts  of

stimulus, and it cannot be doubted that there are pleasurable tensions

and  unpleasurable  relaxations  of  tension.  The  state  of  sexual

excitation is the most striking example of a pleasurable increase of

stimulus of this sort, but it is certainly not the only one.

 

   ¹ Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920g).

 


                      The Economic Problem Of Masochism

                                                                                      4072

 

      Pleasure  and  unpleasure,  therefore,  cannot  be  referred  to  an

increase or decrease of a quantity (which we describe as ‘tension due

to stimulus’), although they obviously have a great deal to do with that

factor. It appears that they depend, not on this quantitative factor, but

on  some  characteristic  of  it  which  we  can  only  describe  as  a

qualitative  one.  If  we  were  able  to  say  what  this  qualitative

characteristic is, we should be much further advanced in psychology.

Perhaps it is the rhythm, the temporal sequence of changes, rises and

falls in the quantity of stimulus. We do not know.

   However this may be, we must perceive that the Nirvana principle,

belonging  as  it  does  to  the  death  instinct,  has  undergone  a

modification  in  living  organisms  through  which  it  has  become  the

pleasure principle; and we shall henceforward avoid regarding the twoprinciples as one. It is not difficult, if we care to follow up this line of

thought, to guess what power was the source of the modification. It

can only be the life instinct, the libido, which has thus, alongside of the

death instinct, seized upon a share in the regulation of the processes

of life. In this way we obtain a small but interesting set of connections.

The Nirvana principle expresses the trend of the death instinct; the

pleasure  principle  represents  the  demands  of  the  libido;  and  the

modification of the latter principle, the reality principle, represents the

influence of the external world.

 


                      The Economic Problem Of Masochism

                                                                                      4073

 

      None  of  these  three  principles  is  actually  put  out  of  action  by

another.  As  a  rule  they  are  able  to  tolerate  one  another,  although

conflicts are bound to arise occasionally from the fact of the differing

aims that are set for each - in one case a quantitative reduction of the

load  of  the  stimulus,  in  another  a  qualitative  characteristic  of  the

stimulus, and, lastly, a postponement of the discharge of the stimulus

and a temporary acquiescence in the unpleasure due to tension.

   The conclusion to be drawn from these considerations is that the

description  of  the  pleasure  principle  as  the  watchman  over  our  life

cannot be rejected.

 

   To return to masochism. Masochism comes under our observation

in  three  forms:  as  a  condition  imposed  on  sexual  excitation,  as  an

expression of the feminine nature, and as a norm of behaviour. We

may, accordingly, distinguish an erotogenic, a feminine and a moral

masochism. The first, the erotogenic, masochism - pleasure in pain -

lies at the bottom of the other two forms as well. Its basis must be

sought  along  biological  and  constitutional  lines  and  it  remains

incomprehensible  unless  one  decides  to  make  certain  assumptions

about  matters  that  are  extremely  obscure.  The  third,  and  in  some

respects the most important, form assumed by masochism has only

recently been recognized by psycho-analysis as a sense of guilt which

is mostly unconscious; but it can already be completely explained andfitted  into  the  rest  of  our  knowledge.  Feminine  masochism,  on  the

other hand, is the one that is most accessible to our observation and

least problematical, and it can be surveyed in all its relations. We will

begin our discussion with it.

 


                      The Economic Problem Of Masochism

                                                                                      4074

 

 

   We have sufficient acquaintance with this kind of masochism in men

(to whom, owing to the material at my command, I shall restrict my

remarks), derived from masochistic - and therefore often impotent -

subjects whose phantasies either terminate in an act of masturbation

or  represent  a  sexual  satisfaction  in  themselves.  The  real-life

performances  of  masochistic  perverts  tally  completely  with  these

phantasies, whether the performances are carried out as an end in

themselves or serve to induce potency and to lead to the sexual act.

In both cases - for the performances are, after all, only a carrying-out

of the phantasies in play - the manifest content is of being gagged,

bound, painfully beaten, whipped, in some way maltreated, forced into

unconditional obedience, dirtied and debased. It is far more rare for

mutilations to be included in the content, and then only subject to strict

limitations.  The  obvious  interpretation,  and  one  easily  arrived  at,  is

that the masochist wants to be treated like a small and helpless child,

but, particularly, like a naughty child. It is unnecessary to quote cases

to illustrate this; for the material is very uniform and is accessible to

any observer, even to non-analysts. But if one has an opportunity of

studying  cases  in  which  the  masochistic  phantasies  have  been

especially richly elaborated, one quickly discovers that they place the

subject  in  a  characteristically  female  situation;  they  signify,  that  is,

being castrated, or copulated with, or giving birth to a baby. For this

reason I have called this form of masochism, a potiori as it were, the

feminine form, although so many of its features point to infantile life.

This superimposed stratification of the infantile and the feminine will

find a simple explanation later on. Being castrated - or being blinded,

which  stands  for  it  -  often  leaves  a  negative  trace  of  itself  inphantasies, in the condition that no injury is to occur precisely to the

genitals or the eyes. (Masochistic tortures, incidentally, rarely make

such  a  serious  impression  as  the  cruelties  of  sadism,  whether

imagined or performed.) A sense of guilt, too, finds expression in the

manifest content of masochistic phantasies; the subject assumes that

he has committed some crime (the nature of which is left indefinite)

which is to be expiated by all these painful and tormenting procedures.

This looks like a superficial rationalization of the masochistic subject-

matter,  but  behind  it  there  lies  a  connection  with  infantile

masturbation.  On  the  other  hand,  this  factor  of  guilt  provides  a

transition to the third, moral, form of masochism.

 

   This feminine masochism which we have been describing is entirely

based  on  the  primary,  erotogenic  masochism,  on  pleasure  in  pain.

This cannot be explained without taking our discussion very far back.

 


                      The Economic Problem Of Masochism

                                                                                      4075

 

   In my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality, in the section on the

sources of infantile sexuality, I put forward the proposition that ‘in the

case of a great number of internal processes sexual excitation arises

as a concomitant effect, as soon as the intensity of those processes

passes beyond certain quantitative limits’. Indeed, ‘it may well be that

nothing of considerable importance can occur in the organism without

contributing some component to the excitation of the sexual instinct’.

In accordance with this, the excitation of pain and unpleasure would

be  bound  to  have  the  same  result,  too.  The  occurrence  of  such  a

libidinal sympathetic excitation when there is tension due to pain and

unpleasure  would  be  an  infantile  physiological  mechanism  which

ceases  to  operate  later  on.  It  would  attain  a  varying  degree  of

development in different sexual constitutions; but in any case it would

provide the physiological foundation on which the psychical structure

of erotogenic masochism would afterwards be erected.

   The inadequacy of this explanation is seen, however, in the fact that

it throws no light on the regular and close connections of masochismwith its counterpart in instinctual life, sadism. If we go back a little

further,  to  our  hypothesis  of  the  two  classes  of  instincts  which  we

regard  as  operative  in  the  living  organism,  we  arrive  at  another

derivation of masochism, which, however, is not in contradiction with

the  former  one.  In  (multicellular)  organisms  the  libido  meets  the

instinct of death, or destruction, which is dominant in them and which

seeks  to  disintegrate  the  cellular  organism  and  to  conduct  each

separate unicellular organism into a state of inorganic stability (relative

though this may be). The libido has the task of making the destroying

instinct innocuous, and it fulfils the task by diverting that instinct to a

great extent outwards - soon with the help of a special organic system,

the muscular apparatus - towards objects in the external world. The

instinct is then called the destructive instinct, the instinct for mastery,

or the will to power. A portion of the instinct is placed directly in the

service of the sexual function, where it has an important part to play.

This  is  sadism  proper.  Another  portion  does  not  share  in  this

transposition outwards; it remains inside the organism and, with the

help  of  the  accompanying  sexual  excitation  described  above,

becomes libidinally bound there. It is in this portion that we have to

recognize the original, erotogenic masochism.

 


                      The Economic Problem Of Masochism

                                                                                      4076

 

   We are without any physiological understanding of the ways and

means by which this taming of the death instinct by the libido may be

effected. So far as the psycho-analytic field of ideas is concerned, we

can only assume that a very extensive fusion and amalgamation, in

varying proportions, of the two classes of instincts takes place, so that

we never have to deal with pure life instincts or pure death instincts

but only with mixtures of them in different amounts. Corresponding to

a  fusion  of  instincts  of  this  kind,  there  may,  as  a  result  of  certain

influences, be a defusion of them. How large the portions of the death

instincts are which refuse to be tamed in this way by being bound to

admixtures of libido we cannot at present guess.

   If one is prepared to overlook a little inexactitude, it may be said thatthe death instinct which is operative in the organism - primal sadism -

is  identical  with  masochism.  After  the  main  portion  of  it  has  been

transposed  outwards  on  to  objects,  there  remains  inside,  as  a

residuum of it, the erotogenic masochism proper, which on the one

hand has become a component of the libido and, on the other, still has

the self as its object. This masochism would thus be evidence of, and

a  remainder  from,  the  phase  of  development  in  which  the

coalescence, which is so important for life, between the death instinct

and Eros took place. We shall not be surprised to hear that in certain

circumstances the sadism, or instinct of destruction, which has been

directed  outwards,  projected,  can  be  once  more  introjected,  turned

inwards, and in this way regress to its earlier situation. If this happens,

a secondary masochism is produced, which is added to the original

masochism.

 


                      The Economic Problem Of Masochism

                                                                                      4077

 

      Erotogenic  masochism  accompanies  the  libido  through  all  its

developmental phases and derives from them its changing psychical

coatings. The fear of being eaten up by the totem animal (the father)

originates from the primitive oral organization; the wish to be beaten

by  the  father  comes  from  the  sadistic-anal  phase  which  follows  it;

castration, although it is later disavowed, enters into the content of

masochistic  phantasies  as  a  precipitate  of  the  phallic  stage  or

organization;¹ and from the final genital organization there arise, of

course,  the  situations  of  being  copulated  with  and  of  giving  birth,

which are characteristic of femaleness. The part played in masochism

by  the  nates,  too,  is  easily  understandable,  apart  from  its  obvious

basis  in  reality.  The  nates  are  the  part  of  the  body  which  is  given

erotogenic preference in the sadistic-anal phase, like the breast in the

oral phase and the penis in the genital phase.

 

      The  third  form  of  masochism,  moral  masochism,  is  chiefly

remarkable for having loosened its connection with what we recognize

as  sexuality.  All  other  masochistic  sufferings  carry  with  them  thecondition that they shall emanate from the loved person and shall be

endured at his command. This restriction has been dropped in moral

masochism. The suffering itself is what matters; whether it is decreed

by someone who is loved or by someone who is indifferent is of no

importance.  It  may  even  be  caused  by  impersonal  powers  or  by

circumstances; the true masochist always turns his cheek whenever

he has a chance of receiving a blow. It is very tempting, in explaining

this attitude, to leave the libido out of account and to confine oneself to

assuming that in this case the destructive instinct has been turned

inwards again and is now raging against the self; yet there must be

some meaning in the fact that linguistic usage has not given up the

connection  between  this  norm  of  behaviour  and  erotism  and  calls

these self-injurers masochists too.

 

   ¹ See ‘The Infantile Genital Organization’ (1923e).

 


                      The Economic Problem Of Masochism

                                                                                      4078

 

      Let  us  keep  to  a  habit  of  our  technique  and  consider  first  the

extreme and unmistakably pathological form of this masochism. I have

described  elsewhere¹  how  in  analytic  treatment  we  come  across

patients  to  whom,  owing  to  their  behaviour  towards  its  therapeutic

influence, we are obliged to ascribe an ‘unconscious’ sense of guilt. I

pointed  out  the  sign  by  which  such  people  can  be  recognized  (a

‘negative therapeutic reaction’) and I did not conceal the fact that the

strength  of  such  an  impulse  constitutes  one  of  the  most  serious

resistances and the greatest danger to the success of our medical or

educative aims. The satisfaction of this unconscious sense of guilt is

perhaps the most powerful bastion in the subject’s (usually composite)

gain  from  illness  -  in  the  sum  of  forces  which  struggle  against  his

recovery  and  refuse  to  surrender  his  state  of  illness.  The  suffering

entailed by neuroses is precisely the factor that makes them valuable

to the masochistic trend. It is instructive, too, to find, contrary to all

theory  and  expectation,  that  a  neurosis  which  has  defied  every

therapeutic effort may vanish if the subject becomes involved in the

misery of an unhappy marriage, or loses all his money, or develops adangerous organic disease. In such instances one form of suffering

has been replaced by another; and we see that all that mattered was

that it should be possible to maintain a certain amount of suffering.

      Patients  do  not  easily  believe  us  when  we  tell  them  about  the

unconscious sense of guilt. They know only too well by what torments

-  the  pangs  of  conscience  -  a  conscious  sense  of  guilt,  a

consciousness  of  guilt,  expresses  itself,  and  they  therefore  cannot

admit  that  they  could  harbour  exactly  analogous  impulses  in

themselves without being in the least aware of them. We may, I think,

to  some  extent  meet  their  objection  if  we  give  up  the  term

‘unconscious  sense  of  guilt’,  which  is  in  any  case  psychologically

incorrect, and speak instead of a ‘need for punishment’, which covers

the  observed  state  of  affairs  just  as  aptly.  We  cannot,  however,

restrain ourselves from judging and localizing this unconscious sense

of guilt in the same way as we do the conscious kind.

 

   ¹ The Ego and the Id (1923b).

 


                      The Economic Problem Of Masochism

                                                                                      4079

 

   We have attributed the function of conscience to the super-ego and

we have recognized the consciousness of guilt as an expression of a

tension  between  the  ego  and  the  super-ego.  The  ego  reacts  with

feelings of anxiety (conscience anxiety) to the perception that it has

not come up to the demands made by its ideal, the super-ego. What

we  want  to  know  is  how  the  super-ego  has  come  to  play  this

demanding role and why the ego, in the case of a difference with its

ideal, should have to be afraid.

   We have said that the function of the ego is to unite and to reconcile

the claims of the three agencies which it serves; and we may add that

in doing so it also possesses in the super-ego a model which it can

strive to follow. For this super-ego is as much a representative of the

id as of the external world. It came into being through the introjection

into the ego of the first objects of the id’s libidinal impulses - namely,

the  two  parents.  In  this  process  the  relation  to  those  objects  was

desexualized; it was diverted from its direct sexual aims. Only in thisway was it possible for the Oedipus complex to be surmounted. The

super-ego retained essential features of the introjected persons - their

strength, their severity, their inclination to supervise and to punish. As

I  have  said  elsewhere,¹  it  is  easily  conceivable  that,  thanks  to  the

defusion of instinct which occurs along with this introduction into the

ego, the severity was increased. The super-ego - the conscience at

work  in  the  ego  -  may  then  become  harsh,  cruel  and  inexorable

against the ego which is in its charge. Kant’s Categorical Imperative is

thus the direct heir of the Oedipus complex.

   But the same figures who continue to operate in the super-ego as

the  agency  we  know  as  conscience  after  they  have  ceased  to  be

objects of the libidinal impulses of the id - these same figures also

belong to the real external world. It is from there that they were drawn;

their power, behind which lie hidden all the influences of the past and

of tradition, was one of the most strongly-felt manifestations of reality.

In  virtue  of  this  concurrence,  the  super-ego,  the  substitute  for  the

Oedipus complex, becomes a representative of the real external world

as well and thus also becomes a model for the endeavours of the ego.

 

   ¹ The Ego and the Id.

 


                      The Economic Problem Of Masochism

                                                                                      4080

 

   In this way the Oedipus complex proves to be - as has already been

conjectured in a historical sense¹ - the source of our individual ethical

sense, our morality. The course of childhood development leads to an

ever-increasing  detachment  from  parents,  and  their  personal

significance for the super-ego recedes into the background. To the

imagos  they  leave  behind  there  are  then  linked  the  influences  of

teachers and authorities, self-chosen models and publicly recognized

heroes, whose figures need no longer be introjected by an ego which

has become more resistant. The last figure in the series that began

with the parents is the dark power of Destiny which only the fewest of

us  are  able  to  look  upon  as  impersonal.  There  is  little  to  be  said

against the Dutch writer Multatuli² when he replaces the Μοία[Destiny]

of  the  Greeks  by  the  divine  pair  ‘Λόγος  χαί’  Αυάγχη‚[Reason  andnecessity];  but  all  who  transfer  the  guidance  of  the  world  to

Providence, to God, or to God and Nature, arouse a suspicion that

they still look upon these ultimate and remotest powers as a parental

couple,  in  a  mythological  sense,  and  believe  themselves  linked  to

them by libidinal ties. In The Ego and the Id I made an attempt to

derive mankind’s realistic fear of death, too, from the same parental

view of fate. It seems very hard to free oneself from it.

 

   ¹ In Essay IV of Totem and Taboo (1912-13).

   ² E. D. Dekker (1820-87).

 


                      The Economic Problem Of Masochism

                                                                                      4081

 

   After these preliminaries we can return to our consideration of moral

masochism. We have said that, by their behaviour during treatment

and  in  life,  the  individuals  in  question  give  an  impression  of  being

morally  inhibited  to  an  excessive  degree,  of  being  under  the

domination of an especially sensitive conscience, although they are

not conscious of any of this ultra-morality. On closer inspection, we

can see the difference there is between an unconscious extension of

morality of this kind and moral masochism. In the former, the accent

falls  on  the  heightened  sadism  of  the  super-ego  to  which  the  ego

submits; in the latter, it falls on the ego’s own masochism which seeks

punishment, whether from the super-ego or from the parental powers

outside. We may be forgiven for having confused the two to begin

with; for in both cases it is a question of a relationship between the

ego and the super-ego (or powers that are equivalent to it), and in

both cases what is involved is a need which is satisfied by punishment

and suffering. It can hardly be an insignificant detail, then, that the

sadism  of  the  super-ego  becomes  for  the  most  part  glaringly

conscious, whereas the masochistic trend of the ego remains as a rule

concealed from the subject and has to be inferred from his behaviour.

      The  fact  that  moral  masochism  is  unconscious  leads  us  to  an

obvious clue. We were able to translate the expression ‘unconscious

sense of guilt’ as meaning a need for punishment at the hands of a

parental  power.  We  now  know  that  the  wish,  which  so  frequentlyappears in phantasies, to be beaten by the father stands very close to

the other wish, to have a passive (feminine) sexual relation to him and

is only a regressive distortion of it. If we insert this explanation into the

content of moral masochism, its hidden meaning becomes clear to us.

Conscience  and  morality  have  arisen  through  the  overcoming,  the

desexualization,  of  the  Oedipus  complex;  but  through  moral

masochism  morality  becomes  sexualized  once  more,  the  Oedipus

complex  is  revived  and  the  way  is  opened  for  a  regression  from

morality to the Oedipus complex. This is to the advantage neither of

morality nor of the person concerned. An individual may, it is true,

have  preserved  the  whole  or  some  measure  of  ethical  sense

alongside  of  his  masochism;  but,  alternatively,  a  large  part  of  his

conscience  may  have  vanished  into  his  masochism.  Again,

masochism  creates  a  temptation  to  perform  ‘sinful’  actions,  which

must then be expiated by the reproaches of the sadistic conscience

(as  is  exemplified  in  so  many  Russian  character-types)  or  by

chastisement  from  the  great  parental  power  of  Destiny.  In  order  to

provoke punishment from this last representative of the parents, the

masochist  must  do  what  is  inexpedient,  must  act  against  his  own

interests, must ruin the prospects which open out to him in the real

world and must, perhaps, destroy his own real existence.

 


                      The Economic Problem Of Masochism

                                                                                      4082

 

   The turning back of sadism against the self regularly occurs where a

cultural  suppression  of  the  instincts  holds  back  a  large  part  of  the

subject’s destructive instinctual components from being exercised in

life. We may suppose that this portion of the destructive instinct which

has retreated appears in the ego as an intensification of masochism.

The  phenomena  of  conscience,  however,  lead  us  to  infer  that  the

destructiveness which returns from the external world is also taken up

by the super-ego, without any such transformation, and increases its

sadism  against  the  ego.  The  sadism  of  the  super-ego  and  the

masochism of the ego supplement each other and unite to produce

the same effects. It is only in this way, I think, that we can understandhow the suppression of an instinct can - frequently or quite generally -

result in a sense of guilt and how a person’s conscience becomes

more severe and more sensitive the more he refrains from aggression

against others. One might expect that if a man knows that he is in the

habit  of  avoiding  the  commission  of  acts  of  aggression  that  are

undesirable from a cultural standpoint he will for that reason have a

good conscience and will watch over his ego less suspiciously. The

situation is usually presented as though ethical requirements were the

primary thing and the renunciation of instinct followed from them. This

leaves the origin of the ethical sense unexplained. Actually, it seems

to be the other way about. The first instinctual renunciation is enforced

by external powers, and it is only this which creates the ethical sense,

which  expresses  itself  in  conscience  and  demands  a  further

renunciation of instinct.

   Thus moral masochism becomes a classical piece of evidence for

the  existence  of  fusion  of  instinct.  Its  danger  lies  in  the  fact  that  it

originates from the death instinct and corresponds to the part of that

instinct which has escaped being turned outwards as an instinct of

destruction. But since, on the other hand, it has the significance of an

erotic  component,  even  the  subject’s  destruction  of  himself  cannot

take place without libidinal satisfaction.

                                                                                       4083

 

            THE DISSOLUTION OF THE OEDIPUS COMPLEX

                                        (1924)

 


                                                                                      4084

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4085

 

            THE DISSOLUTION OF THE OEDIPUS COMPLEX

 

To  an  ever-increasing  extent  the  Oedipus  complex  reveals  its

importance as the central phenomenon of the sexual period of early

childhood.  After  that,  its  dissolution  takes  place;  it  succumbs  to

repression, as we say, and is followed by the latency period. It has not

yet become clear, however, what it is that brings about its destruction.

Analyses  seem  to  show  that  it  is  the  experience  of  painful

disappointments.  The  little  girl  likes  to  regard  herself  as  what  her

father  loves  above  all  else;  but  the  time  comes  when  she  has  to

endure a harsh punishment from him and she is cast out of her fool’s

paradise.  The  boy  regards  his  mother  as  his  own  property;  but  he

finds one day that she has transferred her love and solicitude to a new

arrival. Reflection must deepen our sense of the importance of those

influences, for it will emphasize the fact that distressing experiences of

this sort, which act in opposition to the content of the complex, are

inevitable. Even when no special events occur, like those we have

mentioned as examples, the absence of the satisfaction hoped for, the

continued denial of the desired baby, must in the end lead the small

lover to turn away from his hopeless longing. In this way the Oedipus

complex would go to its destruction from its lack of success, from the

effects of its internal impossibility.

   Another view is that the Oedipus complex must collapse because

the time has come for its disintegration, just as the milk-teeth fall outwhen  the  permanent  ones  begin  to  grow.  Although  the  majority  of

human  beings  go  through  the  Oedipus  complex  as  an  individual

experience, it is nevertheless a phenomenon which is determined and

laid down by heredity and which is bound to pass away according to

programme when the next pre-ordained phase of development sets in.

This being so, it is of no great importance what the occasions are

which allow this to happen, or, indeed, whether any such occasions

can be discovered at all.

 


                    The Dissolution Of The Oedipus Complex

                                                                                      4086

 

   The justice of both these views cannot be disputed. Moreover, they

are compatible. There is room for the ontogenetic view side by side

with the more far-reaching phylogenetic one. It is also true that even at

birth the whole individual is destined to die, and perhaps his organic

disposition  may  already  contain  the  indication  of  what  he  is  to  die

from. Nevertheless, it remains of interest to follow out how this innate

programme is carried out and in what way accidental noxae exploit his

disposition.

   We have lately been made more clearly aware than before that a

child’s sexual development advances to a certain phase at which the

genital organ has already taken over the leading role. But this genital

is the male one only, or, more correctly, the penis; the female genital

has  remained  undiscovered.  This  phallic  phase,  which  is

contemporaneous with the Oedipus complex, does not develop further

to  the  definitive  genital  organization,  but  is  submerged,  and  is

succeeded by the latency period. Its termination, however, takes place

in a typical manner and in conjunction with events that are of regular

recurrence.

   When the (male) child’s interest turns to his genitals he betrays the

fact by manipulating them frequently; and he then finds that the adults

do not approve of this behaviour. More or less plainly, more or less

brutally, a threat is pronounced that this part of him which he values

so highly will be taken away from him. Usually it is from women that

the threat emanates; very often they seek to strengthen their authorityby a reference to the father or the doctor, who, so they say, will carry

out the punishment. In a number of cases the women will themselves

mitigate the threat in a symbolic manner by telling the child that what

is to be removed is not his genital, which actually plays a passive part,

but his hand, which is the active culprit. It happens particularly often

that the little boy is threatened with castration, not because he plays

with his penis with his hand, but because he wets his bed every night

and cannot be got to be clean. Those in charge of him behave as if

this nocturnal incontinence was the result and the proof of his being

unduly concerned with his penis, and they are probably right. In any

case, long-continued bed-wetting is to be equated with the emissions

of adults. It is an expression of the same excitation of the genitals

which has impelled the child to masturbate at this period.

 


                    The Dissolution Of The Oedipus Complex

                                                                                      4087

 

   Now it is my view that what brings about the destruction of the

child’s  phallic  genital  organization  is  this  threat  of  castration.  Not

immediately, it is true, and not without other influences being brought

to bear as well. For to begin with the boy does not believe in the threat

or  obey  it  in  the  least.  Psycho-analysis  has  recently  attached

importance  to  two  experiences  which  all  children  go  through  and

which, it is suggested, prepare them for the loss of highly valued parts

of the body. These experiences are the withdrawal of the mother’s

breast - at first intermittently and later for good - and the daily demand

on them to give up the contents of the bowel. But there is no evidence

to  show  that,  when  the  threat  of  castration  takes  place,  those

experiences have any effect. It is not until a fresh experience comes

his way that the child begins to reckon with the possibility of being

castrated, and then only hesitatingly and unwillingly, and not without

making  efforts  to  depreciate  the  significance  of  something  he  has

himself observed.

   The observation which finally breaks down his unbelief is the sight of

the female genitals. Sooner or later the child, who is so proud of his

possession of a penis, has a view of the genital region of a little girl,and  cannot  help  being  convinced  of  the  absence  of  a  penis  in  a

creature who is so like himself. With this, the loss of his own penis

becomes imaginable, and the threat of castration takes its deferred

effect.

 


                    The Dissolution Of The Oedipus Complex

                                                                                      4088

 

   We should not be as short-sighted as the person in charge of the

child who threatens him with castration, and we must not overlook the

fact that at this time masturbation by no means represents the whole

of his sexual life. As can be clearly shown, he stands in the Oedipus

attitude to his parents; his masturbation is only a genital discharge of

the  sexual  excitation  belonging  to  the  complex,  and  throughout  his

later years will owe its importance to that relationship. The Oedipus

complex  offered  the  child  two  possibilities  of  satisfaction,  an  active

and  a  passive  one.  He  could  put  himself  in  his  father’s  place  in  a

masculine fashion and have intercourse with his mother as his father

did, in which case he would soon have felt the latter as a hindrance; or

he might want to take the place of his mother and be loved by his

father, in which case his mother would become superfluous. The child

may  have  had  only  very  vague  notions  as  to  what  constitutes  a

satisfying erotic intercourse; but certainly the penis must play a part in

it, for the sensations in his own organ were evidence of that. So far he

had had no occasion to doubt that women possessed a penis. But

now his acceptance of the possibility of castration, his recognition that

women  were  castrated,  made  an  end  of  both  possible  ways  of

obtaining  satisfaction  from  the  Oedipus  complex.  For  both  of  them

entailed  the  loss  of  his  penis  -  the  masculine  one  as  a  resulting

punishment and the feminine one as a precondition. If the satisfaction

of  love  in  the  field  of  the  Oedipus  complex  is  to  cost  the  child  his

penis, a conflict is bound to arise between his narcissistic interest in

that part of his body and the libidinal cathexis of his parental objects.

In this conflict the first of these forces normally triumphs: the child’s

ego turns away from the Oedipus complex.

   I have described elsewhere how this turning away takes place. Theobject-cathexes  are  given  up  and  replaced  by  identifications.  The

authority of the father or the parents is introjected into the ego, and

there  it  forms  the  nucleus  of  the  super-ego,  which  takes  over  the

severity of the father and perpetuates his prohibition against incest,

and so secures the ego from the return of the libidinal object-cathexis.

The  libidinal  trends  belonging  to  the  Oedipus  complex  are  in  part

desexualized and sublimated (a thing which probably happens with

every transformation into an identification) and in part inhibited in their

aim and changed into impulses of affection. The whole process has,

on the one hand, preserved the genital organ - has averted the danger

of  its  loss  -  and,  on  the  other,  has  paralysed  it  -  has  removed  its

function.  This  process  ushers  in  the  latency  period,  which  now

interrupts the child’s sexual development.

 


                    The Dissolution Of The Oedipus Complex

                                                                                      4089

 

   I see no reason for denying the name of a ‘repression’ to the ego’s

turning away from the Oedipus complex, although later repressions

come about for the most part with the participation of the super-ego,

which in this case is only just being formed. But the process we have

described is more than a repression. It is equivalent, if it is ideally

carried out, to a destruction and an abolition of the complex. We may

plausibly assume that we have here come upon the borderline - never

a very sharply drawn one - between the normal and the pathological. If

the ego has in fact not achieved much more than a repression of the

complex, the latter persists in an unconscious state in the id and will

later manifest its pathogenic effect.

      Analytic  observation  enables  us  to  recognize  or  guess  these

connections between the phallic organization, the Oedipus complex,

the threat of castration, the formation of the super-ego and the latency

period. These connections justify the statement that the destruction of

the Oedipus complex is brought about by the threat of castration. But

this does not dispose of the problem; there is room for a theoretical

speculation which may upset the results we have come to or put them

in a new light. Before we start along this new path, however, we mustturn to a question which has arisen in the course of this discussion

and has so far been left on one side. The process which has been

described refers, as has been expressly said, to male children only.

How does the corresponding development take place in little girls?

 


                    The Dissolution Of The Oedipus Complex

                                                                                      4090

 

      At  this  point  our  material  -  for  some  incomprehensible  reason  -

becomes  far  more  obscure  and  full  of  gaps.  The  female  sex,  too,

develops an Oedipus complex, a super-ego and a latency period. May

we also attribute a phallic organization and a castration complex to it?

The answer is in the affirmative; but these things cannot be the same

as they are in boys. Here the feminist demand for equal rights for the

sexes does not take us far, for the morphological distinction is bound

to find expression in differences of psychical development. ‘Anatomy

is  Destiny’,  to  vary  a  saying  of  Napoleon’s.  The  little  girl’s  clitoris

behaves  just  like  a  penis  to  begin  with;  but,  when  she  makes  a

comparison with a playfellow of the other sex, she perceives that she

has ‘come off badly’ and she feels this as a wrong done to her and as

a ground for inferiority. For a while still she consoles herself with the

expectation that later on, when she grows older, she will acquire just

as big an appendage as the boy’s. Here the masculinity complex of

women branches off. A female child, however, does not understand

her  lack  of  a  penis  as  being  a  sex  character;  she  explains  it  by

assuming  that  at  some  earlier  date  she  had  possessed  an  equally

large  organ  and  had  then  lost  it  by  castration.  She  seems  not  to

extend this inference from herself to other, adult females, but, entirely

on the lines of the phallic phase, to regard them as possessing large

and complete - that is to say, male - genitals. The essential difference

thus comes about that the girl accepts castration as an accomplished

fact, whereas the boy fears the possibility of its occurrence.

   The fear of castration being thus excluded in the little girl, a powerful

motive also drops out for the setting-up of a super-ego and for the

breaking-off of the infantile genital organization. In her, far more than

in the boy, these changes seem to be the result of upbringing and ofintimidation from outside which threatens her with a loss of love. The

girl’s Oedipus complex is much simpler than that of the small bearer of

the penis; in my experience, it seldom goes beyond the taking of her

mother’s place and the adopting of a feminine attitude towards her

father. Renunciation of the penis is not tolerated by the girl without

some  attempt  at  compensation.  She  slips  -  along  the  line  of  a

symbolic  equation,  one  might  say  -  from  the  penis  to  a  baby.  Her

Oedipus complex culminates in a desire, which is long retained, to

receive a baby from her father as a gift - to bear him a child. One has

an impression that the Oedipus complex is then gradually given up

because this wish is never fulfilled. The two wishes - to possess a

penis and a child - remain strongly cathected in the unconscious and

help  to  prepare  the  female  creature  for  her  later  sexual  role.  The

comparatively lesser strength of the sadistic contribution to her sexual

instinct, which we may no doubt connect with the stunted growth of

her penis, makes it easier in her case for the direct sexual trends to be

transformed into aim-inhibited trends of an affectionate kind. It must

be  admitted,  however,  that  in  general  our  insight  into  these

developmental  processes  in  girls  is  unsatisfactory,  incomplete  and

vague.

 


                    The Dissolution Of The Oedipus Complex

                                                                                      4091

 

      I  have  no  doubt  that  the  chronological  and  causal  relations

described here between the Oedipus complex, sexual intimidation (the

threat of castration), the formation of the super-ego and the beginning

of the latency period are of a typical kind; but I do not wish to assert

that this type is the only possible one. Variations in the chronological

order and in the linking-up of these events are bound to have a very

important bearing on the development of the individual.

   Since the publication of Otto Rank’s interesting study, The Trauma

of Birth, even the conclusion arrived at by this modest investigation, to

the effect that the boy’s Oedipus complex is destroyed by the fear of

castration,  cannot  be  accepted  without  further  discussion.

Nevertheless,  it  seems  to  me  premature  to  enter  into  such  adiscussion at the present time, and perhaps inadvisable to begin a

criticism or an appreciation of Rank’s view at this juncture.

                                                                                       4092

 

        THE LOSS OF REALITY IN NEUROSIS AND PSYCHOSIS

                                        (1924)

 


                                                                                      4093

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4094

 

        THE LOSS OF REALITY IN NEUROSIS AND PSYCHOSIS

 

I have recently¹ indicated as one of the features which differentiate a

neurosis from a psychosis the fact that in a neurosis the ego, in its

dependence on reality, suppresses a piece of the id (of instinctual life),

whereas  in  a  psychosis,  this  same  ego,  in  the  service  of  the  id,

withdraws  from  a  piece  of  reality.  Thus  for  a  neurosis  the  decisive

factor would be the predominance of the influence of reality, whereas

for a psychosis it would be the predominance of the id. In a psychosis,

a loss of reality would necessarily be present, whereas in a neurosis, it

would seem, this loss would be avoided.

   But this does not at all agree with the observation which all of us can

make that every neurosis disturbs the patient’s relation to reality in

some way, that it serves him as a means of withdrawing from reality,

and that, in its severe forms, it actually signifies a flight from real life.

This contradiction seems a serious one; but it is easily resolved, and

the explanation of it will in fact help us to understand neuroses.

   For the contradiction exists only as long as we keep our eyes fixed

on the situation at the beginning of the neurosis, in which the ego, in

the  service  of  reality,  sets  about  the  repression  of  an  instinctual

impulse.  This,  however,  is  not  yet  the  neurosis  itself.  The  neurosis

consists rather in the processes which provide a compensation for the

portion of the id that has been damaged - that is to say, in the reaction

against  the  repression  and  in  the  failure  of  the  repression.  Theloosening of the relation to reality is a consequence of this second

step in the formation of a neurosis, and it ought not to surprise us if a

detailed examination shows that the loss of reality affects precisely

that  piece  of  reality  as  a  result  of  whose  demands  the  instinctual

repression ensued.

   There is nothing new in our characterization of neurosis as the result

of a repression that has failed. We have said this all along, and it is

only because of the new context in which we are viewing the subject

that it has been necessary to repeat it.

 

   ¹ ‘Neurosis and Psychosis’ (1924b)

 


                The Loss Of Reality In Neurosis And Psychosis

                                                                                      4095

 

   Incidentally, the same objection arises in a specially marked manner

when we are dealing with a neurosis in which the exciting cause (the

‘traumatic scene’) is known, and in which one can see how the person

concerned  turns  away  from  the  experience  and  consigns  it  to

amnesia. Let me go back by way of example to a case analysed a

great many years ago,¹ in which the patient, a young woman, was in

love with her brother-in-law. Standing beside her sister’s death-bed,

she was horrified at having the thought: ‘Now he is free and can marry

me.’  This  scene  was  instantly  forgotten,  and  thus  the  process  of

regression, which led to her hysterical pains, was set in motion. It is

instructive precisely in this case, moreover, to learn along what path

the  neurosis  attempted  to  solve  the  conflict.  It  took  away  from  the

value of the change that had occurred in reality, by repressing the

instinctual  demand  which  had  emerged  -  that  is,  her  love  for  her

brother-in-law. The psychotic reaction would have been a disavowal of

the fact of her sister’s death.

      We  might  expect  that  when  a  psychosis  comes  into  being,

something analogous to the process in a neurosis occurs, though, of

course, between different agencies of the mind; thus we might expect

that in a psychosis, too, two steps could be discerned, of which the

first would drag the ego away, this time from reality, while the second

would  try  to  make  good  the  damage  done  and  re-establish  thesubject’s  relations  to  reality  at  the  expense  of  the  id.  And,  in  fact,

some analogy of the sort can be observed in a psychosis. Here, too,

there  are  two  steps,  the  second  of  which  has  the  character  of  a

reparation.  But  beyond  that  the  analogy  gives  way  to  a  far  more

extensive similarity between the two processes. The second step of

the psychosis is indeed intended to make good the loss of reality, not,

however,  at  the  expense  of  a  restriction  of  the  id  -  as  happens  in

neurosis at the expense of the relation to reality - but in another, more

autocratic manner, by the creation of a new reality which no longer

raises the same objections as the old one that has been given up. The

second step, therefore, both in neurosis and psychosis, is supported

by the same trends. In both cases it serves the desire for power of the

id, which will not allow itself to be dictated to by reality. Both neurosis

and psychosis are thus the expression of a rebellion on the part of the

id against the external world, of its unwillingness - or, if one prefers, its

incapacity  -  to  adapt  itself  to  the  exigencies  of  reality,  to Αυάγχη

[Necessity]. Neurosis and psychosis differ from each other far more in

their first, introductory, reaction than in the attempt at reparation which

follows it.

 

   ¹ In Studies on Hysteria (1895d).

 


                The Loss Of Reality In Neurosis And Psychosis

                                                                                      4096

 

      Accordingly,  the  initial  difference  is  expressed  thus  in  the  final

outcome: in neurosis a piece of reality is avoided by a sort of flight,

whereas in psychosis it is remodelled. Or we might say: in psychosis,

the  initial  flight  is  succeeded  by  an  active  phase  of  remodelling;  in

neurosis, the initial obedience is succeeded by a deferred attempt at

flight.  Or  again,  expressed  in  yet  another  way:  neurosis  does  not

disavow the reality, it only ignores it; psychosis disavows it and tries to

replace it. We call behaviour ‘normal’ or ‘healthy’, if it combines certain

features of both reactions - if it disavows the reality as little as does a

neurosis, but if it then exerts itself, as does a psychosis, to effect an

alteration of that reality. Of course, this expedient, normal, behaviour

leads to work being carried out on the external world; it does not stop,as  in  psychosis,  at  effecting  internal  changes.  It  is  no  longer

autoplastic but alloplastic.

   In a psychosis, the transforming of reality is carried out upon the

psychical  precipitates  of  former  relations  to  it  -  that  is,  upon  the

memory-traces,  ideas  and  judgements  which  have  been  previously

derived from reality and by which reality was represented in the mind.

But  this  relation  was  never  a  closed  one;  it  was  continually  being

enriched and altered by fresh perceptions. Thus the psychosis is also

faced with the task of procuring for itself perceptions of a kind which

shall correspond to the new reality; and this is most radically effected

by means of hallucination. The fact that, in so many forms and cases

of psychosis, the paramnesias, the delusions and the hallucinations

that occur are of a most distressing character and are bound up with a

generation of anxiety - this fact is without doubt a sign that the whole

process of remodelling is carried through against forces which oppose

it violently. We may construct the process on the model of a neurosis,

with  which  we  are  more  familiar.  There  we  see  that  a  reaction  of

anxiety  sets  in  whenever  the  repressed  instinct  makes  a  thrust

forward, and that the outcome of the conflict is only a compromise and

does not provide complete satisfaction. Probably in a psychosis the

rejected piece of reality constantly forces itself upon the mind, just as

the  repressed  instinct  does  in  a  neurosis,  and  that  is  why  in  both

cases  the  consequences  too  are  the  same.  The  elucidation  of  the

various mechanisms which are designed, in the psychoses, to turn the

subject away from reality and to reconstruct reality - this is a task for

specialized psychiatric study which has not yet been taken in hand.

 


                The Loss Of Reality In Neurosis And Psychosis

                                                                                      4097

 

   There is, therefore, a further analogy between a neurosis and a

psychosis, in that in both of them the task which is undertaken in the

second  step  is  partly  unsuccessful.  For  the  repressed  instinct  is

unable to procure a full substitute (in neurosis); and the representation

of reality cannot be remoulded into satisfying forms (not, at least, in

every species of mental illness). But the emphasis is different in thetwo cases. In a psychosis it falls entirely on the first step, which is

pathological in itself and cannot but lead to illness. In a neurosis, on

the  other  hand,  it  falls  on  the  second  step,  on  the  failure  of  the

repression, whereas the first step may succeed, and does succeed in

innumerable  instances  without  overstepping  the  bounds  of  health  -

even  though  it  does  so  at  a  certain  price  and  not  without  leaving

behind  traces  of  the  psychical  expenditure  it  has  called  for.  These

distinctions,  and  perhaps  many  others  as  well,  are  a  result  of  the

topographical  difference  in  the  initial  situation  of  the  pathogenic

conflict - namely whether in it the ego yielded to its allegiance to the

real world or to its dependence on the id.

   A neurosis usually contents itself with avoiding the piece of reality in

question and protecting itself against coming into contact with it. The

sharp  distinction  between  neurosis  and  psychosis,  however,  is

weakened by the circumstance that in neurosis, too, there is no lack of

attempts to replace a disagreeable reality by one which is more in

keeping  with  the  subject’s  wishes.  This  is  made  possible  by  the

existence  of  a world  of  phantasy,  of  a  domain  which  became

separated from the real external world at the time of the introduction of

the reality principle. This domain has since been kept free from the

demands of the exigencies of life, like a kind of ‘reservation’; it is not

inaccessible to the ego, but is only loosely attached to it. It is from this

world  of  phantasy  that  the  neurosis  draws  the  material  for  its  new

wishful constructions, and it usually finds that material along the path

of regression to a more satisfying real past.

 


                The Loss Of Reality In Neurosis And Psychosis

                                                                                      4098

 

   It can hardly be doubted that the world of phantasy plays the same

part in psychosis and that there, too, it is the storehouse from which

the materials or the pattern for building the new reality are derived. But

whereas the new, imaginary external world of a psychosis attempts to

put  itself  in  the  place  of  external  reality,  that  of  a  neurosis,  on  the

contrary, is apt, like the play of children, to attach itself to a piece of

reality - a different piece from the one against which it has to defenditself  -  and  to  lend  that  piece  a  special  importance  and  a  secret

meaning  which  we  (not  always  quite  appropriately)  call  a symbolic

one. Thus we see that both in neurosis and psychosis there comes

into consideration the question not only of a loss of reality but also of a

substitute for reality.

                                                                                       4099

 

                A SHORT ACCOUNT OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

                                        (1924)

 


                                                                                      4100

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4101

 

                A SHORT ACCOUNT OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

                                            I

 

Psycho-analysis may be said to have been born with the twentieth

century; for the publication in which it emerged before the world as

something new - my Interpretation of Dreams - bears the date ‘1900’.

But, as may well be supposed, it did not drop from the skies ready-

made.  It  had  its  starting-point  in  older  ideas,  which  it  developed

further; it sprang from earlier suggestions, which it elaborated. Any

history of it must therefore begin with an account of the influences

which  determined  its  origin  and  should  not  overlook  the  times  and

circumstances that preceded its creation.

   Psycho-analysis grew up in a narrowly-restricted field. At the outset,

it  had  only  a  single  aim  -  that  of  understanding  something  of  the

nature of what were known as the ‘functional’ nervous diseases, with a

view to overcoming the impotence which had so far characterized their

medical treatment. The neurologists of that period had been brought

up  to  have  a  high  respect  for  chemico-physical  and  pathologico-

anatomical  facts;  and  they  were  latterly  under  the  influence  of  the

findings  of  Hitzig  and  Fritsch,  of  Ferrier,  Goltz  and  others,  who

seemed  to  have  established  an  intimate  and  possibly  exclusive

connection between certain functions and particular parts of the brain.

They did not know what to make of the psychical factor and could notunderstand it. They left it to the philosophers, the mystics and - the

quacks; and they considered it unscientific to have anything to do with

it.  Accordingly  they  could  find  no  approach  to  the  secrets  of  the

neuroses,  and  in  particular  of  the  enigmatic  ‘hysteria’,  which  was,

indeed, the prototype of the whole species. As late as in 1885, when I

was studying at the Salpêtrière, I found that people were content to

account for hysterical paralyses by a formula which asserted that they

were founded on slight functional disturbances of the same parts of

the  brain  which,  when  they  were  severely  damaged,  led  to  the

corresponding organic paralyses.

 


                      A Short Account Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4102

 

   Of course this lack of understanding affected the treatment of these

pathological  conditions  badly  as  well.  In  general  this  consisted  in

measures  designed  to  ‘harden’  the  patient  -  in  the  prescription  of

medicines and in attempts, mostly very ill-contrived and executed in

an unfriendly manner, at bringing mental influences to bear on him by

threats, jeers and warnings and by exhorting him to make up his mind

to ‘pull himself together’. Electrical treatment was given out as being a

specific  cure  for  nervous  conditions;  but  anyone  who  has

endeavoured to carry out Erb’s detailed instructions must marvel at

the space that phantasy can occupy even in what professes to be an

exact science. The decisive turn was taken in the eighties, when the

phenomena of hypnotism made one more attempt to find admission to

medical science - this time with more success than so often before,

thanks to the work of Liébeault, Bernheim, Heidenhain and Forel. The

essential thing was that the genuineness of these phenomena was

recognized.  Once  this  had  been  admitted,  two  fundamental  and

unforgettable lessons could not fail to be drawn from hypnotism. First,

one was given convincing proof that striking somatic changes could

after all be brought about solely by mental influences, which in this

case  one  had  oneself  set  in  motion.  Secondly,  one  received  the

clearest impression - especially from the behaviour of subjects after

hypnosis - of the existence of mental processes that one could onlydescribe as ‘unconscious’. The ‘unconscious’ had, it is true, long been

under  discussion  among  philosophers  as  a  theoretical  concept;  but

now  for  the  first  time,  in  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism,  it  became

something actual, tangible and subject to experiment. Apart from all

this, hypnotic phenomena showed an unmistakable similarity to the

manifestations of some neuroses.

   It is not easy to over-estimate the importance of the part played by

hypnotism  in  the  history  of  the  origin  of  psycho-analysis.  From  a

theoretical as well as from a therapeutic point of view, psycho-analysis

has at its command a legacy which it has inherited from hypnotism.

   Hypnosis also proved a valuable aid in the study of the neuroses -

once  again,  first  and  foremost,  of  hysteria.  Charcot’s  experiments

created a great impression. He suspected that certain paralyses which

appeared after a trauma (an accident) were of a hysterical nature, and

he showed that, by suggesting a trauma under hypnosis, he was able

to provoke paralyses of the same sort artificially. The expectation was

thus raised that traumatic influences might in all cases play a part in

the  production  of  hysterical  symptoms.  Charcot  himself  made  no

further efforts towards a psychological understanding of hysteria; but

his pupil, Pierre Janet, took up the question and was able to show,

with the help of hypnosis, that the symptoms of hysteria were firmly

dependent  on  certain  unconscious  thoughts  (idées  fixes).  Janet

attributed to hysteria a supposed constitutional incapacity for holding

mental processes together - an incapacity which led to a disintegration

(dissociation) of mental life.

 


                      A Short Account Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4103

 

      Psycho-analysis,  however,  was  not  in  any  way  based  on  these

researches  of  Janet’s.  The  decisive  factor  in  its  case  was  the

experience  of  a  Viennese  physician,  Dr.  Josef  Breuer.  In  1881,

independently of any outside influence, he was able with the help of

hypnosis  to  study  and  restore  to  health  a  highly-gifted  girl  who

suffered from hysteria. Breuer’s findings were not given to the public

until fifteen years later, after he had taken the present writer (Freud)into collaboration. This case of Breuer’s retains its unique significance

for our understanding of the neuroses to this day; so that we cannot

avoid dwelling on it a little longer. It is essential to realize clearly in

what  its  peculiarity  consisted.  The  girl  had  fallen  ill  while  she  was

nursing her father, to whom she was tenderly attached. Breuer was

able to establish that all her symptoms were related to this period of

nursing and could be explained by it. Thus it had for the first time

become possible to obtain a complete view of a case of this puzzling

neurosis,  and  all  its  symptoms  had  turned  out  to  have  a  meaning.

Further,  it  was  a  universal  feature  of  the  symptoms  that  they  had

arisen in situations involving an impulse to an action which, however,

had not been carried out but had for other reasons been suppressed.

The symptoms had, in fact, appeared in place of the actions that were

not performed. Thus, to explain the aetiology of hysterical symptoms,

we were led to the subject’s emotional life (to affectivity) and to the

interplay  of  mental  forces  (to  dynamics);  and  since  then  these  two

lines of approach have never been dropped.

 


                      A Short Account Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4104

 

   The precipitating causes of the symptoms were compared by Breuer

to  Charcot’s  traumas.  Now  it  was  a  remarkable  fact  that  all  these

traumatic  precipitating  causes,  and  all  the  mental  impulses  starting

from  them,  were  lost  to  the  patient’s  memory,  as  though  they  had

never  happened;  while  their  products  -  the  symptoms  -  persisted

unaltered, as though, so far as they were concerned, there was no

such thing as the effacing effect of time. Here, therefore, we had a

fresh  proof  of  the  existence  of  mental  processes  which  were

unconscious but for that very reason especially powerful - processes

which  we  had  first  come  to  know  in  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  The

therapeutic procedure adopted by Breuer was to induce the patient,

under hypnosis, to remember the forgotten traumas and to react to

them with powerful expressions of affect. When this had been done,

the symptom, which had till then taken the place of these expressions

of emotion, disappeared. Thus one and the same procedure servedsimultaneously the purposes of investigating and of getting rid of the

ailment; and this unusual conjunction was later retained in psycho-

analysis.

   After the present writer had, during the early nineties, confirmed

Breuer’s results in a considerable number of patients, the two, Breuer

and  Freud,  together  decided  on  a  publication, Studies  on  Hysteria

(1895d),  which  contained  their  findings  and  an  attempt  at  a  theory

based on them. This asserted that hysterical symptoms arose when

the  affect  of  a  mental  process  cathected  with  a  strong  affect  was

forcibly prevented from being worked over consciously in the normal

way and was thus diverted into a wrong path. In cases of hysteria,

according  to  this  theory,  the  affect  passed  over  into  an  unusual

somatic  innervation  (‘conversion’),  but  could  be  given  another

direction and got rid of (‘abreacted’), if the experience were revived

under  hypnosis.  The  authors  gave  this  procedure  the  name  of

‘catharsis’ (purging, setting free of a strangulated affect).

      The  cathartic  method  was  the  immediate  precursor  of  psycho-

analysis; and, in spite of every extension of experience and of every

modification of theory, is still contained within it as its nucleus. But it

was no more than a new medical procedure for influencing certain

nervous  diseases,  and  nothing  suggested  that  it  might  become  a

subject  for  the  most  general  interest  and  for  the  most  violent

contradiction.

 


                      A Short Account Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4105

 

                                            II

 

   Soon after the publication of Studies on Hysteria the partnership

between Breuer and Freud came to an end. Breuer, who was in reality

a consultant in internal medicine, gave up treating nervous patients,

and Freud devoted himself to the further perfection of the instrument

left over to him by his elder collaborator. The technical novelties which

he  introduced  and  the  discoveries  which  he  made  changed  the

cathartic method into psycho-analysis. The most momentous step, nodoubt, was his determination to do without the assistance of hypnosis

in his technical procedure. He did so for two reasons: first, because, in

spite of a course of instruction with Bernheim at Nancy, he did not

succeed  in  inducing  hypnosis  in  a  sufficient  number  of  cases,  and

secondly, because he was dissatisfied with the therapeutic results of

catharsis based on hypnosis. It is true that these results were striking

and appeared after a treatment of short duration, but they turned out

not to be permanent and to depend too much on the patient’s personal

relations with the physician. The abandonment of hypnosis made a

breach in the course of development of the procedure up to then, and

it meant a fresh start.

   Hypnosis had, however, performed the service of restoring to the

patient’s  memory  what  he  had  forgotten.  It  was  necessary  to  find

some other technique to replace it; and the idea occurred to Freud of

substituting for it the method of ‘free association’. That is to say, he

pledged his patients to refrain from any conscious reflection and to

abandon themselves, in a state of quiet concentration, to following the

ideas which occurred to them spontaneously (involuntarily) - ‘to skim

off  the  surface  of  their  consciousness’.  They  were  to  communicate

these ideas to the physician even if they felt objections to doing so, if,

for instance, the thoughts seemed too disagreeable, too senseless,

too  unimportant  or  irrelevant.  The  choice  of  free  association  as  a

means of investigating the forgotten unconscious material seems so

strange that a word in justification of it will not be out of place. Freud

was led to it by an expectation that the so-called ‘free’ association

would prove in fact to be unfree, since, when all conscious intellectual

purposes  had  been  suppressed,  the  ideas  that  emerged  would  be

seen to be determined by the unconscious material. This expectation

was justified by experience. When the ‘fundamental rule of psycho-

analysis’ which has just been stated was obeyed, the course of free

association produced a plentiful store of ideas which could put one on

the track of what the patient had forgotten. To be sure, this material

did not bring up what had actually been forgotten, but it brought up

such plain and numerous hints at it that, with the help of a certain

amount  of  supplementing  and  interpreting,  the  doctor  was  able  to

guess  (to  reconstruct)  the  forgotten  material  from  it.  Thus  free

association together with the art of interpretation performed the samefunction as had previously been performed by hypnotism.

 


                      A Short Account Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4106

 

   It looked as though our work had been made much more difficult

and complicated; but the inestimable gain was that an insight was now

obtained into an interplay of forces which had been concealed from

the observer by the hypnotic state. It became evident that the work of

uncovering  what  had  been  pathogenically  forgotten  had  to  struggle

against a constant and very intense resistance. The critical objections

which the patient raised in order to avoid communicating the ideas

which  occurred  to  him,  and  against  which  the  fundamental  rule  of

psycho-analysis  was  directed,  had  themselves  already  been

manifestations of this resistance. A consideration of the phenomena of

resistance  led  to  one  of  the  corner-stones  of  the  psycho-analytic

theory of the neuroses - the theory of repression. It was plausible to

suppose that the same forces which were now struggling against the

pathogenic  material  being  made  conscious  had  at  an  earlier  time

made the same efforts with success. A gap in the aetiology of neurotic

symptoms was thus filled. The impressions and mental impulses, for

which the symptoms were now serving as substitutes, had not been

forgotten without reason or on account of a constitutional in capacity

for synthesis (as Janet supposed); they had, though the influence of

other mental forces, met with a repression the success and evidence

of which was precisely their being debarred from consciousness and

excluded from memory. It was only in consequence of this repression

that  they  had  become  pathogenic  -  that  is,  had  succeeded  in

manifesting themselves along unusual paths as symptoms.

   A conflict between two groups of mental trends had to be looked on

as the ground for repression and accordingly as the cause of every

neurotic illness. And here experience taught us a new and surprising

fact about the nature of the forces that were struggling against each

other.  Repression  invariably  proceeded  from  the  sick  person’s

conscious personality (his ego) and took its stand on aesthetic and

ethical motives; the impulses that were subjected to repression werethose of selfishness and cruelty, which can be summed up in general

as evil, but above all sexual wishful impulses, often of the crudest and

most  forbidden  kind.  Thus  the  symptoms  were  a  substitute  for

forbidden  satisfactions  and  the  illness  seemed  to  correspond  to  an

incomplete subjugation of the immoral side of human beings.

 


                      A Short Account Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4107

 

   Advance in knowledge made ever clearer the enormous part played

in mental life by sexual wishful impulses, and led to a detailed study of

the nature and development of the sexual instinct.¹ But we also came

upon  another  purely  empirical  finding,  in  the  discovery  that  the

experiences  and  conflicts  of  the  first  years  of  childhood  play  an

unsuspectedly  important  part  in  the  individual’s  development  and

leave behind them ineffaceable dispositions bearing upon the period

of maturity. This led to the revelation of something that had hitherto

been fundamentally overlooked by science - infantile sexuality, which,

from  the  tenderest  age  onwards,  is  manifested  both  in  physical

reactions  and  in  mental  attitudes.  In  order  to  bring  together  this

sexuality of children with what is described as the normal sexuality of

adults and the abnormal sexual life of perverts, the concept of what

was sexual had itself to be corrected and widened in a manner which

could be justified by the evolution of the sexual instinct.

   After hypnosis was replaced by the technique of free association,

Breuer’s  cathartic  procedure  turned  into  psycho-analysis,  which  for

more  than  a  decade  was  developed  by  the  author  (Freud)  alone.

During that time psycho-analysis gradually acquired a theory which

appeared to give a satisfactory account of the origin, meaning and

purpose  of  neurotic  symptoms  and  provided  a  rational  basis  for

medical attempts at curing the complaint. I will once again enumerate

the factors that go to make up this theory. They are: emphasis on

instinctual life (affectivity), on mental dynamics, on the fact that even

the  apparently  most  obscure  and  arbitrary  mental  phenomena

invariably have a meaning and a causation, the theory of psychical

conflict  and  of  the  pathogenic  nature  of  repression,  the  view  thatsymptoms  are  substitutive  satisfactions,  the  recognition  of  the

aetiological  importance  of  sexual  life,  and  in  particular  of  the

beginnings of infantile sexuality. From a philosophical standpoint this

theory was bound to adopt the view that the mental does not coincide

with  the  conscious,  that  mental  processes  are  in  themselves

unconscious  and  are  only  made  conscious  by  the  functioning  of

special organs (agencies or systems). By way of completing this list, I

will  add  that  among  the  affective  attitudes  of  childhood  the

complicated emotional relation of children to their parents - what is

known as the Oedipus complex - came into prominence. It became

ever clearer that this was the nucleus of every case of neurosis, and in

the patient’s behaviour towards his analyst certain phenomena of his

emotional  transference  emerged  which  came  to  be  of  great

importance for theory and technique alike.

 

   ¹ Freud, Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d)

 


                      A Short Account Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4108
 

   In the form which it thus assumed, the psycho-analytic theory of the

neuroses already contained a number of things which ran counter to

accepted  opinions  and  inclinations  and  which  were  calculated  to

provoke  astonishment,  repugnance  and  scepticism  in  outsiders:  for

instance,  the  attitude  of  psycho-analysis  to  the  problem  of  the

unconscious, its recognition of an infantile sexuality and the stress it

laid  on  the  sexual  factor  in  mental  life  generally.  But  more  was  to

follow.

 

                                            III

 

   In order to reach even half way to an understanding of how, in a

hysterical  girl,  a  forbidden  sexual  wish  can  change  into  a  painful

symptom,  it  had  been  necessary  to  make  far-reaching  and

complicated  hypotheses  about  the  structure  and  functioning  of  the

mental apparatus. There was an evident contradiction here between

expenditure of effort and result. If the conditions postulated by psycho-analysis really existed, they were of a fundamental nature and must

be  able  to  find  expression  in  other  phenomena  besides  hysterical

ones. But if this inference were correct, psycho-analysis would have

ceased  to  be  of  interest  only  to  neurologists;  it  could  claim  the

attention  of  everyone  to  whom  psychological  research  was  of  any

importance. Its findings would not only have to be taken into account

in  the  field  of  pathological  mental  life  but  could  not  be  overlooked

either in coming to an understanding of normal functioning.

 


                      A Short Account Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4109

 

      Evidence  of  its  being  of  use  for  throwing  light  on  other  than

pathological mental activity was early forthcoming in connection with

two kinds of phenomena: with the very frequent parapraxes that occur

in everyday life - such as forgetting things, slips of the tongue, and

mislaying  objects  -  and  with  the  dreams  dreamt  by  healthy  and

psychically  normal  people.  Small  failures  of  functioning,  like  the

temporary forgetting of normally familiar proper names, slips of the

tongue and of the pen, and so on, had hitherto not been considered

worthy of any explanation at all or were supposed to be accounted for

by  conditions  of  fatigue,  by  distraction  of  the  attention,  etc.  The

present  writer  then  showed  from  many  examples,  in  his  book The

Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901b),  that  events  of  this  kind

have  a  meaning,  and  arise  owing  to  a  conscious  intention  being

interfered with by another, suppressed or actually unconscious one.

As a rule, quick reflection or a short analysis is enough to reveal the

interfering influence. Owing to the frequency of such parapraxes as

slips of the tongue, it became easy for anyone to convince himself

from his own experience of the existence of mental processes which

are not conscious, but which are nevertheless operative and which at

least  find  expression  as  inhibitions  and  modifications  of  other,

intended acts.

   The analysis of dreams led further: it was brought to public notice by

the present writer as early as in 1900 in The Interpretation of Dreams.

This showed that dreams are constructed in just the same way asneurotic  symptoms.  Like  them,  they  may  appear  strange  and

senseless; but, if we examine them by a technique which differs little

from the free association used in psycho-analysis, we are led from

their  manifest  content  to  a  secret  meaning,  to  the  latent  dream-

thoughts. This latent meaning is always a wishful impulse which is

represented as fulfilled at the moment of the dream. But, except in

young children and under the pressure of imperative physical needs,

this secret wish can never be expressed recognizably. It has first to

submit to a distortion, which is the work of restrictive, censoring forces

in  the  dreamer’s  ego.  In  this  way  the  manifest  dream,  as  it  is

remembered in waking life, comes about. It is distorted, to the pitch of

being unrecognizable, by concessions made to the dream-censorship;

but it can be revealed once more by analysis as an expression of a

situation  of  satisfaction  or  as  the  fulfilment  of  a  wish.  It  is  a

compromise between two conflicting groups of mental trends, just as

we have found to be the case with hysterical symptoms. The formula

which,  at  bottom,  best  meets  the  essence  of  the  dream  is  this:  a

dream is a (disguised) fulfilment of a (repressed) wish. The study of

the process which transforms the latent dream-wish into the manifest

content  of  the  dream  -a  process  known  as  the  ‘dream-work’  -  has

taught us the best part of what we know of unconscious mental life.

 


                      A Short Account Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4110

 

   Now a dream is not a morbid symptom but a product of the normal

mind.  The  wishes  which  it  represents  as  fulfilled  are  the  same  as

those which are repressed in neuroses. Dreams owe the possibility of

their genesis merely to the favourable circumstance that during the

state of sleep, which paralyses man’s power of movement, repression

is  mitigated  into  the  dream-censorship.  If,  however,  the  process  of

dream-formation oversteps certain limits, the dreamer brings it to a

stop and wakes up in a fright. Thus it is proved that the same forces

and the same processes taking place between them operate in normal

as in pathological mental life. From the date of The Interpretation of

Dreams psycho-analysis had a twofold significance. It was not only anew  method  of  treating  the  neuroses  but  it  was  also  a  new

psychology; it claimed the attention not only of nerve-specialists but

also of all those who were students of a mental science.

      The  reception  given  it  in  the  scientific  world  was,  however,  no

friendly one. For some ten years no one took any notice of Freud’s

works. About the year 1907 attention was drawn to psycho-analysis by

a group of Swiss psychiatrists (Bleuler and Jung, in Zurich), and a

storm of indignation, which was not precisely fastidious in its methods

and arguments, thereupon broke out, particularly in Germany. In this,

psycho-analysis was sharing the fate of many novelties which, after a

certain lapse of time, have found general recognition. Nevertheless it

lay  in  its  nature  that  it  should  inevitably  arouse  particularly  violent

opposition. It wounded the prejudices of civilized humanity at some

specially sensitive spots. It subjected every individual, as it were, to

the analytic reaction, by uncovering what had by universal agreement

been  repressed  into  the  unconscious;  and  in  this  way  it  forced  its

contemporaries to behave like patients who, under analytic treatment,

above  all  else  bring  their  resistances  to  the  fore.  It  must  also  be

admitted  that  it  was  no  easy  thing  to  become  convinced  of  the

correctness of the psycho-analytic theories, nor to obtain instruction in

the practice of analysis.

 


                      A Short Account Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4111

 

      The  general  hostility,  however,  did  not  succeed  in  preventing

psycho-analysis from continuous expansion during the next decade in

two directions: on the map, for interest in it was constantly cropping up

in new countries, and in the field of the mental sciences, for it was

constantly finding applications in new branches of knowledge. In 1909

President G. Stanley Hall invited Freud and Jung to give a series of

lectures at Clark University in Worcester, Mass., of which he was the

head  and  where  they  were  given  a  friendly  reception.  Since  then

psycho-analysis has remained popular in America, although precisely

in that country its name has been coupled with much superficiality and

some abuses. As early as in 1911, Havelock Ellis was able to reportthat  analysis  was  studied  and  practised,  not  only  in  Austria  and

Switzerland, but also in the United States, in England, India, Canada,

and, no doubt, in Australia too.

   It was in this period of struggle and of first blossoming, moreover,

that  the  periodicals  devoted  exclusively  to  psycho-analysis  were

inaugurated.  These  were  the Jahrbuch  für  psychoanalytische  und

psychopathologische Forschungen  (1909-1914),  directed  by  Bleuler

and  Freud  and  edited  by  Jung,  which  ceased  publication  at  the

outbreak of the World War, the Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse (1911),

edited  by  Adler  and  Stekel,  which  was  soon  replaced  by  the

Internationale Zeitschrift für Psychoanalse (1913, to-day in its tenth

volume); further, since 1912, Imago, founded by Rank and Sachs, a

periodical  for  the  application  of  psycho-analysis  to  the  mental

sciences. The great interest taken in the subject by Anglo-American

doctors was shown in 1913 by the founding of the still active Psycho-

Analytic Revue by White and Jelliffe. Later, in 1920, The International

Journal of Psycho-Analysis, intended specially for readers in England,

made  its  appearance  under  the  editorship  of  Ernest  Jones.  The

Internationaler  Psychoanalytischer  Verlag  and  the  corresponding

English  undertaking,  The  International  Psycho-Analytical  Press,

brought  out  a  continuous  series  of  analytic  publications  under  the

name of the Internationale Psychoanalytische Bibliothek (International

Psycho-Analytical  Library).  The  literature  of  psycho-analysis  is,  of

course, not to be found only in these periodicals, which are for the

most part supported by psycho-analytic societies; it appears far and

wide  in  a  great  number  of  places,  in  scientific  and  in  literary

publications.  Among  the  periodicals  of  the  Latin  world  which  pay

special attention to psycho-analysis the Rivista de Psiquiatria, edited

by H. Delgado in Lima (Peru), may be specially mentioned.

 


                      A Short Account Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4112

 

      An  essential  difference  between  this  second  decade  of  psycho-

analysis and the first lay in the fact that the present writer was no

longer its sole representative. A constantly growing circle of pupils andfollowers had collected around him, who devoted themselves first to

the  diffusion  of  the  theories  of  psycho-analysis  and  then  extended

them, supplemented them and carried them deeper. In the course of

years, several of these supporters, as was inevitable, seceded, took

their  own  paths,  or  turned  themselves  into  an  opposition  which

seemed  to  threaten  the  continuity  of  the  development  of  psycho-

analysis. Between 1911 and 1913 C. G. Jung in Zurich and Alfred

Adler in Vienna produced some stir by their attempts at giving new

interpretations to the facts of analysis and their efforts at a diversion

from  the  analytic  standpoint.  But  it  soon  appeared  that  these

secessions had effected no lasting damage. What temporary success

they achieved was easily accounted for by the readiness of the mass

of  people  to  have  themselves  set  free  from  the  pressure  of  the

demands  of  psycho-analysis  by  whatever  path  might  be  opened  to

them. The great majority of co-workers remained firm and continued

their work along the lines indicated to them. We shall come on their

names  repeatedly  in  the  short  account  below  of  the  findings  of

psycho-analysis in the many and various fields of its application.

 

                                            IV

 

   The noisy rejection of psycho-analysis by the medical world could

not  deter  its  supporters  from  developing  it,  to  begin  with,  along  its

original  lines  into  a  specialized  pathology  and  treatment  of  the

neuroses - a task which has not been completely accomplished even

to-day. Its undeniable therapeutic success, which far exceeded any

that  had  previously  been  achieved,  constantly  spurred  them  on  to

fresh efforts; while the difficulties which came to light as the material

was  examined  more  deeply  led  to  profound  alterations  in  the

technique  of  analysis  and  to  important  corrections  in  its  theoretical

hypotheses and postulates.

 


                      A Short Account Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4113

 

   In the course of this development, the technique of psycho-analysishas  become  as  definite  and  as  delicate  as  that  of  any  other

specialized branch of medicine. A failure to understand this fact has

led to many abuses (particularly in England and America) because

people  who  have  acquired  only  a  literary  knowledge  of  psycho-

analysis  from  reading  consider  themselves  capable  of  undertaking

analytic treatments without having received any special training. The

consequences of such behaviour are damaging both to the science

and to the patients and have brought much discredit upon psycho-

analysis. The foundation of a first psycho-analytic out-patient clinic (by

Max Eitingon in Berlin in 1920) has therefore become a step of high

practical importance. This institute seeks on the one hand to make

analytic treatment accessible to wide circles of the population and on

the  other  hand  undertakes  the  education  of  doctors  to  be  practical

analysts by a course of training which includes as a condition that the

learner shall agree to be analysed himself.

   Among the hypothetical concepts which enable the doctor to deal

with the analytic material, the first to be mentioned is that of ‘libido’.

Libido means in psycho-analysis in the first instance the force (thought

of as quantitatively variable and measurable) of the sexual instincts

directed towards an object - ‘sexual’ in the extended sense required

by analytic theory. Further study showed that it was necessary to set

alongside this ‘object-libido’ a ‘narcissistic’ or ‘ego-libido’, directed to

the  subject’s  own  ego;  and  the  interaction  of  these  two  forces  has

enabled us to account for a great number of normal and abnormal

processes in mental life. A rough distinction was soon made between

what are known as the ‘transference neuroses’ and the narcissistic

disorders.  The  former  (hysteria  and  obsessional  neurosis)  are  the

objects  proper  of  psycho-analytic  treatment,  while  the  others,  the

narcissistic neuroses, though they can, it is true, be examined by the

help of analysis, offer fundamental difficulties to therapeutic influence.

It  is  true  that  the  libido  theory  of  psycho-analysis  is  by  no  means

complete and that its relation to a general theory of the instincts is not

yet clear, for psycho-analysis is a young science, quite unfinished and

in  a  stage  of  rapid  development.  Here,  however,  it  should  be

emphatically pointed out how erroneous the charge of pan-sexualism

is which is so often levelled at psycho-analysis. It seeks to show that

psycho-analytic theory knows of no mental motive forces other thanpurely  sexual  ones  and  in  doing  so  exploits  popular  prejudices  by

using the word ‘sexual’ not in its analytic but in its vulgar sense.

 


                      A Short Account Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4114

 

   The psycho-analytic view would also have to include in narcissistic

disorders  all  the  ailments  described  in  psychiatry  as  ‘functional

psychoses’. It could not be doubted that neuroses and psychoses are

not  separated  by  a  hard  and  fast  line,  any  more  than  health  and

neurosis;  and  it  was  plausible  to  explain  the  mysterious  psychotic

phenomena by the discoveries achieved on the neuroses, which had

hitherto  been  equally  incomprehensible.  The  present  writer  had

himself, during the period of his isolation, made a case of paranoid

illness partly intelligible by an analytic investigation and had pointed

out in this unquestionable psychosis the same contents (complexes)

and a similar interplay of forces as in the simple neuroses. Bleuler

followed out the indications of what he called ‘Freudian mechanisms’

in a whole number of psychoses, and Jung won high opinions as an

analyst  at  a  single  blow  when,  in  1907,  he  explained  the  most

eccentric symptoms in the end-stages of dementia praecox from the

individual  life-histories  of  the  patients.  The  comprehensive  study  of

schizophrenia by Bleuler (1911) probably demonstrated once and for

all  the  justification  of  a  psycho-analytic  angle  of  approach  for  the

understanding of these psychoses.

   In this way psychiatry became the first field to which psycho-analysis

was applied and it has remained so ever since. The same research

workers who have done most to deepen analytic knowledge of the

neuroses,  such  as  Karl  Abraham  in  Berlin  and  Sándor  Ferenczi  in

Budapest  (to  name  only  the  most  prominent),  have  also  played  a

leading part in throwing analytic light on the psychoses. The conviction

of the unity and intimate connection of all the disorders that present

themselves as neurotic and psychotic phenomena is becoming more

and more firmly established despite all the efforts of the psychiatrists.

People are beginning to understand - best of all, perhaps, in America -

that the psycho-analytic study of the neuroses is the only preparationfor an understanding of the psychoses, and that psycho-analysis is

destined to make possible a scientific psychiatry of the future which

will not need to content itself with describing curious clinical pictures

and unintelligible sequences of events and with tracing the influence

of gross anatomical and toxic traumas upon a mental apparatus which

is inaccessible to our knowledge.

 


                      A Short Account Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4115

 

                                            V

 

   But the importance of psycho-analysis for psychiatry would never

have drawn the attention of the intellectual world to it or won it a place

in The  History  of  our  Times.  This  result  was  brought  about  by  the

relation of psycho-analysis to normal, not to pathological, mental life.

Originally, analytic research had indeed no other aim than to establish

the determinants of the onset (the genesis) of a few morbid mental

states. In the course of its efforts, however, it succeeded in bringing to

light  facts  of  fundamental  importance,  in  actually  creating  a  new

psychology, so that it became obvious that the validity of such findings

could not possibly be restricted to the sphere of pathology. We have

seen already when it was that the decisive proof was produced of the

correctness of this conclusion. It was when dreams were successfully

interpreted by analytic technique - dreams, which are a part of the

mental life of normal people and which yet may in fact be regarded as

pathological  products  that  can  regularly  appear  under  healthy

conditions.

   If the psychological discoveries gained from the study of dreams

were  firmly  kept  in  view,  only  one  further  step  was  needed  before

psycho-analysis  could  be  proclaimed  as  the  theory  of  the  deeper

mental  processes  not  directly  accessible  to  consciousness  -  as  a

‘depth-psychology’ - and before it could be applied to almost all the

mental sciences. This step lay in the transition from the mental activity

of  individual  men  to  the  psychical  functions  of  human  communities

and peoples - that is, from individual to group psychology; and manysurprising analogies forced this transition upon us. It had been found,

for  instance,  that  in  the  deep  strata  of  unconscious  mental  activity

contraries are not distinguished from each other but are expressed by

the same element. But already in 1884 Karl Abel the philologist had

put forward the view (in his ‘Über den Gegensinn der Urworte’) that

the oldest languages known to us treat contraries in the same way.

Thus Ancient Egyptian, for example, had in the first instance only one

word for ‘strong’ and ‘weak’, and not till later were the two sides of the

antithesis  distinguished  by  slight  modifications.  Even  in  the  most

modern languages clear relics of such antithetical meanings are to be

found. So in German ‘Boden’ means the highest as well as the lowest

thing in the house; similarly in Latin ‘altus’ means ‘high’ and ‘deep’.

Thus the equivalence of contraries in dreams is a universal archaic

trait in human thinking.

 


                      A Short Account Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4116

 

   To take an instance from another field. It is impossible to escape the

impression of the perfect correspondence which can be discovered

between the obsessive actions of certain obsessional patients and the

religious observances of believers all over the world. Some cases of

obsessional  neurosis  actually  behave  like  a  caricature  of  a  private

religion,  so  that  it  is  tempting  to  liken  the  official  religions  to  an

obsessional  neurosis  that  has  been  mitigated  by  becoming

universalized. This comparison, which is no doubt highly objectionable

to all believers, has nevertheless proved most fruitful psychologically.

For  psycho-analysis  soon  discovered  in  the  case  of  obsessional

neurosis what the forces are that struggle with one another in it till

their  conflicts  find  a  remarkable  expression  in  the  ceremonial  of

obsessive  actions.  Nothing  similar  was  suspected  in  the  case  of

religious  ceremonial  until,  by  tracing  back  religious  feeling  to  the

relation with the father as its deepest root, it became possible to point

to  an  analogous  dynamic  situation  in  that  case  too.  This  instance,

moreover, may warn the reader that even in its application to non-

medical  fields  psycho-analysis  cannot  avoid  wounding  cherishedprejudices,  touching  upon  deeply-rooted  sensibilities  and  thus

provoking enmities which have an essentially emotional basis.

   If we may assume that the most general features of unconscious

mental  life  (conflicts  between  instinctual  impulses,  repressions  and

substitutive  satisfactions)  are  present  everywhere,  and  if  there  is  a

depth-psychology which leads to a knowledge of those features, then

we may reasonably expect that the application of psycho-analysis to

the  most  varied  spheres  of  human  mental  activity  will  everywhere

bring  to  light  important  and  hitherto  unattainable  results.  In  an

exceedingly valuable study, Otto Rank and Hanns Sachs (1913) have

tried to bring together what the work of psycho-analysts had been able

to achieve up to that time towards fulfilling these expectations. Lack of

space  prevents  me  from  attempting  to  complete  their  enumeration

here. I can only select for mention the most important findings with the

addition of a few details.

   If we leave little-known internal urges out of account, we may say

that the main motive force towards the cultural development of man

has  been  real  external  exigency,  which  has  withheld  from  him  the

easy satisfaction of his natural needs and exposed him to immense

dangers. This external frustration drove him into a struggle with reality,

which ended partly in adaptation to it and partly in control over it; but it

also drove him into working and living in common with those of his

kind,  and  this  already  involved  a  renunciation  of  a  number  of

instinctual  impulses  which  could  not  be  satisfied  socially.  With  the

further advances of civilization the demands of repression also grew.

Civilization  is  after  all  built  entirely  on  renunciation  of  instinct,  and

every individual on his journey from childhood to maturity has in his

own person to recapitulate this development of humanity to a state of

judicious  resignation.  Psycho-analysis  has  shown  that  it  is

predominantly, though not exclusively, sexual instinctual impulses that

have  succumbed  to  this  cultural  suppression.  One  portion  of  them,

however, exhibit the valuable characteristic of allowing themselves to

be diverted from their immediate aims and of thus placing their energy

at  the  disposal  of  cultural  development  in  the  form  of  ‘sublimated’

trends. But another portion persist in the unconscious as unsatisfied

wishes and press for some, even if it is distorted, satisfaction.

                       A Short Account Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4117

 

   We have seen that one part of human mental activity is directed

towards  obtaining  control  over  the  real  external  world.  Psycho-

analysis  now  tells  us  further  that  another,  particularly  highly-prized,

part of creative mental work serves for the fulfilment of wishes - for the

substitutive satisfaction of the repressed wishes which, from the days

of childhood, live in the spirit of each of us, unsatisfied. Among these

creations, whose connection with an incomprehensible unconscious

was  always  suspected,  are  myths  and  works  of  imaginative  writing

and of art, and the researches of psycho-analysts have in fact thrown

a flood of light on the fields of mythology, the science of literature, and

the psychology of artists. It is enough to mention Otto Rank’s work as

an  example.  We  have  shown  that  myths  and  fairy  tales  can  be

interpreted like dreams, we have traced the convoluted paths that lead

from the urge of the unconscious wish to its realization in a work of art,

we have learnt to understand the emotional effect of a work of art on

the observer, and in the case of the artist himself we have made clear

his internal kinship with the neurotic as well as his distinction from him,

and  we  have  pointed  out  the  connection  between  his  innate

disposition,  his  chance  experiences  and  his  achievements.  The

aesthetic appreciation of works of art and the elucidation of the artistic

gift are, it is true, not among the tasks set to psycho-analysis. But it

seems that psycho-analysis is in a position to speak the decisive word

in all questions that touch upon the imaginative life of man.

   And now, as a third point, psycho-analysis has shown us, to our

growing astonishment, the enormously important part played by what

is known as the ‘Oedipus complex’ - that is, the emotional relation of a

child  to  its  two  parents  -  in  the  mental  life  of  human  beings.  Our

astonishment diminishes when we realize that the Oedipus complex is

the psychical correlate of two fundamental biological facts: the long

period of the human child’s dependence, and the remarkable way in

which its sexual life reaches a first climax in the third to fifth years of

life, and then, after a period of inhibition, sets in again at puberty. And

here, the discovery was made that a third and extremely serious part

of  human  intellectual  activity,  the  part  which  has  created  the  greatinstitutions of religion, law, ethics, and all forms of civic life, has as its

fundamental aim the enabling of the individual to master his Oedipus

complex and to divert his libido from its infantile attachments into the

social ones that are ultimately desired. The applications of psycho-

analysis to the science of religion and sociology (e. g. by the present

writer,  Theodor  Reik  and  Oskar  Pfister),  which  have  led  to  these

findings, are still young and insufficiently appreciated; but it cannot be

doubted  that  further  studies  will  only  confirm  the  certainty  of  these

important conclusions.

 


                      A Short Account Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4118

 

      By  way,  as  it  were,  of  postscript,  I  must  also  mention  that

educationists, too, cannot avoid making use of the hints which they

have  received  from  the  analytic  exploration  of  the  mental  life  of

children; and further that voices have been raised among therapists

(e.g.  Groddeck  and  Jelliffe),  maintaining  that  the  psycho-analytic

treatment  of  serious  organic  complaints  shows  promising  results,

since in many of these affections some part is played by a psychical

factor on which it is possible to bring influence to bear.

   Thus we may express our expectation that psycho-analysis, whose

development  and  achievements  hitherto  have  been  briefly  and

inadequately  related  in  these  pages,  will  enter  into  the  cultural

development of the next decades as a significant ferment, and will

help to deepen our understanding of the world and to fight against

some things in life which are recognized as injurious. It must not be

forgotten,  however,  that  psycho-analysis  alone  cannot  offer  a

complete picture of the world. If we accept the distinction which I have

recently proposed of dividing the mental apparatus into an ego, turned

towards the external world and equipped with consciousness, and an

unconscious  id,  dominated  by  its  instinctual  needs,  then  psycho-

analysis is to be described as a psychology of the id (and of its effects

upon the ego). In each field of knowledge, therefore, it can make only

contributions, which require to be completed from the psychology of

the ego. If these contributions often contain the essence of the facts,this only corresponds to the important part which, it may be claimed, is

played  in  our  lives  by  the  mental  unconscious  that  has  so  long

remained unknown.

                                                                                       4119

 

                THE RESISTANCES TO PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

                                        (1925)

 


                                                                                      4120

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4121

 

                THE RESISTANCES TO PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

A child in his nurse’s arms will turn away screaming at the sight of a

strange face; a pious man will begin the new season with a prayer and

he will also greet the first fruits of the year with a blessing; a peasant

will refuse to buy a scythe unless it bears the trade-mark that was

familiar  to  his  parents.  The  distinction  between  these  situations  is

obvious and would seem to justify one in looking for a different motive

in each of them.

   Nevertheless, it would be a mistake to overlook what they have in

common. In each case we are dealing with unpleasure of the same

kind. The child expresses it in an elementary fashion, the pious man

lulls it by an artifice, while the peasant uses it as the motive for a

decision. The source of this unpleasure is the demand made upon the

mind  by  anything  that  is new,  the  psychical  expenditure  that  it

requires, the uncertainty, mounting up to anxious expectancy, which it

bring along with it. It would be interesting to devote a whole study to

mental  reactions  to  novelty;  for  under  certain,  no  longer  primary,

conditions we can observe behaviour of the contrary kind - a thirst for

stimulation  which  flings  itself  upon  anything  that  is  new  merely

because it is new.

      In  scientific  affairs  there  should  be  no  place  for  recoiling  from

novelty. Science, in her perpetual incompleteness and insufficiency, is

driven to hope for her salvation in new discoveries and new ways ofregarding things. She does well, in order not to be deceived, to arm

herself  with  scepticism  and  to  accept  nothing  new  unless  it  has

withstood  the  strictest  examination.  Sometimes,  however,  this

scepticism shows two unexpected features; it may be sharply directed

against what is new while it spares what is familiar and accepted, and

it may be content to reject things before it has examined them. But in

behaving  thus  it  reveals  itself  as  a  prolongation  of  the  primitive

reaction against what is new and as a cloak for the retention of that

reaction. It is a matter of common knowledge how often in the history

of scientific research it has happened that innovations have met with

intense  and  stubborn  resistance,  while  subsequent  events  have

shown that the resistance was unjustified and that the novelty was

valuable and important. What provoked the resistance was, as a rule,

certain factors in the subject-matter of the novelty, while, on the other

side, several factors must have combined to make the irruption of the

primitive reaction possible.

 


                      The Resistances To Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4122

 

   A particularly bad reception was accorded to psycho-analysis, which

the present writer began to develop nearly thirty years ago from the

discoveries  of  Josef  Breuer  (of  Vienna)  on  the  origin  of  neurotic

symptoms.  It  cannot  be  disputed  that  it  possessed  the  quality  of

novelty, even though it made use of plenty of material which was well

known  from  other  sources  (quite  apart  from  Breuer’s  discoveries),

such  as  the  lessons  from  the  teachings  of  Charcot,  the  great

neuropathologist, and impressions derived from the sphere of hypnotic

phenomena. Its original significance was purely therapeutic: it aimed

at creating a new and efficient method for treating neurotic illnesses.

But connections which could not be foreseen in the beginning caused

psycho-analysis to reach out far beyond its original aim. It ended by

claiming to have set our whole view of mental life upon a new basis

and therefore to be of importance for every field of knowledge that is

founded  on  psychology.  After  a  decade  of  complete  neglect  it

suddenly became a subject of general interest - and set loose a stormof indignant opposition.

      The forms  in  which  the  resistance  to  psycho-analysis  found

expression need not now be considered. It is enough to say that the

struggle over this innovation is by no means at an end, though it is

already possible to see what direction it will take. Its opponents have

not  succeeded  in  suppressing  the  movement.  Psycho-analysis,  of

which twenty years ago I was the only spokesman, has since attracted

the support of numerous valuable and active workers, medical and

non-medical, who make use of it as a procedure for the treatment of

nervous diseases, as a method of psychological research and as an

auxiliary instrument for scientific work in the most various departments

of intellectual life. In the following pages our interest will be directed

only to the motives of the resistance to psycho-analysis, with particular

stress upon the composite character of that resistance and upon the

differing amount of weight carried by its components.

 


                      The Resistances To Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4123

 

   From a clinical standpoint the neuroses must necessarily be put

alongside  the  intoxications  and  such  disorders  as  Graves’  disease.

These  are  conditions  arising  from  an  excess  or  a  relative  lack  of

certain highly active substances, whether produced inside the body or

introduced into it from outside - in short, they are disturbances of the

chemistry  of  the  body,  toxic  conditions.  If  someone  succeeded  in

isolating and demonstrating the hypothetical substance or substances

concerned  in  neuroses,  he  would  have  no  need  to  worry  about

opposition from the medical profession. For the present, however, no

such avenue of approach to the problem is open. At the moment we

can only start from the symptoms presented by a neurosis - symptoms

which in the case of hysteria, for instance, consist of a combination of

somatic and mental disturbances. Now Charcot’s experiments as well

as Breuer’s clinical observations taught us that the somatic symptoms

of hysteria are psychogenic too - that is, that they are precipitates of

mental processes that have run their course. By putting a subject into

a  state  of  hypnosis  it  was  possible  at  will  to  produce  the  somaticsymptoms of hysteria artificially.

      Psycho-analysis  took  hold  of  this  new  realization  and  began  to

consider the problem of the nature of the psychical processes which

led to these unusual consequences. But the direction taken by this

enquiry  was  not  to  the  liking  of  the  contemporary  generation  of

physicians.  They  had  been  brought  up  to  respect  only  anatomical,

physical  and  chemical  factors.  They  were  not  prepared  for  taking

psychical ones into account and therefore met them with indifference

or  antipathy.  They  obviously  had  doubts  whether  psychical  events

allowed of any exact scientific treatment whatever. As an excessive

reaction  against  an  earlier  phase  during  which  medicine  had  been

dominated  by  what  was  known  as  the  ‘philosophy  of  Nature’,  they

regarded such abstractions as those with which psychology is obliged

to work as nebulous, fantastic and mystical; while they simply refused

to  believe  in  remarkable  phenomena  which  might  have  been  the

starting-point of research. The symptoms of hysterical neuroses were

looked  upon  as  shamming  and  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism  as  a

hoax. Even the psychiatrists, upon whose attention the most unusual

and  astonishing  mental  phenomena  were  constantly  being  forced,

showed  no  inclination  to  examine  their  details  or  enquire  into  their

connections.  They  were  content  to  classify  the  variegated  array  of

symptoms  and  trace  them  back,  so  far  as  they  could  manage,  to

somatic, anatomical or chemical aetiological disturbances. During this

materialistic  or,  rather,  mechanistic  period,  medicine  made

tremendous  advances,  but  it  also  showed  a  short-sighted

misunderstanding of the most important and most difficult among the

problems of life.

 


                      The Resistances To Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4124

 

   It is easy to understand why doctors, with an attitude of this kind

towards the mind, should have had no liking for psycho-analysis and

should have demurred to its demand for learning many things afresh

and for seeing many things in a different light. But as a compensation

it might be supposed that the new theory would be all the more likelyto  meet  with  applause  from  philosophers.  For  philosophers  were

accustomed to putting abstract concepts (or, as unkind tongues would

say, hazy words) in the forefront of their explanations of the universe,

and it would be impossible that they should object to the extension of

the sphere of psychology for which psycho-analysis had paved the

way. But here another obstacle arose. The philosophers’ idea of what

is mental was not that of psycho-analysis. The overwhelming majority

of  philosophers  regard  as  mental  only  the  phenomena  of

consciousness. For them the world of consciousness coincides with

the sphere of what is mental. Everything else that may take place in

the ‘mind’ - an entity so hard to grasp - is relegated by them to the

organic determinants of mental processes or to processes parallel to

mental  ones.  Or,  more  strictly  speaking,  the  mind  has  no  contents

other  than  the  phenomena  of  consciousness,  and  consequently

psychology, the science of the mind, has no other subject-matter. And

on this point the layman’s view is the same.

   What, then, can a philosopher say to a theory which, like psycho-

analysis,  asserts  that  on  the  contrary  what  is  mental  is  in  itself

unconscious and that being conscious is only a quality, which may or

may not accrue to a particular mental act and the withholding of which

may perhaps alter that act in no other respect? He will naturally say

that anything both unconscious and mental would be an impossibility,

a contradictio in adjecto, and he will fail to observe that in making this

judgement he is merely repeating his own definition of what is mental,

a  definition  which  may  perhaps  be  too  narrow.  It  is  easy  for

philosophers to feel this certainty, since they have no acquaintance

with  the  material  whose  investigation  has  compelled  analysts  to

believe in unconscious mental acts. Philosophers have never taken

account of hypnosis, they have not concerned themselves with the

interpreting  of  dreams  -  on  the  contrary,  like  doctors,  they  regard

dreams as the meaningless products of reduced mental activity during

sleep  -  they  are  scarcely  aware  that  there  are  such  things  as

obsessions and delusions and they would find themselves in a most

embarrassing situation if they were asked to explain them on the basis

of  their  own  psychological  premisses.  Analysts,  too,  refuse  to  say

what  the  unconscious  is,  but  they  can  indicate  the  domain  of

phenomena  whose  observation  has  obliged  them  to  assume  itsexistence. Philosophers, who know no kind of observation other than

self-observation, cannot follow them into that domain.

 


                      The Resistances To Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4125

 

      So  it  comes  about  that  psycho-analysis  derives  nothing  but

disadvantages  from  its  middle  position  between  medicine  and

philosophy. Doctors regard it as a speculative system and refuse to

believe that, like every other natural science, it is based on a patient

and  tireless  elaboration  of  facts  from  the  world  of  perception;

philosophers,  measuring  it  by  the  standard  of  their  own  artificially

constructed systems, find that it starts from impossible premisses and

reproach it because its most general concepts (which are only now in

process of evolution) lack clarity and precision.

      This  state  of  affairs  is  enough  to  account  for  the  reluctant  and

hesitant  reception  of  analysis  in  scientific  quarters.  But  it  does  not

explain  the  outbursts  of  indignation,  derision  and  scorn  which,  in

disregard  of  every  standard  of  logic  and  good  taste,  have

characterized the controversial methods of its opponents. A reaction

of such a kind suggests that resistances other than purely intellectual

ones  were  stirred  up  and  that  powerful  emotional  forces  were

aroused.  And  there  are  indeed  plenty  of  things  to  be  found  in  the

theory of psycho-analysis calculated to produce such an effect as this

upon the passions of men of every kind and not of scientists alone.

Above all there is the very important place in the mental life of human

beings  which  psycho-analysis  assigns  to  what  are  known  as  the

sexual instincts. Psycho-analytic theory maintained that the symptoms

of neuroses are distorted substitutive satisfactions of sexual instinctual

forces, the direct satisfaction of which has been frustrated by internal

resistances. Later on, when analysis had extended beyond its original

field of work and began to be applied to normal mental life, it sought to

show that these same sexual components, which could be diverted

from their immediate aims and directed to other things, made the most

important contributions to the cultural achievements of the individual

and of society. These views were not entirely new. The incomparablesignificance  of  sexual  life  had  been  proclaimed  by  the  philosopher

Schopenhauer  in  an  intensely  impressive  passage.  Moreover,  what

psycho-analysis called sexuality was by no means identical with the

impulsion towards a union of the two sexes or towards producing a

pleasurable sensation in the genitals; it had far more resemblance to

the all-inclusive and all-preserving Eros of Plato’s Symposium.

 


                      The Resistances To Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4126

 

      But  the  opponents  of  psycho-analysis  forgot  its  illustrious

forerunners; they fell upon it as though it had made an assault upon

the  dignity  of  the  human  race.  They  accused  it  of  ‘pan-sexualism’,

though the psycho-analytic theory of the instincts had always been

strictly dualistic and had at no time failed to recognize, alongside the

sexual instincts, others to which it actually ascribed force enough to

suppress the sexual instincts. (These mutually opposing forces were

described to begin with as the sexual instincts and the ego instincts. A

later theoretical development changed them into Eros and the instinct

of death or destruction.) The suggestion that art, religion and social

order originated in part in a contribution from the sexual instincts was

represented  by  the  opponents  of  analysis  as  a  degradation  of  the

highest  cultural  values.  They  emphatically  declared  that  men  have

other interests besides this eternal one of sex, overlooking in their zeal

the fact that animals too have other interests - indeed they are subject

to sexuality, not permanently like men, but only in bouts occurring at

specific periods - overlooking, too, the fact that the existence of these

other interests in men had never been disputed and that nothing can

be altered in the value of a cultural achievement by its being shown to

have been derived from elementary animal instinctual sources.

 


                      The Resistances To Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4127

 

      Such  a  display  of  unfairness  and  lack  of  logic  cries  out  for  an

explanation. Its origin is not hard to find. Human civilization rests upontwo pillars, of which one is the control of natural forces and the other

the restriction of our instincts. The ruler’s throne rests upon fettered

slaves. Among the instinctual components which are thus brought into

service, the sexual instincts, in the narrower sense of the word, are

conspicuous for their strength and savagery. Woe, if they should be

set  loose!  The  throne  would  be  overturned  and  the  ruler  trampled

under foot. Society is aware of this - and will not allow the topic to be

mentioned.

   But why not? What harm could the discussion do? Psycho-analysis

has  never  said  a  word  in  favour  of  unfettering  instincts  that  would

injure our community; on the contrary it has issued a warning and an

exhortation to us to mend our ways. But society refuses to consent to

the ventilation of the question, because it has a bad conscience in

more than one respect. In the first place it has set up a high ideal of

morality - morality being restriction of the instincts - and insists that all

its  members  shall  fulfil  that  ideal  without  troubling  itself  with  the

possibility that obedience may bear heavily upon the individual. Nor is

it sufficiently wealthy or well-organized to be able to compensate the

individual  for  the  amount  of  his  instinctual  renunciation.  It  is

consequently left to the individual to decide how he can obtain, for the

sacrifice  he  has  made,  enough  compensation  to  enable  him  to

preserve his mental balance. On the whole, however, he is obliged to

live psychologically beyond his means, while the unsatisfied claims of

his instincts make him feel the demands of civilization as a constant

pressure  upon  him.  Thus  society  maintains  a  condition  of cultural

hypocrisy which is bound to be accompanied by a sense of insecurity

and  a  necessity  for  guarding  what  is  an  undeniably  precarious

situation by forbidding criticism and discussion. This line of thought

holds  good  for  all  the  instinctual  impulses,  including,  therefore,  the

egoistic ones. The question whether it applies to all possible forms of

civilization,  and  not  merely  to  those  which  have  evolved  hitherto,

cannot  be  discussed  here.  As  regards  the  sexual  instincts  in  the

narrower sense, there is the further point that in most people they are

tamed insufficiently and in a manner which is psychologically wrong

and are therefore readier than the rest to break loose.

                       The Resistances To Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4128

 

   Psycho-analysis has revealed the weaknesses of this system and

has  recommended  that  it  should  be  altered.  It  proposes  that  there

should  be  a  reduction  in  the  strictness  with  which  instincts  are

repressed  and  that  correspondingly  more  play  should  be  given  to

truthfulness.  Certain  instinctual  impulses,  with  whose  suppression

society  has  gone  too  far,  should  be  permitted  a  greater  amount  of

satisfaction;  in  the  case  of  certain  others  the  inefficient  method  of

suppressing them by means of repression should be replaced by a

better and securer procedure. As a result of these criticisms psycho-

analysis is regarded as ‘inimical to culture’ and has been put under a

ban  as  a  ‘social  danger’.  This  resistance  cannot  last  for  ever.  No

human  institution  can  in  the  long  run  escape  the  influence  of  fair

criticism; but men’s attitude to psycho-analysis is still dominated by

this fear, which gives rein to their passions and diminishes their power

of logical argument.

   By its theory of the instincts psycho-analysis offended the feelings of

individuals in so far as they regarded themselves as members of the

social community; another branch of its theory was calculated to hurt

every  single  person  at  the  tenderest  point  of  his  own  psychical

development. Psycho-analysis disposed once and for all of the fairy

tale  of  an  asexual  childhood.  It  demonstrated  the  fact  that  sexual

interests and activities occur in small children from the beginning of

their  lives.  It  showed  what  transformations  those  activities  pass

through, how at about the age of five they succumb to inhibition and

how from puberty onwards they enter the service of the reproductive

function. It recognized that early infantile sexual life reaches its peak

in what is known as the Oedipus complex (an emotional attachment of

the child to the parent of the opposite sex accompanied by an attitude

of rivalry to the parent of the same sex) and that at that period of life

this impulsion extends uninhibited into a straightforward sexual desire.

This can be confirmed so easily that only the greatest efforts could

make  it  possible  to  overlook  it.  Every  individual  has  in  fact  gone

through  this  phase  but  has  afterwards  energetically  repressed  its

purport  and  succeeded  in  forgetting  it.  A  horror  of  incest  and  anenormous sense of guilt are left over from this prehistoric epoch of the

individual’s existence. It may be that something quite similar occurred

in the prehistoric epoch of the human species as a whole and that the

beginnings  of  morality,  religion  and  social  order  were  intimately

connected with the surmounting of that primaeval era. To adults their

prehistory seems so inglorious that they refuse to allow themselves to

be reminded of it: they were infuriated when psycho-analysis tried to

lift the veil of amnesia from their years of childhood. There was only

one way out: what psycho-analysis asserted must be false and what

posed as a new science must be a tissue of fancies and distortions.

 


                      The Resistances To Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4129

 

   Thus the strongest resistances to psycho-analysis were not of an

intellectual kind but arose from emotional sources. This explained their

passionate character as well as their poverty in logic. The situation

obeyed  a  simple  formula:  men  in  the  mass  behaved  to  psycho-

analysis  in  precisely  the  same  way  as  individual  neurotics  under

treatment for their disorders. It is possible, however, by patient work to

convince  these  latter  individuals  that  everything  happened  as  we

maintained it did: we had not invented it ourselves but had arrived at it

from a study of other neurotics covering a period of twenty or thirty

years.  The  position  was  at  once  alarming  and  consoling:  alarming

because it was no small thing to have the whole human race as one’s

patient, and consoling because after all everything was taking place

as the hypotheses of psycho-analysis declared that it was bound to.

      If  we  cast  our  eyes  once  again  over  the  various  resistances  to

psycho-analysis that have been enumerated, it is evident that only a

minority of them are of the kind which habitually arise against most

scientific innovations of any considerable importance. The majority of

them are due to the fact that powerful human feelings are hurt by the

subject-matter of the theory. Darwin’s theory of descent met with the

same fate, since it tore down the barrier that had been arrogantly set

up between men and beasts. I drew attention to this analogy in an

earlier paper,¹ in which I showed how the psycho-analytic view of therelation of the conscious ego to an overpowering unconscious was a

severe blow to human self-love. I described this as the psychological

blow to men’s narcissism, and compared it with the biological blow

delivered by the theory of descent and the earlier cosmological blow

aimed at it by the discovery of Copernicus.

 

   ¹ ‘A Difficulty in the Path of Psycho-Analysis’ (1917a).

 


                      The Resistances To Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4130

 

   Purely external difficulties have also contributed to strengthen the

resistance  to  psycho-analysis.  It  is  not  easy  to  arrive  at  an

independent  judgement  upon  matters  to  do  with  analysis  without

having experienced it oneself or practised it on someone else. Nor can

one  do  the  latter  without  having  acquired  a  specific  and  decidedly

delicate technique, while until recently there was no easily accessible

means  of  learning  psycho-analysis  and  its  technique.  This  position

has  now  been  improved  by  the  foundation  (in  1920)  of  the  Berlin

Psycho-Analytic Clinic and Training Institute, and soon afterwards (in

1922) of an exactly similar institute in Vienna.

   Finally, with all reserve, the question may be raised whether the

personality of the present writer as a Jew who has never sought to

disguise  the  fact  that  he  is  a  Jew  may  not  have  had  a  share  in

provoking  the  antipathy  of  his  environment  to  psycho-analysis.  An

argument  of  this  kind  is  not  often  uttered  aloud.  But  we  have

unfortunately grown so suspicious that we cannot avoid thinking that

this factor may not have been quite without its effect. Nor is it perhaps

entirely a matter of chance that the first advocate of psycho-analysis

was a Jew. To profess belief in this new theory called for a certain

degree  of  readiness  to  accept  a  situation  of  solitary  opposition  -  a

situation with which no one is more familiar than a Jew.

                                                                                       4131

 

                A NOTE UPON THE ‘MYSTIC WRITING-PAD’

                                        (1925)

 


                                                                                      4132

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4133

 

                A NOTE UPON THE ‘MYSTIC WRITING-PAD’

 

If I distrust my memory - neurotics, as we know, do so to a remarkable

extent, but normal people have every reason for doing so as well - I

am able to supplement and guarantee its working by making a note in

writing. In that case the surface upon which this note is preserved, the

pocket-book or sheet of paper, is as it were a materialized portion of

my mnemic apparatus, which I otherwise carry about with me invisible.

I have only to bear in mind the place where this ‘memory’ has been

deposited  and  I  can  then  ‘reproduce’  it  at  any  time  I  like,  with  the

certainty that it will have remained unaltered and so have escaped the

possible distortions to which it might have been subjected in my actual

memory.

   If I want to make full use of this technique for improving my mnemic

function, I find that there are two different procedures open to me. On

the one hand, I can choose a writing-surface which will preserve intact

any note made upon it for an indefinite length of time - for instance, a

sheet of paper which I can write upon in ink. I am then in possession

of a ‘permanent memory-trace’. The disadvantage of this procedure is

that the receptive capacity of the writing-surface is soon exhausted.

The sheet is filled with writing, there is no room on it for any more

notes, and I find myself obliged to bring another sheet into use, that

has not been written on. Moreover, the advantage of this procedure,

the fact that it provides a ‘permanent trace’, may lose its value for meif after a time the note ceases to interest me and I no longer want to

‘retain  it  in  my  memory’.  The  alternative  procedure  avoids  both  of

these disadvantages. If, for instance, I write with a piece of chalk on a

slate, I have a receptive surface which retains its receptive capacity

for an unlimited time and the notes upon which can be destroyed as

soon as they cease to interest me, without any need for throwing away

the  writing-surface  itself.  Here  the  disadvantage  is  that  I  cannot

preserve a permanent trace. If I want to put some fresh notes on the

slate, I must first wipe out the ones which cover it. Thus an unlimited

receptive capacity and a retention of permanent traces seem to be

mutually  exclusive  properties  in  the  apparatus  which  we  use  as

substitutes  for  our  memory:  either  the  receptive  surface  must  be

renewed or the note must be destroyed.

 


                      A Note Upon The 'Mystic Writing-Pad'

                                                                                      4134

 

   All the forms of auxiliary apparatus which we have invented for the

improvement or intensification of our sensory functions are built on the

same model as the sense organs themselves or portions of them: for

instance, spectacles, photographic cameras, ear-trumpets. Measured

by  this  standard,  devices  to  aid  our  memory  seem  particularly

imperfect,  since  our  mental  apparatus  accomplishes  precisely  what

they cannot: it has an unlimited receptive capacity for new perceptions

and nevertheless lays down permanent - even though not unalterable

- memory-traces of them. As long ago as in 1900 I gave expression in

The Interpretation of Dreams to a suspicion that this unusual capacity

was to be divided between two different systems (or organs of the

mental  apparatus).  According  to  this  view,  we  possess  a  system

Pcpt.-Cs., which receives perceptions but retains no permanent trace

of  them,  so  that  it  can  react  like  a  clean  sheet  to  every  new

perception; while the permanent traces of the excitations which have

been  received  are  preserved  in  ‘mnemic  systems’  lying  behind  the

perceptual system. Later, in Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920g), I

added  a  remark  to  the  effect  that  the  inexplicable  phenomenon  of

consciousness  arises  in  the  perceptual  system instead  of  thepermanent traces.

   Now some time ago there came upon the market, under the name of

the ‘Mystic Writing-Pad’, a small contrivance that promises to perform

more than the sheet of paper or the slate. It claims to be nothing more

than  a  writing-tablet  from  which  notes  can  be  erased  by  an  easy

movement of the hand. But if it is examined more closely it will be

found  that  its  construction  shows  a  remarkable  agreement  with  my

hypothetical structure of our perceptual apparatus and that it can in

fact  provide  both  an  ever-ready  receptive  surface  and  permanent

traces of the notes that have been made upon it.

 


                      A Note Upon The 'Mystic Writing-Pad'

                                                                                      4135

 

   The Mystic Pad is a slab of dark brown resin or wax with a paper

edging; over the slab is laid a thin transparent sheet, the top end of

which is firmly secured to the slab while its bottom end rests on it

without being fixed to it. This transparent sheet is the more interesting

part of the little device. It itself consists of two layers, which can be

detached from each other except at their two ends. The upper layer is

a  transparent  piece  of  celluloid;  the  lower  layer  is  made  of  thin

translucent waxed paper. When the apparatus is not in use, the lower

surface of the waxed paper adheres lightly to the upper surface of the

wax slab.

   To make use of the Mystic Pad, one writes upon the celluloid portion

of the covering-sheet which rests on the wax slab. For this purpose no

pencil or chalk is necessary, since the writing does not depend on

material being deposited on the receptive surface. It is a return to the

ancient method of writing on tablets of clay or wax: a pointed stilus

scratches  the  surface,  the  depressions  upon  which  constitute  the

‘writing’. In the case of the Mystic Pad this scratching is not effected

directly, but through the medium of the covering-sheet. At the points

which the stilus touches, it presses the lower surface of the waxed

paper on to the wax slab, and the grooves are visible as dark writing

upon the otherwise smooth whitish-grey surface of the celluloid. If one

wishes to destroy what has been written, all that is necessary is toraise  the  double  covering-sheet  from  the  wax  slab  by  a  light  pull,

starting from the free lower end. The close contact between the waxed

paper  and  the  wax  slab  at  the  places  which  have  been  scratched

(upon which the visibility of the writing depended) is thus brought to an

end and it does not recur when the two surfaces come together once

more. The Mystic Pad is now clear of writing and ready to receive

fresh notes.

      The  small  imperfections  of  the  contrivance  have,  of  course,  no

importance for us, since we are only concerned with its approximation

to the structure of the perceptual apparatus of the mind.

 


                      A Note Upon The 'Mystic Writing-Pad'

                                                                                      4136

 

   If, while the Mystic Pad has writing on it, we cautiously raise the

celluloid from the waxed paper, we can see the writing just as clearly

on the surface of the latter, and the question may arise why there

should  be  any  necessity  for  the  celluloid  portion  of  the  cover.

Experiment will then show that the thin paper would be very easily

crumpled or torn if one were to write directly upon it with the stilus.

The layer of celluloid thus acts as a protective sheath for the waxed

paper,  to  keep  off  injurious  effects  from  without.  The  celluloid  is  a

‘protective shield against stimuli’; the layer which actually receives the

stimuli  is  the  paper.  I  may  at  this  point  recall  that  in Beyond  the

Pleasure Principle I showed that the perceptual apparatus of our mind

consists of two layers, of an external protective shield against stimuli

whose task it is to diminish the strength of excitations coming in, and

of a surface behind it which receives the stimuli, namely the system

Pcpt.-Cs.

   The analogy would not be of much value if it could not be pursued

further than this. If we lift the entire covering-sheet - both the celluloid

and the waxed paper - off the wax slab, the writing vanishes and, as I

have already remarked, does not re-appear again. The surface of the

Mystic  Pad  is  clear  of  writing  and  once  more  capable  of  receiving

impressions.  But  it  is  easy  to  discover  that  the  permanent  trace  of

what was written is retained upon the wax slab itself and is legible insuitable lights. Thus the Pad provides not only a receptive surface that

can be used over and over again, like a slate, but also permanent

traces of what has been written, like an ordinary paper pad: it solves

the problem of combining the two functions by dividing them between

two separate but interrelated component parts or systems. But this is

precisely  the  way  in  which,  according  to  the  hypothesis  which  I

mentioned  just  now,  our  mental  apparatus  performs  its  perceptual

function. The layer which receives the stimuli - the system Pcpt.-Cs. -

forms no permanent traces; the foundations of memory come about in

other, adjoining, systems.

   We need not be disturbed by the fact that in the Mystic Pad no use

is made of the permanent traces of the notes that have been received;

it is enough that they are present. There must come a point at which

the analogy between an auxiliary apparatus of this kind and the organ

which is its prototype will cease to apply. It is true, too, that once the

writing has been erased, the Mystic Pad cannot ‘reproduce’ it from

within; it would be a mystic pad indeed if, like our memory, it could

accomplish that. None the less, I do not think it is too far-fetched to

compare the celluloid and waxed paper cover with the system Pcpt.-

Cs. and its protective shield, the wax slab with the unconscious behind

them, and the appearance and disappearance of the writing with the

flickering-up  and  passing-away  of  consciousness  in  the  process  of

perception.

 


                      A Note Upon The 'Mystic Writing-Pad'

                                                                                      4137

 

   But I must admit that I am inclined to press the comparison still

further. On the Mystic Pad the writing vanishes every time the close

contact is broken between the paper which receives the stimulus and

the  wax  slab  which  preserves  the  impression.  This  agrees  with  a

notion  which  I  have  long  had  about  the  method  by  which  the

perceptual apparatus of our mind functions, but which I have hitherto

kept to myself. My theory was that cathectic innervations are sent out

and  withdrawn  in  rapid  periodic  impulses  from  within  into  the

completely  pervious  system Pcpt.-Cs.  So  long  as  that  system  iscathected  in  this  manner,  it  receives  perceptions  (which  are

accompanied by consciousness) and passes the excitation on to the

unconscious  mnemic  systems;  but  as  soon  as  the  cathexis  is

withdrawn, consciousness is extinguished and the functioning of the

system comes to a standstill. It is as though the unconscious stretches

out feelers, through the medium of the system Pcpt.-Cs., towards the

external  world  and  hastily  withdraws  them  as  soon  as  they  have

sampled the excitations coming from it. Thus the interruptions, which

in the case of the Mystic Pad have an external origin, were attributed

by my hypothesis to the discontinuity in the current of innervation; and

the actual breaking of contact which occurs in the Mystic Pad was

replaced in my theory by the periodic non-excitability of the perceptual

system. I further had a suspicion that this discontinuous method of

functioning of the system Pcpt.-Cs. lies at the bottom of the origin of

the concept of time.

      If  we  imagine  one  hand  writing  upon  the  surface  of  the  Mystic

Writing-Pad while another periodically raises its covering-sheet from

the wax slab, we shall have a concrete representation of the way in

which I tried to picture the functioning of the perceptual apparatus of

our mind.

                                                                                       4138

 

                                        NEGATION

                                        (1925)

 


                                                                                      4139

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4140

 

                                        NEGATION

 

The  manner  in  which  our  patients  bring  forward  their  associations

during the work of analysis gives us an opportunity for making some

interesting observations. ‘Now you’ll think I mean to say something

insulting, but really I’ve no such intention.’ we realize that this is a

rejection, by projection, of an idea that has just come up. Or: ‘You ask

who this person in the dream can be. It’s not my mother.’ We emend

this to: ‘So it is his mother.’ In our interpretation, we take the liberty of

disregarding the negation and of picking out the subject-matter alone

of the association. It is as though the patient had said: ‘It’s true that my

mother came into my mind as I thought of this person, but I don’t feel

inclined to let the association count.’

   There is a very convenient method by which we can sometimes

obtain a piece of information we want about unconscious repressed

material.  ‘What’,  we  ask,  ‘would  you  consider  the  most  unlikely

imaginable thing in that situation? What do you think was furthest from

your mind at that time?’ If the patient falls into the trap and says what

he  thinks  is  most  incredible,  he  almost  always  makes  the  right

admission. A neat counterpart to this experiment is often met with in

an  obsessional  neurotic  who  has  already  been  initiated  into  the

meaning of his symptoms. ‘I’ve got a new obsessive idea,’ he says,

‘and it occurred to me at once that it might mean so and so. But no;

that  can’t  be  true,  or  it  couldn’t  have  occurred  to  me.’  What  he  isrepudiating, on grounds picked up from his treatment, is, of course,

the correct meaning of the obsessive idea.

 


                                          Negation

                                                                                      4141

 

   Thus the content of a repressed image or idea can make its way into

consciousness, on condition that it is negated. Negation is a way of

taking cognizance of what is repressed; indeed it is already a lifting of

the  repression,  though  not,  of  course,  an  acceptance  of  what  is

repressed.  We  can  see  how  in  this  the  intellectual  function  is

separated from the affective process. With the help of negation only

one consequence of the process of repression is undone - the fact,

namely, of the ideational content of what is repressed not reaching

consciousness.  The  outcome  of  this  is  a  kind  of  intellectual

acceptance of the repressed, while at the same time what is essential

to the repression persists.¹ In the course of analytic work we often

produce a further, very important and somewhat strange variant of this

situation.  We  succeed  in  conquering  the  negation  as  well,  and  in

bringing about a full intellectual acceptance of the repressed; but the

repressive process itself is not yet removed by this.

   Since to affirm or negate the content of thoughts is the task of the

function of intellectual judgement, what we have just been saying has

led  us  to  the  psychological  origin  of  that  function.  To  negate

something  in  a  judgement  is,  at  bottom,  to  say:  ‘This  is  something

which  I  should  prefer  to  repress.’  A  negative  judgement  is  the

intellectual  substitute  for  repression;  its  ‘no’  is  the  hall-mark  of

repression, a certificate of origin like, let us say, ‘Made in Germany’.

With the help of the symbol of negation, thinking frees itself from the

restrictions  of  repression  and  enriches  itself  with  material  that  is

indispensable for its proper functioning.

   The function of judgement is concerned in the main with two sorts of

decisions.  It  affirms  or  disaffirms  the  possession  by  a  thing  of  a

particular attribute; and it asserts or disputes that a presentation has

an  existence  in  reality.  The  attribute  to  be  decided  about  may

originally have been good or bad, useful or harmful. Expressed in thelanguage of the oldest - the oral - instinctual impulses, the judgement

is: ‘I should like to eat this’, or ‘I should like to spit it out’; and, put more

generally: ‘I should like to take this into myself and to keep that out.’

That is to say: ‘It shall be inside me’ or ‘it shall be outside me’. As I

have  shown  elsewhere,  the  original  pleasure-ego  wants  to  introject

into itself everything that is good and to eject from itself everything that

is bad. What is bad, what is alien to the ego and what is external are,

to begin with, identical.²

 

   ¹ The same process is at the root of the familiar superstition that boasting is dangerous.

‘How nice not to have had one of my headaches for so long.’ But this is in fact the first
announcement of an attack, of whose approach the subject is already sensible, although he is
as yet unwilling to believe it.

   ² See the discussion in ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes’ (1915c).

 


                                          Negation

                                                                                      4142

 

   The other sort of decision made by the function of judgement - as to

the  real  existence  of  something  of  which  there  is  a  presentation

(reality-testing)  -  is  a  concern  of  the  definitive  reality-ego,  which

develops out of the initial pleasure-ego. It is now no longer a question

of whether what has been perceived (a thing) shall be taken into the

ego  or  not,  but  of  whether  something  which  is  in  the  ego  as  a

presentation can be rediscovered in perception (reality) as well. It is,

we see, once more a question of external and internal. What is unreal,

merely a presentation and subjective, is only internal; what is real is

also  there outside.  In  this  stage  of  development  regard  for  the

pleasure  principle  has  been  set  aside.  Experience  has  shown  the

subject  that  it  is  not  only  important  whether  a  thing  (an  object  of

satisfaction for him) possesses the ‘good’ attribute and so deserves to

be taken into his ego, but also whether it is there in the external world,

so  that  he  can  get  hold  of  it  whenever  he  needs  it.  In  order  to

understand this step forward we must recollect that all presentations

originate from perceptions and are repetitions of them. Thus originally

the mere existence of a presentation was a guarantee of the reality of

what was presented. The antithesis between subjective and objectivedoes not exist from the first. It only comes into being from the fact that

thinking possesses the capacity to bring before the mind once more

something  that  has  once  been  perceived,  by  reproducing  it  as  a

presentation without the external object having still to be there. The

first and immediate aim, therefore, of reality-testing is, not to find an

object in real perception which corresponds to the one presented, but

to refind  such  an  object,  to  convince  oneself  that  it  is  still  there.

Another capacity of the power of thinking offers a further contribution

to the differentiation between what is subjective and what is objective.

The reproduction of a perception as a presentation is not always a

faithful  one;  it  may  be  modified  by  omissions,  or  changed  by  the

merging  of  various  elements.  In  that  case,  reality-testing  has  to

ascertain  how  far  such  distortions  go.  But  it  is  evident  that  a

precondition for the setting up of reality-testing is that objects shall

have been lost which once brought real satisfaction.

 


                                          Negation

                                                                                      4143

 

   Judging is the intellectual action which decides the choice of motor

action, which puts an end to the postponement due to thought and

which leads over from thinking to acting. This postponement due to

thought  has  also  been  discussed  by  me  elsewhere.  It  is  to  be

regarded  as  an  experimental  action,  a  motor  palpating,  with  small

expenditure of discharge. Let us consider where the ego has used a

similar kind of palpating before, at what place it learnt the technique

which it now applies in its processes of thought. It happened at the

sensory  end  of  the  mental  apparatus,  in  connection  with  sense

perceptions. For, on our hypothesis, perception is not a purely passive

process. The ego periodically sends out small amounts of cathexis

into the perceptual system, by means of which it samples the external

stimuli,  and  then  after  every  such  tentative  advance  it  draws  back

again.

   The study of judgement affords us, perhaps for the first time, an

insight into the origin of an intellectual function from the interplay of

the primary instinctual impulses. Judging is a continuation, along linesof expediency, of the original process by which the ego took things

into  itself  or  expelled  them  from  itself,  according  to  the  pleasure

principle.  The  polarity  of  judgement  appears  to  correspond  to  the

opposition of the two groups of instincts which we have supposed to

exist.  Affirmation  -  as  a  substitute  for  uniting  -  belongs  to  Eros;

negation  -  the  successor  to  expulsion  -  belongs  to  the  instinct  of

destruction.  The  general  wish  to  negate,  the  negativism  which  is

displayed by some psychotics, is probably to be regarded as a sign of

a defusion of instincts that has taken place through a withdrawal of the

libidinal  components.  But  the  performance  of  the  function  of

judgement is not made possible until the creation of the symbol of

negation has endowed thinking with a first measure of freedom from

the consequences of repression and, with it, from the compulsion of

the pleasure principle.

   This view of negation fits in very well with the fact that in analysis we

never discover a ‘no’ in the unconscious and that recognition of the

unconscious on the part of the ego is expressed in a negative formula.

There is no stronger evidence that we have been successful in our

effort to uncover the unconscious than when the patient reacts to it

with the words ‘I didn’t think that’, or ‘I didn’t (ever) think of that’.

                                                                                       4144

 

    SOME PSYCHICAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE ANATOMICAL

                                    DISTINCTION

                                BETWEEN THE SEXES

                                        (1925)

 


                                                                                      4145

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4146

 

    SOME PSYCHICAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE ANATOMICAL

                                    DISTINCTION

                                BETWEEN THE SEXES

 

In my own writings and in those of my followers more and more stress

is  laid  on  the  necessity  that  the  analyses  of  neurotics  shall  deal

thoroughly with the remotest period of their childhood, the time of the

early  efflorescence  of  sexual  life.  It  is  only  by  examining  the  first

manifestations of the patient’s innate instinctual constitution and the

effects of his earliest experiences that we can accurately gauge the

motive forces that have led to his neurosis and can be secure against

the errors into which we might be tempted by the degree to which

things  have  become  remodelled  and  overlaid  in  adult  life.  This

requirement is not only of theoretical but also of practical importance,

for it distinguishes our efforts from the work of those physicians whose

interests  are  focused  exclusively  on  therapeutic  results  and  who

employ analytic methods, but only up to a certain point. An analysis of

early childhood such as we are considering is tedious and laborious

and makes demands both upon the physician and upon the patient

which cannot always be met. Moreover, it leads us into dark regions

where  there  are  as  yet  no  sign  posts.  Indeed,  analysts  may  feel

reassured,  I  think,  that  there  is  no  risk  of  their  work  becomingmechanical, and so of losing its interest, during the next few decades.

      In  the  following  pages  I  bring  forward  some  findings  of  analytic

research which would be of great importance if they could be proved

to apply universally. Why do I not postpone publication of them until

further experience has given me the necessary proof, if such proof is

obtainable?  Because  the  conditions  under  which  I  work  have

undergone  a  change,  with  implications  which  I  cannot  disguise.

Formerly, I was not one of those who are unable to hold back what

seems to be a new discovery until it has been either confirmed or

corrected. My Interpretation of Dreams (1900a) and my ‘Fragment of

an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’ (1905e) (the case of Dora) were

suppressed by me - if not for the nine years enjoined by Horace - at all

events for four or five years before I allowed them to be published. But

in those days I had unlimited time before me - ‘oceans of time’ as an

amiable  author  puts  it  -  and  material  poured  in  upon  me  in  such

quantities  that  fresh  experiences  were  hardly  to  be  escaped.

Moreover, I was the only worker in a new field, so that my reticence

involved no danger to myself and no loss to others.

 


      Some Psychical Consequences Of The Anatomical Distinction

                                Between The Sexes

                                                                                      4147

 

   But now everything has changed. The time before me is limited. The

whole of it is no longer spent in working, so that my opportunities for

making  fresh  observations  are  not  so  numerous.  If  I  think  I  see

something  new,  I  am  uncertain  whether  I  can  wait  for  it  to  be

confirmed. And further, everything that is to be seen upon the surface

has  already  been  exhausted;  what  remains  has  to  be  slowly  and

laboriously dragged up from the depths. Finally, I am no longer alone.

An eager crowd of fellow-workers is ready to make use of what is

unfinished or doubtful, and I can leave to them that part of the work

which  I  should  otherwise  have  done  myself.  On  this  occasion,

therefore,  I  feel  justified  in  publishing  something  which  stands  in

urgent need of confirmation before its value or lack of value can be

decided. 

   In examining the earliest mental shapes assumed by the sexual life

of children we have been in the habit of taking as the subject of our

investigations the male child, the little boy. With little girls, so we have

supposed, things must be similar, though in some way or other they

must nevertheless be different. The point in development at which this

difference lay could not be clearly determined.

   In boys the situation of the Oedipus complex is the first stage that

can be recognized with certainty. It is easy to understand, because at

that  stage  a  child  retains  the  same  object  which  he  previously

cathected  with  his  libido  -  not  as  yet  a  genital  one  -  during  the

preceding period while he was being suckled and nursed. The fact,

too, that in this situation he regards his father as a disturbing rival and

would like to get rid of him and take his place is a straightforward

consequence of the actual state of affairs. I have shown elsewhere¹

how the Oedipus attitude in little boys belongs to the phallic phase,

and how its destruction is brought about by the fear of castration - that

is, by narcissistic interest in their genitals. The matter is made more

difficult to grasp by the complicating circumstance that even in boys

the Oedipus complex has a double orientation, active and passive, in

accordance with their bisexual constitution; a boy also wants to take

his mother’s place as the love-object of his father - a fact which we

describe as the feminine attitude.

 

   ¹ ‘The Dissolution of the Oedipus Complex’ (1924d).

 


      Some Psychical Consequences Of The Anatomical Distinction

                                Between The Sexes

                                                                                      4148

 

   As regards the prehistory of the Oedipus complex in boys we are far

from  complete  clarity.  We  know  that  that  period  includes  an

identification  of  an  affectionate  sort  with  the  boy’s  father,  an

identification which is still free from any sense of rivalry in regard to his

mother.  Another  element  of  that  stage  is  invariably,  I  believe,  a

masturbatory activity in connection with the genitals, the masturbation

of early childhood, the more or less violent suppression of which bythose in charge of the child sets the castration complex in action. It is

to  be  assumed  that  this  masturbation  is  attached  to  the  Oedipus

complex and serves as a discharge for the sexual excitation belonging

to  it.  It  is,  however,  uncertain  whether  the  masturbation  has  this

character from the first, or whether on the contrary it makes its first

appearance spontaneously as an activity of a bodily organ and is only

brought into relation with the Oedipus complex at some later date; this

second  possibility  is  by  far  the  more  probable.  Another  doubtful

question is the part played by bed-wetting and by the breaking of that

habit through the intervention of training measures. We are inclined to

make the simple connection that continued bed-wetting is a result of

masturbation  and  that  its  suppression  is  regarded  by  boys  as  an

inhibition of their genital activity - that is, as having the meaning of a

threat of castration; but whether we are always right in supposing this

remains to be seen. Finally, analysis shows us in a shadowy way how

the fact of a child at a very early age listening to his parents copulating

may set up his first sexual excitation, and how that event may, owing

to its after-effects, act as a starting-point for the child’s whole sexual

development.  Masturbation,  as  well  as  the  two  attitudes  in  the

Oedipus complex, later on become attached to this early experience,

the child having subsequently interpreted its meaning. It is impossible,

however, to suppose that these observations of coitus are of universal

occurrence,  so  that  at  this  point  we  are  faced  with  the  problem  of

‘primal phantasies’. Thus the prehistory of the Oedipus complex, even

in boys, raises all of these questions for sifting and explanation; and

there is the further problem of whether we are to suppose that the

process invariably follows the same course, or whether a great variety

of  different  preliminary  stages  may  not  converge  upon  the  same

terminal situation.

 


      Some Psychical Consequences Of The Anatomical Distinction

                                Between The Sexes

                                                                                      4149

 

 

   In little girls the Oedipus complex raises one problem more than inboys. In both cases the mother is the original object; and there is no

cause for surprise that boys retain that object in the Oedipus complex.

But how does it happen that girls abandon it and instead take their

father  as  an  object?  In  pursuing  this  question  I  have  been  able  to

reach  some  conclusions  which  may  throw  light  precisely  on  the

prehistory of the Oedipus relation in girls.

      Every  analyst  has  come  across  certain  women  who  cling  with

especial intensity and tenacity to the bond with their father and to the

wish in which it culminates of having a child by him. We have good

reason  to  suppose  that  the  same  wishful  phantasy  was  also  the

motive force of their infantile masturbation, and it is easy to form an

impression  that  at  this  point  we  have  been  brought  up  against  an

elementary  and  unanalysable  fact  of  infantile  sexual  life.  But  a

thorough analysis of these very cases brings something different to

light - namely, that here the Oedipus complex has a long prehistory

and is in some respects a secondary formation.

   The old paediatrician Lindner once remarked that a child discovers

the genital zones (the penis or the clitoris) as a source of pleasure

while indulging in sensual sucking (thumb sucking).¹ I shall leave it an

open question whether it is really true that the child takes the newly

found  source  of  pleasure  in  exchange  for  the  recent  loss  of  the

mother’s nipple - a possibility to which later phantasies (fellatio) seem

to point. Be that as it may, the genital zone is discovered at some time

or other, and there seems no justification for attributing any psychical

content to the first activities in connection with it. But the first step in

the phallic phase which begins in this way is not the linking-up of the

masturbation with the object-cathexes of the Oedipus complex, but a

momentous  discovery  which  little  girls  are  destined  to  make.  They

notice the penis of a brother or playmate, strikingly visible and of large

proportions, at once recognize it as the superior counterpart of their

own small and inconspicuous organ, and from that time forward fall a

victim to envy for the penis.

 

   ¹ Cf. Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d).

 


      Some Psychical Consequences Of The Anatomical Distinction                                Between The Sexes

                                                                                      4150

 

   There is an interesting contrast between the behaviour of the two

sexes. In the analogous situation, when a little boy first catches sight

of a girl’s genital region, he begins by showing irresolution and lack of

interest; he sees nothing or disavows what he has seen, he softens it

down or looks about for expedients for bringing it into line with his

expectations. It is not until later, when some threat of castration has

obtained a hold upon him, that the observation becomes important to

him: if he then recollects or repeats it, it arouses a terrible storm of

emotion in him and forces him to believe in the reality of the threat

which he has hitherto laughed at. This combination of circumstances

leads to two reactions, which may become fixed and will in that case,

whether  separately  or  together  or  in  conjunction  with  other  factors,

permanently  determine  the  boy’s  relations  to  women:  horror  of  the

mutilated  creature  or  triumph  and  contempt  for  her.  These

developments,  however,  belong  to  the  future,  though  not  to  a  very

remote one.

   A little girl behaves differently. She makes her judgement and her

decision in a flash. She has seen it and knows that she is without it

and wants to have it.¹

 

   ¹ This is an opportunity for correcting a statement which I made many years ago. I believed

that  the  sexual  interest  of  children,  unlike  that  of  pubescents,  was  aroused,  not  by  the
difference between the sexes, but by the problem of where babies come from. We now see
that, at all events with girls, this is certainly not the case. With boys it may no doubt happen
sometimes one way and sometimes the other; or with both sexes chance experiences may
determine the event.
 


      Some Psychical Consequences Of The Anatomical Distinction

                                Between The Sexes

                                                                                      4151

 

      Here  what  has  been  named  the  masculinity  complex  of  women

branches off. It may put great difficulties in the way of their regular

development towards femininity, if it cannot be got over soon enough.

The hope of some day obtaining a penis in spite of everything and soof becoming like a man may persist to an incredibly late age and may

become a motive for strange and otherwise unaccountable actions. Or

again, a process may set in which I should like to call a ‘disavowal’, a

process which in the mental life of children seems neither uncommon

nor very dangerous but which in an adult would mean the beginning of

a  psychosis.  Thus  a  girl  may  refuse  to  accept  the  fact  of  being

castrated, may harden herself in the conviction that she does possess

a penis, and may subsequently be compelled to behave as though

she were a man.

   The psychical consequences of envy for the penis, in so far as it

does not become absorbed in the reaction-formation of the masculinity

complex, are various and far-reaching. After a woman has become

aware of the wound to her narcissism, she develops, like a scar, a

sense of inferiority. When she has passed beyond her first attempt at

explaining  her  lack  of  a  penis  as  being  a  punishment  personal  to

herself and has realized that that sexual character is a universal one,

she begins to share the contempt felt by men for a sex which is the

lesser in so important a respect, and, at least in holding that opinion,

insists on being like a man.¹

 

   ¹ In my first critical account of the ‘History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement’ (1914d), I

recognized that this fact represents the core of truth contained in Adler’s theory. That theory
has no hesitation in explaining the whole world by this single point (‘organ inferiority’, the
‘masculine protest’, ‘breaking away from the feminine line’) and prides itself upon having in
this way robbed sexuality of its importance and put the desire for power in its place! Thus the
only organ which could claim to be called ‘inferior’ without any ambiguity would be the clitoris.
On the other hand, one hears of analysts who boast that, though they have worked for dozens
of years, they have never found a sign of the existence of a castration complex. We must bow
our  heads  in  recognition  of  the  greatness  of  this  achievement,  even  though  it  is  only  a
negative one, a piece of virtuosity in the art of overlooking and mistaking. The two theories
form an interesting pair of opposites: in the latter not a trace of a castration complex, in the
former nothing else than its consequences.
 


      Some Psychical Consequences Of The Anatomical Distinction

                                Between The Sexes

                                                                                      4152

 

   Even after penis-envy has abandoned its true object, it continues to

exist:  by  an  easy  displacement  it  persists  in  the  character-trait  ofjealousy. Of course, jealousy is not limited to one sex and has a wider

foundation than this, but I am of opinion that it plays a far larger part in

the mental life of women than of men and that that is because it is

enormously  reinforced  from  the  direction  of  displaced  penis-envy.

While  I  was  still  unaware  of  this  source  of  jealousy  and  was

considering the phantasy ‘a child is being beaten’, which occurs so

commonly  in  girls,  I  constructed  a  first  phase  for  it  in  which  its

meaning  was  that  another  child,  a  rival  of  whom  the  subject  was

jealous, was to be beaten.¹ This phantasy seems to be a relic of the

phallic period in girls. The peculiar rigidity which struck me so much in

the  monotonous  formula  ‘a  child  is  being  beaten’  can  probably  be

interpreted  in  a  special  way.  The  child  which  is  being  beaten  (or

caressed) may ultimately be nothing more nor less than the clitoris

itself,  so  that  at  its  very  lowest  level  the  statement  will  contain  a

confession  of  masturbation,  which  has  remained  attached  to  the

content of the formula from its beginning in the phallic phase till later

life.

   A third consequence of penis-envy seems to be a loosening of the

girl’s  relation  with  her  mother  as  a  love-object.  The  situation  as  a

whole is not very clear, but it can be seen that in the end the girl’s

mother,  who  sent  her  into  the  world  so  insufficiently  equipped,  is

almost always held responsible for her lack of a penis. The way in

which this comes about historically is often that soon after the girl has

discovered  that  her  genitals  are  unsatisfactory  she  begins  to  show

jealousy of another child on the ground that her mother is fonder of it

than  of  her,  which  serves  as  a  reason  for  her  giving  up  her

affectionate  relation  to  her  mother.  It  will  fit  in  with  this  if  the  child

which has been preferred by her mother is made into the first object of

the beating-phantasy which ends in masturbation.

 

   ¹ ‘"A child is Being Beaten"’ (1919e).

 


      Some Psychical Consequences Of The Anatomical Distinction

                                Between The Sexes

                                                                                      4153

 

      There  is  yet  another  surprising  effect  of  penis-envy,  or  of  thediscovery of the inferiority of the clitoris, which is undoubtedly the most

important of all. In the past I had often formed an impression that in

general women tolerate masturbation worse than men, that they more

frequently fight against it and that they are unable to make use of it in

circumstances in which a man would seize upon it as a way of escape

without any hesitation. Experience would no doubt elicit innumerable

exceptions to this statement, if we attempted to turn it into a rule. The

reactions of human individuals of both sexes are of course made up of

masculine and feminine traits. But it appeared to me nevertheless as

though masturbation were further removed from the nature of women

than of men, and the solution of the problem could be assisted by the

reflection that masturbation, at all events of the clitoris, is a masculine

activity and that the elimination of clitoridal sexuality is a necessary

precondition for the development of femininity. Analyses of the remote

phallic period have now taught me that in girls, soon after the first

signs of penis-envy, an intense current of feeling against masturbation

makes its appearance, which cannot be attributed exclusively to the

educational influence of those in charge of the child. This impulse is

clearly a forerunner of the wave of repression which at puberty will do

away with a large amount of the girl’s masculine sexuality in order to

make room for the development of her femininity. It may happen that

this first opposition to auto-erotic activity fails to attain its end. And this

was in fact the case in the instances which I analysed. The conflict

continued, and both then and later the girl did everything she could to

free  herself  from  the  compulsion  to  masturbate.  Many  of  the  later

manifestations of sexual life in women remain unintelligible unless this

powerful motive is recognized.

   I cannot explain the opposition which is raised in this way by little

girls to phallic masturbation except by supposing that there is some

concurrent  factor  which  turns  her  violently  against  that  pleasurable

activity. Such a factor lies close at hand. It cannot be anything else

than  her  narcissistic  sense  of  humiliation  which  is  bound  up  with

penis-envy,  the  reminder  that  after  all  this  is  a  point  on  which  she

cannot compete with boys and that it would therefore be best for her

to give up the idea of doing so. Thus the little girl’s recognition of the

anatomical  distinction  between  the  sexes  forces  her  away  from

masculinity and masculine masturbation on to new lines which lead tothe development of femininity.

 


      Some Psychical Consequences Of The Anatomical Distinction

                                Between The Sexes

                                                                                      4154

 

   So far there has been no question of the Oedipus complex, nor has

it up to this point played any part. But now the girl’s libido slips into a

new position along the line - there is no other way of putting it - of the

equation ‘penis-child’. She gives up her wish for a penis and puts in

place of it a wish for a child: and with that purpose in view she takes

her father as a love object. Her mother becomes the object of her

jealousy. The girl has turned into a little woman. If I am to credit a

single analytic instance, this new situation can give rise to physical

sensations  which  would  have  to  be  regarded  as  a  premature

awakening of the female genital apparatus. When the girl’s attachment

to her father comes to grief later on and has to be abandoned, it may

give place to an identification with him and the girl may thus return to

her masculinity complex and perhaps remain fixated in it.

 

      I  have  now  said  the  essence  of  what  I  had  to  say:  I  will  stop,

therefore, and cast an eye over our findings. We have gained some

insight  into  the  prehistory  of  the  Oedipus  complex  in  girls.  The

corresponding period in boys is more or less unknown. In girls the

Oedipus  complex  is  a  secondary  formation.  The  operations  of  the

castration  complex  precede  it  and  prepare  for  it.  As  regards  the

relation  between  the  Oedipus  and  castration  complexes  there  is  a

fundamental contrast between the two sexes. Whereas in boys the

Oedipus complex is destroyed by the castration complex, in girls it is

made  possible  and  led  up  to  by  the  castration  complex.  This

contradiction  is  cleared  up  if  we  reflect  that  the  castration  complex

always operates in the sense implied in its subject-matter: it inhibits

and  limits  masculinity  and  encourages  femininity.  The  difference

between the sexual development of males and females at the stage

we  have  been  considering  is  an  intelligible  consequence  of  the

anatomical  distinction  between  their  genitals  and  of  the  psychicalsituation  involved  in  it;  it  corresponds  to  the  difference  between  a

castration that has been carried out and one that has merely been

threatened. In their essentials, therefore, our findings are self-evident

and it should have been possible to foresee them.

 


      Some Psychical Consequences Of The Anatomical Distinction

                                Between The Sexes

                                                                                      4155

 

   The Oedipus complex, however, is such an important thing that the

manner in which one enters and leaves it cannot be without its effects.

In boys (as I have shown at length in the paper to which I have just

referred and to which all of my present remarks are closely related)

the complex is not simply repressed, it is literally smashed to pieces

by  the  shock  of  threatened  castration.  Its  libidinal  cathexes  are

abandoned,  desexualized  and  in  part  sublimated;  its  objects  are

incorporated into the ego, where they form the nucleus of the super-

ego and give that new structure its characteristic qualities. In normal,

or, it is better to say, in ideal cases, the Oedipus complex exists no

longer, even in the unconscious; the super-ego has become its heir.

Since  the  penis  (to  follow  Ferenczi)  owes  its  extraordinarily  high

narcissistic cathexis to its organic significance for the propagation of

the  species,  the  catastrophe  to  the  Oedipus  complex  (the

abandonment of incest and the institution of conscience and morality)

may be regarded as a victory of the race over the individual. This is an

interesting point of view when one considers that neurosis is based

upon a struggle of the ego against the demands of the sexual function.

But  to  leave  the  standpoint  of  individual  psychology  is  not  of  any

immediate help in clarifying this complicated situation.

   In girls the motive for the demolition of the Oedipus complex is

lacking. Castration has already had its effect, which was to force the

child  into  the  situation  of  the  Oedipus  complex.  Thus  the  Oedipus

complex escapes the fate which it meets with in boys: it may be slowly

abandoned or dealt with by repression, or its effects may persist far

into women’s normal mental life. I cannot evade the notion (though I

hesitate  to  give  it  expression)  that  for  women  the  level  of  what  isethically normal is different from what it is in men. Their super-ego is

never so inexorable, so impersonal, so independent of its emotional

origins as we require it to be in men. Character-traits which critics of

every epoch have brought up against women - that they show less

sense of justice than men, that they are less ready to submit to the

great exigencies of life, that they are more often influenced in their

judgements by feelings of affection or hostility - all these would be

amply  accounted  for  by  the  modification  in  the  formation  of  their

super-ego  which  we  have  inferred  above.  We  must  not  allow

ourselves to be deflected from such conclusions by the denials of the

feminists,  who  are  anxious  to  force  us  to  regard  the  two  sexes  as

completely  equal  in  position  and  worth;  but  we  shall,  of  course,

willingly  agree  that  the  majority  of  men  are  also  far  behind  the

masculine  ideal  and  that  all  human  individuals,  as  a  result  of  their

bisexual disposition and of cross-inheritance, combine in themselves

both masculine and feminine characteristics, so that pure masculinity

and femininity remain theoretical constructions of uncertain content.

 


      Some Psychical Consequences Of The Anatomical Distinction

                                Between The Sexes

                                                                                      4156

 

   I am inclined to set some value on the considerations I have brought

forward  upon  the  psychical  consequences  of  the  anatomical

distinction between the sexes. I am aware, however, that this opinion

can only be maintained if my findings, which are based on a handful of

cases, turn out to have general validity and to be typical. If not, they

would remain no more than a contribution to our knowledge of the

different paths along which sexual life develops.

   In the valuable and comprehensive studies on the masculinity and

castration complexes in women by Abraham (1921), Horney (1923)

and  Helene  Deutsch  (1925)  there  is  much  that  touches  closely  on

what I have written but nothing that coincides with it completely, so

that here again I feel justified in publishing this paper.

                                                                                       4157

 

      JOSEF POPPER-LYNKEUS AND THE THEORY OF DREAMS

                                        (1923)

 


                                                                                      4158

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4159

 

      JOSEF POPPER-LYNKEUS AND THE THEORY OF DREAMS

 

There  is  much  of  interest  to  be  said  on  the  subject  of  apparent

scientific originality. When some new idea comes up in science, which

is hailed at first as a discovery and is also as a rule disputed as such,

objective research soon afterwards reveals that after all it was in fact

no novelty. Usually the discovery has already been made repeatedly

and has afterwards been forgotten, often at very long intervals of time.

Or at least it has had forerunners, had been obscurely surmised or

incompletely  enunciated.  This  is  too  well  known  to  call  for  further

discussion.

   But the subjective side of originality also deserves consideration. A

scientific worker may sometimes ask himself what was the source of

the ideas peculiar to himself which he has applied to his material. As

regards  some  of  them  he  will  discover  without  much  reflection  the

hints from which they were derived, the statements made by other

people which he has picked out and modified and whose implications

he has elaborated. But as regards others of his ideas he can make no

such  acknowledgements;  he  can  only  suppose  that  these  thoughts

and lines of approach were generated - he cannot tell how - in his own

mental activity, and it is on them that he bases his claim to originality.

   Careful psychological investigation, however, diminishes this claim

still further. It reveals hidden and long-forgotten sources which gave

the  stimulus  to  the  apparently  original  ideas,  and  it  replaces  theostensible new creation by a revival of something forgotten applied to

fresh material. There is nothing to regret in this; we had no right to

expect  that  what  was  ‘original’  could  be  untraceable  and

undetermined.

   In my case, too, the originality of many of the new ideas employed

by  me  in  the  interpretation  of  dreams  and  in  psycho-analysis  has

evaporated in this way. I am ignorant of the source of only one of

these ideas. It was no less than the key to my view of dreams and

helped me to solve their riddles, so far as it has been possible to solve

them hitherto. I started out from the strange, confused and senseless

character of so many dreams, and hit upon the notion that dreams

were bound to become like that because something was struggling for

expression in them which was opposed by a resistance from other

mental forces. In dreams hidden impulses were stirring which stood in

contradiction to what might be called the dreamer’s official ethical and

aesthetic creed; the dreamer was thus ashamed of these impulses,

turned away from them and refused to acknowledge them in day-time,

and if during the night he could not withhold expression of some kind

from them, he submitted them to a ‘dream-distortion’ which made the

content of the dream appear confused and senseless. To the mental

force  in  human  beings  which  keeps  watch  on  this  internal

contradiction and distorts the dream’s primitive instinctual impulses in

favour of conventional or of higher moral standards, I gave the name

of ‘dream-censorship’.

 


              Josef Popper-Lynkeus And The Theory Of Dreams

                                                                                      4160

 

   Precisely this essential part of my theory of dreams was, however,

discovered by Popper-Lynkeus independently. I will ask the reader to

compare  the  following  quotation  from  a  story  called  ‘Träumen  wie

Wachen’ in his Phantasien eines Realisten which was certainly written

in ignorance of the theory of dreams which I published in 1900, just as

I myself was then in ignorance of Lynkeus’s Phantasien:

   ‘About a man who has the remarkable attribute of never dreaming

nonsense.      ‘"This  splendid  gift  of  yours,  for  dreaming  as  though  you  were

waking,  is  a  consequence  of  your  virtues,  of  your  kindness,  your

sense of justice, and your love of truth; it is the moral serenity of your

nature which makes me understand all about you."

   ‘"But when I think the matter over properly", replied the other, "I

almost believe that everyone is made like me, and that no one at all

ever dreams nonsense. Any dream which one can remember clearly

enough to describe it afterwards - any dream, that is to say, which is

not a fever-dream - must always make sense, and it cannot possibly

be otherwise. For things that were mutually contradictory could not

group themselves into a single whole. The fact that time and space

are often thrown into confusion does not affect the true content of the

dream, since no doubt neither of them are of significance for its real

essence. We often do the same thing in waking life. Only think of fairy

tales and of the many daring products of the imagination, which are

full of meaning and of which only a man without intelligence could say:

‘This is nonsense, for it is impossible.’"

   ‘"If only one always knew how to interpret dreams in the right way,

as you have just done with mine!" said his friend.

   ‘"That is certainly no easy task; but with a little attention on the part

of the dreamer himself it should no doubt always succeed. - You ask

why  it  is  that  for  the  most  part  it  does not  succeed?  In  you  other

people  there  seems  always  to  be  something  that  lies  concealed  in

your dreams, something unchaste in a special and higher sense, a

certain secret quality in your being which it is hard to follow. And that

is why your dreams so often seem to be without meaning or even to

be  nonsense.  But  in  the  deepest  sense  this  is  not  in  the  least  so;

indeed, it cannot be so at all - for it is always the same man, whether

he is awake or dreaming."’

   I believe that what enabled me to discover the cause of dream-

distortion was my moral courage. In the case of Popper it was the

purity, love of truth and moral serenity of his nature.

                                                                                       4161

 

                              DR. SÁNDOR FERENCZI

                                (ON HIS 5Oth BIRTHDAY)

                                        (1923)

 


                                                                                      4162

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4163

 

                              DR. SÁNDOR FERENCZI

                                (ON HIS 50th BIRTHDAY)

 

Not many years after its publication (in 1900), The Interpretation of

Dreams  fell  into  the  hands  of  a  young  Budapest  physician,  who,

although  he  was  a  neurologist,  psychiatrist  and  expert  in  forensic

medicine, was eagerly in search of new scientific knowledge. He did

not get far in reading the book; very soon he had thrown it aside -

whether  out  of  boredom  or  disgust  is  not  known.  Soon  afterwards,

however, the call for fresh possibilities of work and discovery took him

to Zurich, and thence he was led to Vienna to meet the author of the

book that he had once contemptuously cast aside. This first visit was

succeeded by a long, intimate and hitherto untroubled friendship, in

the course of which he too made the journey to America in 1909 to

lecture at Clark University at Worcester, Mass.

      Such  were  the  beginnings  of  Ferenczi,  who  has  since  himself

become  a  master  and  teacher  of  psycho-analysis  and  who  in  the

present year, 1923, completes alike the fiftieth anniversary of his birth

and  the  first  decade  of  his  leadership  of  the  Budapest  Psycho-

Analytical Society.

   Ferenczi has repeatedly played a part, too, in the external affairs of

psycho-analysis. His appearance at the Second Analytical Congress,

at Nuremberg in 1910, will be remembered, where he proposed andhelped  to  bring  about  the  foundation  of  an  International  Psycho-

Analytical Association as a means of defence against the contempt

with  which  analysis  was  treated  by  official  Medicine.  At  the  Fifth

Analytical  Congress,  at  Budapest,  in  September,  1918,  he  was

elected President of the Association. He appointed Anton von Freund

as Secretary; and there is no doubt that the combined energy of the

two men, together with Freund’s generous schemes of endowment,

would have made Budapest the analytic capital of Europe, had not

political  catastrophes  and  personal  tragedy  put  a  merciless  end  to

these fair hopes. Freund fell ill and died in January, 1920. In view of

Hungary’s isolation from contact with the rest of the world, Ferenczi

had resigned his position in October, 1919, and had transferred the

Presidency of the International Association to Ernest Jones in London.

For the duration of the Soviet Republic in Hungary Ferenczi had been

allotted  the  functions  of  a  University  teacher,  and  his  lectures  had

attracted  crowded  audiences.  The  Branch  Society,  which  he  had

founded  in  1913,¹  survived  every  storm  and,  under  his  guidance,

became  a  centre  of  intense  and  productive  work  and  was

distinguished by an accumulation of abilities such as were exhibited in

combination by no other Branch Society. Ferenczi, who, as a middle

child in a large family, had to struggle with a powerful brother complex,

had, under the influence of analysis, become an irreproachable elder

brother, a kindly teacher and promoter of young talent.

 

   ¹ Its Inaugural General Meeting was held on May 19, 1913, with Ferenczi as President, Dr.

Radó as Secretary, and Drs. Hollós, Ignotus and Lévy as members.
 


                  Dr. Sandor Ferenczi (On His 50th Birthday)

                                                                                      4164

 

      Ferenczi’s  analytic  writings  have  become  universally  known  and

appreciated.  It  was  not  until  1922  that  his Popular  Lectures  on

Psycho-Analysis were published by our Verlag as Volume XIII of the

‘Internationale  Psychoanalytische  Bibliothek’.  These  lectures,  clear

and formally perfect, sometimes most fascinatingly written, offer what

is in fact the best ‘Introduction to Psycho-Analysis’ for those who are

unfamiliar  with  it.  There  is  still  no  collection  of  his  purely  technicalmedical writings, a number of which have been translated into English

by  Ernest  Jones.  The Verlag  will  fulfil  this  task  as  soon  as  more

favourable  times  make  it  possible.  Those  of  his  books  and  papers

which  have  appeared  in  Hungarian  have  passed  through  many

editions  and  have  made  analysis  familiar  to  educated  circles  in

Hungary.

   Ferenczi’s scientific achievement is impressive above all from its

many-sidedness.  Besides  well-chosen  case  histories  and  acutely

observed  clinical  communications  (‘A  Little  Chanticleer’,  ‘Transitory

Symptom-Constructions  during  the  Analysis’,  and  shorter  clinical

works) we find exemplary critical writings such as those upon Jung’s

Wandlungen  und  Symbole  der  Libido,  upon  Régis  and  Hesnard’s

views on psycho-analysis, as well as effective polemical writings such

as  those  against  Bleuler  on  alcohol  and  against  Putnam  on  the

relation  between  psycho-analysis  and  philosophy,  moderate  and

dignified in spite of their decisiveness. But besides all these there are

the papers upon which Ferenczi’s fame principally rests, in which his

originality, his wealth of ideas and his command over a well-directed

scientific imagination find such happy expression, and with which he

has  enlarged  important  sections  of  psycho-analytic  theory  and  has

promoted  the  discovery  of  fundamental  situations  in  mental  life:

‘Introjection and Transference’, including a discussion of the theory of

hypnosis, ‘Stages in the Development of the Sense of Reality’ and his

discussion of symbolism. Finally there are the works of these last few

years  -  ‘The  Psycho-Analysis  of  the  War  Neuroses’, Hysterie  und

Pathoneurosen and, in collaboration with Hollós, Psycho-Analysis and

the Psychic Disorder of General Paresis (in which the medical interest

advances  from  the  psychological  conditions  to  the  somatic

determinants), and his approaches to an ‘active’ therapy.

   However incomplete this enumeration may seem to be, his friends

know that Ferenczi has held back even more than he has been able to

make up his mind to communicate. On his fiftieth birthday they are

united in wishing that he may be granted strength, leisure and a frame

of  mind  to  bring  his  scientific  plans  to  realization  in  fresh

achievements.

                                                                                       4165

 

              PREFACE TO AICHHORN’S WAYWARD YOUTH

                                        (1925)

 


                                                                                      4166

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4167

 

              PREFACE TO AICHHORN’S WAYWARD YOUTH

 

None  of  the  applications  of  psycho-analysis  has  excited  so  much

interest and aroused so many hopes, and none, consequently, has

attracted  so  many  capable  workers,  as  its  use  in  the  theory  and

practice of education. It is easy to understand why; for children have

become the main subject of psycho-analytic research and have thus

replaced  in  importance  the  neurotics  on  whom  its  studies  began.

Analysis has shown how the child lives on, almost unchanged, in the

sick man as well as in the dreamer and the artist; it has thrown light on

the motive forces and trends which set its characteristic stamp upon

the childish nature; and it has traced the stages through which a child

grows to maturity. No wonder, therefore, if an expectation has arisen

that  psycho-analytic  concern  with  children  will  benefit  the  work  of

education, whose aim it is to guide and assist children on their forward

path and to shield them from going astray.

   My personal share in this application of psycho-analysis been very

slight. At an early stage I had accepted the from bon mot which lays it

down that there are three impossible professions - educating, healing

and governing - and I was already fully occupied with the second of

them. But this does not mean that I overlook the high social value of

the work done by those of my friends who are engaged in education.

      The  present  volume  by  August  Aichhorn  is  concerned  with  one

department of the great problem - with the educational influencing ofjuvenile  delinquents.  The  author  had  worked  for  many  years  in  an

official capacity as a director of municipal institutions for delinquents

before he became acquainted with psycho-analysis. His attitude to his

charges  sprang  from  a  warm  sympathy  with  the  fate  of  those

unfortunates  and  was  correctly  guided  by  an  intuitive  perception  of

their  mental  needs.  Psycho-analysis  could  teach  him  little  that  was

new of a practical kind, but it brought him a clear theoretical insight

into the justification of his way of acting and put him in a position to

explain its basis to other people.

   It must not be assumed that this gift of intuitive understanding will be

found  in  everyone  concerned  with  the  bringing-up  of  children.  Two

lessons may be derived, it seems to me, from the experience and the

success of August Aichhorn. One is that every such person should

receive a psycho-analytic training, since without it children, the object

of his endeavours, must remain an inaccessible problem to him. A

training  of  this  kind  is  best  carried  out  if  such  a  person  himself

undergoes  an  analysis  and  experiences  it  on  himself:  theoretical

instruction in analysis fails to penetrate deep enough and carries no

conviction.

 


                      Preface To Aichhorn's Wayward Youth

                                                                                      4168

 

   The second lesson has a somewhat conservative ring. It is to the

effect that the work of education is something sui generis: it is not to

be confused with psycho-analytic influence and cannot be replaced by

it.  Psycho-analysis  can  be  called  in  by  education  as  an  auxiliary

means of dealing with a child; but it is not a suitable substitute for

education.  Not  only  is  such  a  substitution  impossible  on  practical

grounds but it is also to be disrecommended for theoretical reasons.

The  relation  between  education  and  psycho-analytic  treatment  will

probably before long be the subject of a detailed investigation. Here I

will only give a few hints. One should not be misled by the statement -

incidentally a perfectly true one - that the psycho-analysis of an adult

neurotic is equivalent to an after-education. A child, even a wayward

and  delinquent  child,  is  still  not  a  neurotic;  and  after-education  issomething  quite  different  from  the  education  of  the  immature.  The

possibility  of  analytic  influence  rests  on  quite  definite  preconditions

which can be summed up under the term ‘analytic situation’; it requires

the  development  of  certain  psychical  structures  and  a  particular

attitude to the analyst. Where these are lacking - as in the case of

children, of juvenile delinquents, and, as a rule, of impulsive criminals

- something other than analysis must be employed, though something

which  will  be  at  one  with  analysis  in  its purpose.  The  theoretical

chapters of the present volume will give the reader a preliminary grasp

of the multiplicity of the decisions involved.

      I  will  end  with  a  further  inference,  and  this  time  one  which  is

important not for the theory of education but for the status of those

who are engaged in education. If one of these has learnt analysis by

experiencing it on his own person and is in a position of being able to

employ it in borderline and mixed cases to assist him in his work, he

should obviously be given the right to practise analysis, and narrow-

minded motives should not be allowed to try to put obstacles in his

way.

                                                                                       4169

 

                                    JOSEF BREUER

                                        (1925)

 


                                                                                      4170

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4171

 

                                    JOSEF BREUER

 

On  June  20,  1925,  there  died  in  Vienna,  in  his  eighty-fourth  year,

Josef Breuer, the creator of the cathartic method, whose name is for

that reason indissolubly linked with the beginnings of psycho-analysis.

   Breuer was a physician, a pupil of the clinician Oppolzer. In his

youth  he  had  worked  at  the  physiology  of  respiration  under  Ewald

Hering,  and  later,  in  the  scanty  hours  of  leisure  allowed  by  an

extensive  medical  practice,  he  occupied  himself  successfully  with

experiments on the function of the vestibular apparatus in animals.

Nothing in his education could lead one to expect that he would gain

the  first  decisive  insight  into  the  age-old  riddle  of  the  hysterical

neurosis and would make a contribution of imperishable value to our

knowledge of the human mind. But he was a man of rich and universal

gifts,  and  his  interests  extended  in  many  directions  far  beyond  his

professional activities.

      It  was  in  1880  that  chance  brought  into  his  hands  an  unusual

patient, a girl of more than ordinary intelligence who had fallen ill of

severe  hysteria  while  she  was  nursing  her  sick  father.  It  was  only

some fourteen years later, in our joint publication, Studies on Hysteria

(1895d) - and even then unluckily only in a much abbreviated form,

censored,  too,  from  considerations  of  medical  discretion  -  that  the

world learnt the nature of his treatment of this celebrated ‘first case’,

with what immense care and patience he carried out the techniquewhen once he had discovered it, till the patient was freed from all the

incomprehensible  symptoms  of  her  illness,  and  what  insight  he

obtained in the course of the work into the mental mechanisms of the

neurosis.

   We psycho-analysts, who have long been familiar with the idea of

devoting  hundreds  of  sessions  to  a  single  patient,  can  form  no

conception of how novel such a procedure must have seemed forty-

five  years  ago.  It  must  have  called  for  a  large  amount  of  personal

interest and, if the phrase can be allowed, of medical libido, but also

for  a  considerable  degree  of  freedom  of  thought  and  certainty  of

judgement. At the date of the publication of our Studies we were able

to appeal to Charcot’s writings and to Pierre Janet’s investigations,

which had by that time deprived Breuer’s discoveries of some of their

priority. But when Breuer was treating his first case (in 1881-2) none

of  this  was  as  yet  available.  Janet’s Automatisme  psychologique

appeared in 1889 and his second work, L’état mental des hystériques,

not until 1892. It seems that Breuer’s researches were wholly original,

and were directed only by the hints offered to him by the material of

his case.

 


                                      Josef Breuer

                                                                                      4172

 

   I have repeatedly attempted - most recently in my Autobiographical

Study  (1925d),  in  Grote’s  series, Die  Medizin  der  Gegenwart  -  to

define my share in the Studies which we published jointly. My merit lay

chiefly in reviving in Breuer an interest which seemed to have become

extinct, and in then urging him on to publication. A kind of reserve

which was characteristic of him, an inner modesty, surprising in a man

of  such  a  brilliant  personality,  had  led  him  to  keep  his  astonishing

discovery secret for so long that not all of it was any longer new. I

found reason later to suppose that a purely emotional factor, too, had

given  him  an  aversion  to  further  work  on  the  elucidation  of  the

neuroses. He had come up against something that is never absent -

his patient’s transference on to her physician, and he had not grasped

the impersonal nature of the process. At the time when he submittedto  my  influence  and  was  preparing  the Studies  for  publication,  his

judgement of their significance seemed to be confirmed. ‘I believe’, he

told me, ‘that this is the most important thing we two have to give the

world.’

   Besides the case history of his first patient Breuer contributed a

theoretical paper to the Studies. It is very far from being out of date;

on  the  contrary,  it  conceals  thoughts  and  suggestions  which  have

even now not been turned to sufficient account. Anyone immersing

himself  in  this  speculative  essay  will  form  a  true  impression  of  the

mental build of this man, whose scientific interests were, alas, turned

in the direction of our psychopathology during only one short episode

of his long life.

                                                                                       4173

 

      PREFACE TO RAYMOND DE SAUSSURE’S THE PSYCHO-

                                ANALYTIC METHOD

                                        (1922)

 

It is with great pleasure that I am able to assure the public that the

present work by Dr. de Saussure is a book of value and merit. It is

especially  well  calculated  to  give  French  readers  a  correct  idea  of

what psycho-analysis is and what it contains.

   Dr. de Saussure has not only conscientiously studied my writings,

but in addition he has made the sacrifice of coming to me to undergo

an analysis lasting several months. This has put him in a position to

form his own judgement on the majority of those questions in psycho-

analysis which are still undecided, and to avoid the many distortions

and errors which one is accustomed to finding in French as well as in

German  expositions  of  psycho-analysis.  Nor  has  he  failed  to

contradict certain false or negligent statements which commentators

pass on from one to another: such as, for instance, that all dreams

have a sexual meaning or that, according to me, the only motive force

in our mental life is that of sexual libido.

   Since Dr. de Saussure has said in his preface that I have corrected

his work, I must add a qualification; my influence has only made itself

felt in a few corrections and comments and I have in no way sought to

encroach upon the author’s independence. In the first, theoretical part

of this work, I should have expounded a number of things differently

from him: for instance, the difficult topic of the preconscious and the

unconscious.  And  above  all,  I  should  have  treated  the  Oedipus

complex far more exhaustively.

 


    Preface To Raymond De Saussure's The Psycho-Analytic Method

                                                                                      4174

 

   The excellent dream which Dr. Odier has put at the author’s disposal

may  give  even  the  uninitiated  an  idea  of  the  wealth  of  dream-

associations and of the relation between the manifest dream-imageand the latent thoughts concealed behind it. It demonstrates too the

significance that the analysis of a dream can have in the treatment of

a patient.

   Finally, the remarks which the author makes in conclusion on the

technique  of  psycho-analysis  are  quite  excellent.  They  are  entirely

correct  and,  in  spite  of  their  conciseness,  leave  aside  nothing

essential.  They  are  convincing  evidence  of  the  author’s  subtle

understanding.  The  reader  should  not,  of  course,  conclude  that

knowledge of these rules of technique alone will make him capable of

undertaking an analysis.

   To-day psycho-analysis is beginning to arouse in a larger measure

the interest of professional men and of the lay public in France as well;

it  will  certainly  not  find  any  fewer  resistances  there  than  it  has

encountered  previously  in  other  countries.  Let  us  hope  that  Dr.  de

Saussure’s book will make an important contribution to the clarification

of the discussions that lie ahead.

                                                                                  FREUD

VIENNA, February 1922

                                                                                       4175

 

                          PREFACE TO MAX EITINGON’S

      REPORT ON THE BERLIN PSYCHO-ANALYTIC POLICLINIC

                          (MARCH 1920 TO JUNE 1922)

                                        (1923)

 

My  friend  Max  Eitingon,  who  created  the  Berlin  Psycho-Analytical

Policlinic and has hitherto supported it out of his own resources, has in

the following pages made public his reasons for founding it and has

also given an account of the Institute’s organization and functions. I

can  only  add  to  what  he  has  written  my  wish  that  individuals  or

societies may be found elsewhere to follow Eitingon’s example and

bring similar institutions into existence. If psycho-analysis, alongside

of its scientific significance, has a value as a therapeutic procedure, if

it is capable of giving help to sufferers in their struggle to fulfil the

demands of civilization, this help should be accessible as well to the

great multitude who are too poor themselves to repay an analyst for

his laborious work. This seems to be a social necessity particularly in

our  times,  when  the  intellectual  strata  of  the  population,  which  are

especially  prone  to  neurosis,  are  sinking  irresistibly  into  poverty.

Institutes such as the Berlin Policlinic are also alone in a position to

overcome the difficulties which otherwise stand in the way of thorough

instruction in psycho-analysis. They make possible the education of a

considerable  number  of  trained  analysts,  whose  activity  must  be

regarded as the sole possible protection against injury to patients by

ignorant and unqualified persons, whether they are laymen or doctors.

                                                                                       4176

 

                            LETTER TO FRITZ WITTELS

                                        (1924)

 

You  have  given  me  a  Christmas  present  which  is  very  largely

occupied  with  my  own  personality.  The  failure  to  send  a  word  of

thanks  for  such  a  gift  would  be  an  act  of  rudeness  only  to  be

accounted for by very peculiar motives. Fortunately no such motives

exist in this case. Your book is by no means hostile; it is not unduly

indiscreet; and it manifests the serious interest in the topic which was

to be anticipated in so able a writer as yourself.

   I need hardly say that I neither expected nor desired the publication

of such a book. It seems to me that the public has no concern with my

personality, and can learn nothing from an account of it, so long as my

case  (for  manifold  reasons)  cannot  be  expounded  without  any

reserves  whatever.  But  you  have  thought  otherwise.  Your  own

detachment  from  me,  which  you  consider  an  advantage,  entails

serious drawbacks none the less. You know too little of the object of

study, and you have not been able to avoid the danger of straining the

facts a little in your analytic endeavours. Moreover, I am inclined to

think that your adoption of Stekel’s standpoint, and the fact that you

contemplate  the  object  of  study  from  his  outlook,  cannot  but  have

impaired the accuracy of your discernment.

 


                                  Letter To Fritz Wittels

                                                                                      4177

 

   In some respects, I think there are positive distortions, and I believe

these to be the outcome of a preconceived notion of yours. You think

that a great man must have such and such merits and defects, and

must  display  certain  extreme  characteristics;  and  you  hold  that  I

belong to the category of great men. That is why you ascribe to me all

sorts  of  qualities  many  of  which  are  mutually  conflicting.  Much  of

general interest might be said on this matter, but unfortunately your

relationship to Stekel precludes further attempts on my part to clear upthe misunderstanding.

   On the other hand, I am glad to acknowledge that your shrewdness

has  enabled  you  to  detect  some  things  which  are  well  known  to

myself. For instance, you are right in inferring that I have often been

compelled  to  make  détours  when  following  my  own  path.  You  are

right, too, in thinking that I have no use for other people’s ideas when

they are presented to me at an inopportune moment. (Still, as regards

the  latter  point,  I  think  you  might  have  defended  me  from  the

accusation that I am repudiating ideas when I am merely unable for

the time being to pass judgement on them or to elaborate them.) But I

am delighted to find that you do me full justice in the matter of my

relations with Adler....

   I realize that you may have occasion to revise your text in view of a

second  edition.  With  an  eye  to  this  possibility,  I  enclose  a  list  of

suggested emendations. These are based on trustworthy data, and

are  quite  independent  of  my  own  prepossessions.  Some  of  them

relate to matters of trifling importance, but some of them will perhaps

lead you to reverse or modify certain inferences. The fact that I send

you these corrections is a token that I value your work though I cannot

wholly approve it.

                                                                                       4178

 

          LETTER TO SEÑOR LUIS LOPEZ-BALLESTEROS Y DE

                                      TORRES

                                        (1923)

 

When I was a young student, the desire to read the immortal Don

Quixote  in  the  original  of  Cervantes  led  me  to  learn,  untaught,  the

lovely Castilian tongue. Thanks to this youthful enthusiasm, I am able

to-day - at an advanced age - to test the accuracy of your Spanish

version of my works, the reading of which invariably provokes in me a

lively appreciation of your very correct interpretation of my thoughts

and of the elegance of your style. I am above all astonished that one

who,  like  you,  is  neither  a  doctor  nor  a  psychiatrist  by  profession

should have been able to obtain so absolute and precise a mastery

over material which is intricate and at times obscure.

                                                                                       4179

 

                          LETTER TO LE DISQUE VERT

                                        (1924)

 

Of the many lessons lavished upon me in the past (1885-6) by the

great Charcot at the Salpêtrière, two left me with a deep impression:

that one should never tire of considering the same phenomena again

and again (or of submitting to their effects), and that one should not

mind  meeting  with  contradiction  on  every  side  provided  one  has

worked sincerely.

                                                                                  FREUD

                                                                                       4180

 

    LETTER TO THE EDITOR OF THE JEWISH PRESS CENTRE IN

                                        ZURICH

                                        (1925)

 

. . .I can say that I stand as far apart from the Jewish religion as from

all other religions: that is to say, they are of great significance to me as

a subject of scientific interest, but I have no part in them emotionally.

On the other hand I have always had a strong feeling of solidarity with

my fellow-people, and have always encouraged it in my children as

well. We have all remained in the Jewish denomination.

   In the time of my youth our free-thinking religious instructors set no

store by their pupils’ acquiring a knowledge of the Hebrew language

and  literature.  My  education  in  this  field  was  therefore  extremely

behindhand, as I have since often regretted.

                                                                                       4181

 

      ON THE OCCASION OF THE OPENING OF THE HEBREW

                                      UNIVERSITY

                                        (1925)

 

Historians have told us that our small nation withstood the destruction

of its independence as a State only because it began to transfer in its

estimation of values the highest rank to its spiritual possessions, to its

religion and its literature.

   We are now living in a time when this people has a prospect of

again  winning  the  land  of  its  fathers  with  the  help  of  a  Power  that

dominates the world, and it celebrates the occasion by the foundation

of a University in its ancient capital city.

      A  University  is  a  place  in  which  knowledge  is  taught  above  all

differences of religions and of nations, where investigation is carried

on,  which  is  to  show  mankind  how  far  they  understand  the  world

around them and how far they can control it.

   Such an undertaking is a noble witness to the development to which

our  people  has  forced  its  way  in  two  thousand  years  of  unhappy

fortune.

   I find it painful that my ill-health prevents me from being present at

the opening festivities of the Jewish University in Jerusalem.

                                                                                       4182

 

                EDITORIAL CHANGES IN THE ZEITSCHRIFT

                                        (1924)

 

Dr.  Otto  Rank  has  acted  as  editor  of  this  journal  ever  since  its

foundation in 1913, even though it is only since 1920 that he has been

named on its title-page as sole editor. During his period of military

service in the War, his place was taken by Dr. Hanns Sachs, who was

at that time in Vienna. Since the beginning of the current volume Dr.

S. Ferenczi has also had a share in the editing.

   At Easter, 1924, Dr. Rank accepted an invitation which took him to

New York. On his return home he announced that he had decided to

transfer his activity as a teaching and practising analyst to America -

at least for a part of the year. Thus it became necessary to place the

editorship of the Zeitschrift in other hands. It is not within the rights of

the Director to give public expression to his opinion of the level and

achievements  of  this  journal.  No  one  who  is  inclined  to  appreciate

them should overlook or forget how much of its success is due to the

tireless devotion and exemplary work of the retiring editor.

   Dr. Rank’s place will now be taken by Dr. S. Radó of Berlin. He will

be supported as advisers and collaborators by Dr. M. Eitingon (Berlin)

and Dr. S. Ferenczi (Budapest). All communications and contributions

for  the  editor  should  be  addressed  to  Dr.  Sándor  Radó,  Berlin-

Schöneberg, Am Park, 20. The business side of the Zeitschrift will be

conducted  as  before  at  the  offices  of  the  Internationaler

Psychoanalytischer Verlag in Vienna (Manager: A. J. Storfer).

                                                                                       4183

 

                        AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUDY

                                        (1925)

 


                                                                                      4184

 

 Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4185

 

                        AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUDY

 

Several of the contributors to this series of ‘Autobiographical Studies’

have begun by expressing their misgivings at the unusual difficulties of

the task they have undertaken. The difficulties in my case are, I think,

even  greater;  for  I  have  already  more  than  once  published  papers

upon the same line as the present one, papers which, from the nature

of the subject have dealt more with personal considerations than is

usual or than would otherwise have been necessary.

   I gave my first account of the development and subject matter of

psycho-analysis in five lectures which I delivered in 1909 before Clark

University at Worcester, Mass., where I had been invited to attend the

celebration  of  the  twentieth  anniversary  of  the  foundation  of  that

body.¹  Only  recently  I  gave  way  to  the  temptation  of  making  a

contribution  of  a  similar  kind  to  an  American  collective  publication

dealing  with  the  opening  years  of  the  twentieth  century,  since  its

editors  had  shown  their  recognition  of  the  importance  of  psycho-

analysis by allotting a special chapter to it.² Between these two dates

appeared a paper, ‘On the History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement’,

which, in fact, contains the essence of all that I can say on the present

occasion. Since I must not contradict myself and since I have no wish

to repeat myself exactly, I must endeavour to construct a narrative in

which  subjective  and  objective  attitudes,  biographical  and  historical

interests, are combined in a new proportion. 

   ¹ The lectures were first published (in English) in the American Journal of Psychology

(1910); the original German was issued under the title of Über Psychoanalyse.

   ² These Eventful Years (New York, 1924). My essay, translated by Dr. A. A. Brill, forms

chapter lxxiii. of the second volume.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4186

 

 

   I was born on May 6th, 1856, at Freiberg in Moravia, a small town in

what  is  now  Czechoslovakia.  My  parents  were  Jews,  and  I  have

remained  a  Jew  myself.  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  my  father’s

family were settled for a long time on the Rhine (at Cologne), that, as

a result of a persecution of the Jews during the fourteenth or fifteenth

century, they fled eastwards, and that, in the course of the nineteenth

century,  they  migrated  back  from  Lithuania  through  Galicia  into

German Austria. When I was a child of four I came to Vienna, and I

went through the whole of my education there. At the ‘Gymnasium’ I

was at the top of my class for seven years; I enjoyed special privileges

there, and had scarcely ever to be examined in class. Although we

lived  in  very  limited  circumstances,  my  father  insisted  that,  in  my

choice  of  a  profession,  I  should  follow  my  own  inclinations  alone.

Neither at that time, nor indeed in my later life, did I feel any particular

predilection for the career of a doctor. I was moved, rather, by a sort of

curiosity,  which  was,  however,  directed  more  towards  human

concerns  than  towards  natural  objects;  nor  had  I  grasped  the

importance of observation as one of the best means of gratifying it. My

deep engrossment in the Bible story (almost as soon as I had learnt

the art of reading) had, as I recognized much later, an enduring effect

upon the direction of my interest. Under the powerful influence of a

school friendship with a boy rather my senior who grew up to be a

well-known politician, I developed a wish to study law like him and to

engage in social activities. At the same time, the theories of Darwin,

which were then of topical interest, strongly attracted me, for they held

out hopes of an extraordinary advance in our understanding of the

world; and it was hearing Goethe’s beautiful essay on Nature readaloud at a popular lecture by Professor Carl Brühl just before I left

school that decided me to become a medical student.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4187

 

      When,  in  1873,  I  first  joined  the  University,  I  experienced  some

appreciable disappointments. Above all, I found that I was expected to

feel  myself  inferior  and  an  alien  because  I  was  a  Jew.  I  refused

absolutely to do the first of these things. I have never been able to see

why  I  should  feel  ashamed  of  my  descent  or,  as  people  were

beginning to say, of my ‘race’. I put up, without much regret, with my

non-acceptance into the community; for it seemed to me that in spite

of this exclusion an active fellow-worker could not fail to find some

nook or cranny in the framework of humanity. These first impressions

at  the  University,  however,  had  one  consequence  which  was

afterwards to prove important; for at an early age I was made familiar

with the fate of being in the Opposition and of being put under the ban

of the ‘compact majority’. The foundations were thus laid for a certain

degree of independence of judgement.

   I was compelled, moreover, during my first years at the University, to

make the discovery that the peculiarities and limitations of my gifts

denied  me  all  success  in  many  of  the  departments  of  science  into

which  my  youthful  eagerness  had  plunged  me.  Thus  I  learned  the

truth of Mephistopheles’ warning:

 

                                Vergebens, dass ihr ringsum wissenschaftlich schweift,
                                Ein jeder lernt nur, was er lernen kann.

 

   At length, in Ernst Brücke’s physiological laboratory, I found rest and

full satisfaction - and men, too, whom I could respect and take as my

models: the great Brücke himself, and his assistants, Sigmund Exner

and Ernst Fleischl von Marxow. With the last of these, a brilliant man, I

was  privileged  to  be  upon  terms  of  friendship.  Brücke  gave  me  a

problem  to  work  out  in  the  histology  of  the  nervous  system;  I

succeeded  in  solving  it  to  his  satisfaction  and  in  carrying  the  work

further  on  my  own  account.  I  worked  at  this  Institute,  with  shortinterruptions, from 1876 to 1882, and it was generally thought that I

was marked out to fill the next post of Assistant that might fall vacant

there. The various branches of medicine proper, apart from psychiatry,

had no attraction for me. I was decidedly negligent in pursuing my

medical studies, and it was not until 1881 that I took my somewhat

belated degree as a Doctor of Medicine.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4188

 

   The turning-point came in 1882, when my teacher, for whom I felt

the  highest  possible  esteem,  corrected  my  father’s  generous

improvidence  by  strongly  advising  me,  in  view  of  my  bad  financial

position, to abandon my theoretical career. I followed his advice, left

the physiological laboratory and entered the General Hospital as an

Aspirant. I was soon afterwards promoted to being a Sekundararzt,

and worked in various departments of the hospital, among others for

more than six months under Meynert, by whose work and personality I

had been greatly struck while I was still a student.

   In a certain sense I nevertheless remained faithful to the line of work

upon  which  I  had  originally  started.  The  subject  which  Brücke  had

proposed for my investigations had been the spinal cord of one of the

lowest of the fishes (Ammocoetes Petromyzon); and I now passed on

to  the  human  central  nervous  system.  Just  at  this  time  Flechsig’s

discoveries of the non-simultaneity of the formation of the medullary

sheaths were throwing a revealing light upon the intricate course of its

tracts. The fact that I began by choosing the medulla oblongata as the

one and only subject of my work was another sign of the continuity of

my development. In complete contrast to the diffuse character of my

studies during my earlier years at the University, I was now developing

an  inclination  to  concentrate  my  work  exclusively  upon  a  single

subject or problem. This inclination has persisted and has since led to

my being accused of one-sidedness.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4189 

      I  now  became  as  active  a  worker  in  the  Institute  of  Cerebral

Anatomy  as  I  had  previously  been  in  the  physiological  one.  Some

short papers upon the course of the tracts and the nuclear origins in

the  medulla  oblongata  date  from  these  hospital  years,  and  some

notice was taken of my findings by Edinger. One day Meynert, who

had given me access to the laboratory even during the times when I

was not actually working under him, proposed that I should definitely

devote myself to the anatomy of the brain, and promised to hand over

his lecturing work to me, as he felt he was too old to manage the

newer methods. This I declined, in alarm at the magnitude of the task;

it is possible, too, that I had guessed already that this great man was

by no means kindly disposed towards me.

   From the material point of view, brain anatomy was certainly no

better than physiology, and, with an eye to pecuniary considerations, I

began  to  study  nervous  diseases.  There  were,  at  that  time,  few

specialists in that branch of medicine in Vienna, the material for its

study was distributed over a number of different departments of the

hospital, there was no satisfactory opportunity of learning the subject,

and one was forced to be one’s own teacher. Even Nothnagel, who

had been appointed a short time before, on account of his book upon

cerebral localization, did not single out neuropathology from among

the other subdivisions of medicine. In the distance shone the great

name of Charcot; so I formed a plan of first obtaining an appointment

as University Lecturer on Nervous Diseases in Vienna and of then

going to Paris to continue my studies.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4190

 

   In the course of the following years, while I continued to work as a

junior  physician,  I  published  a  number  of  clinical  observations  on

organic diseases of the nervous system. I gradually became familiar

with  the  ground;  I  was  able  to  localize  the  site  of  a  lesion  in  the

medulla oblongata so accurately that the pathological anatomist had

no further information to add; I was the first person in Vienna to send acase for autopsy with a diagnosis of polyneuritis acuta.

   The fame of my diagnoses and of their post-mortem confirmation

brought me an influx of American physicians, to whom I lectured upon

the patients in my department in a sort of pidgin English. About the

neuroses I understood nothing. On one occasion I introduced to my

audience a neurotic suffering from a persistent headache as a case of

chronic localized meningitis; they all quite rightly rose in revolt and

deserted me, and my premature activities as a teacher came to an

end. By way of excuse I may add that this happened at a time when

greater  authorities  than  myself  in  Vienna  were  in  the  habit  of

diagnosing neurasthenia as cerebral tumour.

   In the spring of 1885 I was appointed Lecturer in Neuropathology on

the  ground  of  my  histological  and  clinical  publications.  Soon

afterwards,  as  the  result  of  a  warm  testimonial  from  Brücke,  I  was

awarded a Travelling Bursary of considerable value. In the autumn of

the same year I made the journey to Paris.

   I became a student at the Salpêtrière, but, as one of the crowd of

foreign visitors, I had little attention paid me to begin with. One day in

my hearing Charcot expressed his regret that since the war he had

heard nothing from the German translator of his lectures; he went on

to say that he would be glad if someone would undertake to translate

the new volume of his lectures into German. I wrote to him and offered

to do so; I can still remember a phrase in the letter, to the effect that I

suffered  only  from  ‘l’aphasie  motrice’  and  not  from  ‘l’aphasie

sensorielle du français’. Charcot accepted the offer, I was admitted to

the circle of his personal acquaintances, and from that time forward I

took a full part in all that went on at the Clinic.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4191

 

   As I write these lines, a number of papers and newspaper articles

have  reached  me  from  France,  which  give  evidence  of  a  violent

objection to the acceptance of psycho-analysis, and which often make

the  most  inaccurate  assertions  in  regard  to  my  relations  with  the

French school. I read, for instance, that I made use of my visit to Paristo familiarize myself with the theories of Pierre Janet and then made

off with my booty. I should therefore like to say explicitly that during

the whole of my visit to the Salpêtrière Janet’s name was never so

much as mentioned.

   What impressed me most of all while I was with Charcot were his

latest investigations upon hysteria, some of which were carried out

under my own eyes. He had proved, for instance, the genuineness of

hysterical phenomena and their conformity to laws (‘introite et hic dii

sunt’), the frequent occurrence of hysteria in men, the production of

hysterical paralyses and contractures by hypnotic suggestion and the

fact that such artificial products showed, down to their smallest details,

the same features as spontaneous attacks, which were often brought

on  traumatically.  Many  of  Charcot’s  demonstrations  began  by

provoking in me and in other visitors a sense of astonishment and an

inclination to scepticism, which we tried to justify by an appeal to one

of  the  theories  of  the  day.  He  was  always  friendly  and  patient  in

dealing with such doubts, but he was also most decided; it was in one

of  these  discussions  that  (speaking  of  theory)  he  remarked,  ‘Ca

n’empêche pas d’exister’, a mot which left an indelible mark upon my

mind.

   No doubt not the whole of what Charcot taught us at that time holds

good  to-day:  some  of  it  has  become  doubtful,  some  has  definitely

failed to withstand the test of time. But enough is left over that has

found a permanent place in the storehouse of science. Before leaving

Paris I discussed with the great man a plan for a comparative study of

hysterical and organic paralyses. I wished to establish the thesis that

in  hysteria  paralyses  and  anaesthesias  of  the  various  parts  of  the

body are demarcated according to the popular idea of their limits and

not according to anatomical facts. He agreed with this view, but it was

easy to see that in reality he took no special interest in penetrating

more deeply into the psychology of the neuroses. When all is said and

done, it was from pathological anatomy that his work had started.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4192

    Before I returned to Vienna I stopped for a few weeks in Berlin, in

order to gain a little knowledge of the general disorders of childhood.

Kassowitz, who was at the head of a public institute in Vienna for the

treatment of children’s diseases, had promised to put me in charge of

a  department  for  the  nervous  diseases  of  children.  In  Berlin  I  was

given assistance and a friendly reception by Baginsky. In the course of

the next few years I published, from the Kassowitz Institute, several

monographs of considerable size on unilateral and bilateral cerebral

palsies  in  children.  And  for  that  reason,  at  a  later  date  (in  1897),

Nothnagel made me responsible for dealing with the same subject in

his great Handbuch der allgemeinen und speziellen Therapie.

   In the autumn of 1886 I settled down in Vienna as a physician, and

married the girl who had been waiting for me in a distant city for more

than four years. I may here go back a little and explain how it was the

fault of my fiancée that I was not already famous at that youthful age.

A  side  interest,  though  it  was  a  deep  one,  had  led  me  in  1884  to

obtain  from  Merck  some  of  what  was  then  the  little-known  alkaloid

cocaine and to study its physiological action. While I was in the middle

of this work, an opportunity arose for making a journey to visit my

fiancée, from whom I had been parted for two years. I hastily wound

up my investigation of cocaine and contented myself in my monograph

on the subject with prophesying that further uses for it would soon be

found.  I  suggested,  however,  to  my  friend  Königstein,  the

ophthalmologist, that he should investigate the question of how far the

anaesthetizing properties of cocaine were applicable in diseases of

the eye. When I returned from my holiday I found that not he, but

another of my friends, Carl Koller (now in New York), whom I had also

spoken to about cocaine, had made the decisive experiments upon

animals’ eyes and had demonstrated them at the Ophthalmological

Congress  at  Heidelberg.  Koller  is  therefore  rightly  regarded  as  the

discoverer  of  local  anaesthesia  by  cocaine,  which  has  become  so

important in minor surgery; but I bore my fiancée no grudge for the

interruption.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4193 

   I will now return to the year 1886, the time of my settling down in

Vienna as a specialist in nervous diseases. The duty devolved upon

me of giving a report before the ‘Gesellschaft der Aerzte’ upon what I

had  seen  and  learnt  with  Charcot.  But  I  met  with  a  bad  reception.

Persons  of  authority,  such  as  the  chairman  (Bamberger,  the

physician),  declared  that  what  I  said  was  incredible.  Meynert

challenged me to find some cases in Vienna similar to those which I

had described and to present them before the Society. I tried to do so;

but  the  senior  physicians  in  whose  departments  I  found  any  such

cases refused to allow me to observe them or to work at them. One of

them, an old surgeon, actually broke out with the exclamation: ‘But,

my dear sir, how can you talk such nonsense? Hysteron (sic) means

the uterus. So how can a man be hysterical?’ I objected in vain that

what I wanted was not to have my diagnosis approved, but to have the

case put at my disposal. At length, outside the hospital, I came upon a

case  of  classical  hysterical  hemi-anaesthesia  in  a  man,  and

demonstrated it before the ‘Gesellschaft der Aerzte’. This time I was

applauded, but no further interest was taken in me. The impression

that  the  high  authorities  had  rejected  my  innovations  remained

unshaken;  and,  with  my  hysteria  in  men  and  my  production  of

hysterical  paralyses  by  suggestion,  I  found  myself  forced  into  the

Opposition. As I was soon afterwards excluded from the laboratory of

cerebral anatomy and for terms on end had nowhere to deliver my

lectures,  I  withdrew  from  academic  life  and  ceased  to  attend  the

learned  societies.  It  is  a  whole  generation  since  I  have  visited  the

‘Gesellschaft der Aerzte’.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4194

 

 

   Anyone who wants to make a living from the treatment of nervous

patients  must  clearly  be  able  to  do  something  to  help  them.  My

therapeutic arsenal contained only two weapons, electrotherapy and

hypnotism, for prescribing a visit to a hydropathic establishment aftera  single  consultation  was  an  inadequate  source  of  income.  My

knowledge  of  electrotherapy  was  derived  from  W.  Erb’s  text-book,

which  provided  detailed  instructions  for  the  treatment  of  all  the

symptoms of nervous diseases. Unluckily I was soon driven to see

that  following  these  instructions  was  of  no  help  whatever  and  that

what I had taken for an epitome of exact observations was merely the

construction of phantasy. The realization that the work of the greatest

name in German neuropathology had no more relation to reality than

some ‘Egyptian’ dream-book, such as is sold in cheap book-shops,

was painful, but it helped to rid me of another shred of the innocent

faith in authority from which I was not yet free. So I put my electrical

apparatus  aside,  even  before  Moebius  had  saved  the  situation  by

explaining  that  the  successes  of  electric  treatment  in  nervous

disorders (in so far as there were any) were the effect of suggestion

on the part of the physician.

   With hypnotism the case was better. While I was still a student I had

attended a public exhibition given by Hansen the ‘magnetist’, and had

noticed  that  one  of  the  subjects  experimented  upon  had  become

deathly pale at the onset of cataleptic rigidity and had remained so as

long  as  that  condition  lasted.  This  firmly  convinced  me  of  the

genuineness  of  the  phenomena  of  hypnosis.  Scientific  support  was

soon  afterwards  given  to  this  view  by  Heidenhain;  but  that  did  not

restrain the professors of psychiatry from declaring for a long time to

come that hypnotism was not only fraudulent but dangerous and from

regarding  hypnotists  with  contempt.  In  Paris  I  had  seen  hypnotism

used freely as a method for producing symptoms in patients and then

removing them again. And now the news reached us that a school had

arisen at Nancy which made an extensive and remarkably successful

use of suggestion, with or without hypnosis, for therapeutic purposes.

It thus came about, as a matter of course, that in the first years of my

activity  as  a  physician  my  principal  instrument  of  work,  apart  from

haphazard  and  unsystematic  psychotherapeutic  methods,  was

hypnotic suggestion.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4195 

   This implied, of course, that I abandoned the treatment of organic

nervous diseases; but that was of little importance. For on the one

hand the prospects in the treatment of such disorders were in any

case never promising, while, on the other hand, in the private practice

of a physician working in a large town, the quantity of such patients

was  nothing  compared  to  the  crowds  of  neurotics,  whose  number

seemed further multiplied by the way in which they hurried, with their

troubles unsolved, from one physician to another. And, apart from this,

there was something positively seductive in working with hypnotism.

For  the  first  time  there  was  a  sense  of  having  overcome  one’s

helplessness;  and  it  was  highly  flattering  to  enjoy  the  reputation  of

being a miracle-worker. It was not until later that I was to discover the

drawbacks  of  the  procedure.  At  the  moment  there  were  only  two

points  to  complain  of:  first,  that  I  could  not  succeed  in  hypnotizing

every  patient,  and  secondly,  that  I  was  unable  to  put  individual

patients into as deep a state of hypnosis as I should have wished.

With the idea of perfecting my hypnotic technique, I made a journey to

Nancy  in  the  summer  of  1889  and  spent  several  weeks  there.  I

witnessed the moving spectacle of old Liébeault working among the

poor women and children of the labouring classes. I was a spectator

of Bernheim’s astonishing experiments upon his hospital patients, and

I  received  the  profoundest  impression  of  the  possibility  that  there

could  be  powerful  mental  processes  which  nevertheless  remained

hidden  from  the  consciousness  of  men.  Thinking  it  would  be

instructive, I had persuaded one of my patients to follow me to Nancy.

This patient was a very highly gifted hysteric, a woman of good birth,

who had been handed over to me because no one knew what to do

with her. By hypnotic influence I had made it possible for her to lead a

tolerable existence and I was always able to take her out of the misery

of her condition. But she always relapsed again after a short time, and

in my ignorance I attributed this to the fact that her hypnosis had never

reached  the  stage  of  somnambulism  with  amnesia.  Bernheim  now

attempted  several  times  to  bring  this  about,  but  he  too  failed.  He

frankly admitted to me that his great therapeutic successes by means

of suggestion were only achieved in his hospital practice and not with

his private patients. I had many stimulating conversations with him,and  undertook  to  translate  into  German  his  two  works  upon

suggestion and its therapeutic effects.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4196

 

   During the period from 1886 to 1891 I did little scientific work, and

published scarcely anything. I was occupied with establishing myself

in my new profession and with assuring my own material existence as

well as that of a rapidly increasing family. In 1891 there appeared the

first  of  my  studies  on  the  cerebral  palsies  of  children,  which  was

written in collaboration with my friend and assistant, Dr. Oskar Rie. An

invitation  which  I  received  in  the  same  year  to  contribute  to  an

encyclopaedia of medicine led me to investigate the theory of aphasia.

This  was  at  the  time  dominated  by  the  views  of  Wernicke  and

Lichtheim, which laid stress exclusively upon localization. The fruit of

this enquiry was a small critical and speculative book, Zur Auffassung

der Aphasien

   But I must now show how it happened that scientific research once

more became the chief interest of my life.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4197

 

                                            II

 

   I must supplement what I have just said by explaining that from the

very  first  I  made  use  of  hypnosis  in another  manner,  apart  from

hypnotic  suggestion.  I  used  it  for  questioning  the  patient  upon  the

origin  of  his  symptom,  which  in  his  waking  state  he  could  often

describe only very imperfectly or not at all. Not only did this method

seem more effective than mere suggestive commands or prohibitions,

but it also satisfied the curiosity of the physician, who, after all, had a

right to learn something of the origin of the phenomenon which he was

striving to remove by the monotonous procedure of suggestion.

      The  manner  in  which  I  arrived  at  this  other  procedure  was  asfollows. While I was still working in Brücke’s laboratory I had made the

acquaintance of Dr. Josef Breuer, who was one of the most respected

family physicians in Vienna, but who also had a scientific past, since

he  had  produced  several  works  of  permanent  value  upon  the

physiology of respiration and upon the organ of equilibrium. He was a

man of striking intelligence and fourteen years older than myself. Our

relations soon became more intimate and he became my friend and

helper in my difficult circumstances. We grew accustomed to share all

our scientific interests with each other. In this relationship the gain was

naturally mine. The development of psycho-analysis afterwards cost

me his friendship. It was not easy for me to pay such a price, but I

could not escape it.

   Even before I went to Paris, Breuer had told me about a case of

hysteria which, between 1880 and 1882, he had treated in a peculiar

manner which had allowed him to penetrate deeply into the causation

and significance of hysterical symptoms. This was at a time, therefore,

when Janet’s works still belonged to the future. He repeatedly read me

pieces  of  the  case  history,  and  I  had  an  impression  that  it

accomplished more towards an understanding of neuroses than any

previous  observation.  I  determined  to  inform  Charcot  of  these

discoveries when I reached Paris, and I actually did so. But the great

man showed no interest in my first outline of the subject, so that I

never returned to it and allowed it to pass from my mind.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4198

 

      When  I  was  back  in  Vienna  I  turned  once  more  to  Breuer’s

observation and made him tell me more about it. The patient had been

a young girl of unusual education and gifts, who had fallen ill while she

was  nursing  her  father,  of  whom  she  was  devotedly  fond.  When

Breuer  took  over  her  case  it  presented  a  variegated  picture  of

paralyses  with  contractures,  inhibitions  and  states  of  mental

confusion. A chance observation showed her physician that she could

be  relieved  of  these  clouded  states  of  consciousness  if  she  was

induced to express in words the affective phantasy by which she wasat the moment dominated. From this discovery, Breuer arrived at a

new method of treatment. He put her into deep hypnosis and made

her tell him each time what it was that was oppressing her mind. After

the attacks of depressive confusion had been overcome in this way,

he  employed  the  same  procedure  for  removing  her  inhibitions  and

physical disorders. In her waking state the girl could no more describe

than  other  patients  how  her  symptoms  had  arisen,  and  she  could

discover  no  link  between  them  and  any  experiences  of  her  life.  In

hypnosis  she  immediately  discovered  the  missing  connection.  It

turned out that all her symptoms went back to moving events which

she  had  experienced  while  nursing  her  father;  that  is  to  say,  her

symptoms  had  a  meaning  and  were  residues  or  reminiscences  of

those emotional situations. It was found in most instances that there

had been some thought or impulse which she had had to suppress

while she was by her father’s sick-bed, and that, in place of it, as a

substitute for it, the symptom had afterwards appeared. But as a rule

the  symptom  was  not  the  precipitate  of  a  single  such  ‘traumatic’

scene, but the result of a summation of a number of similar situations.

When the patient recalled a situation of this kind in a hallucinatory way

under  hypnosis  and  carried  through  to  its  conclusion,  with  a  free

expression  of  emotion,  the  mental  act  which  she  had  originally

suppressed, the symptom was abolished and did not return. By this

procedure Breuer succeeded, after long and painful efforts, in relieving

his patient of all her symptoms.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4199

 

   The patient had recovered and had remained well and, in fact, had

become capable of doing serious work. But over the final stage of this

hypnotic treatment there rested a veil of obscurity, which Breuer never

raised for me; and I could not understand why he had so long kept

secret what seemed to me an invaluable discovery instead of making

science  the  richer  by  it.  The  immediate  question,  however,  was

whether it was possible to generalize from what he had found in a

single case. The state of things which he had discovered seemed tome to be of so fundamental a nature that I could not believe it could

fail to be present in any case of hysteria if it had been proved to occur

in a single one. But the question could only be decided by experience.

I  therefore  began  to  repeat  Breuer’s  investigations  with  my  own

patients and eventually, especially after my visit to Bernheim in 1889

had  taught  me  the  limitations  of  hypnotic  suggestion,  I  worked  at

nothing else. After observing for several years that his findings were

invariably confirmed in every case of hysteria that was accessible to

such treatment, and after having accumulated a considerable amount

of material in the shape of observations analogous to his, I proposed

to him that we should issue a joint publication. At first he objected

vehemently,  but  in  the  end  he  gave  way,  especially,  since,  in  the

meantime, Janet’s works had anticipated some of his results, such as

the tracing back of hysterical symptoms to events in the patient’s life,

and  their  removal  by  means  of  hypnotic  reproduction  in statu

nascendi. In 1893 we issued a preliminary communication, ‘On the

Psychical Mechanism of Hysterical Phenomena’, and in 1895 there

followed our book, Studies on Hysteria.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4200

 

   If the account I have so far given has led the reader to expect that

the Studies on Hysteria must, in all essentials of their material content,

be the product of Breuer’s mind, that is precisely what I myself have

always maintained and what it has been my aim to repeat here. As

regards the theory put forward in the book, I was partly responsible,

but to an extent which it is to-day no longer possible to determine.

That theory was in any case unpretentious and hardly went beyond

the direct description of the observations. It did not seek to establish

the nature of hysteria but merely to throw light upon the origin of its

symptoms. Thus it laid stress upon the significance of the life of the

emotions and upon the importance of distinguishing between mental

acts which are unconscious and those which are conscious (or rather

capable  of  being  conscious);  it  introduced  a  dynamic  factor,  by

supposing  that  a  symptom  arises  through  the  damming-up  of  anaffect, and an economic factor, by regarding that same symptom as

the product of the transformation of an amount of energy which would

otherwise  have  been  employed  in  some  other  way.  (This  latter

process was described as conversion.) Breuer spoke of our method

as cathartic; its therapeutic aim was explained as being to provide that

the quota of affect used for maintaining the symptom, which had got

on to the wrong lines and had, as it were, become strangulated there,

should be directed on to the normal path along which it could obtain

discharge  (or abreaction).  The  practical  results  of  the  cathartic

procedure  were  excellent.  Its  defects,  which  became  evident  later,

were those of all forms of hypnotic treatment. There are still a number

of psychotherapists who have not gone beyond catharsis as Breuer

understood it and who still speak in its favour. Its value as an abridged

method of treatment was shown afresh by Simmel in his treatment of

war neuroses in the German army during the Great War. The theory of

catharsis had not much to say on the subject of sexuality. In the case

histories which I contributed to the Studies sexual factors played a

certain  part,  but  scarcely  more  attention  was  paid  to  them  than  to

other emotional excitations. Breuer wrote of the girl, who has since

become  famous  as  his  first  patient,  that  her  sexual  side  was

extraordinarily undeveloped. It would have been difficult to guess from

the Studies  on  Hysteria  what  an  importance  sexuality  has  in  the

aetiology of the neuroses.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4201

 

   The stage of development which now followed, the transition from

catharsis  to  psycho-analysis  proper,  has  been  described  by  me

several times already in such detail that I shall find it difficult to bring

forward any new facts. The event which formed the opening of this

period  was  Breuer’s  retirement  from  our  common  work,  so  that  I

became  the  sole  administrator  of  his  legacy.  There  had  been

differences of opinion between us at quite an early stage, but they had

not been a ground for our separating. In answering the question of

when it is that a mental process becomes pathogenic - that is, when itis that it becomes impossible for it to be dealt with normally - Breuer

preferred what might be called a physiological theory: he thought that

the processes which could not find a normal outcome were such as

had originated during unusual, ‘hypnoid’, mental states. This opened

the further question of the origin of these hypnoid states. I, on the

other hand, was inclined to suspect the existence of an interplay of

forces and the operation of intentions and purposes such as are to be

observed  in  normal  life.  Thus  it  was  a  case  of  ‘hypnoid  hysteria’

versus  ‘neuroses  of  defence’.  But  such  differences  as  this  would

scarcely have alienated him from the subject if there had not been

other factors at work. One of these was undoubtedly that his work as a

physician  and  family  doctor  took  up  much  of  his  time,  and  that  he

could not, like me, devote his whole strength to the work of catharsis.

Again, he was affected by the reception which our book had received

both in Vienna and in Germany. His self-confidence and powers of

resistance  were  not  developed  so  fully  as  the  rest  of  his  mental

organization. When, for instance, the Studies met with a severe rebuff

from  Strümpell,  I  was  able  to  laugh  at  the  lack  of  comprehension

which his criticism showed, but Breuer felt hurt and grew discouraged.

But what contributed chiefly to his decision was that my own further

work led in a direction to which he found it impossible to reconcile

himself.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4202

 

 

      The  theory  which  we  had  attempted  to  construct  in  the Studies

remained, as I have said, very incomplete; and in particular we had

scarcely touched on the problem of aetiology, on the question of the

ground in which the pathogenic process takes root. I now learned from

my rapidly increasing experience that it was not any kind of emotional

excitation that was in action behind the phenomena of neurosis but

habitually  one  of  a  sexual  nature,  whether  it  was  a  current  sexual

conflict or the effect of earlier sexual experiences. I was not prepared

for this conclusion and my expectations played no part in it, for I hadbegun my investigation of neurotics quite unsuspectingly. While I was

writing my ‘History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement’ in 1914, there

recurred to my mind some remarks that had been made to me by

Breuer,  Charcot,  and  Chrobak,  which  might  have  led  me  to  this

discovery earlier. But at the time I heard them I did not understand

what these authorities meant; indeed they had told me more than they

knew themselves or were prepared to defend. What I heard from them

lay dormant and inactive within me, until the chance of my cathartic

experiments brought it out as an apparently original discovery. Nor

was I then aware that in deriving hysteria from sexuality I was going

back to the very beginnings of medicine and following up a thought of

Plato’s.  It  was  not  until  later  that  I  learnt  this  from  an  essay  by

Havelock Ellis.

      Under  the  influence  of  my  surprising  discovery,  I  now  took  a

momentous step. I went beyond the domain of hysteria and began to

investigate the sexual life of the so-called neurasthenics who used to

visit  me  in  numbers  during  my  consultation  hours.  This  experiment

cost  me,  it  is  true,  my  popularity  as  a  doctor,  but  it  brought  me

convictions which to-day, almost thirty years later, have lost none of

their  force.  There  was  a  great  deal  of  equivocation  and  mystery-

making to be overcome, but, once that had been done, it turned out

that in all of these patients grave abuses of the sexual function were

present. Considering how extremely widespread are these abuses on

the one hand and neurasthenia on the other, a frequent coincidence

between the two would not have proved much; but there was more in

it than that one bald fact. Closer observation suggested to me that it

was possible to pick out from the confused jumble of clinical pictures

covered  by  the  name  of  neurasthenia  two  fundamentally  different

types, which might appear in any degree of mixture but which were

nevertheless to be observed in their pure forms. In the one type the

central  phenomenon  was  the  anxiety  attack  with  its  equivalents,

rudimentary forms and chronic substitutive symptoms; I consequently

gave  it  the  name  of anxiety  neurosis,  and  limited  the  term

neurasthenia to the other type. Now it was easy to establish the fact

that each of these types had a different abnormality of sexual life as its

corresponding  aetiological  factor:  in  the  former, coitus  interruptus,

unconsummated excitation and sexual abstinence, and in the latter,excessive masturbation and too numerous nocturnal emissions. In a

few  specially  instructive  cases,  which  had  shown  a  surprising

alteration in the clinical picture from one type to the other, it could be

proved that there had been a corresponding change in the underlying

sexual régime. If it was possible to put an end to the abuse and allow

its place to be taken by normal sexual activity, a striking improvement

in the condition was the reward.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4203

 

      I  was  thus  led  into  regarding  the  neuroses  as  being  without

exception  disturbances  of  the  sexual  function,  the  so-called  ‘actual

neuroses’ being the direct toxic expression of such disturbances and

the psychoneuroses their mental expression. My medical conscience

felt pleased at my having arrived at this conclusion. I hoped that I had

filled up a gap in medical science, which, in dealing with a function of

such great biological importance, had failed to take into account any

injuries  beyond  those  caused  by  infection  or  by  gross  anatomical

lesions. The medical aspect of the matter was, moreover, supported

by the fact that sexuality was not something purely mental. It had a

somatic side as well, and it was possible to assign special chemical

processes to it and to attribute sexual excitation to the presence of

some particular, though at present unknown, substances. There must

also  have  been  some  good  reason  why  the  true  spontaneous

neuroses  resembled  no  group  of  diseases  more  closely  than  the

phenomena of intoxication and abstinence, which are produced by the

administration  or  privation  of  certain  toxic  substances,  or  than

exophthalmic goitre, which is known to depend upon the product of

the thyroid gland.

      Since  that  time  I  have  had  no  opportunity  of  returning  to  the

investigation  of  the  ‘actual  neuroses’;  nor  has  this  part  of  my  work

been  continued  by  anyone  else.  If  I  look  back  to-day  at  my  early

findings, they strike me as being the first rough outlines of what is

probably a far more complicated subject. But on the whole they seem

to me still to hold good. I should have been very glad if I had beenable, later on, to make a psycho-analytic examination of some more

cases of simple juvenile neurasthenia, but unluckily the occasion did

not arise. To avoid misconceptions, I should like to make it clear that I

am far from denying the existence of mental conflicts and of neurotic

complexes  in  neurasthenia.  All  that  I  am  asserting  is  that  the

symptoms of these patients are not mentally determined or removable

by  analysis,  but  that  they  must  be  regarded  as  direct  toxic

consequences of disturbed sexual chemical processes.

   During the years that followed the publication of the Studies, having

reached these conclusions upon the part played by sexuality in the

aetiology of the neuroses, I read some papers on the subject before

various  medical  societies,  but  was  only  met  with  incredulity  and

contradiction. Breuer did what he could for some time longer to throw

the great weight of his personal influence into the scales in my favour,

but he effected nothing and it was easy to see that he too shrank from

recognizing  the  sexual  aetiology  of  the  neuroses.  He  might  have

crushed me or at least disconcerted me by pointing to his own first

patient, in whose case sexual factors had ostensibly played no part

whatever. But he never did so, and I could not understand why this

was, until I came to interpret the case correctly and to reconstruct,

from  some  remarks  which  he  had  made,  the  conclusion  of  his

treatment  of  it.  After  the  work  of  catharsis  had  seemed  to  be

completed,  the  girl  had  suddenly  developed  a  condition  of

‘transference love’; he had not connected this with her illness, and had

therefore  retired  in  dismay.  It  was  obviously  painful  to  him  to  be

reminded  of  this  apparent contretemps.  His  attitude  towards  me

oscillated  for  some  time  between  appreciation  and  sharp  criticism;

then accidental difficulties arose, as they never fail to do in a strained

situation, and we parted.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4204

 

   Another result of my taking up the study of nervous disorders in

general  was  that  I  altered  the  technique  of  catharsis.  I  abandoned

hypnotism and sought to replace it by some other method, because Iwas  anxious  not  to  be  restricted  to  treating  hysteriform  conditions.

Increasing experience had also given rise to two grave doubts in my

mind as to the use of hypnotism even as a means to catharsis. The

first was that even the most brilliant results were liable to be suddenly

wiped away if my personal relation with the patient became disturbed.

It was true that they would be re-established if a reconciliation could

be  effected;  but  such  an  occurrence  proved  that  the  personal

emotional relation between doctor and patient was after all stronger

than the whole cathartic process, and it was precisely that factor which

escaped  every  effort  at  control.  And  one  day  I  had  an  experience

which showed me in the crudest light what I had long suspected. It

related to one of my most acquiescent patients, with whom hypnotism

had enabled me to bring about the most marvellous results, and whom

I was engaged in relieving of her suffering by tracing back her attacks

of pain to their origins. As she woke up on one occasion, she threw

her  arms  round  my  neck.  The  unexpected  entrance  of  a  servant

relieved us from a painful discussion, but from that time onwards there

was  a  tacit  understanding  between  us  that  the  hypnotic  treatment

should  be  discontinued.  I  was  modest  enough  not  to  attribute  the

event to my own irresistible personal attraction, and I felt that I had

now grasped the nature of the mysterious element that was at work

behind hypnotism. In order to exclude it, or at all events to isolate it, it

was necessary to abandon hypnotism.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4205

 

   But hypnotism had been of immense help in the cathartic treatment,

by widening the field of the patient’s consciousness and putting within

his reach knowledge which he did not possess in his waking life. It

seemed no easy task to find a substitute for it. While I was in this

perplexity there came to my help the recollection of an experiment

which  I  had  often  witnessed  while  I  was  with  Bernheim.  When  the

subject awoke from the state of somnambulism, he seemed to have

lost all memory of what had happened while he was in that state. But

Bernheim maintained that the memory was present all the same; andif he insisted on the subject remembering, if he asseverated that the

subject knew it all and had only to say it, and if at the same time he

laid his hand on the subject’s forehead, then the forgotten memories

used in fact to return, hesitatingly at first, but eventually in a flood and

with complete clarity. I determined that I would act in the same way.

My patients, I reflected, must in fact ‘know’ all the things which had

hitherto  only  been  made  accessible  to  them  in  hypnosis;  and

assurances and encouragement on my part, assisted perhaps by the

touch  of  my  hand,  would,  I  thought,  have  the  power  of  forcing  the

forgotten  facts  and  connections  into  consciousness.  No  doubt  this

seemed  a  more  laborious  process  than  putting  the  patients  into

hypnosis,  but  it  might  prove  highly  instructive.  So  I  abandoned

hypnotism,  only  retaining  my  practice  of  requiring  the  patient  to  lie

upon a sofa while I sat behind him, seeing him, but not seen myself.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4206

 

                                            III

 

   My expectations were fulfilled; I was set free from hypnotism. But

along with the change in technique the work of catharsis took on a

new  complexion.  Hypnosis  had  screened  from  view  an  interplay  of

forces which now came in sight and the understanding of which gave

a solid foundation to my theory.

   How had it come about that the patients had forgotten so many of

the  facts  of  their  external  and  internal  lives  but  could  nevertheless

recollect  them  if  a  particular  technique  was  applied?  Observation

supplied  an  exhaustive  answer  to  these  questions.  Everything  that

had been forgotten had in some way or other been distressing; it had

been either alarming or painful or shameful by the standards of the

subject’s personality. It was impossible not to conclude that that was

precisely why it had been forgotten - that is, why it had not remained

conscious. In order to make it conscious again in spite of this, it was

necessary  to  overcome  something  that  fought  against  one  in  the

patient; it was necessary to make efforts on one’s own part so as tourge and compel him to remember. The amount of effort required of

the physician varied in different cases; it increased in direct proportion

to the difficulty of what had to be remembered. The expenditure of

force  on  the  part  of  the  physician  was  evidently  the  measure  of  a

resistance on the part of the patient. It was only necessary to translate

into words what I myself had observed, and I was in possession of the

theory of repression.

   It was now easy to reconstruct the pathogenic process. Let us keep

to a simple example, in which a particular impulsion had arisen in the

subject’s  mind  but  was  opposed  by  other  powerful  impulsions.  We

should have expected the mental conflict which now arose to take the

following  course.  The  two  dynamic  quantities  -  for  our  present

purposes  let  us  call  them  ‘the  instinct’  and  ‘the  resistance’  -  would

struggle  with  each  other  for  some  time  in  the  fullest  light  of

consciousness, until the instinct was repudiated and the cathexis of

energy withdrawn from its impulsion. This would have been the normal

solution.  In  a  neurosis,  however  (for  reasons  which  were  still

unknown), the conflict found a different outcome. The ego drew back,

as  it  were,  on  its  first  collision  with  the  objectionable  instinctual

impulse; it debarred the impulse from access to consciousness and to

direct motor discharge, but at the same time the impulse retained its

full  cathexis  of  energy.  I  named  this  process repression;  it  was  a

novelty, and nothing like it had ever before been recognized in mental

life. It was obviously a primary mechanism of defence, comparable to

an attempt at flight, and was only a forerunner of the later-developed

normal  condemning  judgement.  The  first  act  of  repression  involved

further consequences. In the first place the ego was obliged to protect

itself against the constant threat of a renewed advance on the part of

the repressed impulse by making a permanent expenditure of energy,

an anticathexis, and it thus impoverished itself. On the other hand, the

repressed  impulse,  which  was  now unconscious,  was  able  to  find

means  of  discharge  and  of  substitutive  satisfaction  by  circuitous

routes  and  thus  to  bring  the  whole  purpose  of  the  repression  to

nothing. In the case of conversion hysteria the circuitous route led to

the somatic innervation; the repressed impulse broke its way through

at some point or other and produced symptoms. The symptoms were

thus  results  of  a  compromise,  for  although  they  were  substitutivesatisfactions they were nevertheless distorted and deflected from their

aim owing to the resistance of the ego.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4207

 

      The  theory  of  repression  became  the  corner-stone  of  our

understanding of the neuroses. A different view had now to be taken

of the task of therapy. Its aim was no longer to ‘abreact’ an affect

which had got on to the wrong lines but to uncover repressions and

replace them by acts of judgement which might result either in the

accepting or in the condemning of what had formerly been repudiated.

I showed my recognition of the new situation by no longer calling my

method of investigation and treatment catharsis but psycho-analysis.

   It is possible to take repression as a centre and to bring all the

elements  of  psycho-analytic  theory  into  relation  with  it.  But  before

doing so I have a further comment of a polemical nature to make.

According  to  Janet’s  view  a  hysterical  woman  was  a  wretched

creature who, on account of a constitutional weakness, was unable to

hold her mental acts together, and it was for that reason that she fell a

victim to a splitting of her mind and to a restriction of the field of her

consciousness. The outcome of psycho-analytic investigations, on the

other hand, showed that these phenomena were the result of dynamic

factors - of mental conflict and of repression. This distinction seems to

me to be far-reaching enough to put an end to the glib repetition of the

view that whatever is of value in psycho-analysis is merely borrowed

from the ideas of Janet. The reader will have learned from my account

that historically psycho-analysis is completely independent of Janet’s

discoveries, just as in its content it diverges from them and goes far

beyond them. Janet’s works would never have had the implications

which have made psycho-analysis of such importance to the mental

sciences and have made it attract such universal interest. I always

treated Janet himself with respect, since his discoveries coincided to a

considerable  extent  with  those  of  Breuer,  which  had  been  made

earlier but were published later than his. But when in the course of

time psycho-analysis became a subject of discussion in France, Janetbehaved ill, showed ignorance of the facts and used ugly arguments.

And finally he revealed himself to my eyes and destroyed the value of

his own work by declaring that when he had spoken of ‘unconscious’

mental acts he had meant nothing by the phrase - it had been no more

than a façon de parler.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4208

 

 

   But the study of pathogenic repressions and of other phenomena

which have still to be mentioned compelled psycho-analysis to take

the concept of the ‘unconscious’ seriously. Psycho-analysis regarded

everything  mental  as  being  in  the  first  instance  unconscious;  the

further quality of ‘consciousness’ might also be present, or again it

might  be  absent.  This  of  course  provoked  a  denial  from  the

philosophers, for whom ‘conscious’ and ‘mental’ were identical, and

who protested that they could not conceive of such an absurdity as the

‘unconscious  mental’.  There  was  no  help  for  it,  however,  and  this

idiosyncrasy  of  the  philosophers  could  only  be  disregarded  with  a

shrug.  Experience  (gained  from  pathological  material,  of  which  the

philosophers were ignorant) of the frequency and power of impulses of

which  one  knew  nothing  directly,  and  whose  existence  had  to  be

inferred like some fact in the external world, left no alternative open. It

could be pointed out, incidentally, that this was only treating one’s own

mental  life  as  one  had  always  treated  other  people’s.  One  did  not

hesitate to ascribe mental processes to other people, although one

had no immediate consciousness of them and could only infer them

from  their  words  and  actions.  But  what  held  good  for  other  people

must be applicable to oneself. Anyone who tried to push the argument

further  and  to  conclude  from  it  that  one’s  own  hidden  processes

belonged actually to a second consciousness would be faced with the

concept  of  a  consciousness  of  which  one  knew  nothing,  of  an

‘unconscious consciousness’ - and this would scarcely be preferable

to the assumption of an ‘unconscious mental’. If on the other hand one

declared, like some other philosophers, that one was prepared to takepathological  phenomena  into  account,  but  that  the  processes

underlying  them  ought  not  to  be  described  as  mental  but  as

‘psychoid’,  the  difference  of  opinion  would  degenerate  into  an

unfruitful  dispute  about  words,  though  even  so  expediency  would

decide in favour of keeping the expression ‘unconscious mental’. The

further question as to the ultimate nature of this unconscious is no

more sensible or profitable than the older one as to the nature of the

conscious.

   It would be more difficult to explain concisely how it came about that

psycho-analysis  made  a  further  distinction  in  the  unconscious,  and

separated it into a preconscious and an unconscious proper. It will be

sufficient to say that it appeared a legitimate course to supplement the

theories that were a direct expression of experience with hypotheses

that were designed to facilitate the handling of the material and related

to matters which could not be a subject of immediate observation. The

very  same  procedure  is  adopted  by  the  older  sciences.  The

subdivision  of  the  unconscious  is  part  of  an  attempt  to  picture  the

apparatus of the mind as being built up of a number of agencies or

systems  whose  relations  to  one  another  are  expressed  in  spatial

terms,  without,  however,  implying  any  connection  with  the  actual

anatomy  of  the  brain.  (I  have  described  this  as  the topographical

method of approach.) Such ideas as these are part of a speculative

superstructure  of  psycho-analysis,  any  portion  of  which  can  be

abandoned  or  changed  without  loss  or  regret  the  moment  its

inadequacy has been proved. But there is still plenty to be described

that lies closer to actual experience.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4209

 

 

   I have already mentioned that my investigation of the precipitating

and  underlying  causes  of  the  neuroses  led  me  more  and  more

frequently to conflicts between the subject’s sexual impulses and his

resistances to sexuality. In my search for the pathogenic situations in

which  the  repressions  of  sexuality  had  set  in  and  in  which  thesymptoms,  as  substitutes  for  what  was  repressed,  had  had  their

origin, I was carried further and further back into the patient’s life and

ended by reaching the first years of his childhood. What poets and

students of human nature had always asserted turned out to be true:

the impressions of that early period of life, though they were for the

most  part  buried  in  amnesia,  left  ineradicable  traces  upon  the

individual’s growth and in particular laid down the disposition to any

nervous disorder that was to follow. But since these experiences of

childhood  were  always  concerned  with  sexual  excitations  and  the

reaction  against  them,  I  found  myself  faced  by  the  fact  of infantile

sexuality  -  once  again  a  novelty  and  a  contradiction  of  one  of  the

strongest  of  human  prejudices.  Childhood  was  looked  upon  as

‘innocent’ and free from the lusts of sex, and the fight with the demon

of  ‘sensuality’  was  not  thought  to  begin  until  the  troubled  age  of

puberty. Such occasional sexual activities as it had been impossible to

overlook  in  children  were  put  down  as  signs  of  degeneracy  or

premature  depravity  or  as  a  curious  freak  of  nature.  Few  of  the

findings of psycho-analysis have met with such universal contradiction

or have aroused such an outburst of indignation as the assertion that

the  sexual  function  starts  at  the  beginning  of  life  and  reveals  its

presence  by  important  signs  even  in  childhood.  And  yet  no  other

finding of analysis can be demonstrated so easily and so completely.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4210

 

   Before going further into the question of infantile sexuality I must

mention an error into which I fell for a while and which might well have

had fatal consequences for the whole of my work. Under the influence

of the technical procedure which I used at that time, the majority of my

patients reproduced from their childhood scenes in which they were

sexually seduced by some grown-up person. With female patients the

part of seducer was almost always assigned to their father. I believed

these stories, and consequently supposed that I had discovered the

roots  of  the  subsequent  neurosis  in  these  experiences  of  sexual

seduction  in  childhood.  My  confidence  was  strengthened  by  a  fewcases  in  which  relations  of  this  kind  with  a  father,  uncle,  or  elder

brother  had  continued  up  to  an  age  at  which  memory  was  to  be

trusted. If the reader feels inclined to shake his head at my credulity, I

cannot altogether blame him; though I may plead that this was at a

time when I was intentionally keeping my critical faculty in abeyance

so as to preserve an unprejudiced and receptive attitude towards the

many novelties which were coming to my notice every day. When,

however,  I  was  at  last  obliged  to  recognize  that  these  scenes  of

seduction had never taken place, and that they were only phantasies

which my patients had made up or which I myself had perhaps forced

on them, I was for some time completely at a loss. My confidence

alike in my technique and in its results suffered a severe blow; it could

not  be  disputed  that  I  had  arrived  at  these  scenes  by  a  technical

method  which  I  considered  correct,  and  their  subject-matter  was

unquestionably related to the symptoms from which my investigation

had started. When I had pulled myself together, I was able to draw the

right  conclusions  from  my  discovery:  namely,  that  the  neurotic

symptoms  were  not  related  directly  to  actual  events  but  to  wishful

phantasies, and that as far as the neurosis was concerned psychical

reality was of more importance than material reality. I do not believe

even now that I forced the seduction-phantasies on my patients, that I

‘suggested’ them. I had in fact stumbled for the first time upon the

Oedipus complex, which was later to assume such an overwhelming

importance,  but  which  I  did  not  recognize  as  yet  in  its  disguise  of

phantasy.  Moreover,  seduction  during  childhood  retained  a  certain

share, though a humbler one, in the aetiology of neuroses. But the

seducers turned out as a rule to have been older children.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4211

 

   It will be seen, then, that my mistake was of the same kind as would

be made by someone who believed that the legendary story of the

early kings of Rome (as told by Livy) was historical truth instead of

what  it  is  in  fact  -  a  reaction  against  the  memory  of  times  and

circumstances  that  were  insignificant  and  occasionally,  perhaps,inglorious. When the mistake had been cleared up, the path to the

study of the sexual life of children lay open. It thus became possible to

apply psycho-analysis to another field of science and to use its data

as a means of discovering a new piece of biological knowledge.

      The  sexual  function,  as  I  found,  is  in  existence  from  the  very

beginning of the individual’s life, though at first it is attached to the

other vital functions and does not become independent of them until

later;  it  has  to  pass  through  a  long  and  complicated  process  of

development  before  it  becomes  what  we  are  familiar  with  as  the

normal sexual life of the adult. It begins by manifesting itself in the

activity  of  a  whole  number  of component  instincts.  These  are

dependent upon erotogenic zones in the body; some of them make

their appearance in pairs of opposite impulses (such as sadism and

masochism or the impulses to look and to be looked at); they operate

independently of one another in a search for pleasure, and they find

their object for the most part in the subject’s own body. Thus at first

the sexual function is non-centralized and predominantly auto-erotic.

Later, syntheses begin to appear in it; a first stage of organization is

reached  under  the  dominance  of  the oral  components,  an anal-

sadistic stage follows, and it is only after the third stage has at last

been reached that the primacy of the genitals is established and that

the sexual function begins to serve the ends of reproduction. In the

course of this process of development a number of elements of the

various component instincts turn out to be unserviceable for this last

end and are therefore left on one side or turned to other uses, while

others are diverted from their aims and carried over into the genital

organization. I gave the name of libido to the energy of the sexual

instincts  and  to  that  form  of  energy  alone.  I  was  next  driven  to

suppose that the libido does not always pass through its prescribed

course of development smoothly. As a result either of the excessive

strength  of  certain  of  the  components  or  of  experiences  involving

premature  satisfaction, fixations  of  the  libido  may  occur  at  various

points in the course of its development. If subsequently a repression

takes place, the libido flows back to these points (a process described

as regression), and it is from them that the energy breaks through in

the  form  of  a  symptom.  Later  on  it  further  became  clear  that  the

localization of the point of fixation is what determines the choice ofneurosis, that is, the form in which the subsequent illness makes its

appearance.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4212

 

   The process of arriving at an object, which plays such an important

part in mental life, takes place alongside of the organization of the

libido. After the stage of auto-erotism, the first love-object in the case

of both sexes is the mother; and it seems probable that to begin with a

child does not distinguish its mother’s organ of nutrition from its own

body. Later, but still in the first years of infancy, the relation known as

the Oedipus  complex  becomes  established:  boys  concentrate  their

sexual wishes upon their mother and develop hostile impulses against

their father as being a rival, while girls adopt an analogous attitude.¹

All  of  the  different  variations  and  consequences  of  the  Oedipus

complex  are  important;  and  the  innately  bisexual  constitution  of

human  beings  makes  itself  felt  and  increases  the  number  of

simultaneously active tendencies. Children do not become clear for

quite a long time about the differences between the sexes; and during

this period of sexual researches they produce typical sexual theories

which,  being  circumscribed  by  the  incompleteness  of  their  authors’

own physical development, are a mixture of truth and error and fail to

solve the problems of sexual life (the riddle of the Sphinx - that is, the

question of where babies come from). We see, then, that a child’s first

object-choice is an incestuous one. The whole course of development

that I have described is run through rapidly. For the most remarkable

feature of the sexual life of man is its diphasic onset, its onset in two

waves, with an interval between them. It reaches a first climax in the

fourth  or  fifth  year  of  a  child’s  life.  But  thereafter  this  early

efflorescence of sexuality passes off; the sexual impulses which have

shown such liveliness are overcome by repression, and a period of

latency  follows,  which  lasts  until  puberty  and  during  which  the

reaction-formations of morality, shame, and disgust are built up.² Of all

living  creatures  man  alone  seems  to  show  this  diphasic  onset  of

sexual growth, and it may perhaps be the biological determinant of hispredisposition  to  neuroses.  At  puberty  the  impulses  and  object-

relations of a child’s early years become re-animated, and amongst

them the emotional ties of its Oedipus complex. In the sexual life of

puberty there is a struggle between the urges of early years and the

inhibitions of the latency period. Before this, and while the child is at

the  highest  point  of  its  infantile  sexual  development,  a  genital

organization of a sort is established; but only the male genitals play a

part in it, and the female ones remain undiscovered. (I have described

this  as  the  period  of phallic  primacy.)  At  this  stage  the  contrast

between the sexes is not stated in terms of ‘male’ or ‘female’ but of

‘possessing  a  penis’  or  ‘castrated’.  The castration  complex  which

arises  in  this  connection  is  of  the  profoundest  importance  in  the

formation alike of character and of neuroses.

 

   ¹ (Footnote added 1935:) The information about infantile sexuality was obtained from the

study of men and the theory deduced from it was concerned with male children. It was natural
enough to expect to find a complete parallel between the two sexes; but this turned out not to
hold. Further investigations and reflections revealed profound differences between the sexual
development of men and women. The first sexual object of a baby girl (just as of a baby boy)
is her mother; and before a woman can reach the end of her normal development she has to
change not only her sexual object but also her leading genital zone. From this circumstance
difficulties arise and possibilities of inhibition which are not present in the case of men.

   ²(Footnote added 1935:) The period of latency is a physiological phenomenon. It can,

however, only give rise to a complete interruption of sexual life in cultural organizations which
have made the suppression of infantile sexuality a part of their system. This is not the case
with the majority of primitive peoples.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4213

 

   In order to make this condensed account of my discoveries upon the

sexual  life  of  man  more  intelligible,  I  have  brought  together

conclusions  which  I  reached  at  different  dates  and  incorporated  by

way  of  supplement  or  correction  in  the  successive  editions  of  my

Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d). I hope it will have

been easy to gather the nature of my extension (on which so much

stress has been laid and which has excited so much opposition) of the

concept of sexuality. That extension is of a twofold kind. In the first

place  sexuality  is  divorced  from  its  too  close  connection  with  thegenitals and is regarded as a more comprehensive bodily function,

having pleasure as its goal and only secondarily coming to serve the

ends  of  reproduction.  In  the  second  place  the  sexual  impulses  are

regarded  as  including  all  of  those  merely  affectionate  and  friendly

impulses  to  which  usage  applies  the  exceedingly  ambiguous  word

‘love’.  I  do  not,  however,  consider  that  these  extensions  are

innovations  but  rather  restorations:  they  signify  the  removal  of

inexpedient  limitations  of  the  concept  into  which  we  had  allowed

ourselves to be led.

   The detaching of sexuality from the genitals has the advantage of

allowing us to bring the sexual activities of children and of perverts

into the same scope as those of normal adults. The sexual activities of

children  have  hitherto  been  entirely  neglected  and  though  those  of

perverts have been recognized it has been with moral indignation and

without understanding. Looked at from the psycho-analytic standpoint,

even the most eccentric and repellent perversions are explicable as

manifestations of component instincts of sexuality which have freed

themselves from the primacy of the genitals and are now in pursuit of

pleasure on their own account as they were in the very early days of

the  libido’s  development.  The  most  important  of  these  perversions,

homosexuality, scarcely deserves the name. It can be traced back to

the  constitutional  bisexuality  of  all  human  beings  and  to  the  after-

effects of the phallic primacy. Psycho-analysis enables us to point to

some trace or other of a homosexual object-choice in everyone. If I

have  described  children  as  ‘polymorphously  perverse’,  I  was  only

using a terminology that was generally current; no moral judgement

was implied by the phrase. Psycho-analysis has no concern whatever

with such judgements of value.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4214

 

   The second of my alleged extensions of the concept of sexuality

finds  its  justification  in  the  fact  revealed  by  psycho-analytic

investigation that all of these affectionate impulses were originally of a

completely sexual nature but have become inhibited in their aim orsublimated.  The  manner  in  which  the  sexual  instincts  can  thus  be

influenced  and  diverted  enables  them  to  be  employed  for  cultural

activities of every kind, to which indeed they bring the most important

contributions.

   My surprising discoveries as to the sexuality of children were made

in  the  first  instance  through  the  analysis  of  adults.  But  later  (from

about 1908 onwards) it became possible to confirm them fully and in

every detail by direct observations upon children. Indeed, it is so easy

to convince oneself of the regular sexual activities of children that one

cannot help asking in astonishment how the human race can have

succeeded in overlooking the facts and in maintaining for so long the

wishful  legend  of  the  asexuality  of  childhood.  This  surprising

circumstance  must  be  connected  with  the  amnesia  which,  with  the

majority of adults, hides their own infancy.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4215

 

                                            IV

 

   The theories of resistance and of repression, of the unconscious, of

the  aetiological  significance  of  sexual  life  and  of  the  importance  of

infantile  experiences  -  these  form  the  principal  constituents  of  the

theoretical structure of psycho-analysis. In these pages, unfortunately,

I have been able to describe only the separate elements and not their

interconnections and their bearing upon one another. But I am obliged

now  to  turn  to  the  alterations  which  gradually  took  place  in  the

technique of the analytic method.

      The  means  which  I  first  adopted  for  overcoming  the  patient’s

resistance, by insistence and encouragement, had been indispensable

for the purpose of giving me a first general survey of what was to be

expected. But in the long run it proved to be too much of a strain on

both sides, and further, it seemed open to certain obvious criticisms. It

therefore gave place to another method which was in one sense its

opposite. Instead of urging the patient to say something upon some

particular subject, I now asked him to abandon himself to a process offree association - that is, to say whatever came into his head, while

ceasing  to  give  any  conscious  direction  to  his  thoughts.  It  was

essential,  however,  that  he  should  bind  himself  to  report  literally

everything that occurred to his self-perception and not to give way to

critical objections which sought to put certain associations on one side

on the ground that they were not sufficiently important or that they

were irrelevant or that they were altogether meaningless. There was

no  necessity  to  repeat  explicitly  the  demand  for  candour  on  the

patient’s part in reporting his thoughts, for it was the precondition of

the whole analytic treatment.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4216

 

   It may seem surprising that this method of free association, carried

out  subject  to  the  observation  of  the fundamental  rule  of  psycho-

analysis, should have achieved what was expected of it, namely the

bringing into consciousness of the repressed material which was held

back  by  resistances.  We  must,  however,  bear  in  mind  that  free

association is not really free. The patient remains under the influence

of  the  analytic  situation  even  though  he  is  not  directing  his  mental

activities on to a particular subject. We shall be justified in assuming

that  nothing  will  occur  to  him  that  has  not  some  reference  to  that

situation. His resistance against reproducing the repressed material

will now be expressed in two ways. Firstly it will be shown by critical

objections; and it was to deal with these that the fundamental rule of

psycho-analysis was invented. But if the patient observes that rule and

so overcomes his reticences, the resistance will find another means of

expression. It will so arrange it that the repressed material itself will

never occur to the patient but only something which approximates to it

in an allusive way; and the greater the resistance, the more remote

from  the  actual  idea  that  the  analyst  is  in  search  of  will  be  the

substitutive association which the patient has to report. The analyst,

who  listens  composedly  but  without  any  constrained  effort  to  the

stream of associations and who, from his experience, has a general

notion of what to expect, can make use of the material brought to lightby the patient according to two possibilities. If the resistance is slight

he will be able from the patient’s allusions to infer the unconscious

material  itself;  or  if  the  resistance  is  stronger  he  will  be  able  to

recognize  its  character  from  the  associations,  as  they  seem  to

become more remote from the topic in hand, and will explain it to the

patient. Uncovering the resistance, however, is the first step towards

overcoming  it.  Thus  the  work  of  analysis  involves  an art  of

interpretation, the successful handling of which may require tact and

practice but which is not hard to acquire. But it is not only in the saving

of labour that the method of free association has an advantage over

the earlier method. It exposes the patient to the least possible amount

of  compulsion,  it  never  allows  of  contact  being  lost  with  the  actual

current situation, it guarantees to a great extent that no factor in the

structure of the neurosis will be overlooked and that nothing will be

introduced into it by the expectations of the analyst. It is left to the

patient in all essentials to determine the course of the analysis and the

arrangement  of  the  material;  any  systematic  handling  of  particular

symptoms  or  complexes  thus  becomes  impossible.  In  complete

contrast  to  what  happened  with  hypnotism  and  with  the  urging

method, interrelated material makes its appearance at different times

and  at  different  points  in  the  treatment.  To  a  spectator,  therefore  -

though in fact there must be none - an analytic treatment would seem

completely obscure.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4217

 

   Another advantage of the method is that it need never break down.

It  must  theoretically  always  be  possible  to  have  an  association,

provided that no conditions are made as to its character. Yet there is

one case in which in fact a breakdown occurs with absolute regularity;

from its very uniqueness, however, this case too can be interpreted.

   I now come to the description of a factor which adds an essential

feature to my picture of analysis and which can claim, alike technically

and theoretically, to be regarded as of the first importance. In every

analytic  treatment  there  arises,  without  the  physician’s  agency,  anintense  emotional  relationship  between  the  patient  and  the  analyst

which is not to be accounted for by the actual situation. It can be of a

positive or of a negative character and can vary between the extremes

of a passionate, completely sensual love and the unbridled expression

of an embittered defiance and hatred. This transference - to give it its

short  name  -  soon  replaces  in  the  patient’s  mind  the  desire  to  be

cured, and, so long as it is affectionate and moderate, becomes the

agent of the physician’s influence and neither more nor less than the

mainspring of the joint work of analysis. Later on, when it has become

passionate  or  has  been  converted  into  hostility,  it  becomes  the

principal tool of the resistance. It may then happen that it will paralyse

the patient’s powers of associating and endanger the success of the

treatment. Yet it would be senseless to try to evade it; for an analysis

without  transference  is  an  impossibility.  It  must  not  be  supposed,

however, that transference is created by analysis and does not occur

apart  from  it.  Transference  is  merely  uncovered  and  isolated  by

analysis. It is a universal phenomenon of the human mind, it decides

the success of all medical influence, and in fact dominates the whole

of each person’s relations to his human environment. We can easily

recognize it as the same dynamic factor which the hypnotists have

named  ‘suggestibility’,  which  is  the  agent  of  hypnotic rapport  and

whose  incalculable  behaviour  led  to  difficulties  with  the  cathartic

method  as  well.  When  there  is  no  inclination  to  a  transference  of

emotion  such  as  this,  or  when  it  has  become  entirely  negative,  as

happens  in  dementia  praecox  or  paranoia,  then  there  is  also  no

possibility of influencing the patient by psychological means.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4218

 

   It is perfectly true that psycho-analysis, like other psychotherapeutic

methods, employs the instrument of suggestion (or transference). But

the  difference  is  this:  that  in  analysis  it  is  not  allowed  to  play  the

decisive part in determining the therapeutic results. It is used instead

to  induce  the  patient  to  perform  a  piece  of  psychical  work  -  the

overcoming  of  his  transference  resistances  -  which  involves  apermanent  alteration  in  his  mental  economy.  The  transference  is

made conscious to the patient by the analyst, and it is resolved by

convincing him that in his transference-attitude he is re-experiencing

emotional  relations  which  had  their  origin  in  his  earliest  object-

attachments during the repressed period of his childhood. In this way

the  transference  is  changed  from  the  strongest  weapon  of  the

resistance  into  the  best  instrument  of  the  analytic  treatment.

Nevertheless  its  handling  remains  the  most  difficult  as  well  as  the

most important part of the technique of analysis.

 

   With the help of the method of free association and of the related art

of  interpretation,  psycho-analysis  succeeded  in  achieving  one  thing

which  appeared  to  be  of  no  practical  importance  but  which  in  fact

necessarily led to a totally fresh attitude and a fresh scale of values in

scientific  thought.  It  became  possible  to  prove  that dreams  have  a

meaning,  and  to  discover  it.  In  classical  antiquity  great  importance

was attached to dreams as foretelling the future; but modern science

would  have  nothing  to  do  with  them,  it  handed  them  over  to

superstition, declaring them to be purely ‘somatic’ processes - a kind

of  twitching  of  a  mind  that  is  otherwise  asleep.  It  seemed  quite

inconceivable that anyone who had done serious scientific work could

make  his  appearance  as  an  ‘interpreter  of  dreams’.  But  by

disregarding  the  excommunication  pronounced  upon  dreams,  by

treating  them  as  unexplained  neurotic  symptoms,  as  delusional  or

obsessional ideas, by neglecting their apparent content and by making

their separate component images into subjects for free association,

psycho-analysis  arrived  at  a  different  conclusion.  The  numerous

associations  produced  by  the  dreamer  led  to  the  discovery  of  a

thought-structure  which  could  no  longer  be  described  as  absurd  or

confused, which ranked as a completely valid psychical product, and

of  which  the manifest  dream  was  no  more  than  a  distorted,

abbreviated, and misunderstood translation, and for the most part a

translation into visual images. These latent dream-thoughts contained

the meaning of the dream, while its manifest content was simply a

make-believe, a façade, which could serve as a starting-point for the

associations but not for the interpretation.

                               An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4219

 

   There were now a whole series of questions to be answered, among

the most important of them being whether the formation of dreams

had a motive, under what conditions it took place, by what methods

the  dream-thoughts  (which  are  invariably  full  of  sense)  become

converted  into  the  dream  (which  is  often  senseless),  and  others

besides.  I  attempted  to  solve  all  of  these  problems  in The

Interpretation of Dreams, which I published in the year 1900. I can

only find space here for the briefest abstract of my investigation. When

the latent dream-thoughts that are revealed by the analysis of a dream

are examined, one of them is found to stand out from among the rest,

which  are  intelligible  and  well  known  to  the  dreamer.  These  latter

thoughts are residues of waking life (the day’s residues, as they are

called technically); but the isolated thought is found to be a wishful

impulse, often of a very repellent kind, which is foreign to the waking

life  of  the  dreamer  and  is  consequently  disavowed  by  him  with

surprise or indignation. This impulse is the actual constructor of the

dream: it provides the energy for its production and makes use of the

day’s  residues  as  material.  The  dream  which  thus  originates

represents a situation of satisfaction for the impulse, it is the fulfilment

of  its  wish.  It  would  not  be  possible  for  this  process  to  take  place

without being favoured by the presence of something in the nature of

a state of sleep. The necessary mental precondition of sleep is the

concentration of the ego upon the wish to sleep and the withdrawal of

psychical energy from all the interests of life. Since at the same time

all the paths of approach to motility are blocked, the ego is also able to

reduce  the  expenditure  by  which  at  other  times  it  maintains  the

repressions.  The  unconscious  impulse  makes  use  of  this  nocturnal

relaxation of repression in order to push its way into consciousness

with  the  dream.  But  the  repressive  resistance  of  the  ego  is  not

abolished  in  sleep  but  merely  reduced.  Some  of  it  remains  in  the

shape of a censorship of dreams and forbids the unconscious impulse

to  express  itself  in  the  forms  which  it  would  properly  assume.  In

consequence of the severity of the censorship of dreams, the latent

dream-thoughts are obliged to submit to being altered and softened soas to make the forbidden meaning of the dream unrecognizable. This

is the explanation of dream-distortion,  which  accounts  for  the  most

striking  characteristics  of  the  manifest  dream.  We  are  therefore

justified  in  asserting  that a  dream  is  the  (disguised)  fulfilment  of  a

(repressed) wish. It will now be seen that dreams are constructed like

a neurotic symptom: they are compromises between the demands of a

repressed impulse and the resistance of a censoring force in the ego.

Since  they  have  a  similar  origin  they  are  equally  unintelligible  and

stand in equal need of interpretation.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4220

 

   There is no difficulty in discovering the general function of dreaming.

It  serves  the  purpose  of  fending  off,  by  a  kind  of  soothing  action,

external or internal stimuli which would tend to arouse the sleeper,

and thus of securing sleep against interruption. External stimuli are

fended off by being given a new interpretation and by being woven

into  some  harmless  situation;  internal  stimuli,  caused  by  instinctual

demands,  are  given  free  play  by  the  sleeper  and  allowed  to  find

satisfaction in the formation of dreams, so long as the latent dream-

thoughts submit to the control of the censorship. But if they threaten to

break  free  and  the  meaning  of  the  dream  becomes  too  plain,  the

sleeper cuts short the dream and wakes in a fright. (Dreams of this

class are known as anxiety-dreams.) A similar failure in the function of

dreaming  occurs  if  an  external  stimulus  becomes  too  strong  to  be

fended  off.  (This  is  the  class  of arousal-dreams.)  I  have  given  the

name of dream-work to the process which, with the co-operation of the

censorship, converts the latent thoughts into the manifest content of

the dream. It consists of a peculiar way of treating the preconscious

material of thought, so that its component parts become condensed,

its  psychical  emphasis  becomes displaced,  and  the  whole  of  it  is

translated  into  visual  images  or dramatized,  and  completed  by  a

deceptive secondary  revision.  The  dream-work  is  an  excellent

example of the processes occurring in the deeper, unconscious layers

of  the  mind,  which  differ  considerably  from  the  familiar  normalprocesses  of  thought.  It  also  displays  a  number  of  archaic

characteristics,  such  as  the  use  of  a symbolism  (in  this  case  of  a

predominantly sexual kind) which it has since also been possible to

discover in other spheres of mental activity.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4221

 

   We have explained that the unconscious instinctual impulse of the

dream connects itself with a residue of the day, with some interest of

waking life which has not been disposed of; it thus gives the dream

which it constructs a double value for the work of analysis. For on the

one  hand  a  dream  that  has  been  analysed  reveals  itself  as  the

fulfilment  of  a  repressed  wish;  but  on  the  other  hand  it  may  be  a

continuation of some preconscious activity of the day before and may

contain  every  kind  of  subject-matter  and  give  expression  to  an

intention, a warning, a reflection, or once more to the fulfilment of a

wish. Analysis exploits the dream in both directions, as a means of

obtaining  knowledge  alike  of  the  patient’s  conscious  and  of  his

unconscious processes. It also profits from the fact that dreams have

access to the forgotten material of childhood, and so it happens that

infantile amnesia is for the most part overcome in connection with the

interpretation of dreams. In this respect dreams achieve a part of what

was previously the task of hypnotism. On the other hand, I have never

maintained the assertion which has so often been ascribed to me that

dream-interpretation shows that all dreams have a sexual content or

are derived from sexual motive forces. It is easy to see that hunger,

thirst, or the need to excrete, can produce dreams of satisfaction just

as  well  as  any  repressed  sexual  or  egoistic  impulse.  The  case  of

young children affords us a convenient test of the validity of our theory

of dreams. In them the various psychical systems are not yet sharply

divided and the repressions have not yet grown deep, so that we often

come  upon  dreams  which  are  nothing  more  than  undisguised

fulfilments  of  wishful  impulses  left  over  from  waking  life.  Under  the

influence of imperative needs, adults may also produce dreams of this

infantile type.¹ 

   ¹ (Footnote added 1935:) When it is considered how frequently the function of dreaming

miscarries, the dream may aptly be characterized as an attempt at the fulfilment of a wish.
Aristotle’s old definition of the dream as mental life during sleep still holds good. There was a
reason  for  my  choosing  as  the  title  of  my  book  not The Dream but The  Interpretation  of
Dreams.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4222

 

 

      In  the  same  way  that  psycho-analysis  makes  use  of  dream-

interpretation, it also profits by the study of the numerous little slips

and mistakes which people make - symptomatic actions, as they are

called.  I  investigated  this  subject  in  a  series  of  papers  which  were

published for the first time in book form in 1904 under the title of The

Psychopathology  of  Everyday  Life.  In  this  widely  circulated  work  I

have pointed out that these phenomena are not accidental, that they

require  more  than  physiological  explanations,  that  they  have  a

meaning and can be interpreted, and that one is justified in inferring

from  them  the  presence  of  restrained  or  repressed  impulses  and

intentions. But what constitutes the enormous importance of dream-

interpretation, as well as of this latter study, is not the assistance they

give to the work of analysis but another of their attributes. Previously

psycho-analysis  had  only  been  concerned  with  solving  pathological

phenomena and in order to explain them it had often been driven into

making  assumptions  whose  comprehensiveness  was  out  of  all

proportion  to  the  importance  of  the  actual  material  under

consideration. But when it came to dreams, it was no longer dealing

with  a  pathological  symptom,  but  with  a  phenomenon  of  normal

mental life which might occur in any healthy person. If dreams turned

out to be constructed like symptoms, if their explanation required the

same assumptions - the repression of impulses, substitutive formation,

  compromise-formation,  the  dividing  of  the  conscious  and  the

unconscious  into  various  psychical  systems  -  then  psycho-analysis

was no longer an auxiliary science in the field of psychopathology, it

was rather the starting-point of a new and deeper science of the mindwhich  would  be  equally  indispensable  for  the  understanding  of  the

normal.  Its  postulates  and  findings  could  be  carried  over  to  other

regions of mental happening; a path lay open to it that led far afield,

into spheres of universal interest.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4223

 

                                            V

 

   I must interrupt my account of the internal growth of psycho-analysis

and turn to its external history. What I have so far described of its

discoveries  has  related  for  the  most  part  to  the  results  of  my  own

work; but I have also filled in my story with material from later dates

and have not distinguished between my own contributions and those

of my pupils and followers.

   For more than ten years after my separation from Breuer I had no

followers. I was completely isolated. In Vienna I was shunned; abroad

no notice was taken of me. My Interpretation of Dreams, published in

1900, was scarcely reviewed in the technical journals. In my paper ‘On

the  History  of  the  Psycho-Analytic  Movement’  I  mentioned  as  an

instance  of  the  attitude  adopted  by  psychiatric  circles  in  Vienna  a

conversation with an assistant at the clinic, who had written a book

against my theories but had never read my Interpretation of Dreams.

He had been told at the clinic that it was not worth while. The man in

question, who has since become a professor, has gone so far as to

repudiate my report of the conversation and to throw doubts in general

upon the accuracy of my recollection. I can only say that I stand by

every word of the account I then gave.

   As soon as I realized the inevitable nature of what I had come up

against, my sensitiveness greatly diminished. Moreover my isolation

gradually  came  to  an  end.  To  begin  with,  a  small  circle  of  pupils

gathered round me in Vienna; and then, after 1906, came the news

that the psychiatrists at Zurich, E. Bleuler, his assistant C. G. Jung,

and others, were taking a lively interest in psycho-analysis. We got

into personal touch with one another, and at Easter 1908 the friends ofthe young science met at Salzburg, agreed upon the regular repetition

of similar informal congresses and arranged for the publication of a

journal which was edited by Jung and was given the title of Jahrbuch

für psychoanalytische und psychopathologische Forschungen. It was

brought  out  under  the  direction  of  Bleuler  and  myself  and  ceased

publication at the beginning of the World War. At the same time that

the  Swiss  psychiatrists  joined  the  movement,  interest  in  psycho-

analysis began to be aroused all over Germany as well; it became the

subject  of  a  large  number  of  written  comments  and  of  lively

discussions at scientific congresses. But its reception was nowhere

friendly  or  even  benevolently  non-committal.  After  the  briefest

acquaintance  with  psycho-analysis  German  science  was  united  in

rejecting it.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4224

 

   Even to-day it is of course impossible for me to foresee the final

judgment of posterity upon the value of psycho-analysis for psychiatry,

psychology, and the mental sciences in general. But I fancy that, when

the history of the phase we have lived through comes to be written,

German  science  will  not  have  cause  to  be  proud  of  those  who

represented it. I am not thinking of the fact that they rejected psycho-

analysis or of the decisive way in which they did so; both of these

things were easily intelligible, they were only to be expected and at

any rate they threw no discredit on the character of the opponents of

analysis. But for the degree of arrogance which they displayed, for

their conscienceless contempt of logic, and for the coarseness and

bad taste of their attacks there could be no excuse. It may be said that

it is childish of me to give free rein to such feelings as these now, after

fifteen years have passed; nor would I do so unless I had something

more to add. Years later, during the World War, when a chorus of

enemies  were  bringing  against  the  German  nation  the  charge  of

barbarism, a charge which sums up all that I have written above, it

none the less hurt deeply to feel that my own experience would not

allow me to contradict it.   One of my opponents boasted of silencing his patients as soon as

they began to talk of anything sexual and evidently thought that this

technique gave him a right to judge the part played by sexuality in the

aetiology  of  the  neuroses.  Apart  from  emotional  resistances,  which

were  so  easily  explicable  by  the  psycho-analytic  theory  that  it  was

impossible  to  be  misled  by  them,  it  seemed  to  me  that  the  main

obstacle  to  agreement  lay  in  the  fact  that  my  opponents  regarded

psycho-analysis as a product of my speculative imagination and were

unwilling to believe in the long, patient and unbiased work which had

gone to its making. Since in their opinion analysis had nothing to do

with  observation  or  experience,  they  believed  that  they  themselves

were justified in rejecting it without experience. Others again, who did

not feel so strongly convinced of this, repeated in their resistance the

classical manoeuvre of not looking through the microscope so as to

avoid  seeing  what  they  had  denied.  It  is  remarkable,  indeed,  how

incorrectly most people act when they are obliged to form a judgement

of  their  own  on  some  new  subject.  For  years  I  have  been  told  by

‘benevolent’  critics  -  and  I  hear  the  same  thing  even  to-day  -  that

psycho-analysis is right up to such-and-such a point but that there it

begins  to  exaggerate  and  to  generalize  without  justification.  And  I

know that, though nothing is more difficult than to decide where such a

point  lies,  these  critics  had  been  completely  ignorant  of  the  whole

subject only a few weeks or days earlier.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4225

 

   The result of the official anathema against psycho-analysis was that

the analysts began to come closer together. At the second Congress,

held at Nuremberg in 1910, they formed themselves, on the proposal

of  Ferenczi,  into  an  ‘International  Psycho-Analytical  Association’

divided  into  a  number  of  local  societies  but  under  a  common

President.  The  Association  survived  the  Great  War  and  still  exists,

consisting to-day of branch societies in Austria, Germany, Hungary,

Switzerland, Great Britain, Holland, Russia, and India, as well as two

in the United States. I arranged that C. G. Jung should be appointedas  the  first  President,  which  turned  out  later  to  have  been  a  most

unfortunate  step.  At  the  same  time  a  second  journal  devoted  to

psycho-analysis  was  started,  the Zentralblatt  für  Psychoanalyse,

edited by Adler and Stekel, and a little later a third, Imago, edited by

two non-medical analysts, H. Sachs and O. Rank, and intended to

deal  with  the  application  of  analysis  to  the  mental  sciences.  Soon

afterwards Bleuler published a paper in defence of psycho-analysis.

Though  it  was  a  relief  to  find  honesty  and  straightforward  logic  for

once taking part in the dispute, yet I could not feel completely satisfied

by  Bleuler’s  essay.  He  strove  too  eagerly  after  an  appearance  of

impartiality; nor is it a matter of chance that it is to him that our science

owes  the  valuable  concept  of ambivalence.  In  later  papers  Bleuler

adopted  such  a  critical  attitude  towards  the  theoretical  structure  of

analysis and rejected or threw doubts upon such essential parts of it

that I could not help asking myself in astonishment what could be left

of it for him to admire. Yet not only has he subsequently uttered the

strongest  pleas  in  favour  of  ‘depth  psychology’  but  he  based  his

comprehensive study of schizophrenia upon it. Nevertheless Bleuler

did  not  for  long  remain  a  member  of  the  International  Psycho-

Analytical  Association;  he  resigned  from  it  as  a  result  of

misunderstandings with Jung, and the Burghölzli was lost to analysis.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4226

 

   Official disapproval could not hinder the spread of psycho-analysis

either in Germany or in other countries. I have elsewhere followed the

stages of its growth and given the names of those who were its first

representatives.  In  1909  G.  Stanley  Hall  invited  Jung  and  me  to

America to go to Clark University, Worcester, Mass., of which he was

President, and to spend a week giving lectures (in German) at the

celebration of the twentieth anniversary of that body’s foundation. Hall

was justly esteemed as a psychologist and educationalist, and had

introduced  psycho-analysis  into  his  courses  several  years  earlier;

there was a touch of the ‘king-maker’ about him, a pleasure in setting

up  authorities  and  in  then  deposing  them.  We  also  met  James  J.Putnam there, the Harvard neurologist, who in spite of his age was an

enthusiastic supporter of psycho-analysis and threw the whole weight

of a personality that was universally respected into the defence of the

cultural  value  of  analysis  and  the  purity  of  its  aims.  He  was  an

estimable  man,  in  whom,  as  a  reaction  against  a  predisposition  to

obsessional neurosis, an ethical bias predominated; and the only thing

in  him  that  was  disquieting  was  his  inclination  to  attach  psycho-

analysis  to  a  particular  philosophical  system  and  to  make  it  the

servant of moral aims. Another event of this time which made a lasting

impression on me was a meeting with William James the philosopher.

I shall never forget one little scene that occurred as we were on a walk

together. He stopped suddenly, handed me a bag he was carrying and

asked me to walk on, saying that he would catch me up as soon as he

had got through an attack of angina pectoris which was just coming

on. He died of that disease a year later; and I have always wished that

I might be as fearless as he was in the face of approaching death.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4227

 

   At that time I was only fifty-three. I felt young and healthy, and my

short visit to the new world encouraged my self-respect in every way.

In  Europe  I  felt  as  though  I  were  despised;  but  over  there  I  found

myself received by the foremost men as an equal. As I stepped on to

the  platform  at  Worcester  to  deliver  my Five  Lectures  on  Psycho-

Analysis it seemed like the realization of some incredible day-dream:

psycho-analysis was no longer a product of delusion, it had become a

valuable part of reality. It has not lost ground in America since our

visit; it is extremely popular among the lay public and is recognized by

a number of official psychiatrists as an important element in medical

training.  Unfortunately,  however,  it  has  suffered  a  great  deal  from

being watered down. Moreover, many abuses which have no relation

to it find a cover under its name, and there are few opportunities for

any thorough training in technique or theory. In America, too, it has

come in conflict with Behaviourism, a theory which is naïve enough to

boast that it has put the whole problem of psychology completely outof court.

   In Europe during the years 1911-13 two secessionist movements

from  psycho-analysis  took  place,  led  by  men  who  had  previously

played a considerable part in the young science, Alfred Adler and C.

G.  Jung.  Both  movements  seemed  most  threatening  and  quickly

obtained  a  large  following.  But  their  strength  lay,  not  in  their  own

content, but in the temptation which they offered of being freed from

what  were  felt  as  the  repellent  findings  of  psycho-analysis  even

though its actual material was no longer rejected. Jung attempted to

give  to  the  facts  of  analysis  a  fresh  interpretation  of  an  abstract,

impersonal  and  non-historical  character,  and  thus  hoped  to  escape

the need for recognizing the importance of infantile sexuality and of

the  Oedipus  complex  as  well  as  the  necessity  for  any  analysis  of

childhood. Adler seemed to depart still further from psycho-analysis;

he  entirely  repudiated  the  importance  of  sexuality,  traced  back  the

formation both of character and of the neuroses solely to men’s desire

for  power  and  to  their  need  to  compensate  for  their  constitutional

inferiorities,  and  threw  all  the  psychological  discoveries  of  psycho-

analysis to the winds. But what he had rejected forced its way back

into his closed system under other names; his ‘masculine protest’ is

nothing  else  than  repression  unjustifiably  sexualized.  The  criticism

with which the two heretics were met was a mild one; I only insisted

that both Adler and Jung should cease to describe their theories as

‘psycho-analysis’. After a lapse of ten years it can be asserted that

both  of  these  attempts  against  psycho-analysis  have  blown  over

without doing any harm.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4228

 

   If a community is based on agreement upon a few cardinal points, it

is obvious that people who have abandoned that common ground will

cease to belong to it. Yet the secession of former pupils has often

been brought up against me as a sign of my intolerance or has been

regarded as evidence of some special fatality that hangs over me. It is

a sufficient answer to point out that in contrast to those who have leftme,  like  Jung,  Adler,  Stekel,  and  a  few  besides,  there  are  a  great

number of men, like Abraham, Eitingon, Ferenczi, Rank, Jones, Brill,

Sachs, Pfister, van Emden, Reik, and others, who have worked with

me for some fifteen years in loyal collaboration and for the most part in

uninterrupted  friendship.  I  have  only  mentioned  the  oldest  of  my

pupils, who have already made a distinguished name for themselves

in the literature of psycho-analysis; if I have passed over others, that is

not to be taken as a slight, and indeed among those who are young

and  have  joined  me  lately  talents  are  to  be  found  on  which  great

hopes  may  be  set.  But  I  think  I  can  say  in  my  defence  that  an

intolerant man, dominated by an arrogant belief in his own infallibility,

would  never  have  been  able  to  maintain  his  hold  upon  so  large  a

number  of  intellectually  eminent  people,  especially  if  he  had  at  his

command as few practical attractions as I had.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4229

 

   The World War, which broke up so many other organizations, could

do nothing against our ‘International’. The first meeting after the war

took place in 1920, at The Hague, on neutral ground. It was moving to

see  how  hospitably  the  Dutch  welcomed  the  starving  and

impoverished subjects of the Central European states; and I believe

this was the first occasion in a ruined world on which Englishmen and

Germans sat at the same table for the friendly discussion of scientific

interests. Both in Germany and in the countries of Western Europe the

war  had  actually  stimulated  interest  in  psycho-analysis.  The

observation  of  war  neuroses  had  at  last  opened  the  eyes  of  the

medical  profession  to  the  importance  of  psychogenesis  in  neurotic

disturbances, and some of our psychological conceptions, such as the

‘gain from illness’ and the ‘flight into illness’, quickly became popular.

The last Congress before the German collapse, which was held at

Budapest  in  1918,  was  attended  by  official  representatives  of  the

allied governments of the Central European powers, and they agreed

to the establishment of psycho-analytic Centres for the treatment of

war  neuroses.  But  this  point  was  never  reached.  Similarly  too  thecomprehensive plans made by one of our leading members, Dr. Anton

von Freund, for establishing in Budapest a centre for analytic study

and treatment came to grief as a result of the political upheavals that

followed  soon  afterwards  and  of  the  premature  death  of  their

irreplaceable author. At a later date some of his ideas were put into

execution by Max Eitingon, who in 1920 founded a psycho-analytical

clinic in Berlin. During the brief period of Bolshevik rule in Hungary,

Ferenczi was still able to carry on a successful course of instruction as

the  official  representative  of  psycho-analysis  at  the  University  of

Budapest. After the war our opponents were pleased to announce that

events had produced a conclusive argument against the validity of the

theses  of  analysis.  The  war  neuroses,  they  said,  had  proved  that

sexual  factors  were  unnecessary  to  the  aetiology  of  neurotic

disorders. But their triumph was frivolous and premature. For on the

one hand no one had been able to carry out a thorough analysis of a

case of war neurosis, so that in fact nothing whatever was known for

certain as to their motivation and no conclusions could be drawn from

this  uncertainty;  while  on  the  other  hand  psycho-analysis  had  long

before  arrived  at  the  concept  of  narcissism  and  of  narcissistic

neuroses,  in  which  the  subject’s  libido  is  attached  to  his  own  ego

instead  of  to  an  object.  Though  on  other  occasions,  therefore,  the

charge  was  brought  against  psycho-analysis  of  having  made  an

unjustifiable extension of the concept of sexuality, yet, when it became

convenient  for  controversial  ends,  this  crime  was  forgotten  and  we

were once more held down to the narrowest meaning of the word.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4230

 

 

   If the preliminary cathartic period is left on one side, the history of

psycho-analysis falls from my point of view into two phases. In the first

of these I stood alone and had to do all the work myself: this was from

1895-6 until 1906 or 1907. In the second phase, lasting from then until

the present time, the contributions of my pupils and collaborators have

been growing more and more in importance, so that to-day, when agrave illness warns me of the approaching end, I can think with a quiet

mind  of  the  cessation  of  my  own  labours.  For  that  very  reason,

however, it is impossible for me in this Autobiographical Study to deal

as fully with the progress of psycho-analysis during the second phase

as  I  did  with  its  gradual  rise  during  the  first  phase,  which  was

concerned  with  my  own  activity  alone.  I  feel  that  I  should  only  be

justified  in  mentioning  here  those  new  discoveries  in  which  I  still

played a prominent part, in particular, therefore, those made in the

sphere  of  narcissism,  of  the  theory  of  the  instincts,  and  of  the

application of psycho-analysis to the psychoses.

   I must begin by adding that increasing experience showed more and

more  plainly  that  the  Oedipus  complex  was  the  nucleus  of  the

neurosis. It was at once the climax of infantile sexual life and the point

of junction from which all of its later developments proceeded. But if

so, it was no longer possible to expect analysis to discover a factor

that was specific in the aetiology of the neuroses. It must be true, as

Jung  expressed  it  so  well  in  the  early  days  when  he  was  still  an

analyst,  that  neuroses  have  no  peculiar  content  which  belongs

exclusively  to  them  but  that  neurotics  break  down  at  the  same

difficulties  that  are  successfully  overcome  by  normal  people.  This

discovery  was  very  far  from  being  a  disappointment.  It  was  in

complete  harmony  with  another  one:  that  the  depth-psychology

revealed by psycho-analysis was in fact the psychology of the normal

mind. Our path had been like that of chemistry: the great qualitative

differences  between  substances  were  traced  back  to  quantitative

variations  in  the  proportions  in  which  the  same  elements  were

combined.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4231

 

   In the Oedipus complex the libido was seen to be attached to the

image of the parental figures. But earlier there was a period in which

there were no such objects. There followed from this fact the concept

(of fundamental importance for the libido theory) of a state in which

the subject’s libido filled his own ego and had that for its object. Thisstate could be called narcissism or self-love. A moment’s reflection

showed  that  this  state  never  completely  ceases.  All  through  the

subject’s life his ego remains the great reservoir of his libido, from

which  object-cathexes  are  sent  out  and  into  which  the  libido  can

stream  back  again  from  the  objects.  Thus  narcissistic  libido  is

constantly  being  transformed  into  object-libido,  and vice  versa.  An

excellent instance of the length to which this transformation can go is

afforded  by  the  state  of  being  in  love,  whether  in  a  sexual  or

sublimated manner, which goes so far as involving a sacrifice of the

self.  Whereas  hitherto  in  considering  the  process  of  repression

attention  had  only  been  paid  to  what  was  repressed,  these  ideas

made it possible to form a correct estimate of the repressing forces

too. It had been said that repression was set in action by the instincts

of self-preservation operating in the ego (the ‘ego-instincts’) and that it

was brought to bear upon the libidinal instincts. But since the instincts

of self-preservation were now recognized as also being of a libidinal

nature,  as  being  narcissistic  libido,  the  process  of  repression  was

seen to be a process occurring within the libido itself; narcissistic libido

was  opposed  to  object-libido,  the  interest  of  self-preservation  was

defending  itself  against  the  demands  of  object-love,  and  therefore

against the demands of sexuality in the narrower sense as well.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4232

 

   There is no more urgent need in psychology than for a securely

founded theory of the instincts on which it might then be possible to

build further. Nothing of the sort exists, however, and psycho-analysis

is  driven  to  making  tentative  efforts  towards  some  such  theory.  It

began by drawing a contrast between the ego-instincts (the instinct of

self-preservation,  hunger)  and  the  libidinal  instincts  (love),  but  later

replaced it by a new contrast between narcissistic and object-libido.

This  was  clearly  not  the  last  word  on  the  subject;  biological

considerations seemed to make it impossible to remain content with

assuming the existence of only a single class of instincts.

      In  the  works  of  my  later  years  (Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, and The Ego and the

Id, I have given free rein to the inclination, which I kept down for so

long, to speculation, and I have also contemplated a new solution of

the problem of the instincts. I have combined the instincts for self-

preservation and for the preservation of the species under the concept

of Eros and have contrasted with it an instinct of death or destruction

which works in silence. Instinct in general is regarded as a kind of

elasticity  of  living  things,  an  impulsion  towards  the  restoration  of  a

situation  which  once  existed  but  was  brought  to  an  end  by  some

external  disturbance.  This  essentially  conservative  character  of

instincts is exemplified by the phenomena of the compulsion to repeat.

The picture which life presents to us is the result of the concurrent and

mutually opposing action of Eros and the death instinct.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4233

 

   It remains to be seen whether this construction will turn out to be

serviceable. Although it arose from a desire to fix some of the most

important  theoretical  ideas  of  psycho-analysis,  it  goes  far  beyond

psycho-analysis. I have repeatedly heard it said contemptuously that it

is  impossible  to  take  a  science  seriously  whose  most  general

concepts are as lacking in precision as those of libido and of instinct in

psycho-analysis. But this reproach rests on a complete misconception

of the facts. Clear basic concepts and sharply drawn definitions are

only possible in the mental sciences in so far as the latter seek to fit a

region  of  facts  into  the  frame  of  a  logical  system.  In  the  natural

sciences, of which psychology is one, such clear-cut general concepts

are superfluous and indeed impossible. Zoology and Botany did not

start from correct and adequate definitions of an animal and a plant; to

this very day biology has been unable to give any certain meaning to

the concept of life. Physics itself, indeed, would never have made any

advance  if  it  had  had  to  wait  until  its  concepts  of  matter,  force,

gravitation, and so on, had reached the desirable degree of clarity and

precision.  The  basic  ideas  or  most  general  concepts  in  any  of  the

disciplines of science are always left indeterminate at first and are onlyexplained to begin with by reference to the realm of phenomena from

which they were derived; it is only by means of a progressive analysis

of the material of observation that they can be made clear and can

find a significant and consistent meaning. I have always felt it as a

gross injustice that people have refused to treat psycho-analysis like

any other science. This refusal found an expression in the raising of

the  most  obstinate  objections.  Psycho-analysis  was  constantly

reproached  for  its  incompleteness  and  insufficiencies;  though  it  is

plain that a science based upon observation has no alternative but to

work out its findings piecemeal and to solve its problems step by step.

Again,  when  I  endeavoured  to  obtain  for  the  sexual  function  the

recognition which had so long been withheld from it, psycho-analytic

theory was branded as ‘pan-sexualism’. And when I laid stress on the

hitherto  neglected  importance  of  the  part  played  by  the  accidental

impressions  of  early  youth,  I  was  told  that  psycho-analysis  was

denying  constitutional  and  hereditary  factors  -  a  thing  which  I  had

never dreamt of doing. It was a case of contradiction at any price and

by any methods.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4234

 

   I had already made attempts at earlier stages of my work to arrive at

some  more  general  points  of  view  on  the  basis  of  psycho-analytic

observation. In a short essay, ‘Formulations on the Two Principles of

Mental  Functioning’,  I  drew  attention  (and  there  was,  of  course,

nothing original in this) to the domination of the pleasure-unpleasure

principle in mental life and to its displacement by what is called the

reality  principle.  Later  on  I  made  an  attempt  to  produce  a

‘Metapsychology’. By this I meant a method of approach according to

which  every  mental  process  is  considered  in  relation  to  three  co-

ordinates, which I described as dynamic, topographical, and economic

respectively; and this seemed to me to represent the furthest goal that

psychology could attain. The attempt remained no more than a torso;

after  writing  two  or  three  papers  -  ‘Instincts  and  their  Vicissitudes’,

‘Repression’, ‘The Unconscious’, ‘Mourning and Melancholia’, etc. - Ibroke off, wisely perhaps, since the time for theoretical predications of

this kind had not yet come. In my latest speculative works I have set

about the task of dissecting our mental apparatus on the basis of the

analytic view of pathological facts and have divided it into an ego, an

id,  and  a super-ego.¹  The  super-ego  is  the  heir  of  the  Oedipus

complex and represents the ethical standards of mankind.

   I should not like to create an impression that during this last period

of my work I have turned my back upon patient observation and have

abandoned  myself  entirely  to  speculation.  I  have  on  the  contrary

always remained in the closest touch with the analytic material and

have never ceased working at detailed points of clinical or technical

importance. Even when I have moved away from observation, I have

carefully avoided any contact with philosophy proper. This avoidance

has been greatly facilitated by constitutional incapacity. I was always

open to the ideas of G. T. Fechner and have followed that thinker

upon  many  important  points.  The  large  extent  to  which  psycho-

analysis coincides with the philosophy of Schopenhauer - not only did

he assert the dominance of the emotions and the supreme importance

of sexuality but he was even aware of the mechanism of repression -

is  not  to  be  traced  to  my  acquaintance  with  his  teaching.  I  read

Schopenhauer  very  late  in  my  life.  Nietzsche,  another  philosopher

whose guesses and intuitions often agree in the most astonishing way

with  the  laborious  findings  of  psycho-analysis,  was  for  a  long  time

avoided by me on that very account; I was less concerned with the

question of priority than with keeping my mind unembarrassed.

 

   ¹ The Ego and the Id.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4235

 

   The neuroses were the first subject of analysis, and for a long time

they were the only one. No analyst could doubt that medical practice

was wrong in separating those disorders from the psychoses and in

attaching  them  to  the  organic  nervous  diseases.  The  theory  of  the

neuroses  belongs  to  psychiatry  and  is  indispensable  as  anintroduction to it. It would seem, however, that the analytic study of the

psychoses  is  impracticable  owing  to  its  lack  of  therapeutic  results.

Mental  patients  are  as  a  rule  without  the  capacity  for  forming  a

positive  transference,  so  that  the  principal  instrument  of  analytic

technique is inapplicable to them. There are nevertheless a number of

methods  of  approach  to  be  found.  Transference  is  often  not  so

completely  absent  but  that  it  can  be  used  to  a  certain  extent;  and

analysis  has  achieved  undoubted  successes  with  cyclical

depressions, light paranoic modifications, and partial schizophrenias.

It  has  at  least  been  a  benefit  to  science  that  in  many  cases  the

diagnosis can oscillate for quite a long time between assuming the

presence  of  a  psychoneurosis  or  of  a  dementia  praecox;  for

therapeutic attempts initiated in such cases have resulted in valuable

discoveries  before  they  have  had  to  be  broken  off.  But  the  chief

consideration  in  this  connection  is  that  so  many  things  that  in  the

neuroses have to be laboriously fetched up from the depths are found

in the psychoses on the surface, visible to every eye. For that reason

the best subjects for the demonstration of many of the assertions of

analysis are provided by the psychiatric clinic. It was thus bound to

happen before long that analysis would find its way to the objects of

psychiatric observation. I was able very early (1896) to establish in a

case  of  paranoid  dementia  the  presence  of  the  same  aetiological

factors and the same emotional complexes as in the neuroses. Jung

explained  some  most  puzzling  stereotypies  in  dements  by  bringing

them into relation with the patients’ life-histories; Bleuler demonstrated

the existence in various psychoses of mechanisms like those which

analysis had discovered in neurotics. Since then analysts have never

relaxed their efforts to come to an understanding of the psychoses.

Especially  since  it  has  been  possible  to  work  with  the  concept  of

narcissism, they have managed, now in this place and now in that, to

get a glimpse beyond the wall. Most of all, no doubt, was achieved by

Abraham in his elucidation of the melancholias. It is true that in this

sphere all our knowledge is not yet converted into therapeutic power;

but the mere theoretical gain is not to be despised, and we may be

content to wait for its practical application. In the long run even the

psychiatrists  cannot  resist  the  convincing  force  of  their  own  clinical

material. At the present time German psychiatry is undergoing a kindof  ‘peaceful  penetration’  by  analytic  views.  While  they  continually

declare  that  they  will  never  be  psycho-analysts,  that  they  do  not

belong to the ‘orthodox’ school or agree with its exaggerations, and in

particular that they do not believe in the predominance of the sexual

factor, nevertheless the majority of the younger workers take over one

piece or another of analytic theory and apply it in their own fashion to

the  material.  All  the  signs  point  to  the  proximity  of  further

developments in the same direction.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4236

 

                                            V

 

   I now watch from a distance the symptomatic reactions that are

accompanying  the  introduction  of  psycho-analysis  into  the  France

which  was  for  so  long  refractory.  It  seems  like  a  reproduction  of

something I have lived through before, and yet it has peculiarities of its

own. Objections of incredible simplicity are raised, such as that French

sensitiveness  is  offended  by  the  pedantry  and  crudity  of  psycho-

analytic terminology. (One cannot help being reminded of Lessing’s

immortal Chevalier Riccaut de la Marlinière.) Another comment has a

more serious ring (a Professor of Psychology at the Sorbonne did not

think it beneath him): the whole mode of thought of psycho-analysis,

so he declared, is inconsistent with the génie latin. Here the Anglo-

Saxon  allies  of  France,  who  count  as  supporters  of  analysis,  are

explicitly thrown over. Anyone hearing the remark would suppose that

psycho-analysis had been the favourite child of the génie teutonique

and had been clasped to its heart from the moment of birth.

   In France the interest in psycho-analysis began among the men of

letters. To understand this, it must be borne in mind that from the time

of the writing of The Interpretation of Dreams psycho-analysis ceased

to be a purely medical subject. Between its appearance in Germany

and  in  France  lies  the  history  of  its  numerous  applications  to

departments of literature and of aesthetics, to the history of religions

and to prehistory, to mythology, to folklore, to education, and so on.None of these things have much to do with medicine; in fact it is only

through  psycho-analysis  that  they  are  connected  with  it.  I  have  no

business, therefore, to go into them in detail in these pages. I cannot

pass them over completely in silence, however, for on the one hand

they are essential to a correct appreciation of the nature and value of

psycho-analysis, and on the other hand I have, after all, undertaken to

give  an  account  of  my  life-work.  The  beginnings  of  the  majority  of

these applications of psycho-analysis will be found in my works. Here

and there I have gone a little way along the path in order to gratify my

non-medical  interests.  Later  on,  others  (not  only  doctors,  but

specialists in the various fields as well) have followed in my tracks and

penetrated  far  into  the  different  subjects.  But  since  my  programme

limits  me  to  a  mention  of  my  own  share  in  these  applications  of

psycho-analysis, I can only give a quite inadequate picture of their

extent and importance.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4237

 

   A number of suggestions came to me out of the Oedipus complex,

the ubiquity of which gradually dawned on me. The poet’s choice, or

his invention, of such a terrible subject seemed puzzling; and so too

did the overwhelming effect of its dramatic treatment, and the general

nature of such tragedies of destiny. But all of this became intelligible

when one realized that a universal law of mental life had here been

captured in all its emotional significance. Fate and the oracle were no

more than materializations of an internal necessity; and the fact of the

hero’s sinning without his knowledge and against his intentions was

evidently a right expression of the unconscious nature of his criminal

tendencies. From understanding this tragedy of destiny it was only a

step further to understanding a tragedy of character - Hamlet, which

had been admired for three hundred years without its meaning being

discovered  or  its  author’s  motives  guessed.  It  could  scarcely  be  a

chance that this neurotic creation of the poet should have come to

grief, like his numberless fellows in the real world, over the Oedipus

complex. For Hamlet was faced with the task of taking vengeance onanother  for  the  two  deeds  which  are  the  subject  of  the  Oedipus

desires;  and  before  that  task  his  arm  was  paralysed  by  his  own

obscure sense of guilt. Shakespeare wrote Hamlet very soon after his

father’s death.¹ The suggestions made by me for the analysis of this

tragedy were fully worked out later on by Ernest Jones. And the same

example was afterwards used by Otto Rank as the starting-point for

his investigation of the choice of material made by dramatists. In his

large volume on the incest theme (Rank, 1912) he was able to show

how often imaginative writers have taken as their subject the themes

of the Oedipus situation, and traced in the different literatures of the

world the way in which the material has been transformed, modified,

and softened.

 

   ¹ (Footnote added 1935:) This is a construction which I should like explicitly to withdraw. I

no longer believe that William Shakespeare the actor from Stratford was the author of the
works which have so long been attributed to him. Since the publication of J. T. Looney’s
volume ‘Shakespeare’ Identified, I am almost convinced that in fact Edward de Vere, Earl of
Oxford, is concealed behind this pseudonym.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4238

 

   It was tempting to go on from there to an attempt at an analysis of

poetic and artistic creation in general. The realm of imagination was

seen to be a ‘reservation’ made during the painful transition from the

pleasure  principle  to  the  reality  principle  in  order  to  provide  a

substitute for instinctual satisfactions which had to be given up in real

life. The artist, like the neurotic, had withdrawn from an unsatisfying

reality into this world of imagination; but, unlike the neurotic, he knew

how to find a way back from it and once more to get a firm foothold in

reality. His creations, works of art, were the imaginary satisfactions of

unconscious wishes, just as dreams are; and like them they were in

the nature of compromises, since they too were forced to avoid any

open conflict with the forces of repression. But they differed from the

asocial, narcissistic products of dreaming in that they were calculated

to arouse sympathetic interest in other people and were able to evoke

and to satisfy the same unconscious wishful impulses in them too.Besides  this,  they  made  use  of  the  perceptual  pleasure  of  formal

beauty  as  what  I  have  called  an  ‘incentive  bonus’.  What  psycho-

analysis was able to do was to take the interrelations between the

impressions of the artist’s life, his chance experiences, and his works,

and  from  them  to  construct  his  constitution  and  the  instinctual

impulses at work in it - that is to say, that part of him which he shared

with all men. With this aim in view, for instance, I made Leonardo da

Vinci the subject of a study, which is based on a single memory of

childhood  related  by  him  and  which  aims  chiefly  at  explaining  his

picture  of  ‘The  Madonna  and  Child  with  St.  Anne’.  Since  then  my

friends and pupils have undertaken numerous analyses of artists and

their works. It does not appear that the enjoyment of a work of art is

spoiled by the knowledge gained from such an analysis. The layman

may perhaps expect too much from analysis in this respect, for it must

be admitted that it throws no light on the two problems which probably

interest him the most. It can do nothing towards elucidating the nature

of the artistic gift, nor can it explain the means by which the artist

works - artistic technique.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4239

 

   I was able to show from a short story by W. Jensen called Gradiva,

which has no particular merit in itself, that invented dreams can be

interpreted in the same way as real ones and that the unconscious

mechanisms familiar to us in the ‘dream-work’ are thus also operative

in the processes of imaginative writing. My book on Jokes and their

Relation to the Unconscious was a side-issue directly derived from

The Interpretation of Dreams. The only friend of mine who was at that

time interested in my work remarked to me that my interpretations of

dreams  often  impressed  him  as  being  like  jokes.  In  order  to  throw

some light on this impression, I began to investigate jokes and found

that their essence lay in the technical methods employed in them, and

that these were the same as the means used in the ‘dream-work’ -

that  is  to  say,  condensation,  displacement,  the  representation  of  a

thing by its opposite or by something very small, and so on. This led toan economic enquiry into the origin of the high degree of pleasure

obtained from hearing a joke. And to this the answer was that it was

due to the momentary suspension of the expenditure of energy upon

maintaining repression, owing to the attraction exercised by the offer

of a bonus of pleasure (fore-pleasure).

   I myself set a higher value on my contributions to the psychology of

religion, which began with the establishment of a remarkable similarity

between obsessive actions and religious practices or ritual (1907b).

Without as yet understanding the deeper connections, I described the

obsessional neurosis as a distorted private religion and religion as a

kind  of  universal  obsessional  neurosis.  Later  on,  in  1912,  Jung’s

forcible indication of the far-reaching analogies between the mental

products  of  neurotics  and  of  primitive  peoples  led  me  to  turn  my

attention to that subject. In four essays, which were collected into a

book with the title of Totem and Taboo, I showed that the horror of

incest was even more marked among primitive than among civilized

races and had given rise to very special measures of defence against

it.  I  examined  the  relations  between  taboo-prohibitions  (the  earliest

form in which moral restrictions make their appearance) and emotional

ambivalence;  and  I  discovered  under  the  primitive  scheme  of  the

universe known as ‘animism’ the principle of the over-estimation of the

importance  of  psychical  reality  -  the  belief  in  ‘the  omnipotence  of

thoughts’ - which lies at the root of magic as well. I developed the

comparison with the obsessional neurosis at every point, and showed

how many of the postulates of primitive mental life are still in force in

that  remarkable  illness.  Above  all,  however,  I  was  attracted  by

totemism, the first system of organization in primitive tribes, a system

in which the beginnings of social order are united with a rudimentary

religion and the implacable domination of a small number of taboo-

prohibitions. The being that is revered is ultimately always an animal,

from which the clan also claims to be descended. Many indications

pointed  to  the  conclusion  that  every  race,  even  the  most  highly

developed, had once passed through the stage of totemism.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4240 

   The chief literary sources of my studies in this field were the well-

known  works  of  J.  G.  Frazer  (Totemism  and  Exogamy  and The

Golden Bough),  a  mine  of  valuable  facts  and  opinions.  But  Frazer

effected little towards elucidating the problems of totemism; he had

several times fundamentally altered his views on the subject, and the

other ethnologists and prehistorians seemed in equal uncertainty and

disagreement.  My  starting-point  was  the  striking  correspondence

between the two taboo-ordinances of totemism (not to kill the totem

and not to have sexual relations with any woman of the same totem-

clan) and the two elements of the Oedipus complex (getting rid of the

father  and  taking  the  mother  to  wife).  I  was  therefore  tempted  to

equate the totem-animal with the father; and in fact primitive peoples

themselves do this explicitly, by honouring it as the forefather of the

clan. There next came to my help two facts from psycho-analysis, a

lucky observation of a child made by Ferenczi, which enabled me to

speak of an ‘infantile return of totemism’, and the analysis of early

animal-phobias in children, which so often showed that the animal was

a  substitute  for  the  father,  a  substitute  on  to  which  the  fear  of  the

father  derived  from  the  Oedipus  complex  had  been  displaced.  Not

much was lacking to enable me to recognize the killing of the father as

the  nucleus  of  totemism  and  the  starting-point  in  the  formation  of

religion.

   This missing element was supplied when I became acquainted with

W. Robertson Smith’s work, The Religion of the Semites. Its author (a

man  of  genius  who  was  both  a  physicist  and  an  expert  in  biblical

researches) introduced the so-called ‘totem meal’ as an essential part

of the totemic religion. Once a year the totem animal, which was at

other times regarded as sacred, was solemnly killed in the presence of

all the members of the clan, was devoured and was then mourned

over. The mourning was followed by a great festival. When I further

took  into  account  Darwin’s  conjecture  that  men  originally  lived  in

hordes, each under the domination of a single powerful, violent and

jealous male, there rose before me out of all these components the

following hypothesis, or, I would rather say, vision. The father of the

primal horde, since he was an unlimited despot, had seized all the

women for himself; his sons, being dangerous to him as rivals, hadbeen  killed  or  driven  away.  One  day,  however,  the  sons  came

together and united to overwhelm, kill, and devour their father, who

had been their enemy but also their ideal. After the deed they were

unable to take over their heritage since they stood in one another’s

way. Under the influence of failure and remorse they learned to come

to an agreement among themselves; they banded themselves into a

clan  of  brothers  by  the  help  of  the  ordinances  of  totemism,  which

aimed  at  preventing  a  repetition  of  such  a  deed,  and  they  jointly

undertook to forgo the possession of the women on whose account

they had killed their father. They were then driven to finding strange

women, and this was the origin of the exogamy which is so closely

bound  up  with  totemism.  The  totem  meal  was  the  festival

commemorating the fearful deed from which sprang man’s sense of

guilt (or ‘original sin’) and which was the beginning at once of social

organization, of religion and of ethical restrictions.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4241

 

   Now whether we suppose that such a possibility was a historical

event or not, it brings the formation of religion within the circle of the

father-complex and bases it upon the ambivalence which dominates

that  complex.  After  the  totem  animal  had  ceased  to  serve  as  a

substitute for him, the primal father, at once feared and hated, revered

and  envied,  became  the  prototype  of  God  himself.  The  son’s

rebelliousness and his affection for his father struggled against each

other through a constant succession of compromises, which sought on

the  one  hand  to  atone  for  the  act  of  parricide  and  on  the  other  to

consolidate the advantages it had brought. This view of religion throws

a particularly clear light upon the psychological basis of Christianity, in

which, as we know, the ceremony of the totem meal still survives with

but little distortion, in the form of Communion. I should like explicitly to

mention that this last observation was not made by me but is to be

found in the works of Robertson Smith and Frazer.

   Theodor Reik and G. Róheim, the ethnologist, have taken up the

line of thought which I developed in Totem and Taboo and, in a seriesof important works, have extended it, deepened it, or corrected it. I

myself have since returned to it more than once, in the course of my

investigations into the ‘unconscious sense of guilt’ (which also plays

such an important part among the motives of neurotic suffering) and in

my  attempts  at  forming  a  closer  connection  between  social

psychology  and  the  psychology  of  the  individual.¹  I  have  moreover

made use of the idea of an archaic heritage from the ‘primal horde’

epoch  of  mankind’s  development  in  explaining  susceptibility  to

hypnosis.

 

   ¹ The Ego and the Id and Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4242

 

      I  have  taken  but  little  direct  part  in  certain  other  applications  of

psycho-analysis, though they are none the less of general interest. It

is  only  a  step  from  the  phantasies  of  individual  neurotics  to  the

imaginative creations of groups and peoples as we find them in myths,

legends, and fairy tales. Mythology became the special province of

Otto Rank; the interpretation of myths, the tracing of them back to the

familiar unconscious complexes of early childhood, the replacing of

astral explanations by a discovery of human motives, all of this is to a

large extent due to his analytic efforts. The subject of symbolism, too,

has  found  many  students  among  my  followers.  Symbolism  has

brought psycho-analysis many enemies; many enquirers with unduly

prosaic minds have never been able to forgive it the recognition of

symbolism,  which  followed  from  the  interpretation  of  dreams.  But

analysis is guiltless of the discovery of symbolism, for it had long been

known  in  other  regions  of  thought  (such  as  folklore,  legends,  and

myths) and plays an even larger part in them than in the ‘language of

dreams’.

   I myself have contributed nothing to the application of analysis to

education. It was natural, however, that the analytic discoveries about

the sexual life and mental development of children should attract the

attention of educators and make them see their problems in a new

light. Dr. Oskar Pfister, a protestant pastor at Zurich, led the way as atireless  pioneer  along  these  lines,  nor  did  he  find  the  practice  of

analysis incompatible with the retention of his religion, though it is true

that  this  was  of  a  sublimated  kind.  Among  the  many  others  who

worked alongside of him I may mention Frau Dr. Hug-Hellmuth and

Dr. S. Bernfeld, both of Vienna.¹ The application of analysis to the

prophylactic  upbringing  of  healthy  children  and  to  the  correcting  of

those  who,  though  not  actually  neurotic,  have  deviated  from  the

normal course of development has led to one consequence which is of

practical importance. It is no longer possible to restrict the practice of

psycho-analysis to doctors and to exclude laymen from it. In fact, a

doctor who has not been through a special training is, in spite of his

diploma,  a  layman  in  analysis,  and  a  non-doctor  who  has  been

suitably trained can, with occasional reference to a doctor, carry out

the analytic treatment not only of children but also of neurotics.

 

   ¹ (Footnote added 1935:) Since these words were written child analysis in particular has

gained a powerful momentum owing to the work of Mrs. Melanie Klein and of my daughter,
Anna Freud.
 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4243

 

   By a process of development against which it would have been

useless  to  struggle,  the  word  ‘psycho-analysis’  has  itself  become

ambiguous. While it was originally the name of a particular therapeutic

method, it has now also become the name of a science - the science

of unconscious mental processes. By itself this science is seldom able

to  deal  with  a  problem  completely,  but  it  seems  destined  to  give

valuable contributory help in the most varied regions of knowledge.

The sphere of application of psycho-analysis extends as far as that of

psychology, to which it forms a complement of the greatest moment.

   Looking back, then, over the patchwork of my life’s labours, I can

say  that  I  have  made  many  beginnings  and  thrown  out  many

suggestions.  Something  will  come  of  them  in  the  future,  though  I

cannot  myself  tell  whether  it  will  be  much  or  little.  I  can,  however,

express a hope that I have opened up a pathway for an important

advance in our knowledge. 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4244

 

                                    POSTSCRIPT

                                        (1935)

 

The editor of this series of autobiographical studies did not, so far as I

know,  consider  the  possibility  that  after  a  certain  lapse  of  time  a

sequel might be written to any of them; and it may be that such an

event has occurred only in the present instance. I am undertaking the

task since my American publisher desires to issue the little work in a

new  edition.  It  first  appeared  in  America  in  1927  (published  by

Brentano)  under  the  title  of An  Autobiographical  Study,  but  it  was

injudiciously brought out in the same volume as another essay of mine

which gave its title, The Problem of Lay-Analyses, to the whole book

and so obscured the present work.

   Two themes run through these pages: the story of my life and the

history  of  psycho-analysis.  They  are  intimately  interwoven.  This

Autobiographical Study shows how psycho-analysis came to be the

whole  content  of  my  life  and  rightly  assumes  that  no  personal

experiences of mine are of any interest in comparison to my relations

with that science.

   Shortly before I wrote this study it seemed as though my life would

soon be brought to an end by the recurrence of a malignant disease;

but surgical skill saved me in 1923 and I was able to continue my life

and my work, though no longer in freedom from pain. In the period of

more than ten years that has passed since then, I have never ceased

my analytic work nor my writing - as is proved by the completion of the

twelfth  volume  of  the  German  edition  of  my  collected  works.  But  I

myself find that a significant change has come about. Threads which

in the course of my development had become intertangled have now

begun to separate; interests which I had acquired in the later part of

my  life  have  receded,  while  the  older  and  original  ones  become

prominent once more. It is true that in this last decade I have carried

out some important pieces of analytic work, such as the revision of theproblem  of  anxiety  in  my  book Inhibitions,  Symptoms  and  Anxiety

(1926d) or the simple explanation of sexual ‘fetishism’ which I was

able to make a year later (1927e). Nevertheless it would be true to say

that, since I put forward my hypothesis of the existence of two classes

of instinct (Eros and the death instinct) and since I proposed a division

of the mental personality into an ego, a super-ego, and an id (1923b),

I have made no further decisive contributions to psycho-analysis: what

I have written on the subject since then has been either unessential or

would soon have been supplied by someone else. This circumstance

is connected with an alteration in myself, with what might be described

as a phase of regressive development. My interest, after making a

lifelong détour  through  the  natural  sciences,  medicine  and

psychotherapy, returned to the cultural problems which had fascinated

me long before, when I was a youth scarcely old enough for thinking.

At the very climax of my psycho-analytic work, in 1912, I had already

attempted in Totem and Taboo to make use of the newly discovered

findings of analysis in order to investigate the origins of religion and

morality. I now carried this work a stage further in two later essays,

The Future of an Illusion (1927c) and Civilization and its Discontents

(1930a).  I  perceived  ever  more  clearly  that  the  events  of  human

history, the interactions between human nature, cultural development

and  the  precipitates  of  primaeval  experiences  (the  most  prominent

example  of  which  is  religion)  are  no  more  than  a  reflection  of  the

dynamic conflicts between the ego, the id and the super-ego, which

psycho-analysis  studies  in  the  individual  -  are  the  very  same

processes repeated upon a wider stage. In The Future of an Illusion I

expressed an essentially negative valuation of religion. Later, I found a

formula which did better justice to it: while granting that its power lies

in  the  truth  which  it  contains,  I  showed  that  that  truth  was  not  a

material but a historical truth.

 


                              An Autobiographical Study

                                                                                      4245

 

      These  studies,  which,  though  they  originate  in  psycho-analysis,

stretch far beyond it, have perhaps awakened more public sympathythan psycho-analysis itself. They may have played a part in creating

the short-lived illusion that I was among the writers to whom a great

nation  like  Germany  was  ready  to  listen.  It  was  in  1929  that,  with

words  no  less  pregnant  than  friendly,  Thomas  Mann,  one  of  the

acknowledged spokesmen of the German people, found a place for

me in the history of modern thought. A little later my daughter Anna,

acting  as  my  proxy,  was  given  a  civic  reception  in  the  Rathaus  at

Frankfort-on-Main on the occasion of my being awarded the Goethe

Prize  for  1930.  This  was  the  climax  of  my  life  as  a  citizen.  Soon

afterwards  the  boundaries  of  our  country  narrowed  and  the  nation

would know no more of us.

      And  here  I  may  be  allowed  to  break  off  these  autobiographical

notes.  The  public  has  no  claim  to  learn  any  more  of  my  personal

affairs - of my struggles, my disappointments, and my successes. I

have in any case been more open and frank in some of my writings

(such as The Interpretation of Dreams and The Psychopathology of

Everyday Life)  than  people  usually  are  who  describe  their  lives  for

their contemporaries or for posterity. I have had small thanks for it,

and from my experience I cannot recommend anyone to follow my

example.

   I must add a few more words on the history of psycho-analysis

during the last decade. There can no longer be any doubt that it will

continue; it has proved its capacity to survive and to develop both as a

branch of knowledge and as a therapeutic method. The number of its

supporters  (organized  into  the  International  Psycho-Analytical

Association) has considerably increased. In addition to the older local

groups  (in  Vienna,  Berlin,  Budapest,  London,  Holland,  Switzerland,

and Russia), societies have since been formed in Paris and Calcutta,

two  in  Japan,  several  in  the  United  States,  and  quite  recently  one

each in Jerusalem and South Africa and two in Scandinavia. Out of

their  own  funds  these  local  societies  support  (or  are  in  process  of

forming)  training  institutes,  in  which  instruction  in  the  practice  of

psycho-analysis is given according to a uniform plan, and out-patient

clinics  in  which  experienced  analysts  as  well  as  students  give  free

treatment to patients of limited means. Every other year the members

of the International Psycho-Analytical Association hold a Congress at

which  scientific  papers  are  read  and  questions  of  organizationdecided. The thirteenth of these congresses (which I myself can no

longer attend) took place at Lucerne in 1934. From a core of interests

that  are  common  to  all  members  of  the  Association,  their  work

radiates  in  many  different  directions.  Some  lay  most  stress  upon

clarifying and deepening our knowledge of psychology, while others

are concerned with keeping in contact with medicine and psychiatry.

From the practical point of view, some analysts have set themselves

the task of bringing about the recognition of psycho-analysis at the

universities and its inclusion in the medical curriculum, whereas others

are content to remain outside these institutions and will not allow that

psycho-analysis is less important in the field of education than in that

of medicine. It happens from time to time that an analytic worker may

find himself isolated in an attempt to emphasize some single one of

the findings or views of psycho-analysis at the expense of all the rest.

Nevertheless, the whole impression is a satisfactory one - of serious

scientific work carried on at a high level.

                                                                                       4246

 

                    INHIBITIONS, SYMPTOMS AND ANXIETY

                                        (1926)

 


                                                                                      4247

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4248

 

                    INHIBITIONS, SYMPTOMS AND ANXIETY

 

                                            I

 

In the description of pathological phenomena, linguistic usage enables

us  to  distinguish  symptoms  from  inhibitions,  without,  however,

attaching much importance to the distinction. Indeed, we might hardly

think it worth while to differentiate exactly between the two, were it not

for  the  fact  that  we  meet  with  illnesses  in  which  we  observe  the

presence of inhibitions but not of symptoms and are curious to know

the reason for this.

   The two concepts are not upon the same plane. Inhibition has a

special relation to function. It does not necessarily have a pathological

implication. One can quite well call a normal restriction of a function an

inhibition of it. A symptom, on the other hand, actually denotes the

presence of some pathological process. Thus, an inhibition may be a

symptom as well. Linguistic usage, then, employs the word inhibition

when  there  is  a  simple  lowering  of  function,  and symptom when a

function  has  undergone  some  unusual  change  or  when  a  new

phenomenon has arisen out of it. Very often it seems to be quite an

arbitrary  matter  whether  we  emphasize  the  positive  side  of  a

pathological process and call its outcome a symptom, or its negative

side  and  call  its  outcome  an  inhibition.  But  all  this  is  really  of  little

interest; and the problem as we have stated it does not carry us veryfar.

   Since the concept of inhibition is so intimately associated with that of

function, it might be helpful to examine the various functions of the

ego with a view to discovering the forms which any disturbance of

those functions assumes in each of the different neurotic affections.

Let us pick out for a comparative study of this kind the sexual function

and those of eating, of locomotion and of professional work.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4249

 

 

   (a) The sexual function is liable to a great number of disturbances,

most of which exhibit the characteristics of simple inhibitions. These

are classed together as psychical impotence. The normal performance

of the sexual function can only come about as the result of a very

complicated process, and disturbances may appear at any point in it.

In men the chief stages at which inhibition occurs are shown by: a

turning  away  of  the  libido  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  process

(psychical unpleasure); an absence of the physical preparation for it

(lack  of  erection);  an  abridgement  of  the  sexual  act  (ejaculatio

praecox), an occurrence which might equally well be regarded as a

symptom;  an  arrest  of  the  act  before  it  has  reached  its  natural

conclusion  (absence  of  ejaculation);  or  a  non-appearance  of  the

psychical outcome (lack of the feeling of pleasure in orgasm). Other

disturbances arise from the sexual function becoming dependent on

special conditions of a perverse or fetishist nature.

   That there is a relationship between inhibition and anxiety is pretty

evident. Some inhibitions obviously represent a relinquishment of a

function  because  its  exercise  would  produce  anxiety.  Many  women

are openly afraid of the sexual function. We class this anxiety under

hysteria,  just  as  we  do  the  defensive  symptom  of  disgust  which,

arising  originally  as  a  deferred  reaction  to  the  experiencing  of  a

passive sexual act, appears later whenever the idea of such an act is

presented.  Furthermore,  many  obsessional  acts  turn  out  to  be

measures of precaution and security against sexual experiences andare thus of a phobic character.

   This is not very illuminating. We can only note that disturbances of

the sexual function are brought about by a great variety of means. (1)

The  libido  may  simply  be  turned  away  (this  seems  most  readily  to

produce  what  we  regard  as  an  inhibition  pure  and  simple);  (2)  the

function  may  be  less  well  carried  out;  (3)  it  may  be  hampered  by

having conditions attached to it, or modified by being diverted to other

aims; (4) it may be prevented by security measures; (5) if it cannot be

prevented  from  starting,  it  may  be  immediately  interrupted  by  the

appearance of anxiety; and (6), if it is nevertheless carried out, there

may be a subsequent reaction of protest against it and an attempt to

undo what has been done.

      (b)  The  function  of  nutrition  is  most  frequently  disturbed  by  a

disinclination  to  eat,  brought  about  by  a  withdrawal  of  libido.  An

increase  in  the  desire  to  eat  is  also  a  not  uncommon  thing.  The

compulsion to eat is attributed to a fear of starving; but this is a subject

which has been but little studied. The symptom of vomiting is known to

us  as  a  hysterical  defence  against  eating.  Refusal  to  eat  owing  to

anxiety  is  a  concomitant  of  psychotic  states  (delusions  of  being

poisoned).

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4250

 

      (c)  In  some  neurotic  conditions  locomotion  is  inhibited  by  a

disinclination to walk or a weakness in walking. In hysteria there will

be a paralysis of the motor apparatus, or this one special function of

the apparatus will be abolished (abasia). Especially characteristic are

the  increased  difficulties  that  appear  in  locomotion  owing  to  the

introduction  of  certain  stipulations  whose  non-observance  results  in

anxiety (phobia).

   (d) In inhibition in work - a thing which we so often have to deal with

as an isolated symptom in our therapeutic work - the subject feels a

decrease in his pleasure in it or becomes less able to do it well; or he

has certain reactions to it, like fatigue, giddiness or sickness, if he is

obliged to go on with it. If he is a hysteric he will have to give up hiswork  owing  to  the  appearance  of  organic  and  functional  paralyses

which make it impossible for him to carry it on. If he is an obsessional

neurotic he will be perpetually being distracted from his work or losing

time over it through the introduction of delays and repetitions.

 

   Our survey might be extended to other functions as well; but there

would be nothing more to be learnt by doing so. For we should not

penetrate below the surface of the phenomena presented to us. Let us

then proceed to describe inhibition in such a way as to leave very little

doubt  about  what  is  meant  by  it,  and  say  that  inhibition  is  the

expression of a restriction of an ego-function. A restriction of this kind

can  itself  have  very  different  causes.  Some  of  the  mechanisms

involved in this renunciation of function are well known to us, as is a

certain general purpose which governs it.

   This purpose is more easily recognizable in the specific inhibitions.

Analysis shows that when activities like playing the piano, writing or

even walking are subjected to neurotic inhibitions it is because the

physical  organs  brought  into  play  -  the  fingers  or  the  legs  -  have

become too strongly erotized. It has been discovered as a general fact

that the ego-function of an organ is impaired if its erotogenicity - its

sexual significance - is increased. It behaves, if I may be allowed a

rather  absurd  analogy,  like  a  maid-servant  who  refuses  to  go  on

cooking  because  her  master  has  started  a  love-affair  with  her.  As

soon as writing, which entails making a liquid flow out of a tube on to a

piece of white paper, assumes the significance of copulation, or as

soon as walking becomes a symbolic substitute for treading upon the

body of mother earth, both writing and walking are stopped because

they represent the performance of a forbidden sexual act. The ego

renounces these functions, which are within its sphere, in order not to

have to undertake fresh measures of repression - in order to avoid a

conflict with the id.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4251

 

   There are clearly also inhibitions which serve the purpose of self-punishment.  This  is  often  the  case  in  inhibitions  of  professional

activities. The ego is not allowed to carry on those activities, because

they would bring success and gain, and these are things which the

severe super-ego has forbidden. So the ego gives them up too, in

order to avoid coming into conflict with the super-ego.

      The  more generalized  inhibitions  of  the  ego  obey  a  different

mechanism of a simple kind. When the ego is involved in a particularly

difficult psychical task, as occurs in mourning, or when there is some

tremendous suppression of affect or when a continual flood of sexual

phantasies has to be kept down, it loses so much of the energy at its

disposal that it has to cut down the expenditure of it at many points at

once. It is in the position of a speculator whose money has become

tied  up  in  his  various  enterprises.  I  came  across  an  instructive

example of this kind of intense, though short-lived, general inhibition.

The  patient,  an  obsessional  neurotic,  used  to  be  overcome  by  a

paralysing  fatigue  which  lasted  for  one  or  more  days  whenever

something occurred which should obviously have thrown him into a

rage. We have here a point from which it should be possible to reach

an  understanding  of  the  condition  of  general  inhibition  which

characterizes states of depression, including the gravest form of them,

melancholia.

   As regards inhibitions, then, we may say in conclusion that they are

restrictions  of  the  functions  of  the  ego  which  have  been  either

imposed as a measure of precaution or brought about as a result of an

impoverishment of energy; and we can see without difficulty in what

respect an inhibition differs from a symptom: for a symptom cannot

any longer be described as a process that takes place within, or acts

upon, the ego.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4252

 

                                            II

 

   The main characteristics of the formation of symptoms have long

since  been  studied  and,  I  hope,  established  beyond  dispute.  Asymptom is a sign of, and a substitute for, an instinctual satisfaction

which has remained in abeyance; it is a consequence of the process

of repression. Repression proceeds from the ego when the latter - it

may be at the behest of the super-ego - refuses to associate itself with

an instinctual cathexis which has been aroused in the id. The ego is

able by means of repression to keep the idea which is the vehicle of

the reprehensible impulse from becoming conscious. Analysis shows

that the idea often persists as an unconscious formation.

   So far everything seems clear; but we soon come upon difficulties

which have not as yet been solved. Up till now our account of what

occurs in repression has laid great stress on this point of exclusion

from consciousness. But it has left other points open to uncertainty.

One  question  that  arose  was,  what  happened  to  the  instinctual

impulse  which  had  been  activated  in  the  id  and  which  sought

satisfaction? The answer was an indirect one. It was that owing to the

process of repression the pleasure that would have been expected

from satisfaction had been transformed into unpleasure. But we were

then faced with the problem of how the satisfaction of an instinct could

produce unpleasure. The whole matter can be clarified, I think, if we

commit  ourselves  to  the  definite  statement  that  as  a  result  of

repression the intended course of the excitatory process in the id does

not occur at all; the ego succeeds in inhibiting or deflecting it. If this is

so  the  problem  of  ‘transformation  of  affect’  under  repression

disappears. At the same time this view implies a concession to the

ego that it can exert a very extensive influence over processes in the

id, and we shall have to find out in what way it is able to develop such

surprising powers.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4253

 

   It seems to me that the ego obtains this influence in virtue of its

intimate connections with the perceptual system - connections which,

as  we  know,  constitute  its  essence  and  provide  the  basis  of  its

differentiation from the id. The function of this system, which we have

called Pcpt.-Cs., is bound up with the phenomenon of consciousness.It  receives  excitations  not  only  from  outside  but  from  within,  and

endeavours, by means of the sensations of pleasure and unpleasure

which  reach  it  from  these  quarters,  to  direct  the  course  of  mental

events in accordance with the pleasure principle. We are very apt to

think of the ego as powerless against the id; but when it is opposed to

an  instinctual  process  in  the  id  it  has  only  to  give  a  ‘signal  of

unpleasure’  in  order  to  attain  its  object  with  the  aid  of  that  almost

omnipotent institution, the pleasure principle. To take this situation by

itself for a moment, we can illustrate it by an example from another

field. Let us imagine a country in which a certain small faction objects

to a proposed measure the passage of which would have the support

of the masses. This minority obtains command of the press and by its

help  manipulates  the  supreme  arbiter,  ‘public  opinion’,  and  so

succeeds in preventing the measure from being passed.

      But  this  explanation  opens  up  fresh  problems.  Where  does  the

energy  come  from  which  is  employed  for  giving  the  signal  of

unpleasure?  Here  we  may  be  assisted  by  the  idea  that  a  defence

against  an  unwelcome internal  process  will  be  modelled  upon  the

defence adopted against an external stimulus, that the ego wards off

internal and external dangers alike along identical lines. In the case of

external danger the organism has recourse to attempts at flight. The

first thing it does is to withdraw cathexis from the perception of the

dangerous  object;  later  on  it  discovers  that  it  is  a  better  plan  to

perform muscular movements of such a sort as will render perception

of the dangerous object impossible even in the absence of any refusal

to perceive it - that it is a better plan, that is, to remove itself from the

sphere of danger. Repression is an equivalent of this attempt at flight.

The  ego  withdraws  its  (preconscious)  cathexis  from  the  instinctual

representative that is to be repressed and uses that cathexis for the

purpose  of  releasing  unpleasure  (anxiety).  The  problem  of  how

anxiety arises in connection with repression may be no simple one;

but  we  may  legitimately  hold  firmly  to  the  idea  that  the  ego  is  the

actual seat of anxiety and give up our earlier view that the cathectic

energy of the repressed impulse is automatically turned into anxiety. If

I  expressed  myself  earlier  in  the  latter  sense,  I  was  giving  a

phenomenological description and not a metapsychological account of

what was occurring.