this  situation  is  relieved  by  the  girls  giving  up  the  veil;  it  then  takes  an

innocent turn. The narrator follows the same mechanism in the cloaking of

the  equivocal  scene  at  Andermatt;  there  is  nothing  but  nice  food,  coffee,

potatoes, honey, butter, a turning back to the infantile life according to the

well-known method. The conclusion is apparently very abrupt: the teacher

becomes a godfather.

Witness II.—M. dreamt she had gone bathing with L. P. and the teacher. Far

out in the lake M. said to the teacher that her leg was hurting her very much.

Then the teacher said she could get up on him. I don't know now whether the

last sentence was really so told, but I think so. As there was just then a ship

on the lake the teacher said she should swim as far as the ship and then get in.

I don't remember exactly how it went on. Then the teacher or M., I don't

really remember which, said they would get out at Z. and run home. Then the

teacher called out to two gentlemen who had just been bathing there, that

they might carry the children to land. Then L. P. sat up on one man, and M.

on the other fat man, and the teacher held on to the fat man's leg and swam

after them. Arrived on land they ran home. On the way the teacher met his

friend who had a wedding. M. said: "It was then the fashion to go on foot, not

in a carriage." Then the bride said she must now go along also. Then the

teacher said it would be nice if the two girls gave the bride their black veils,

which they had got on the way. I can't now remember how. The children gave

it her, and the bride said they were really dear generous children. Then they

went on further and put up at the Sun Hotel. There they got something to eat,

I don't know exactly what. Then they went to a barn and danced. All the men

had taken off their coats except the teacher. Then the bride said he ought to

take off his coat also. Then the teacher hesitated but finally did so. Then the

teacher was.... Then the teacher said he was cold. I must not tell any more; it

is improper. That's all I heard of the dream.

Remarks.—The  narrator  pays  special  attention  to  the  getting  up,  but  is

uncertain whether in the original it referred to getting up on the teacher or the

steamer.  This  uncertainty  is,  however,  amply  compensated  for  by  the

elaborate invention of the two strangers who take the girls upon their backs.

The getting up is too valuable a thought for the narrator to surrender, but she

is troubled by the idea of the teacher seeing the object. The want of clothing

likewise arouses much interest. The bride's veil has, it is true, become the

black veil of mourning (naturally in order to conceal anything indelicate).

There is not only no innocent twisting, but it is conspicuously virtuous ("dear,generous children"); the amoral wish has become changed into virtue which

receives  special  emphasis,  arousing  suspicion  as  does  every  accentuated

virtue.

This narrator exuberantly fills in the blanks in the scene of the barn: the men

take off their coats; the teacher also, and is therefore ... i.e. naked and hence

cold. Whereupon it becomes too improper.

The narrator has correctly recognised the parallels which were suspected in

the criticisms of the original dream; she has filled in the scene about the

undressing which belongs to the bathing, for it must finally come out that the

girls are together with the naked teacher.

Witness III.—M. told me she had dreamt: Once I went to the baths but there

was no room for me. The teacher took me into his dressing-room. I undressed

and went bathing. I swam until I reached the bank. Then I met the teacher. He

said would I not like to swim across the lake with him. I went, and L. P. also.

We swam out and were soon in the middle of the lake. I did not want to swim

any further. Now I can't remember it exactly. Soon a ship came up, and we

got up on the ship. The teacher said, "I am cold," and a sailor gave us an old

shirt. The three of us each tore a piece of the shirt away. I fastened it round

the neck. Then we left the ship and swam away towards K.

L. P. and I did not want to go further, and two fat men took us upon their

backs. In K. we got a veil which we put on. In K. we went into the street. The

teacher met his friend who invited us to the wedding. We went to the Sun and

played games. We also danced the polonaise; now I don't remember exactly.

Then we went for a honeymoon journey to Andermatt. The teacher had no

money with him, and stole some chestnuts in Andermatt. The teacher said, "I

am so glad that I can travel with my two pupils." Then there is something

improper which I will not write. The dream is now finished.

Remarks.—The undressing together now takes place in the narrow space of

the dressing-room at the baths. The want of dress on the ship gives occasion

to a further variant. (The old shirt torn in three.) In consequence of great

uncertainty the getting up on the teacher is not mentioned. Instead, the two

girls get up on two fat men. As "fat" becomes so prominent it should be noted

that the teacher is more than a little plump. The setting is thoroughly typical;

each one has a teacher. The duplication or multiplication of the persons is an

expression of their significance, i.e. of the stored-up libido. (Compare the

duplication  of  the  attribute  in  dementia  præcox  in  my  "Psychology  of

Dementia  Præcox.")  In  cults  and  mythologies  the  significance  of  thisduplication is very striking. (Cp. the Trinity and the two mystical formulas of

confession:  "Isis  una  quæ  es  omnia.  Hermes  omnia  solus  et  ter  unus.")

Proverbially we say he eats, drinks, or sleeps "for two." The multiplication of

the personality expresses also an analogy or comparison—my friend has the

same  "ætiological  value"  (Freud)  as myself.  In  dementia  præcox,  or

schizophrenia, to use Bleuler's wider and better term, the multiplication of the

personality  is  mainly  the  expression  of  the  stored-up  libido,  for  it  is

invariably the person to whom the patient has transference who is subjected

to this multiplication. ("There are two professors N." "Oh, you are also Dr. J.;

this morning another came to see me who called himself Dr. J.") It seems

that, corresponding to the general tendency in schizophrenia, this splitting is

an analytic degradation whose motive is to prevent the arousing of too violent

impressions. A final significance of the multiplication of personality which,

however, does not come exactly under this concept is the raising of some

attribute of the person to a living figure. A simple instance is Dionysos and

his  companion  Phales,  wherein  Phales  is  the  equivalent  of  Phallos,  the

personification  of  the  penis  of  Dionysos.  The  so-called  attendants  of

Dionysos  (Satyri,  Sileni,  Mænades,  Mimallones,  etc.)  consist  of  the

personification of the attributes of Dionysos.

The  scene  in  Andermatt  is  portrayed  with  a  nice  wit,  or  more  properly

speaking, dreamt further: "The teacher steals chestnuts," that is equivalent to

saying he does what is prohibited. By chestnuts is meant roasted chestnuts,

which on account of the incision are known as a female sexual symbol. Thus

the remark of the teacher, that he was especially glad to travel with his pupils,

following directly upon the theft of the chestnuts, becomes intelligible. This

theft of the chestnuts is certainly a personal interpolation, for it does not

occur in any of the other accounts. It shows how intensive was the inner

participation of the school companions of Marie X. in the dream, resting

upon similar ætiological requirements.

This is the last of the aural witnesses. The story of the veil, the pain in the

feet, are items which we may perhaps suspect to have been suggested in the

original narrative. Other interpolations are, however, absolutely personal, and

are due to independent inner participation in the meaning of the dream.                      HEARSAY EVIDENCE.

(I.) The whole school had to go bathing with the teacher. M. X. had no place

in the bath in which to undress. Then the teacher said: "You can come into

my  room  and  undress  with  me."  She  must  have  felt  very  uncomfortable.

When both were undressed they went into the lake. The teacher took a long

rope and wound it round M. Then they both swam far out. But M. got tired,

and then the teacher took her upon his back. Then M. saw Lina P.; she called

out to her, Come along with me, and Lina came. Then they all swam out still

farther. They met a ship. Then the teacher asked, "May we get in? these girls

are tired." The boat stopped, and they could all get up. I do not know exactly

how they came ashore again at K. Then the teacher got an old night-shirt. He

put it on. Then he met an old friend who was celebrating his wedding. The

teacher, M. and L. were invited. The wedding was celebrated at the Crown in

K.  They  wanted  to  play  the  polonaise.  The  teacher  said  he  would  not

accompany them. Then the others said he might as well. He did it with M.

The teacher said: "I shall not go home again to my wife and children. I love

you  best,  M."  She  was  greatly  pleased.  After  the  wedding  there  was  the

honeymoon journey. The teacher, M. and L. had to accompany the others

also. The journey was to Milan. Afterwards they went to Andermatt, where

they could find no place to sleep. They went to a barn, where they could stop

the night all together. I must not say any more because it becomes highly

improper.

Remarks.—The undressing in the swimming-bath is properly detailed. The

union in the water receives a further simplification for which the story of the

rope  led  the  way;  the  teacher  fastens  himself  to  Marie.  Lina  P.  is  not

mentioned at all; she only comes later when Marie is already sitting upon the

teacher. The dress is here a jacket. The wedding ceremony contains a very

direct meaning. "The teacher will not go home any more to wife and child."

Marie is the darling. In the barn they all found a place together, and then it

becomes highly improper.

(II.) It was said that she had gone with the school to the swimming-baths to

bathe. But as the baths were over-full the teacher had called her to come to

him. We swam out to the lake, and L. P. followed us. Then the teacher took a

string and bound us to one another. I do not know now exactly how they

again got separated. But after a long time they suddenly arrived at Z. There ascene is said to have taken place which I would rather not tell, for if it were

true it would be too disgraceful; also now I don't know exactly how it is said

to have been, for I was very tired, only I also heard that M. X. is said to have

told how she was always to remain with our teacher, and he again and again

caressed her as his favourite pupil. If I knew exactly I would also say the

other thing, but my sister only said something about a little child which was

born there, and of which the teacher was said to have been the godfather.

Remarks.—Note that in this story the improper scene is inserted in the place

of  the  wedding  ceremony,  where  it  is  as  apposite  as  at  the  end,  for  the

attentive reader will certainly have already observed that the improper scene

could have taken place in the swimming-bath dressing-room. The procedure

has  been  adopted  which  is  so  frequent  in  dreams  as  a  whole;  the  final

thoughts  of  a  long  series  of  dream  images  contain  exactly  what  the  first

image of the series was trying to represent. The censor pushes the complex

away  as  long  as  possible  through  ever-renewed  disguises,  displacements,

innocent renderings, etc. It does not take place in the bathing-room, in the

water the "getting up" does not occur, on landing it is not on the teacher's

back that the girls are sitting, it is another pair who are married in the barn,

another  girl  has  the  child,  and  the  teacher  is  only—godfather.  All  these

images and situations are, however, directed to pick out the complex, the

desire for coitus. Nevertheless the action still occurs at the back of all these

metamorphoses, and the result is the birth placed at the end of the scene.

(III.) Marie said: the teacher had a wedding with his wife, and they went to

the "Crown" and danced with one another. M. said a lot of wild things which

I cannot repeat or write about, for it is too embarrassing.

Remarks.—Here everything is too improper to be told. Note that the marriage

takes place with the wife.

(IV.) ... that the teacher and M. once went bathing, and he asked M. whether

she  wanted  to  come  along  too.  She  said  "yes."  When  they  had  gone  out

together they met L. P., and the teacher asked whether she wished to come

along. And they went out farther. Then I also heard that she said that the

teacher said L. P. and she were the favourite pupils. She also told us that the

teacher was in his swimming drawers. Then they went to a wedding, and the

bride got a little child.

Remarks.—The personal relationship to the teacher is strongly emphasised

(the "favourite pupils"), likewise the want of clothing ("swimming drawers").

(V.) M. and L. P. went bathing with the teacher. When M. and L. P. and theteacher had swum a little way, M. said: "I cannot go any further, teacher, my

foot hurts me." Then the teacher said she should sit on his back, which M.

did. Then a small steamer came along, and the teacher got into the ship. The

teacher had also two ropes, and he fastened both children to the ship. Then

they went together to Z. and got out there. Then the teacher bought himself a

dressing  jacket  and  put  it  on,  and  the  children  had  put  a  cloth  over

themselves. The teacher had a bride, and they were in a barn. Both children

were with the teacher and the bride in the barn, and danced. I must not write

the other thing, for it is too awful.

Remarks.—Here Marie sits upon the teacher's back. The teacher fastens the

two children by ropes to the ship, from which it can be seen how easily ship

is put for teacher. The jacket again emerges as the piece of clothing. It was

the teacher's own wedding, and what is improper comes after the dance.

(VI.) The teacher is said to have gone bathing with the whole school. M.

could not find any room, and she cried. The teacher is said to have told M.

she could come into his dressing-room.

"I must leave out something here and there," said my sister, "for it is a long

story." But she told me something more which I must tell in order to speak

the truth. When they were in the bath the teacher asked M. if she wished to

swim out into the lake with him. To which she replied, "If I go along, you

come also." Then we swam until about half-way. Then M. got tired, and then

the teacher pulled her by a cord. At K. they went on land, and from there to

Z. (The teacher was all the time dressed as in the bath.) There we met a

friend,  whose  wedding  it  was.  We  were  invited  by  this  friend.  After  the

ceremony there was a honeymoon journey, and we came to Milan. We had to

pass one night in a barn where something occurred which I cannot say. The

teacher said we were his favourite pupils, and he also kissed M.

Remarks.—The excuse "I must leave out something here and there" replaces

the undressing. The teacher's want of clothing is emphasised. The journey to

Milan is a typical honeymoon. This passage also seems to be an independent

fancy, due to some personal participation. Marie clearly figures as the loved

one.

(VII.) The whole school and the teacher went bathing. They all went into one

room. The teacher also. M. alone had no place, and the teacher said to her, "I

have still room," she went. Then the teacher said, "Lie on my back, I will

swim  out  into  the  lake  with  you."  I  must  not  write  any  more,  for  it  is

improper; I can hardly say it at all. Beyond the improper part which followedI do not know any more of the dream.

Remarks.—The  narrator  approaches  the  basis.  Marie  is  to  lie  upon  the

teacher's back in the bathing compartment. Beyond the improper part she

cannot give any more of the dream.

(VIII.) The whole school went bathing. M. had no room and was invited by

the teacher into his compartment. The teacher swam out with her and told her

that she was his darling or something like that. When they got ashore at Z. a

friend was just having a wedding and he invited them both in their swimming

costumes.  The  teacher  found  an  old  dressing  jacket  and  put  it  over  the

swimming drawers. He (the teacher) also kissed M. and said he would not

return  home  to  his  wife  any  more.  They  were  also  both  invited  on  the

honeymoon  journey.  On  the  journey  they  passed  Andermatt,  where  they

could not find any place to sleep, and so had to sleep in the hay. There was a

woman; the dreadful part now comes, it is not at all right to make something

serious into mockery and laughter. This woman got a small child. I will not

say any more now, for it becomes too dreadful.

Remarks.—The narrator is thoroughgoing. (He told her simply she was his

darling. He kissed her and said he would not go home to his wife.) The

vexation about the silly tattling which breaks through at the end suggests

some peculiarity in the narrator. From subsequent investigation it was found

that  this  girl  was  the  only  one  of  the  witnesses  who  had  been  early  and

intentionally given an explanation about sex by her mother.                                    EPICRISIS.

So far as the interpretation of the dream is concerned, there is nothing for me

to add; the children have taken care of all the essentials, leaving practically

nothing  over  for  psychoanalytic  interpretation. Rumour  has  analysed  and

interpreted  the  dream.  So  far  as  I  know  rumour  has  not  hitherto  been

investigated in this new capacity. This case certainly makes it appear worth

while to fathom the psychology of rumour. In the presentation of the material

I  have  purposely  restricted  myself  to  the  psychoanalytic  point  of  view,

although I do not deny that my material offers numerous openings for the

invaluable researches of the followers of Stern, Claparède, and others.

The  material  enables  us  to  understand  the  structure  of  the  rumour,  but

psychoanalysis cannot rest satisfied with that. The why and wherefore of the

whole  manifestation  demands  further  knowledge.  As  we  have  seen,  the

teacher,  astonished  by  this  rumour,  was  left  puzzled  by  the  problem,

wondering as to its cause and effect. How can a dream which is notoriously

incorrect and meaningless (for teachers are, as is well known, grounded in

psychology) produce such effects, such malicious gossip? Faced by this, the

teacher seems to have instinctively hit upon the correct answer. The effect of

the  dream  can  only  be  explained  by  its  being  "le  vrai  mot  de  la

situation," i.e. that the dream formed the fit expression for something that was

already in the air. It was the spark which fell into the powder magazine. The

material  contains  all  the  proofs  essential  for  this  view.  I  have  repeatedly

drawn  attention  to  their  own  unrecognised  participation  in  the  dream  by

Marie's school-companions, and the special points of interest where any of

them have added their own phantasies or dreams. The class consists of girls

between twelve and thirteen years of age, who therefore are in the midst of

the prodromata of puberty. The dreamer Marie X. is herself physically almost

completely developed sexually, and in this respect ahead of her class; she is

therefore a leader who has given the watchword for the unconscious, and thus

brought to expression the sexual complexes of her companions which were

lying there ready prepared.

As can be easily understood, the occasion was most painful to the teacher.

The  supposition  that  therein  lay  some  secret  motive  of  the  schoolgirls  is

justified by the psychoanalytic axiom—judge actions by their results rather

than  by  their  conscious  motives.  Consequently  it  would  be  probable  thatMarie X. had been especially troublesome to her teacher. Marie at first liked

this teacher most of all. In the course of the latter half-year her position had,

however, changed. She had become dreamy and inattentive, and towards the

dusk of evening was afraid to go into the streets for fear of bad men. She

talked several times to her companions about sexual things in a somewhat

obscene way; her mother asked me anxiously how she should explain the

approaching menstruation to her daughter. On account of this alteration in

conduct Marie had forfeited the good opinion of her teacher, as was clearly

evidenced for the first time by a school report, which she and some of her

friends  had  received  a  few  days  before  the  outbreak  of  the  rumour.  The

disappointment was so great that the girls had imagined all kinds of fancied

acts of revenge against the teacher; for instance, they might push him on to

the lines so that the train would run over him, etc. Marie was especially to the

fore in these murderous phantasies. On the night of this great outburst of

anger, when her former liking for her teacher seemed quite forgotten, that

repressed part of herself announced itself in the dream, and fulfilled its desire

for sexual union with the teacher—as a compensation for the hate which had

filled the day.

On waking, the dream became a subtle instrument of her hatred, because the

wish-idea was also that of her school companions, as it always is in rumours

of this kind. Revenge certainly had its triumph, but the recoil upon Marie

herself was still more severe. Such is the rule when our impulses are given

over to the unconscious. Marie X. was expelled from school, but upon my

report she was allowed to return to it.

I  am  well  aware  that  this  little  communication  is  inadequate  and

unsatisfactory from the point of view of exact science. Had the original story

been accurately verified we should have clearly demonstrated what we have

now been only able to suggest. This case therefore only posits a question, and

it  remains  for  happier  observers  to  collect  convincing  experiences  in  this

field.                                  CHAPTER V

          ON THE SIGNIFICANCE OF NUMBER-DREAMS

The  symbolism  of  numbers  which  greatly  engaged  the  imaginative

philosophy of earlier centuries has again acquired a fresh interest from the

analytic  investigations  of  Freud  and  his  school.  But  in  the  material  of

number-dreams  we  no  longer  discover  conscious  puzzles  of  symbolic

concatenations of numbers but the unconscious roots of the symbolism of

numbers. There is scarcely anything quite fundamentally new to offer in this

sphere since the presentations of Freud, Adler and Stekel. It must here suffice

to corroborate their experiences by recording parallel cases. I have had under

observation  a  few  cases  of  this  kind  which  are  worth  reporting  for  their

general interest.

The first three instances are from a middle-aged married man whose conflict

of the moment was an extra-conjugal love affair. The piece of the dream from

which I take the symbolised number is: in front of the manager his general

subscription. The manager comments on the high number of the subscription.

It reads 2477.

The analysis of the dream brings out a rather ungentlemanly reckoning up of

the  expense  of  the  affair,  which  is  foreign  to  the  generous  nature  of  the

dreamer,  and  which  the  unconscious  makes  use  of  as  a  resistance  to  this

affair. The preliminary interpretation is, therefore, that the number has some

financial importance and origin. A rough estimate of the expenses so far leads

to a number which in fact approaches 2477 francs; a more exact reckoning,

however, gives 2387 francs, which could be only arbitrarily translated into

2477. I then left the numbers to the free association of the patient; it occurs to

him that the figure in the dream should be divided as 24-77. Perhaps it is a

telephone number; this supposition proves incorrect. The next association is

that it is the total of some numbers. A reminiscence then occurs to him that

he once told me that he had celebrated the 100th birthday of his mother and

himself when his mother was 65 and he was 35 years old. (Their birthdays

are on the same day.)

In this way the patient arrived at the following series of associations:—

                He is born on26 II.


                His mistress28 VIII.                His wife1 III.


                His mother (his father is long dead)26 II.


                His two children29 IV.


                and 13 VII.


                The patient is bornII. 75.


                His mistressVIII. 85.

He is now 36 years old, his mistress 25.

If this series of associations is written in the usual figures, the following

addition is arrived at:—

                                26. II.=262


                                28. VIII.=288


                                1. III.=13


                                26. II.=262


                                29. IV.=294


                                13. VII.=137


                                II. 75.=275


                                VIII. 85=885


                                25=25


                                36=36


  ——


  2477This series, which includes all the members of his family, gives the number

2477.

This construction led to a deeper layer of the dream's meaning. The patient is

most closely united to his family, but on the other hand very much in love.

This  situation  provokes  a  severe  conflict.  The  detailed  description  of  the

manager's appearance (which I leave out for the sake of brevity) pointed to

the analyst, from whom the patient rightly fears and desires firm control and

criticism of his condition of dependence and bondage.

The  dream  which  followed  soon  afterwards,  reported  in  brief,  runs: The

analyst asks the patient what he actually does at his mistress'? to which the

patient replied he plays there, and that indeed on a very high number, on

152. The analyst remarks: "You are sadly cheated."

The analysis displayed again a repressed tendency to reckon up the expense

of the affair. The amount spent monthly was close on 152 francs, it was from

148-158 francs. The remark that he was being cheated alludes to the point at

issue in the difficulties of the patient with his mistress. She maintains that he

had deflowered her; he, on the contrary, is firmly convinced that she was not

a virgin, and that she had already been seduced by some one else at the time

when he was seeking her favours and she was refusing him. The expression

"number" leads to the associations: number of the gloves, calibre-number.

From there the next step was to the fact that he recognized, at the first coitus,

a noticeable width of the opening instead of the expected resistance of the

hymen. To him, this is proof of the deception. The unconscious naturally

makes  use  of  this  opportunity  as  an  effective  means  of  opposition  to  the

relationship. 152 proves at first refractory to further analysis. The number on

a  subsequent  occasion  aroused  the  really  not  remote  association,  "house-

number." Then came this series of associations. When the patient first knew

her the lady lived at X Street No. 17, then Y Street No. 129, then Z Street No.

48.

Here the patient thought that he had clearly gone far beyond 152, the total

being 194. It then occurred to him that the lady had removed from No. 48 Z

Street at his instigation for certain reasons; it must therefore run 194 - 48 =

146. She now lives in A Street No. 6, therefore 146 + 6 = 152.

The following dream was obtained during a later part of the analysis. The

patient dreamt that he had received an account from the analyst in which he

was charged interest for delay in payment from the period September 3rd to

29th. The interest on the total of 315 francs was 1 franc.Under this reproach of meanness and avariciousness levelled at the analyst,

the patient covered, as analysis proved, a violent unconscious envy. Diverse

things in the life of the analyst can arouse the patient's envy; one fact here in

particular  had  recently  made  a  marked  impression.  His  physician  had

received an addition to the family. The disturbed relations between the patient

and his wife unfortunately does not permit such an expectation in his case.

Hence his ground for envy and invidious comparisons.

As before, the analysis of 315 produces a separation into 3—1—5. To three

he  associates—his  doctor  has  three  children,  just  lately  there  is  one  in

addition. He himself would have five children were all living; as it is he has 3

- 1 = 2 living; for three of the children were stillborn. The symbolism of the

numbers is not exhausted by these associations.

The patient remarks that the period from 3rd to 29th September contains

twenty-six days. His next thought is to add this and the other figures of the

dream:

            26

            315

          1

            ___

            342

            ___

With 342 he carries out the same operation as on 315, splitting it into 3—4—

2. Whereas before it came out that his doctor had three children, and then had

another, and the patient had five, now it runs: the doctor had three children,

and now has four, patient has only two. He remarks on this that the second

figure sounds like a rectification in contrast with the wish-fulfilment of the

first.

The  patient,  who  had  discovered  this  explanation  for  himself  without  my

help, declared himself satisfied. His physician, however, was not; to him it

seemed that the above disclosures did not exhaust the rich possibilities that

determined the unconscious images. The patient had, for instance, added to

the figure five that of the stillborn children; one was born in the 9th month

and two in the 7th. He also emphasised the fact that his wife had had two

miscarriages, one in the 5th week and the other in the 7th. Adding these

figures together we get the determination of the number 26.

                  Child of7months                  "    "7"


                  "    "9"


 __ 


 23"


                  2 miscarriages (5 + 7 weeks)3"


  __ 


 26"


 __ 

It seems as if the number twenty-six were determined by the number of the

lost times of pregnancy. This time (twenty-six days) denotes, in the dream, a

delay for which the patient was charged one franc interest. He has, in fact,

suffered a delay through the lost pregnancies, for his doctor has, during the

time the patient has known him, surpassed him with one child. One franc

must be one child. We have already seen the tendency of the patient to add

together all his children, even the dead ones, in order to outdo his rival. The

thought that his physician had outdone him by one child could easily react

immediately upon the determination of 1. We will therefore follow up this

tendency of the patient and carry on his play with figures, by adding to the

figure 26 the two complete pregnancies of nine months each.

26 + 9 + 9 = 44

If we follow the tendency to split up the numbers we get 2 + 6 and 4 + 4, two

groups of figures which have only this in common, that each group gives 8 by

addition. These numbers are, as we must notice, composed entirely of the

months of pregnancy given by the patient. Compare with them those groups

of figures which contain the information as to the doctor's fecundity, viz. 315

and 342; it is to be noted that the resemblance lies in their sum-total giving 9

: 9 - 8 = 1. It looks as if here likewise the notion about the differentiation of 1

were carried out. As the patient remarked, 315 seems thus a wish-fulfilment,

342 on the other hand a rectification. An ingenious fancy playing round will

discover the following difference between the two numbers:

3 × 1 × 5 = 15.     3 × 4 × 2 = 24.     24 - 15 = 9Here again we come upon the important figure 9, which neatly combines the

reckoning of the pregnancies and births.

It is difficult to say where the borderline of play begins; necessarily so, for

the unconscious product is the creation of a sportive fancy, of that psychic

impulse out of which play itself arises. It is repugnant to the scientific mind

to have serious dealings with this element of play, which on all sides loses

itself in the vague. But it must be never forgotten that the human mind has for

thousands of years amused itself with just this kind of game; it were therefore

nothing wonderful if this historic past again compelled admission in dream to

similar tendencies. The patient pursues in his waking life similar phantastic

tendencies  about  figures,  as  is  seen  in  the  fact  already  mentioned  of  the

celebration of the 100th birthday. Their presence in the dream therefore need

not  surprise  us.  In  a  single  example  of  unconscious  determination  exact

proofs are often lacking, but the sum of our experiences entitles us to rely

upon the accuracy of the individual discoveries. In the investigation of free

creative phantasy we are in the region, almost more than anywhere else, of

broad  empiricism;  a  high  measure  of  discretion  as  to  the  accuracy  of

individual results is consequently required, but this in nowise obliges us to

pass over in silence what is active and living, for fear of being execrated as

unscientific. There must be no parleying with the superstition-phobia of the

modern  mind;  for  this  itself  is  a  means  by  which  the  secrets  of  the

unconscious are kept veiled.

It is of special interest to see how the problems of the patient are mirrored in

the unconscious of his wife. His wife had the following dream: She dreamt,

and this is the whole dream: "Luke 137." The analysis of the number gives

the following. To 1 she associates: The doctor has another child. He had

three. If all her children were living she would have 7; now she has only 3 - 1

= 2. But she desires 1 + 3 + 7 = 11 (a twin number, 1 and 1), which expresses

her wish that her two children had been pairs of twins, for then she would

have reached the same number of children as the doctor. Her mother once

had twins. The hope of getting a child by her husband is very precarious; this

had for a long time turned her ideas in the unconscious towards a second

marriage. Other phantasies pictured her as "done with," i.e. having reached

the climacteric at 44. She is now 33 years old, therefore in 11 years she will

have reached her 44th year. This is an important period as her father died in

his 44th year. Her phantasy of the 44th year contains the idea of the death of

her  father.  The  emphasis  on  the  death  of  her  father  corresponds  to  therepressed phantasy of the death of her husband, who is the obstacle to a

second  marriage.  At  this  place  the  material  belonging  to  the  dream

"Luke  137"  comes  in  to  solve  the  conflict.  The  dreamer  is,  one  soon

discovers, in no wise well up in her Bible, she has not read it for an incredible

time, she is not at all religious. It would be therefore quite purposeless to

have recourse to associations here. The dreamer's ignorance of her Bible is so

great that she did not even know that the citation "Luke 137" could only refer

to the Gospel of St. Luke. When she turned up the New Testament she came

to the Acts of the Apostles. As chapter i. has only 26 verses and not 37, she

took the 7th verse, "It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which

the Father hath put in his own power."

But if we turn to Luke i. 37, we find the Annunciation of the Virgin.

Verse  35.  The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee,  and  the  power  of  the

Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be

born of thee shall be called the Son of God.

Verse 36. And, behold, thy cousin Elisabeth, she hath also conceived a son in

her old age: and this is the sixth month with her, who was called barren.

Verse 37. For with God nothing shall be impossible.

The  necessary  continuation  of  the  analysis  of  "Luke  137"  demanded  the

looking up of Luke xiii. 7, where it says:

Verse 6. A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard; and he came

and sought fruit thereon, and found none.

Verse 7. Then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard, Behold, these three

years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none: cut it down; why

cumbereth it the ground?

The fig-tree, which from antiquity has been a symbol of the male genital, is

to be cut down on account of its unfruitfulness. This passage is in complete

accord with innumerable sadistic phantasies of the dreamer, concerned with

the cutting or biting off of the penis. The relation to her husband's unfruitful

organ is obvious. That she withdraws her libido from her husband is clear for

he  is  impotent  as  regard  herself;  it  is  equally  clear  that  she  undergoes

regression to the father ("which the father hath put in his own power") and

identifies herself with her mother who had twins. By thus advancing her age

the dreamer places her husband in regard to herself in the position of a son or

boy,  of  an  age  at  which  impotency  is  normal.  Furthermore,  the  desire  to

overcome her husband is easily understood from, and amply evidenced in her

earlier analysis. It is therefore only a confirmation of what has been alreadysaid, if, following up the matter of "Luke 137," we find in Luke vii. verse 12,

Now when he came nigh to the gate of the city, behold, there was a dead man

carried out, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow. (13) And when

the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not.

(14) And he came and touched the bier: and they that bare him stood still.

And he said, Young man, I say unto thee, Arise.

In the particular psychological situation of the dreamer, the allusion to the

resurrection  presents  a  delightful  meaning  as  the  cure  of  her  husband's

impotency. Then the whole problem would be solved. There is no need for

me to point out in so many words the numerous wish-fulfilments contained in

this material; they are obvious to the reader.

The important combination of the symbol "Luke 137" must be conceived as

cryptomnesia,  since  the  dreamer  is  quite  unversed  in  the  Bible.  Both

Flournoy and myself have already drawn attention to the important effects of

this phenomenon. So far as one can be humanly certain, the question of any

manipulation  of  the  material  with  intent  to  deceive  does  not  come  into

consideration in this case. Those well posted in psychoanalysis will be able to

allay  any  such  suspicion  simply  from  the  disposition  and  setting  of  the

material as a whole.                                CHAPTER VI

A CRITICISM OF BLEULER'S "THEORY OF SCHIZOPHRENIC

                                    NEGATIVISM"

Bleuler's  work  contains  a  noteworthy  clinical  analysis  of  "Negativism."

Besides  giving  a  very  precise  and  discerning  summary  of  the  various

manifestations of negativism, the author presents us with a new psychological

conception well worthy of attention, viz. the concept of ambivalency  and

of ambitendency,  thus  formulating  the  psychological  axiom  that  every

tendency is balanced by its opposite tendency (to this must be added that

positive action is produced by a comparatively small leaning to one side of

the scale). Similarly all other tendencies, under the stress of emotions, are

balanced  by  their  opposites—thus  giving  an ambivalent  character  to  their

expression. This theory rests on clinical observation of katatonic negativism,

which more than proves the existence of contrasting tendencies and values.

These facts are well known to psychoanalysis, where they are summed up

under the concept of resistance. But this must not be taken as meaning that

every positive psychic action simply calls up its opposite. One may easily

gain the impression from Bleuler's work that his standpoint is that, cum grano

salis,  the  conception  or  the  tendency  of  the  Schizophrenic  is  always

accompanied by its opposite. For instance, Bleuler says:—

1. "Disposing causes of negativistic phenomena are: the ambitendency by

which every impulse is accompanied by its opposite."

2. "Ambivalency, which gives two opposed emotional expressions to the same

idea, and would regard that idea as positive and negative at the same time."

3. "The schizophrenic splitting of the psyche prevents any final summing up

of  the  conflicting  and  corresponding  psychisms,  so  that  the  unsuitable

impulse  can  be  realised  just  as  much  as  the  right  one,  and  the  negative

thought  substituted  for  the  right  one."  "On  this  theory,  negative

manifestations may directly arise, since non-selected positive and negative

psychisms may stand for one another," and so on.

If we investigate psychoanalytically a case of obvious ambivalency, i.e. of a

more or less unexpected negative reaction instead of a positive one, we find

that there is a strict sequence of psychological causes conditioning negative

reaction.  The  tendency  of  this  sequence  is  to  disturb  the  intention  of  the

contrasting  or  opposite  series,  that  is  to  say, it  is  resistance  set  up  by  acomplex. This fact, which has not yet been refuted by any other observations,

seems to me to contradict the above-mentioned formulæ. (For confirmation,

see  my  "Psychology  of  Dementia  Præcox,"  p.  103.)  Psychoanalysis  has

proved conclusively that a resistance always has an intention and a meaning;

that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  capricious  playing  with  contrasts.  The

systematic character of resistance holds good, as I believe I have proved,

even in schizophrenia. So long as this position, founded upon a great variety

of  experience,  is  not  disproved  by  any  other  observations,  the  theory  of

negativism must adapt itself to it. Bleuler in a sense supports this when he

says:  "For  the  most  part  the  negative  reaction  does  not  simply  appear  as

accidental, but is actually preferred to the right one." This is an admission

that  negativism  is  of  the  nature  of  resistance.  Once  admit  this,  and  the

primary  importance  of  ambivalency  disappears  so  far  as  negativism  is

concerned.  The  tendency  to  resistance  remains  as  the  only  fundamental

principle.  Ambivalency  can  in  no  sense  be  put  on  all  fours  with  the

"schizophrenic splitting of the psyche," but must be regarded as a concept

which gives expression to the universal and ever-present inner association of

pairs  of  opposites.  (One  of  the  most  remarkable  examples  of  this  is  the

"contrary meaning of root-words." See Freud's "Essay on Dreams," Jahrbuch,

vol. II., p. 179.) The same thing applies to ambitendency. Neither is specific

of schizophrenia, but applies equally to the neuroses and the normal. All that

is  specific  to  katatonic  negativism  is the  intentional  contrast,  i.e.  the

resistance.  From  this  explanation  we  see  that  resistance  is  something

different from ambivalency; it is the dynamic factor which makes manifest

the  everywhere  latent  ambivalency.  What  is  characteristic  of  the  diseased

mind  is  not  ambivalency  but  resistance.  This  implies  the  existence  of  a

conflict between two opposite tendencies which has succeeded in raising the

normally  present  ambivalency  into  a  struggle  of  opposing  components.

(Freud has very aptly called this, "The separation of pairs of opposites.") In

other words it is a conflict of wills, bringing about the neurotic condition of

"disharmony  within  the  self."  This  condition  is  the  only  "splitting  of  the

psyche" known to us, and is not so much to be regarded as a predisposing

cause, but rather as a manifestation resulting from the inner conflict—the

"incompatibility of the complex" (Riklin).

Resistance,  as  the  fundamental  fact  of  schizophrenic  dissociation,  thus

becomes something which, in contra-distinction to ambivalency, is not eo

ipso identical with the concept of the state of feeling, but is a secondary andsupplementary one, with its own special and quasi independent psychological

development; and this is identical with the necessary previous history of the

complex in every case. It follows that the theory of negativism coincides with

the theory of the complex, as the complex is the cause of the resistance.

Bleuler summarises the causes of negativism as follows:

(a) The autistic retirement of the patient into his own phantasies.

(b) The existence of a life-wound (complex) which must be protected from

injury.

(c) The misconception of the environment and of its meaning.

(d) The directly hostile relation to environment.

(e) The pathological irritability of schizophrenics.

(f) The "press of ideas," and other aggravations of action and thought.

(g) Sexuality with its ambivalency on the emotional plane is often one of the

roots of negative reaction.


(a)  Autistic  withdrawal  into  one's  own  phantasies  is  what  I  formerly

designated as the obvious overgrowth of the phantasies of the complex. The

strengthening of the complex is coincident with the increase of the resistance.

(b)  The  life-wound  (Lebenswund)  is  the  complex  which,  as  a  matter  of

course, is present in every case of schizophrenia, and of necessity always

carries with it the phenomena of autism or auto-erotism (introversion), for

complexes and involuntary egocentricity are inseparable reciprocities. Points

(a) and (b) are therefore identical. (Cf. "Psychology of Dementia Præcox,"

chapters ii. and iii.)

(c) It is proved that the misconception of environment is an assimilation of

the complex.

(d)  The  hostile  relation  to  environment  is  the  maximum  of  resistance  as

psychoanalysis clearly shows. (d) goes with (a).

(e) "Irritability" proves itself psychoanalytically to be one of the commonest

results  of  the  complex.  I  designated  it complex-sensibility.  Its  generalised

form (if one may use such an expression) manifests itself as a damming up of

the affect (= damming of the libido), consequent on increased resistance. So-

called neurasthenia is a classical example of this.

(f) Under the term "press of ideas," and similar intellectual troubles, may be

classified the "want of clearness and logic of the schizophrenic thinking,"

which Bleuler considers a predisposing cause. I have, as I may presume is

known,  expressed  myself  with  much  reserve  on  what  he  regards  as  thepremeditation of the schizophrenic adjustment. Further and wider experience

has  taught  me  that  the  laws  of  the  Freudian  psychology  of  dreams  and

the  theory  of  the  neuroses  must  be  turned  towards  the  obscurities  of

schizophrenic  thinking. The  painfulness  of  the  elaborated  complex

necessitates a censorship of its expression. This principle has to be applied to

schizophrenic disturbance in thinking; and until it has been proved that this

principle is not applicable to schizophrenia, there is no justification for setting

up a new principle; i.e. to postulate that schizophrenic disturbance of ideas is

something  primary.  Investigations  of  hypnagogic  activity,  as  well  as

association reactions in states of concentrated attention, give psychical results

which  up  to  now  are  indistinguishable  from  the  mental  conditions  in

schizophrenia.  For  example  excessive  relaxation  of  attention  suffices  to

conjure up images as like as two peas to the phantasies and expressions of

schizophrenia.  It  will  be  remembered  that  I  have  attributed  the  notorious

disturbances  of  attention  in  schizophrenia  to  the  special  character  of  the

complex; an idea which my experience since 1906 have further confirmed.

There  are  good  reasons  for  believing  specific  schizophrenic  thought-

disturbance to be the result of a complex.

Now as regards the symptoms of thought-pressure, it is first and foremost a

thought-compulsion, which, as Freud has shown, is first a thought-complex

and secondly a sexualisation of the thought. Then to the symptom of thought-

pressure there is superadded at least a demoniac impulse such as may be

observed in every vigorous release or production of libido.

Thought-pressure,  on  closer  examination,  is  seen  to  be  a  result  of

schizophrenic introversion, which necessarily leads to a sexualisation of the

thought; i.e. to an autonomy of the complex.

(g) The transition to sexuality appears from the psychoanalytical standpoint

difficult  to  understand.  If  we  consider  that  the  development  of  resistance

coincides  in  every  case  with  the  history  of  the  complex  we  must  ask

ourselves: Is the complex sexual or not? (It goes without saying thatwe must

understand sexuality in its proper sense of psycho-sexuality.) To this question

psychoanalysis gives the invariable answer: Resistance always springs from a

peculiar sexual development. The latter leads in the well-known manner to

conflict, i.e. to the complex. Every case of schizophrenia which has so far

been analysed confirms this. It can therefore claim at least to be a working

hypothesis, and one to be followed up. In the present state of our knowledge,

it is therefore not easy to see why Bleuler only allows to sexuality a quasi-determining influence on the phenomena of negativism; for psychoanalysis

demonstrates  that  the  cause  of  negativism  is  resistance;  and  that  with

schizophrenia, as with all other neuroses, this arises from the peculiar sexual

development.

It can scarcely be doubted to-day that schizophrenia, with its preponderance

of the mechanisms of introversion, possesses the same mechanism as any

other "psycho-neurosis." In my opinion, at any rate, its peculiar symptoms

(apart from the clinical and anatomical standpoints) are only to be studied by

psychoanalysis, i.e. when the investigation is mainly directed to the genetic

impetus. I have, therefore, endeavoured to indicate how Bleuler's hypothesis

stands  in  the  light  of  the  theory  of  complexes;  I  feel  myself  bound  to

emphasise  the  complex-theory  in  this  relation,  and  am  not  disposed  to

surrender  this  conception,  which  is  as  illuminating  as  it  was  difficult  to

evolve.                                CHAPTER VII

                                PSYCHOANALYSIS

Psychoanalysis is not only scientific, but also technical in character; and from

results  technical  in  their  nature,  has  been  developed  a  new  psychological

science which might be called "analytical psychology."

Psychologists and doctors in general are by no means conversant with this

particular  branch  of  psychology,  owing  to  the  fact  that  its  technical

foundations are as yet comparatively unknown to them. Reason for this may

be found in that the new method is exquisitely psychological, and therefore

belongs  neither  to  the  realm  of  medicine  nor  to  that  of  experimental

psychology.  The  medical  man  has,  as  a  rule,  but  little  knowledge  of

psychology;  and  the  psychologist  has  no  medical  knowledge.  There  is

therefore  a  lack  of  suitable  soil  in  which  to  plant  the  spirit  of  this  new

method. Furthermore, the method itself appears to many persons so arbitrary

that they cannot reconcile it with their scientific conscience. The conceptions

of Freud, the founder of this method, laid particular stress upon the sexual

factor; this fact has aroused strong prejudice, and many scientific men are

repelled merely by this feeling. I need hardly remark that such an antipathy is

not a logical ground for rejecting a new method. The facts being so, it is

obvious that the psychoanalyst should discuss the principles rather than the

results  of  his  method,  when  he  speaks  in  public;  for  he  who  does  not

acknowledge the scientific character of the method cannot acknowledge the

scientific character of its results.

Before  I  enter  into  the  principles  of  the  psychoanalytic  method,  I  must

mention two common prejudices against it.

The first of these is that psychoanalysis is nothing but a somewhat deep and

complicated form of anamnesis. Now it is well known that the anamnesis is

based upon the evidence supplied by the patient's family, and upon his own

conscious  self-knowledge,  revealed  in  reply  to  direct  questions.  The

psychoanalyst naturally develops his anamnesic data as carefully as any other

specialist; but this is merely the patient's history, and must not be confused

with analysis. Analysis is the reduction of an actual conscious content of a

so-called accidental nature, into its psychological determinants. This process

has nothing to do with the anamnesic reconstruction of the history of the

illness.The second prejudice, which is based, as a rule, upon a superficial knowledge

of psychoanalytic literature, is that psychoanalysis is a method of suggestion,

by which a faith or doctrine of living is imposed upon the patient, thereby

effecting a cure in the manner of mental healing or Christian Science. Many

analysts, especially those who have worked in psychoanalysis for a long time,

previously used therapeutic suggestion, and are therefore familiar with its

workings.  They  know  that  the  psychoanalyst's  method  of  working  is

diametrically  opposed  to  that  of  the  hypnotist.  In  direct  contrast  with

therapeutic suggestion, the psychoanalyst does not attempt to force anything

upon his patient which the latter does not see himself, and find reasonable

with his own understanding. Faced with the constant desire on the part of the

neurotic  patient  to  receive  suggestions  and  advice,  the  analyst  just  as

constantly endeavours to lead him away from this passive receptive attitude,

and make him use his common sense and powers of criticism, that equipped

with these he may become fitted to meet the problems of life independently.

We  have  often  been  accused  of  forcing  interpretations  upon  patients,

interpretations that were frequently quite arbitrary in character. I wish that

one  of  these  critics  would  make  the  attempt  to  force  such  arbitrary

interpretations upon my patients, who are often persons of great intelligence

and high culture, and who are, indeed, not infrequently my own colleagues.

The  impossibility  of  such  an  undertaking  would  soon  be  laid  bare.  In

psychoanalysis we are dependent upon the patient and his judgment, for the

reason that the very nature of analysis consists in leading him to a knowledge

of his own self. The principles of psychoanalysis are so entirely different

from those of therapeutic suggestion that they are not comparable.

An  attempt  has  also  been  made  to  compare  analysis  with  the  reasoning

method of Dubois, which is in itself a rational process. This comparison does

not however hold good, for the psychoanalyst strictly avoids argument and

persuasion with his patients. He must naturally listen to and take note of the

conscious problems and conflicts of his patient, but not for the purpose of

fulfilling his desire to obtain advice or direction with regard to his conduct.

The problems of a neurotic patient cannot be solved by advice and conscious

argument. I do not doubt that good advice at the right time can produce good

results;  but  I  do  not  know  whence  one  can  obtain  the  belief  that  the

psychoanalyst can always give the right advice at the right time. The neurotic

conflict is frequently, indeed as a rule, of such a character that advice cannot

possibly be given. Furthermore, it is well known that the patient only desiresauthoritative  advice  in  order  that  he  may  cast  aside  the  burden  of

responsibility,  referring  himself  and  others  to  the  opinion  of  the  higher

authority.

In  direct  contrast  to  all  previous  methods,  psychoanalysis  endeavours  to

overcome the disorders of the neurotic psyche through the subconscious, not

through  the  conscious  self.  In  this  work  we  naturally  have  need  of  the

patient's  conscious  content,  for  his  subconsciousness  can  only  be

reached viâ the conscious. The material furnished by the anamnesis is the

source  from  which  our  work  starts.  The  detailed  recital  usually  furnishes

many valuable clues which make the psychogenic origin of the symptoms

clear to the patient. This work is naturally only necessary where the patient is

convinced that his neurosis is organic in its origin. But even in those cases

where the patient is convinced from the very first of the psychic nature of his

illness, a critical survey of the history is very advantageous, since it discloses

to him a psychological concatenation of ideas of which he was unaware. In

this  manner  those  problems  which  need  special  discussion  are  frequently

brought to the surface. Work of this kind may occupy many sittings. Finally

the explanation of the conscious material reaches an end, in so far as neither

the patient nor the doctor can add anything to it that is decisive in character.

Under the most favourable circumstances the end comes with the formulation

of the problem which proved itself to be impossible of solution. Let us take,

for  instance,  the  case  of  a  man  who  was  once  well,  but  who  became  a

neurotic between the age of 35 and 40. His position in life is assured, and he

has a wife and children. Parallel with his neurosis he developed an intense

resistance towards his professional work. He observed that the first symptoms

of neurosis became noticeable when he had to overcome a certain difficulty

in  regard  to  it.  Later  on  his  symptoms  became  aggravated  with  each

successive  difficulty  that  arose.  An  amelioration  in  his  neurosis  occurred

whenever fortune favoured him in his professional work. The problem that

results from a critical discussion of the anamnesis is as follows:—

The patient is aware that if he could improve his work, the mere satisfaction

that would result could bring about the much-desired improvement in his

neurotic  condition.  He  cannot,  however,  make  his  work  more  efficient

because of his great resistance against it. This problem cannot be solved by

any reasoning process.

Let  us  take  another  case.  A  woman  of  40,  the  mother  of  four  children,

became neurotic four years ago after the death of one of her children. A newperiod of pregnancy, followed by the birth of another child, produced a great

improvement in her condition. The patient now lived in the thought that it

would be a great help to her if she could have yet another child. Believing,

however, that this could not happen, she attempted to devote her energies to

philanthropic interests. But she failed to obtain the least satisfaction from this

work.  She  observed  a  distinct  alleviation  of  her  complaint  whenever  she

succeeded in giving real, living interest to any matter, but she felt entirely

incapable of discovering anything that could bring her lasting interest and

satisfaction. It is clear that no process of reasoning can solve this problem.

Here psychoanalysis must begin with the endeavour to solve the problem as

to what prevents the patient from developing interests above and beyond her

longing for a child.

Since we cannot assume that we know from the very beginning what the

solution of such problems is, we must at this point trust to the clues furnished

us  by  the  individuality  of  the  patient.  Neither  conscious  questioning  nor

rational advice can aid us in the discovery of these clues, for the causes which

prevent us from finding them are hidden from her consciousness. There is,

therefore, no clearly indicated path by which to reach these subconscious

inhibitions. The only rule that psychoanalysis lays down for our guidance in

this respect, is to let the patient speak of that which occurs to him at the

moment. The analyst must observe carefully what the patient says and, in the

first  instance,  take  due  note  thereof  without  attempting  to  force  his  own

opinions upon him. Thus we observe that the patient whom I first mentioned

begins by talking about his marriage, which we hitherto had reason to regard

as normal. We now learn that he constantly has difficulties with his wife, and

that  he  does  not  understand  her  in  the  least.  This  knowledge  causes  the

physician to remark that the patient's professional work is clearly not his only

problem; but that his conjugal relations are also in need of revision. This

starts a train of thought in which many further ideas occur to the patient,

concerning his married life. Hereupon follow ideas about the love affairs he

had before his marriage. These experiences, related in detail, show that the

patient was always somewhat peculiar in his more intimate relations with

women, and that this peculiarity took the form of a certain childish egoism.

This is a new and surprising point of view for him, and explains to him many

of his misfortunes with women.

We cannot in every case get so far as this on the simple principle of letting

the  patient  talk;  few  patients  have  their  psychic  material  so  much  on  thesurface.  Furthermore,  many  persons  have  a  positive  resistance  against

speaking freely about what occurs to them on the spur of the moment; it is

often too painful to tell the doctor whom perhaps they do not entirely trust; in

other cases because apparently nothing occurs to them, they force themselves

to speak of matters about which they are more or less indifferent. This habit

of  not  talking  to  the  point  by  no  means  proves  that  patients  consciously

conceal  their  unpleasant  contents,  for  such  irrelevant  speaking  can  occur

quite unconsciously. In such cases it sometimes helps the patient if he is told

that he must not force himself, that he must only seize upon the very first

thoughts that present themselves, no matter how unimportant or ridiculous

they may seem. In certain cases even these instructions are of no use, and

then the doctor is obliged to have recourse to other expedients. One of these

is  the  employment  of  the  association  test,  which  usually  gives  excellent

information as to the chief momentary tendencies of the individual.

A  second  expedient  is  dream  analysis;  this  is the  real  instrument  of

psychoanalysis. We have already experienced so much opposition to dream

analysis  that  a  brief  exposition  of  its  principles  is  necessary.  The

interpretation of dreams, as well as the meaning given to them, is, as we

know, in bad odour. It is not long since that oneirocritics were practised and

believed in; nor is the time long past when even the most enlightened human

beings  were  entirely  under  the  ban  of  superstition.  It  is  therefore

comprehensible that our age should still retain a certain lively fear of those

superstitions  which  have  but  recently  been  partially  overcome.  To  this

timidity in regard to superstition, the opposition to dream analysis is in a

large measure due; but analysis is in no wise to blame for this. We do not

select the dream as our object because we pay it the homage of superstitious

admiration, but because it is a psychic product that is independent of the

patient's consciousness. We ask for the patient's free thoughts, but he gives us

little, or nothing; or at best something forced or irrelevant. Dreams are free

thoughts,  free  phantasies,  they  are  not  forced,  and  they  are  psychic

phenomena just as much as thoughts are.

It may be said of the dream that it enters into the consciousness as a complex

structure, the connection between the elements of which is not conscious.

Only by afterwards joining associations to the separate pictures of the dream,

can the origin of these pictures, in certain recollections of the near and more

remote past, be proved. One asks oneself: "Where have I seen or heard that?"

And by the same process of free association comes the memory that one hasactually  experienced  certain  parts  of  the  dream,  some  of  them  yesterday,

some at an earlier date. This is well known, and every one will probably

agree  to  it.  Thus  far  the  dream  presents  itself,  as  a  rule,  as  an

incomprehensible composition of certain elements which are not in the first

instance  conscious,  but  which  are  later  recognised  by  the  process  of  free

association.  This  might  be  disputed  on  the  ground  that  it  is  an a

priori statement. I must remark, however, that this conception conforms to

the only generally recognised working hypothesis as to the genesis of dreams,

namely, the derivation of the dream from experiences and thoughts of the

recent past. We are, therefore, upon known ground. Not that certain dream

parts have under all circumstances been known to the individual, so that one

might ascribe to them the character of being conscious; on the contrary, they

are  frequently,  even  generally,  unrecognisable.  Not  until  later  do  we

remember having consciously experienced this or that dream part. We may

therefore regard the dream from this point of view as a product that comes

from a subconscious origin. The technical unfolding of these subconscious

sources is a mode of procedure that has always been instinctively employed.

One simply tries to remember whence the dream parts come. Upon this most

simple principle the psychoanalytic method of solving dreams is based. It is a

fact that certain dream parts are derived from our waking life and, indeed,

from experiences which, owing to their notorious lack of importance, would

frequently have been consigned to certain oblivion, and were therefore well

on their way towards becoming definitely subconscious. Such dream parts are

the results of subconscious representations (images).

The principles according to which psychoanalysis solves dreams are therefore

exceedingly simple, and have really been known for a long time. The further

procedure follows the same path logically and consistently. If one spends

considerable  time  over  a  dream,  which  really  never  happens  outside

psychoanalysis, one can succeed in finding more and more recollections for

the  separate  dream  parts.  It  is,  however,  not  always  possible  to  discover

recollections for certain other parts; and then one must leave them for the

time being, whether one likes it or not. When I speak of "recollections" I

naturally do not mean merely memories of certain concrete experiences, but

also of their inter-related meanings. The collected recollections are known as

the dream material. With this material one proceeds according to a scientific

method that is universally valid. If one has any experimental material to work

up,  one  compares  its  separate  parts  and  arranges  them  according  to  theirsimilarities. Exactly the same course is pursued in dealing with the dream

material; one gathers together its common characteristics, whether these be

formal  or  material.  In  doing  this  one  must  absolutely  get  rid  of  certain

prejudices. I have always observed that the beginner expects to find some

tendency or other according to which he endeavours to mould his material. I

have noticed this particularly in the cases of colleagues who were previously

more or less violent opponents of psychoanalysis, owing to their well-known

prejudices and misunderstandings. When fate willed that I should analyse

them,  and  they  consequently  gained  at  last  an  insight  into  the  method  of

analysis, it was demonstrated that the first mistake which they had been apt to

make in their own psychoanalytic practice was that they forced the material

into accord with their own preconceived opinions; that is, they allowed their

former  attitude  towards  psychoanalysis,  which  they  were  not  able  to

appreciate objectively, but only according to subjective phantasies, to have its

influence upon their material. If one goes so far as to venture upon the task of

examining the dream material, one must permit no comparison to frighten

one away. The material consists, as a general rule, of very unequal images,

from  which  it  is  under  some  circumstances  most  difficult  to  obtain  the

"tertium comparationis." I must forego giving you detailed examples of this,

since it is quite impossible to introduce such extensive material into a lecture.

One pursues, then, the same method in classifying the unconscious content,

as is used everywhere in comparing materials for the purpose of drawing

conclusions from them. One objection has often been made, namely: why

should  the  dream  have  a  subconscious  content  at  all?  This  objection  is

unscientific in my opinion. Every psychological moment has its own history.

Every sentence that I utter has, besides the meaning consciously intended by

me, a meaning that is historical; and this last may be entirely different from

the  conscious  meaning.  I  am  purposely  expressing  myself  somewhat

paradoxically.  I  certainly  should  not  take  it  upon  myself  to  explain  each

sentence according to its individual-historical meaning. That is easier in the

case  of  larger  and  more  complex  formations.  Every  one  is  certainly

convinced of the fact that a poem—in addition to its manifest contents—is

also particularly characteristic of its author, in its form, subject-matter, and

the history of its origin. Whereas the poet gave skilful expression to a fleeting

mood in his song, the historian of literature sees in it and beyond it, things

which the poet would never have suspected. The analysis which the literary

critic makes of the subject-matter furnished by the poet may be comparedwith  psychoanalysis  in  its  method,  even  to  the  very  errors  which  occur

therein. The psychoanalytic method may be aptly compared with historical

analysis and synthesis. Let us assume, for instance, that we do not understand

the meaning of the rite of baptism as it is practised in our churches to-day.

The priest tells us that baptism means the reception of the child into the

Christian community. But we are not satisfied with this. Why should the

child be sprinkled with water, etc.? In order that we may understand this rite

we must gather together materials for comparison from the history of the rite,

that is, from the memories of mankind appertaining to it; and this must be

done from various points of view.

Firstly—Baptism is clearly a rite of initiation, a consecration. Therefore those

memories, above all, must be assembled which preserve the rites of initiation.

Secondly—The act of baptism is performed with water. This especial form of

procedure  proves  the  necessity  of  welding  together  another  chain  of

memories concerning rites in which water was used.

Thirdly—The child is sprinkled with water when it is christened. In this case

we  must  gather  together  all  the  forms  of  the  rite,  where  the  neophyte  is

sprinkled or where the child is submerged, etc.

Fourthly—We must recollect all the reminiscences in mythology and all the

superstitious customs which are in any respect similar to the symbolic act of

baptism.

In this manner we obtain a comparative study of the act of baptism. Thus we

ascertain the elements from which baptism is derived; we further ascertain its

original meaning, and at the same time make the acquaintance of a world rich

in  religious  mythology,  which  makes  clear  to  us  all  the  multifarious  and

derived  meanings  of  the  act  of  baptism.  Thus  the  analyst  deals  with  the

dream.  He  gathers  together  historical  parallels  for  each  dream  part,  even

though  they  be  very  remote  and  attempts  to  construct  the  psychological

history of the dream and the meanings that underlie it. By this monographic

elaboration of the dream one gains, exactly as in the analysis of the act of

baptism, a deep insight into the wonderfully subtle and significant network of

subconscious determinations; an insight which, as I have said, can only be

compared with the historical understanding of an act that we used only to

consider from a very one-sided and superficial point of view.

I cannot disguise the fact that in practice, especially at the beginning of an

analysis, we do not in all cases make complete and ideal analyses of dreams,

but that we more generally continue to gather together the dream associationsuntil the problem which the patient hides from us becomes so clear that even

he can recognize it. This problem is then subjected to conscious elaboration

until it is cleared up as far as possible, and once again we stand before a

question that cannot be answered.

You will now ask what course is to be pursued when the patient does not

dream  at  all;  I  can  assure  you  that  hitherto  all  patients,  even  those  who

claimed  never  to  have  dreamed  before,  began  to  dream  when  they  went

through analysis. But on the other hand it frequently occurs that patients who

began by dreaming vividly are suddenly no longer able to remember their

dreams. The empirical and practical rule, which I have hitherto regarded as

binding, is that the patient, if he does not dream, has sufficient conscious

material, which he keeps back for certain reasons. A common reason is: "I am

in the doctor's hands and am quite willing to be treated by him. But the doctor

must do the work, I shall remain passive in the matter."

Sometimes  the  resistances  are  of  a  more  serious  character.  For  instance,

persons who cannot admit certain morally grave sides to their characters,

project their deficiencies upon the doctor by calmly presuming that he is

more  or  less  deficient  morally,  and  that  for  this  reason  they  cannot

communicate certain unpleasant things to him. If, then a patient does not

dream from the beginning or ceases to dream he retains material which is

susceptible of conscious elaboration. Here the personal relation between the

doctor and his patient may be regarded as the chief hindrance. It can prevent

them both, the doctor as well as the patient, from seeing the situation clearly.

We must not forget that, as the doctor shows, and must show, a searching

interest in the psychology of his patient, so, too, the patient, if he has an

active mind, gains some familiarity with the psychology of the doctor and

assumes a corresponding attitude towards him. Thus the doctor is blind to the

mental  attitude  of  the  patient  to  the  exact  extent  that  he  does  not  see

himself  and  his  own  subconscious  problems.  Therefore  I  maintain  that  a

doctor must be analysed before he practises analysis. Otherwise the practice

of analysis can easily be a great disappointment to him, because he can, under

certain circumstances, reach a point where further progress is impossible, a

situation which may make him lose his head. He is then readily inclined to

assume that psychoanalysis is nonsense, so as to avoid the admission that he

has run his vessel ashore. If you are sure of your own psychology you can

confidently tell your patient that he does not dream because there is still

conscious material to be disposed of. I say that one must be sure of one's selfin  such  cases,  for  the  opinions  and  unsparing  criticisms  to  which  one

sometimes  has  to  submit,  can  be  excessively  disturbing  to  one  who  is

unprepared  to  meet  them.  The  immediate  consequence  of  such  a  loss  of

personal balance on the part of the doctor is that he begins to argue with his

patient,  in  order  to  maintain  his  influence  over  him;  and  this,  of  course,

renders all further analysis impossible.

I have told you that, in the first instance, dreams need only be used as sources

of  material  for  analysis.  At  the  beginning  of  an  analysis  it  is  not  only

unnecessary, but also unwise, to make a so-called complete interpretation of a

dream; for it is very difficult indeed to make a complete and really exhaustive

interpretation.  The  interpretations  of  dreams  that  one  sometimes  reads  in

psychoanalytic  publications  are  often  one-sided,  and  not  infrequently

contestable  formulations.  I  include  among  these  certain  one-sided  sexual

reductions  of  the  Viennese  school.  In  view  of  the  comprehensive  many-

sidedness of the dream material one must beware, above all, of one-sided

formulations.  The  many-sidedness  of  the  meaning  of  a  dream,  not  its

singleness of meaning, is of the utmost value, especially at the beginning of

the psychoanalytic treatment. Thus, for instance, a patient had the following

dream  not  long  after  her  treatment  had  begun:  "She  was  in  a  hotel  in  a

strange city. Suddenly a fire broke out; and her husband and her father, who

were with her, helped her in the work of saving others." The patient was

intelligent,  extraordinarily  sceptical,  and  absolutely  convinced  that  dream

analysis was nonsense. I had difficulty in inducing her to give dream analysis

even one trial. Indeed I saw at once that I could not inform my patient of the

real content of the dream under these circumstances because her resistances

were much too great. I selected the fire, the most conspicuous occurrence of

the dream, as the starting point for obtaining her free associations. The patient

told me that she had recently read in a newspaper that a certain hotel in Z.

had been burnt down; that she remembered the hotel because she had once

lived in it. At the hotel she had made the acquaintance of a man, and from

this  acquaintance  a  somewhat  questionable  love  affair  developed.  In

connection with this story the fact came out that she had already had quite a

number of similar adventures, all of which had a certain frivolous character.

This important bit of past history was brought out by the first free association

with a dream-part. It would have been impossible in this case to make clear to

the patient the very striking meaning of the dream. With her frivolous mental

attitude, of which her scepticism was only a special instance, she could havecalmly repelled any attempt of this kind. But after the frivolity of her mental

attitude was recognised and proved to her, by the material that she herself had

furnished, it was possible to analyse the dreams which followed much more

thoroughly.

It is, therefore, advisable in the beginning to make use of dreams for the

purpose of reaching the important subconscious material by means of the

patient's free associations in connection with them. This is the best and most

cautious  method,  especially  for  those  who  are  just  beginning  to  practise

analysis.  An  arbitrary  translation  of  the  dreams  is  absolutely  unadvisable.

That  would  be  a  superstitious  practice  based  on  the  acceptance  of  well-

established symbolic meanings. But there are no fixed symbolic meanings.

There are certain symbols that recur frequently, but we are not able to get

beyond general statements. For instance, it is quite incorrect to assume that

the snake, when it appears in dreams, has a merely phallic meaning; just as

incorrect as it is to deny that it may have a phallic meaning in some cases.

Every  symbol  has  more  than  one  meaning.  I  can  therefore  not  admit  the

correctness  of  exclusively  sexual  interpretations,  such  as  appear  in  some

psychoanalytic publications, for my experience has made me regard them as

one-sided and therefore insufficient. As an example of this I will tell you a

very simple dream of a young patient of mine. It was as follows: "I was going

up a flight of stairs with my mother and sister. When we reached the top I

was told that my sister was soon to have a child."

I shall now show you how, on the strength of the hitherto prevailing point of

view, this dream may be translated so that it receives a sexual meaning. We

know that the incest phantasy plays a prominent part in the life of a neurotic.

Hence  the  picture  "with  my  mother  and  sister"  might  be  regarded  as  an

allusion  in  this  direction.  The  "stairs"  have  a  sexual  meaning  that  is

supposedly  well  established;  they  represent  the  sexual  act  because  of  the

rhythmic climbing of steps. The child that my patient's sister is expecting is

nothing but the logical result of these premises. The dream, translated thus,

would be a clear fulfilment of infantile desires which as we know play an

important part in Freud's theory of dreams.

Now I have analysed this with the aid of the following process of reasoning:

If I say that the stairs are a symbol for the sexual act, whence do I obtain the

right to regard the mother, the sister, and the child as concrete; that is, as not

symbolic? If, on the strength of the claim that dream pictures are symbolic, I

give to certain of these pictures the value of symbols, what right have I toexempt certain other dream parts from this process? If, therefore, I attach

symbolic value to the ascent of the stairs, I must also attach a symbolic value

to the pictures that represent the mother, the sister, and the child. Therefore I

did not translate the dream, but really analysed it. The result was surprising. I

will give you the free associations with the separate dream-parts, word for

word, so that you can form your own opinions concerning the material. I

should state in advance that the young man had finished his studies at the

university a few months previously; that he found the choice of a profession

too  difficult  to  make;  and  that  he  thereupon  became  a  neurotic.  In

consequence of this he gave up his work. His neurosis took, among other

things, a decidedly homosexual form.

The patient's associations with his mother are as follows: "I have not seen her

for a long time, a very long time. I really ought to reproach myself for this. It

is wrong of me to neglect her so." "Mother," then, stands here for something

which is neglected in an inexcusable manner. I said to the patient: "What is

that?" And he replied, with considerable embarrassment, "My work."

With his sister he associated as follows: "It is years since I have seen her. I

long to see her again. Whenever I think of her I recall the time when I took

leave of her. I kissed her with real affection; and at that moment I understood

for the first time what love for a woman can mean." It is at once clear to the

patient that his sister represents "love for woman."

With the stairs he has this association: "Climbing upwards; getting to the top;

making a success of life; being grown up; being great." The child brings him

the ideas: "New born; a revival; a regeneration; to become a new man."

One only has to hear this material in order to understand at once that the

patient's dream is not so much the fulfilment of infantile desires, as it is the

expression of biological duties which he has hitherto neglected because of his

infantilism. Biological justice, which is inexorable, sometimes compels the

human being to atone in his dreams for the duties which he has neglected in

real life.

This dream is a typical example of the prospective and teleological function

of dreams in general, a function that has been especially emphasised by my

colleague  Dr.  Maeder.  If  we  adhered  to  the  one-sidedness  of  sexual

interpretation, the real meaning of the dream would escape us. Sexuality in

dreams  is,  in  the  first  instance,  a  means  of  expression,  and  by  no  means

always  the  meaning  and  the  object  of  the  dream.  The  unfolding  of  the

prospective or teleological meaning of dreams is of particular importance assoon as analysis is so far advanced that the eyes of the patient are more easily

turned upon the future, than upon his inner life and upon the past.

In connection with the application of symbolism, we can also learn from the

example  furnished  us  by  this  dream,  that  there  can  be  no  fixed  and

unalterable dream symbols, but at best a frequent repetition of fairly general

meanings. So far as the so-called sexual meaning of dreams, in particular, is

concerned, my experience has led me to lay down the following practical

rules:

If dream analysis at the beginning of the treatment shows that the dream has

an undoubted sexual meaning, this meaning is to be taken realistically; that

is, it is proved thereby that the sexual problem itself must be subjected to a

careful revision. If, for instance, an incest phantasy is clearly shown to be a

latent content of the dream, one must subject the patient's infantile relations

towards  his  parents  and  his  brothers  and  sisters,  as  well  as  his  relations

towards other persons who are fitted to play the part of his father or mother in

his mind, to a careful examination on this basis. But if a dream that comes in

a later stage of the analysis has, let us say, an incest phantasy as its essential

content, a phantasy that we have reason to consider disposed of, concrete

value must not be attached to it under all circumstances; it must be regarded

as symbolic. In this case symbolic value, not concrete value, must be attached

to the sexual phantasy. If we did not go beyond the concrete value in this

case, we should keep reducing the patient to sexuality, and this would arrest

the progress of the development of his personality. The patient's salvation is

not to be found by thrusting him back again into primitive sexuality; this

would leave him on a low plane of civilisation whence he could never obtain

freedom  and  complete  restoration  to  health.  Retrogression  to  a  state  of

barbarism is no advantage at all for a civilised human being.

The above-mentioned formula, according to which the sexuality of a dream is

a symbolic or analogous expression, naturally also holds good in the case of

dreams occurring in the beginning of an analysis. But the practical reasons

that have induced us not to take into consideration the symbolic value of this

sexual phantasy, owe their existence to the fact that a genuine realistic value

must be given to the abnormal sexual phantasies of a neurotic, in so far as the

latter  suffers  himself  to  be  influenced  in  his  actions  by  these  phantasies.

Experience  teaches  us  that  these  phantasies  not  only  hinder  him  from

adapting himself suitably to his situation, but that they also lead him to all

manner of really sexual acts, and occasionally even to incest. Under thesecircumstances, it would be of little use to consider the symbolic content of

the dream only; the concrete content must first be disposed of.

These arguments are based upon a different conception of the dream from

that put forward by Freud; for, indeed, my experience has forced me to a

different  conception.  According  to  Freud,  the  dream  is  in  its  essence  a

symbolic veil for repressed desires which are in conflict with the ideals of the

personality. I am obliged to regard the dream structure from a different point

of view. The dream for me is, in the first instance, the subliminal picture of

the psychological condition of the individual in his waking state. It presents

a résumé of the subliminal association material which is brought together by

the momentary psychological situation. The volitional meaning of the dream

which Freud calls the repressed desire, is, for me, essentially a means of

expression.  The  activity  of  the  consciousness,  speaking  biologically,

represents the psychological effort which the individual makes in adapting

himself to the conditions of life. His consciousness endeavours to adjust itself

to the necessities of the moment, or, to put it differently: there are tasks ahead

of the individual, which he must overcome. In many cases the solution is

unknown;  and  for  this  reason  the  consciousness  always  tries  to  find  the

solution by the way of analogous experience. We always try to grasp what is

unknown and in the future, according to our mental understanding of what

has gone before. Now we have no reasons for assuming that the unconscious

follows  other  laws  than  those  which  apply  to  conscious  thought.  The

unconscious, like the conscious, gathers itself about the biological problems

and endeavours to find solutions for these by analogy with what has gone

before, just as much as the conscious does. Whenever we wish to assimilate

something that is unknown, we arrive at it by a process of comparison. A

simple  example  of  this  is  the  well-known  fact  that,  when  America  was

discovered by the Spaniards, the Indians took the horses of the conquerors,

which were strange to them, for large pigs, because pigs were familiar to their

experience.  This  is  the  mental  process  which  we  always  employ  in

recognising unknown things; and this is the essential reason for the existence

of symbolism. It is a process of comprehension by means of analogy. The

apparently repressed desires, contained in the dream, are volitional tendencies

which serve as language-material for subconscious expression. So far as this

particular point is concerned, I am in full accord with the views of Adler,

another  member  of  Freud's  school.  With  reference  to  the  fact  that

subconscious materials of expression are volitional elements or tendencies, Imay say that this is dependent upon the archaic nature of dream thinking, a

problem with which I have already dealt in previous researches.

Owing to our different conception of the structure of the dream, the further

course of analysis also gains a different complexion from that which it had

until now. The symbolic valuation given to sexual phantasies in the later

stages  of  analysis  necessarily  leads  less  to  the  reduction  of  the  patient's

personality  into  primitive  tendencies,  than  to  the  extension  and  further

development  of  his  mental  attitude;  that  is,  it  tends  to  make  his  thinking

richer and deeper, thus giving him what has always been one of the most

powerful  weapons  that  a  human  being  can  have  in  his  struggle  to  adapt

himself to life. By following this new course logically, I have come to the

conclusion  that  these  religious  and  philosophical  motive  forces—the  so-

called  metaphysical  needs  of  the  human  being—must  receive  positive

consideration at the hands of the analyst. Though he must not destroy the

motive forces that underlie them, by reducing them to their primitive, sexual

roots, he must make them serve biological ends as psychologically valuable

factors. Thus these instincts assume once more those functions that have been

theirs from time immemorial.

Just as primitive man was able, with the aid of religious and philosophical

symbol, to free himself from his original state, so, too, the neurotic can shake

off his illness in a similar way. It is hardly necessary for me to say, that I do

not mean by this, that the belief in a religious or philosophical dogma should

be  thrust  upon  the  patient;  I  mean  simply  that  he  has  to  reassume  that

psychological attitude which, in an earlier civilisation, was characterised by

the living belief in a religious or philosophical dogma. But the religious-

philosophical  attitude  does  not  necessarily  correspond  to  the  belief  in  a

dogma. A dogma is a transitory intellectual formulation; it is the result of the

religious-philosophical  attitude,  and  is  dependent  upon  time  and

circumstances. This attitude is itself an achievement of civilization; it is a

function that is exceedingly valuable from a biological point of view, for it

gives rise to the incentives that force human beings to do creative work for

the benefit of a future age, and, if necessary, to sacrifice themselves for the

welfare of the species.

Thus the human being attains the same sense of unity and totality, the same

confidence, the same capacity for self-sacrifice in his conscious existence that

belongs  unconsciously  and  instinctively  to  wild  animals.  Every  reduction,

every digression from the course that has been laid down for the developmentof civilisation does nothing more than turn the human being into a crippled

animal;  it  never  makes  a  so-called  natural  man  of  him.  My  numerous

successes and failures in the course of my analytic practice have convinced

me of the invariable correctness of this psychological orientation. We do not

help  the  neurotic  patient  by  freeing  him  from  the  demand  made  by

civilisation; we can only help him by inducing him to take an active part in

the  strenuous  task  of  carrying  on  the  development  of  civilisation.  The

suffering which he undergoes in performing this duty takes the place of his

neurosis. But, whereas the neurosis and the complaints that accompany it are

never followed by the delicious feeling of good work well done, of duty

fearlessly performed, the suffering that comes from useful work, and from

victory  over  real  difficulties,  brings  with  it  those  moments  of  peace  and

satisfaction  which  give  the  human  being  the  priceless  feeling  that  he  has

really lived his life.                              CHAPTER VIII

                            ON PSYCHOANALYSIS

After many years' experience I now know that it is extremely difficult to

discuss psychoanalysis at public meetings and at congresses. There are so

many  misconceptions  of  the  matter,  so  many  prejudices  against  certain

psychoanalytic  views,  that  it  becomes  an  almost  impossible  task  to  reach

mutual  understanding  in  public  discussion.  I  have  always  found  a  quiet

conversation  on  the  subject  much  more  useful  and  fruitful  than  heated

discussions coram publico. However, having been honoured by an invitation

from  the  Committee  of  this  Congress  as  a  representative  of  the

psychoanalytic  movement,  I  will  do  my  best  to  discuss  some  of  the

fundamental theoretical conceptions of psychoanalysis. I must limit myself to

this part of the subject because I am quite unable to place before my audience

all that psychoanalysis means and strives for, all its various applications, its

psychology, its theoretical tendencies, its importance for the realm of the so-

called  "Geisteswissenschaften," e.g.  Mythology,  Comparative  Religion,

Philosophy,  &c.  But  if  I  am  to  discuss  certain  theoretical  problems

fundamental to psychoanalysis, I must presuppose my audience to be well

acquainted  with  the  development  and  main  results  of  psychoanalytic

researches. Unfortunately, it often happens that people believe themselves

entitled to judge psychoanalysis who have not even read the literature. It is

my firm conviction that no one is competent to form a judgment concerning

the subject until he has studied the fundamental works on psychoanalysis.

In spite of the fact that Freud's theory of neurosis has been worked out in

great  detail,  it  cannot  be  said  to  be,  on  the  whole,  very  clear  or  easily

accessible.  This  justifies  my  giving  you  a  very  short  abstract  of  his

fundamental views concerning the theory of neurosis.

You are aware that the original theory that hysteria and the related neuroses

take their origin in a trauma or shock of sexual character in early childhood,

was given up about fifteen years ago. It soon became obvious that the sexual

trauma could not be the real cause of a neurosis, since trauma is found so

universally; there is scarcely a human being who has not had some sexual

shock in early youth, and yet comparatively few have incurred a neurosis in

later life. Freud himself soon became aware that several of the patients who

related an early traumatic event, had only invented the story of a so-calledtrauma;  it  had  never  taken  place  in  reality,  and  was  a  mere  creation  of

phantasy. Moreover, on further investigation it became quite obvious that

even a trauma which had actually occurred was not always responsible for

the whole of the neurosis, although it does sometimes look as if the structure

of the neurosis depended entirely upon the trauma. If a neurosis were the

inevitable consequence of a trauma it would be quite incomprehensible why

neurotics are not incomparably more numerous.

This  apparently  heightened  shock-effect  was  clearly  based  upon

the exaggerated and morbid phantasy of the patient. Freud also saw that this

same phantasy manifested itself in relatively early bad habits, which he called

infantile perversities. His new conception of the ætiology of a neurosis was

based upon this further understanding and traced the neurosis back to some

sexual activity in early infancy; this conception led on to his recent view that

the neurotic is "fixed" to a certain period of his early infancy, because he still

seems to preserve some trace of it, direct or indirect, in his mental attitude.

Freud  also  makes  the  attempt  to  classify  or  to  differentiate  the  neuroses,

including  dementia  præcox,  according  to  the  stage  of  the  infantile

development in which the fixation took place.

From  the  standpoint  of  this  theory,  the  neurotic  appears  to  be  entirely

dependent upon his infantile past, and all his troubles in later life, his moral

conflicts, and deficiencies, seem to be derived from the powerful influence of

that period. The therapy and its main preoccupation are in full accord with

this view, and are chiefly concerned with the unravelling of this infantile

fixation,  which  is  understood  as  an  unconscious  attachment  of  the  sexual

libido to certain infantile phantasies and habits.

This is, so far as I can see, the essence of Freud's theory. But this conception

neglects the following important question: What is the cause of this fixation

of the libido to the old infantile phantasies and habits? We have to remember

that almost all persons have at some time had infantile phantasies and habits

exactly corresponding to those of a neurotic, but they do not become fixed to

them; consequently, they do not become neurotic later on. The ætiological

secret of the neurosis, therefore, does not consist in the mere existence of

infantile phantasies, but lies in the so-called fixation. The manifold statements

of the existence of infantile sexual phantasies in neurotic cases are worthless,

in  so  far  as  they  attribute  an  ætiological  value  to  them,  for  the  same

phantasies can be found in normal individuals as well, a fact which I have

often proved. It is only the fixation which seems to be characteristic. It isimportant to demand the nature of the proofs of the real existence of this

infantile  fixation.  Freud,  an  absolutely  sincere  and  thorough  empiricist,

would never have evolved this hypothesis had he not had sufficient grounds

for  it.  The  grounds  are  found  in  the  results  of  the  psychoanalytic

investigations of the unconscious. Psychoanalysis discloses the unconscious

existence of manifold phantasies, which have their end root in the infantile

past  and  turn  around  the  so-called  "Kern-complex,"  or  nucleus-complex,

which may be designated in male individuals as the Œdipus-complex and in

females  as  the  Electra-complex.  These  terms  convey  their  own  meaning

exactly. The whole tragic fate of Œdipus and Electra took place within the

narrow confines of the family, just as the child's fate lies wholly within the

family boundaries. Hence the Œdipus conflict is very characteristic of an

infantile  conflict,  so  also  is  the  Electra  conflict.  The  existence  of  these

conflicts in infancy is largely proven by means of psychoanalytic experience.

It is in the realm of this complex that the fixation is supposed to have taken

place.  Through  the  highly  potent  and  effective  existence  of  the  nucleus-

complex in the unconscious of neurotics, Freud was led to the hypothesis,

that the neurotic has a peculiar fixation or attachment to it. Not the mere

existence of this complex—for everybody has it in the unconscious—but the

very strong attachment to it is what is typical of the neurotic. He is far more

influenced  by  this  complex  than  the  normal  person;  many  examples  in

confirmation  of  this  statement  will  be  found  in  every  one  of  the  recent

psychoanalytic histories of neurotic cases.

We  must  admit  that  this  conception  is  a  very  plausible  one,  because  the

hypothesis of fixation is based upon the well-known fact, that certain periods

of  human  life,  and  particularly  infancy,  do  sometimes  leave  determining

traces for ever. The only question is whether this principle is a sufficient

explanation  or  not.  If  we  examine  persons  who  have  been  neurotic  from

infancy  it  seems  to  be  confirmed,  for  we  see  the  nucleus-complex  as  a

permanent and powerful activity throughout the whole life. But if we take

cases which never show any considerable traces of neurosis except at the

particular time when they break down, and there are many such, this principle

becomes doubtful. If there is such a thing as fixation, it is not permissible to

base upon it a new hypothesis, claiming that at times during certain epochs of

life the fixation becomes loosened and ineffective, while at others it suddenly

becomes  strengthened  and  effective.  In  such  cases  we  find  the  nucleus-

complex as active and as potent as in those which apparently support thetheory of fixation. Here a critical attitude is peculiarly justifiable, when we

consider the often-repeated observation that the moment of the outbreak of

the disease is by no means indifferent; as a rule it is most critical. It usually

occurs at the moment when a new psychological adjustment, that is, a new

adaptation, is demanded. Such moments facilitate the outbreak of a neurosis,

as every experienced neurologist knows. This fact seems to me extremely

significant.  If  the  fixation  were  indeed  real  we  should  expect  to  find  its

influence  constant, i.e.  a  neurosis  continuous  throughout  life.  This  is

obviously not the case. The psychological determination of a neurosis is only

partially due to an early infantile predisposition; it is due to a certain actual

cause as well. And if we carefully examine the kind of infantile phantasies

and events to which the neurotic individual is attached, we shall be obliged to

agree that there is nothing in them specific for neurosis. Normal individuals

have pretty much the same kind of internal and external experiences, and are

attached  to  them  to  an  even  astonishing  degree,  without  developing  a

neurosis. You will find primitive people, especially, very much bound to their

infantility. It now begins to look as if this so-called fixation were a normal

phenomenon, and that the importance of infancy for the later mental attitude

is natural and prevails everywhere. The fact that the neurotic seems to be

markedly influenced by his infantile conflicts, shows that it is less a matter of

fixation than of a peculiar use which he makes of his infantile past. It looks as

if he exaggerated its importance, and attributed a very great artificial value to

it (Adler, a pupil of Freud's, expresses a very similar view). It would be

unjust to say that Freud confined himself to the hypothesis of fixation; he also

was  conscious  of  the  impression  I  have  just  discussed.  He  called  this

phenomenon  of  reactivation  or  secondary  exaggeration  of  infantile

reminiscences  "regression."  But  in  Freud's  conception  it  appears  as  if  the

incestuous  desires  of  the  Œdipus-complex  were  the  real  cause  of  the

regression to infantile phantasies. If this were the case, we should have to

postulate an unexpected intensity of the primary incestuous tendencies. This

view led Freud to his recent comparison between the so-called psychological

"incest-barrier"  in  children  and  the  "incest-taboo"  in  primitive  man.  He

supposes  that  a  real  incestuous  desire  has  led  the  primitive  man  to  the

invention of a protective law; while to me it looks as if the incest-taboo is one

among numerous taboos of all sorts, and due to the typical superstitious fear

of primitive man, a fear existing independently of incest and its interdiction. I

am  able  to  attribute  as  little  particular  strength  to  incestuous  desires  inchildhood  as  in  primitive  humanity.  I  do  not  even  seek  the  reason  for

regression in primary incestuous or any other sexual desires. I must state that

a purely sexual ætiology of neurosis seems to me much too narrow. I base

this  criticism  upon  no  prejudice  against  sexuality,  but  upon  an  intimate

acquaintance with the whole problem.

Therefore I suggest that the psychoanalytic theory should be liberated from

the  purely  sexual  standpoint.  In  place  of  it  I  should  like  to  introduce

an energic view-point into the psychology of neurosis.

All psychological phenomena can be considered as manifestations of energy,

in the same way as all physical phenomena are already understood as energic

manifestations since Robert Mayer discovered the law of the conservation of

energy. This energy is subjectively and psychologically conceived as desire. I

call it libido, using the word in the original meaning of this term, which is by

no means only sexual. Sallustius applies the term exactly in the way we do

here:  "Magis  in  armis  et  militaribus  equis,  quam  in  scortis  et  conviviis

libidinem habebant."

From  a  broader  standpoint  libido  can  be  understood  as  vital  energy  in

general, or as Bergson's élan vital. The first manifestation of this energy in

the suckling is the instinct of nutrition. From this stage the libido slowly

develops  through  manifold  varieties  of  the  act  of  sucking  into  the  sexual

function. Hence I do not consider the act of sucking as a sexual act. The

pleasure in sucking can certainly not be considered as sexual pleasure, but as

pleasure in nutrition, for it is nowhere proved that pleasure is sexual in itself.

This process of development continues into adult life and is connected with a

constantly increased adaptation to the external world. Whenever the libido, in

the process of adaptation, meets an obstacle, an accumulation takes place

which normally gives rise to an increased effort to overcome the obstacle.

But if the obstacle seems to be insurmountable, and the individual renounces

the overcoming of it, the stored-up libido makes a regression. In place of

being employed in the increased effort, the libido now gives up the present

task and returns to a former and more primitive way of adaptation. We meet

with the best examples of such regressions very frequently in hysterical cases

where a disappointment in love or marriage gives rise to the neurosis. There

we find the well-known disturbances of nutrition, resistance against eating,

dyspeptic  symptoms  of  all  sorts,  etc.  In  these  cases  the  regressive  libido,

turning away from its application to the work of adaptation, holds sway over

the function of nutrition and provokes considerable disturbance. Such casesare obvious examples of regression. Similar effects of regression are to be

found in cases where there are no troubles in the function of nutrition, and

here we readily find a regressive revival of reminiscences of a time long past.

We find a revival of the images of the parents, of the Œdipus-complex. Here

things and events of infancy—never before important—suddenly become so.

They are regressively reanimated. Take away the obstacle in the path of life

and  this  whole  system  of  infantile  phantasies  at  once  breaks  down  and

becomes again as inactive and as ineffective as before. But do not let us

forget  that,  to  a  certain  extent,  it  is  at  work  influencing  us  always  and

everywhere.  I  cannot  forbear  to  mention  that  this  view  comes  very  near

Janet's hypothesis of the substitution of the "parties supérieures" of a function

by  its  "parties  inférieures."  I  would  also  remind  you  of  Claparède's

conception of neurotic symptoms as emotional reflexes of a primitive nature.

Therefore I no longer find the cause of a neurosis in the past, but in the

present.  I  ask,  what  is  the  necessary  task  which  the  patient  will  not

accomplish? The whole list of his infantile phantasies does not give me any

sufficient ætiological explanation, because I know that these phantasies are

only puffed up by the regressive libido, which has not found its natural outlet

into a new form of adjustment to the demands of life.

You may ask why the neurotic has a special inclination not to accomplish his

necessary tasks. Here let me point out that no living being adjusts itself easily

and smoothly to new conditions. The principle of the minimum of effort is

valid everywhere.

A sensitive and somewhat inharmonious character, as a neurotic always is,

will meet special difficulties and perhaps more unusual tasks in life than a

normal individual, who as a rule has only to follow the well-established line

of an ordinary life. For the neurotic there is no established way, for his aims

and tasks are apt to be of a highly individual character. He tries to follow the

more or less uncontrolled and half-conscious way of normal people, not fully

realizing his own critical and very different nature, which imposes upon him

more effort than the normal person is required to exert. There are neurotics

who  have  shown  their  increased  sensitiveness  and  their  resistance  against

adaptation  in  the  very  first  weeks  of  life,  in  their  difficulty  in  taking  the

mother's  breast,  and  in  their  exaggerated  nervous  reactions,  &c.  For  this

portion of a neurotic predisposition it will always be impossible to find a

psychological  ætiology,  for  it  is  anterior  to  all  psychology.  But  this

predisposition—you may call it "congenital sensitiveness" or by what nameyou like—is the cause of the first resistances against adaptation. In such case,

the way of adaptation being blocked, the biological energy we call libido

does not find its appropriate outlet or activity and therefore replaces an up-to-

date and suitable form of adaptation by an abnormal or primitive one.

In neurosis we speak of an infantile attitude or the predominance of infantile

phantasies and desires. In so far as infantile impressions and desires are of

obvious importance in normal people they are equally influential in neurosis,

but they have here no ætiological significance, they are reactions merely,

being chiefly secondary and regressive phenomena. It is perfectly true, as

Freud  states,  that  infantile  phantasies  determine  the  form  and  further

development  of  neurosis,  but  this  is  not  ætiology.  Even  when  we  find

perverted  sexual  phantasies  of  which  we  can  prove  the  existence  in

childhood, we cannot consider them of ætiological significance. A neurosis is

not really originated by infantile sexual phantasies and the same must be said

of  the  sexualism  of  neurotic  phantasy  in  general.  It  is  not  a  primary

phenomenon  based  upon  a  perverted  sexual  disposition,  but  merely

secondary and a consequence of a failure to apply the stored-up libido in a

suitable way. I realize that this is a very old view, but this does not prevent its

being  true.  The  fact  that  the  patient  himself  very  often  believes  that  this

infantile phantasy is the real cause of the neurosis, does not prove that he is

right in his belief, or that a theory following the same belief is right either. It

may look as if it were so, and I must confess that indeed very many cases do

have that appearance. At all events, it is perfectly easy to understand how

Freud came to this view. Every one having any psychoanalytic experience

will agree with me here.

To  sum  up:  I  cannot  see  the  real  ætiology  of  a  neurosis  in  the  various

manifestations  of  infantile  sexual  development  and  their  corresponding

phantasies. The fact that they are exaggerated and put into the foreground in

neurosis  is  a  consequence  of  the  stored-up  energy  or  libido.  The

psychological trouble in neurosis, and neurosis itself, can be considered as an

act of adaptation that has failed. This formulation might reconcile certain

views of Janet's with Freud's view, that a neurosis is—under a certain aspect

—an attempt at self-cure; a view which can be and has been applied to many

diseases.

Here the question arises whether it is still advisable to bring to light all the

patient's phantasies by analysis, if we now consider them as of no ætiological

significance.  Psychoanalysis  hitherto  has  proceeded  to  the  unravelling  ofthese phantasies because they were considered to be ætiologically significant.

My  altered  view  concerning  the  theory  of  neurosis  does  not  change  the

procedure of psychoanalysis. The technique remains the same. We no longer

imagine we are unearthing the end-root of the disease, but we have to pull up

the  sexual  phantasies  because  the  energy  which  the  patient  needs  for  his

health,  that  is,  for  his  adaptation,  is  attached  to  them.  By  means  of

psychoanalysis  the  connexion  between  the  conscious  and  the  libido  in

the unconscious is re-established. Thus you restore this unconscious libido to

the command of conscious intention. Only in this way can the formerly split-

off energy become again applicable to the accomplishment of the necessary

tasks  of  life.  Considered  from  this  standpoint,  psychoanalysis  no  longer

appears  to  be  a  mere  reduction  of  the  individual  to  his  primitive  sexual

wishes, but it becomes clear that, if rightly understood, it is a highly moral

task of immense educational value.                                CHAPTER IX

        ON SOME CRUCIAL POINTS IN PSYCHOANALYSIS

          Correspondence between Dr. Jung and Dr. Loÿ appearing in

  "Psychotherapeutische Zeitfragen." Published by Dr. Loÿ, Sanatorium L'abri,

                        Territet-Montreux, Switzerland, 1914.                                              I

From Dr. Loÿ.

12th January, 1913.

What you said at our last conversation was extraordinarily stimulating. I was

expecting  you  to  throw  light  upon  the  interpretation  of  my  own  and  my

patients' dreams from the standpoint of Freud's "Interpretation of Dreams."

Instead, you put before me an entirely new conception: the dream as a means

of  re-establishing  the  moral  equipoise,  fashioned  in  the  realm  below  the

threshold  of  consciousness.  That  indeed  is  a  fruitful  conception.  But  still

more fruitful appears to me your other suggestion. You regard the problems

of psychoanalysis as much deeper than I had ever thought: it is no longer

merely a question of getting rid of troublesome pathological symptoms; the

analysed person gets to understand not his anxiety-experiences alone, but his

whole self most completely, and by means of this understanding he can build

up and fashion his whole life anew. But he himself must be the builder, the

Analyst only furnishes him with the necessary tools.

To begin with, I would ask you to consider what justification there is for the

original procedure of Breuer and Freud, now entirely given up both by Freud

himself and by you, but practised by Frank, for instance, as his only method:

I mean "the abreaction of the inhibited effects under light hypnosis." Why

have  you  given  up  the  cathartic  method?  More  particularly,  has  light

hypnosis in psychocatharsis a different value from suggestion during sleep,

long  customary  in  treatment  by  suggestion?  that  is,  has  it  only  the  value

which the suggestionist contributes, or does it claim to possess only the value

which the patient's belief bestows upon it? Or, again, is suggestion in the

waking-state  equivalent  to  suggestion  in  hypnoidal  states?  This  Bernheim

now  asserts  to  be  the  case,  after  having  used  suggestion  for  many  years

exclusively in hypnosis. You will tell me we must talk of psychoanalysis, not

of suggestion. But I really mean this: is not the suggestion, by means of

which the psychocatharsis in the hypnoidal state produces therapeutic effects,

(modified  naturally,  by  the  patients'  age,  etc.)  the  main  factor  in  the

therapeutic success of the psychocatharsis? Frank, in his "Affektstörungen,"

says: "these partial adjustments of effect, suggestibility and suggestion, are

almost altogether omitted in the psychocathartic treatment in light sleep, in so

far as the content of the reproduced presentations is concerned." Is that reallytrue? Frank himself adds: "How can meditation upon the dreams of youth in

itself lead to the discharge of the stored-up anxiety, whether in hypnoidal

states  or  under  any  other  conditions?  Must  one  not  suppose,  with  much

greater probability, that the anxiety-states would become more pronounced

through  such  concentration  upon  them?"  [I  have  noticed  that  myself,  and

much more than I at all liked.] One does indeed say to the patient: "First we

must stir up, then afterwards comes peace." And it does come. But does it not

come in  spite  of  the  stirring-up  process,  because  gradually,  by  means  of

frequent talks under light hypnosis, the patient gets such confidence in the

doctor that he becomes susceptible to direct suggestion, and that produces at

first improvement and finally, cure? I go still further: in an analysis in the

waking-state, is not the patient's belief that the method employed will cure

him, coupled with his ever-growing trust in the doctor, a main cause of his

cure?  And  I  ask  even  further:  in  every  systematically  carried-out

therapeutic treatment, is not faith in it, trust in the doctor, a main factor in its

success? I will not indeed say the only factor, for one cannot deny that the

physical, dietetic and chemical procedures, when properly selected, have a

real  effect  in  securing  a  cure,  over  and  above  the  obvious  effect  of  their

indirect suggestion.                                            II

From Dr. Jung.

28th January, 1913.

With regard to your question as to the applicability of the cathartic method,

the following is my standpoint: every method is good if it serves its purpose,

including  every  method  of  suggestion,  even  Christian  Science,  Mental

Healing, etc. "A truth is a truth, when it works." It is quite another question

whether a scientific physician can answer for it to his conscience should he

sell little bottles of Lourdes-water because that suggestion is at times very

useful. Even the so-called highly scientific suggestion-therapy employs the

wares of the medicine-man and the exorcising Schaman. And please, why

should it not? The public is not even now much more advanced and continues

to expect miracles from the doctor. And truly those doctors should be deemed

clever—worldly-wise in every respect—who understand the art of investing

themselves with the halo of the medicine-man. Not only have they the biggest

practices—they have also the best results. This is simply because countless

physical maladies (leaving out of count the neuroses) are complicated and

burdened  with  psychic  elements  to  an  extent  scarcely  yet  suspected.  The

medical exorcist's whole behaviour betrays his full valuation of the psychic

element when he gives the patient the opportunity of fixing his faith firmly

upon the doctor's mysterious personality. Thus does he win the sick man's

mind, which henceforth helps him indeed to restore his body also to health.

The cure works best when the doctor really believes in his own formulæ,

otherwise  he  may  be  overcome  by  scientific  doubt  and  so  lose  the

correct,  convincing  tone.  I,  too,  for  a  time  practised  hypnotic  suggestion

enthusiastically. But there befell me three dubious incidents which I want you

to note:—

1. Once there came to me to be hypnotised for various neurotic troubles a

withered  peasant-woman  of  some  fifty  years  old.  She  was  not  easy  to

hypnotise, was very restless, kept opening her eyes—but at last I did succeed.

When I waked her after about half an hour she seized my hand and with

many words testified to her overflowing gratitude. I said: "But you are by no

means cured yet, so keep your thanks till the end of the treatment." She: "I

am not thanking you for that, but—(blushing and whispering)—because you

have  been  so decent."  So  she  said,  looked  at  me  with  a  sort  of  tenderadmiration and departed. I gazed long at the spot where she had stood—and

asked myself, confounded, "So decent?"—good heavens! surely she hadn't

imagined, somehow or other.... This glimpse made me suspect for the first

time  that  possibly  the  loose-minded  person,  by  means  of  that  notorious

feminine (I should at that time have said "animal") directness of instinct,

understood  more  about  the  essence  of  hypnotism  than  I  with  all  my

knowledge  of  the  scientific  profundity  of  the  text-books.  Therein  lay  my

harmlessness.

2. Next came a pretty, coquettish, seventeen-year-old girl with a harassed,

suspicious  mother.  The  young  daughter  had  suffered  since  early  girlhood

from enuresis nocturna, which, among other difficulties, hindered her from

going to a boarding-school abroad.

At once I thought of the old woman and her wisdom. I tried to hypnotise the

girl; she laughed affectedly and prevented hypnosis for twenty minutes. Of

course I kept quiet and thought: I know why you laugh; you have already

fallen in love with me, but I will give you proof of my decency in gratitude

for  your  wasting  my  time  with  your  challenging  laughter.  I  succeeded  in

hypnotising  her.  Success  followed  at  once.  The  enuresis  stopped,  and  I

therefore informed the young lady later that, instead of Wednesday, I would

not see her again for hypnosis till the following Saturday. On Saturday she

arrived with a cross countenance, presaging failure. The enuresis had come

back again. I remembered my wise old woman, and asked: "When did the

enuresis  return?"  She  (unsuspecting),  "Wednesday  night."  I  thought  to

myself, There it is again, she wants to show me that I simply must see her on

Wednesdays too; not to see me for a whole long week is too much for a

tender,  loving  heart.  But  I  was  quite  resolved  to  give  no  help  to  such

annoying romancing, so I said, "To continue the hypnosis would be quite

wrong under these circumstances. We must drop it for quite three weeks, to

give the enuresis a chance to stop. Then come again for treatment." In my

malicious heart I knew I should then be on my holiday and so the course of

hypnotic  treatment  would  come  to  an  end.  After  the  holidays  my locum

tenens told me the young lady had been there with the news that the enuresis

had vanished, but her disappointment at not seeing me was very keen. The

old woman was right, thought I.

3. The third case gave my joy in suggestion its death-blow. This was the

manner  of  it.  She  was  a  lady  of  sixty-five  who  came  stumbling  into  the

consulting-room with a crutch. She had suffered from pain in the knee-jointfor seventeen years, and this at times kept her in bed for many weeks. No

doctor had been able to cure her, and she had tried every possible remedy of

present-day medicine. After I had suffered the stream of her narrative to flow

over me for some ten minutes, I said, "I will try to hypnotise you, perhaps

that will do you good." She, "Oh yes, please do!" leaned her head on one side

and  fell  asleep  before  ever  I  said  or  did  anything.  She  passed  into

somnambulism  and  showed  every  form  of  hypnosis  you  could  possibly

desire. After half an hour I had the greatest difficulty in waking her; when at

last she was awake she jumped up: "I am well, I am all right, you have cured

me." I tried to make timid objections, but her praises drowned me. She could

really walk. Then I blushed and said, embarrassed, to my colleagues: "Look!

behold the wondrously successful hypnotic therapy." That day saw the death

of my connection with treatment by suggestion; the therapeutic praise won by

this case shamed and humiliated me. When, a year later, at the beginning of

my hypnotic course, the good old lady returned, this time with the pain in her

back, I was already sunk in hopeless cynicism; I saw written on her forehead

that  she  had  just  read  the  notice  of  the  re-opening  of  my  clinic  in  the

newspaper, that vexatious romanticism had provided her with a convenient

pain in the back so that she might have a pretext for seeing me, and again let

herself be cured in the same theatrical fashion. This proved true in every

particular.

As  you  will  understand,  a  man  possessed  of  scientific  conscience  cannot

endure such cases without embarrassment. There ripened in me the resolve to

renounce suggestion altogether rather than to allow myself passively to be

transformed into a miracle-worker. I wanted to understand what really went

on in the souls of people. It suddenly seemed to me incredibly childish to

think of dispelling an illness with charms, and that this should be the only

result  of  our  scientific  endeavours  for  a  psychotherapy.  Thus  for  me  the

discovery of Breuer and Freud was a veritable deliverance. I took up their

method with unalloyed enthusiasm and soon recognised how right Freud was,

when at a very early date, indeed so far back as the Studien ueber Hysterie,

he began to direct a searchlight upon the accompanying circumstances of the

so-called trauma. I too soon discovered that certainly some traumata with an

obvious  etiological  tinge  are  opportunely  present.  But  the  greater  number

appeared highly improbable. So many of them seemed so insignificant, even

so  normal,  that  at  most  one  could  regard  them  as  just  providing  the

opportunity  for  the  neurosis  to  appear.  But  what  especially  spurred  mycriticism  was  the  fact  that  so  many  traumata  were  simply  inventions  of

phantasy  which  had  never  really  existed.  This  perception  was  enough  to

make me sceptical about the whole trauma-theory. (But I have dealt with

these  matters  in  detail  in  my  lectures  on  the  theory  of  psychoanalysis).  I

could no longer suppose that the hundred and one cathartic experiences of a

phantastically puffed-up or entirely invented trauma were anything but the

effect  of  suggestion.  It  is  well  enough  if  it  helps.  If  one  only  had  not  a

scientific conscience and that impulsion towards the truth! I found in many

cases, especially when dealing with more mentally gifted patients, that I must

recognise the therapeutic limitations of this method. It is, of course, a definite

plan, and convenient for the doctor, since it makes no particular demands

upon his intellect for new adaptations. The theory and practice are both of the

pleasantest simplicity: "The neurosis is caused by a trauma. The trauma is

abreacted." When the abreaction takes place under hypnotism, or with other

magical accessories (dark room, peculiar lighting, and the rest), I remember

once more the wise old woman, who opened my eyes not merely to the magic

influence  of  the  mesmeric  gestures,  but  also  to  the  essential  character  of

hypnotism  itself.  But  what  alienated  me  once  for  all  from  this  relatively

efficacious  indirect  method  of  suggestion,  based  as  it  is  upon  an  equally

efficacious false theory, was the perception I obtained at the same time that,

behind the confused deceptive intricacies of neurotic phantasies, there stands

a conflict, which may be best described as a moral one. With this there began

for me a new era of understanding. Research and therapy now coincided in

the attempt to discover the causes and the rational solution of this conflict.

That  is  what  psychoanalysis  meant  to  me.  Whilst  I  had  been  getting  this

insight, Freud had built up his sexual theory of the neurosis, and therewith

had brought forward an enormous number of questions for discussion, all of

which I thought deserved the profoundest consideration. Thus I have had the

good fortune of co-operating with Freud for a long time, and working with

him  in  the  investigation  of  the  problem  of  sexuality  in  neurosis.  You,

perhaps,  know  from  some  of  my  earlier  work  that  I  was  always  dubious

somewhat concerning the significance of sexuality. This has now become the

exact point where I am no longer altogether of Freud's opinion.

I  have  preferred  to  answer  your  questions  in  rather  non-sequent  fashion.

Whatever is still unanswered, let me now repeat: light hypnosis and complete

hypnosis are but varying grades of intensity of unconscious attraction towards

the hypnotist. Who can here venture to draw sharp distinctions? To a criticalintelligence  it  is  unthinkable  that  suggestibility  and  suggestion  can  be

excluded  in  the  cathartic  method.  They  are  present  everywhere  and  are

universal human attributes, even with Dubois and the psychoanalysts who

think  they  work  on  purely  rational  lines. No  technique,  no  self-deception

avails  here—the  doctor  works,  nolens  volens—and  perhaps  primarily—by

means of his personality, that is by suggestion. In the cathartic treatment,

what is of far more importance to the patient than the conjuring up of old

phantasies is the being so often with the doctor, and having confidence and

belief in him personally, and in his method. The belief, the self-confidence,

perhaps also the devotion with which the doctor does his work, are far more

important  things  to  the  patient  (imponderabilia  though  they  be)  than  the

recalling of old traumata.

Ultimately we shall some day know from the history of medicine everything

that has ever been of service; then perhaps at last we may come to the really

desirable therapy, to psychotherapy. Did not even the old materia medica of

filth have brilliant cures?—cures which only faded away with the belief in it!

Because I recognise that the patient does attempt to lay hold of the doctor's

personality, in spite of all possible rational safeguards, I have formulated the

demand that the psychotherapeutist shall be held just as responsible for the

cleanness of his own hands as is the surgeon. I hold it to be an absolutely

indispensable preliminary that the psychoanalyst should himself first undergo

an analysis, for his personality is one of the chief factors in the cure.

Patients read the doctor's character intuitively and they should find in him a

human being, with faults indeed, but also a man who has striven at every

point to fulfil his own human duties in the fullest sense. I think that this is the

first healing factor. Many times I have had the opportunity of seeing that the

analyst is successful with his treatment just in so far as he has succeeded in

his own moral development. I think this answer will satisfy your question.                                            III

From Dr. Loÿ.

2nd February, 1913.

You answer several of my questions in a decidedly affirmative sense. You

take it as proved that in the cures by the cathartic method the main rôle is

played by faith in the doctor and in his method, and not by the "abreaction" of

real or imaginary traumata. I also. Equally I am at one with your view that the

cures of the old materia medica of filth, as well as the Lourdes cures, or those

of  the  Mental  Healers,  Christian  Scientists  and  Persuasionists,  are  to  be

attributed to faith in the miracle-worker, rather than to any of the methods

employed.

Now comes the ticklish point: the augur can remain an augur so long as he

himself believes the will of the gods is made manifest by the entrails of the

sacrificial beast. When he no longer believes, he has to ask himself: Shall I

continue to use my augur's authority to further the welfare of the State, or

shall I make use of my newer, and (I hope) truer convictions of to-day? Both

ways are possible. The first is called opportunism; the second the pursuit of

truth,  and  scientific  honour.  For  a  doctor,  the  first  way  brings  perhaps

therapeutic success and fame; the second, reproach: such a man is not taken

seriously. What I esteem most highly in Freud and his school is just this

passionate  desire  for  truth.  But  again,  it  is  precisely  here  that  people

pronounce a different verdict: "It is impossible for the busy practitioner to

keep pace with the development of the views of this investigator and his

initiates." (Frank, "Affektstörungen Einleitung.")

One can easily disregard this little quip, but one must take more seriously

one's self-criticism. We may have to ask ourselves whether, since science is

an  undivided,  ever-flowing  stream,  we  are  justified  in  relinquishing  on

conscientious grounds any method or combination of methods by means of

which we know cures can be achieved?

Looking more closely at the fundamental grounds of your aversion to the use

of hypnosis (or semi-hypnosis, the degree matters nothing) in treatment by

suggestion, (which as a matter of fact every doctor and every therapeutic

method makes use of willy-nilly, no matter what it is called), it is clear that

what has disgusted you in hypnotism is at bottom nothing but the so-called

"transference" to the doctor, which you, with your unalloyed psychoanalytictreatment, can get rid of as little as any one else, for indeed it plays a chief

part in the success of the treatment. Your insistence that the psychoanalyst

must be answerable for the cleanness of his own hands—(here I agree with

you  unreservedly)——is  an  inevitable  conclusion.  But,  after  all,  does

anything  more  "augurish"  really  cling  to  the  use  made  of  hypnosis  in

psychotherapeutic  treatment,  than  to  the  quite  inevitable  use  made  of  the

"transference  to  the  doctor"  for  therapeutic  ends?  In  either  case  we  must

perforce "take shares" in faith as a healing agent. As for the feeling which the

patient—whether man or woman—entertains for the doctor, is there never

anything in the background save conscious or unconscious sexual desire? In

many cases your view is most certainly correct; more than one woman has

been  frank  enough  to  confess  that  the  beginning  of  hypnosis  was

accompanied by voluptuous pleasure. But this is not true in all instances—or

how  would  you  explain  the  underlying  feeling  in  the  hypnotising  of  one

animal by another, e.g. snake and bird? Surely you can say that there the

feeling of fear reigns, fear which is an inversion of the libido, such as comes

upon  the  bride  in  that  hypnoidal  state  before  she  yields  to  her  husband

wherein pure sexual desire rules, though possibly it contains an element of

fear. However this may be, from your three cases I cannot draw any ethical

distinction between the "unconscious readiness towards the hypnotist" and

the "transference to the doctor" which should avail to condemn a combination

of hypnotism and psychoanalysis as a method of treatment. You will ask why

I cling to the use of hypnotism; or rather of hypnoidal states. Because I think

there are cases that can be much more rapidly cured thereby, than through a

purely psychoanalytic treatment. For example, in no more than five or six

interviews  I  cured  a  fifteen-year-old  girl  who  had  suffered  from enuresis

nocturna from infancy, but was otherwise thoroughly healthy, gifted, and

pre-eminent at school: she had previously tried all sorts of treatment without

any result.

Perhaps I ought to have sought out the psychoanalytic connexion between the

enuresis and her psychosexual attitude and explained it to her, etc., but I

could  not,  she  had  only  the  short  Easter  holidays  for  treatment:  so  I  just

hypnotised her and the tiresome trouble vanished. It was a lasting cure.

In  psychoanalysis  I  use  hypnosis  to  help  the  patient  to  overcome

"resistances."

Further, I use light hypnosis in association with psychoanalysis, to hasten the

advance when the "re-education" stage comes.For example, a patient afflicted with washing-mania was sent to me after a

year's  psychocathartic  treatment  by  Dr.  X.  The  symbolic  meaning  of  her

washing-ceremonial was first made plain to her; she became more and more

agitated during the "abreaction" of alleged traumata in childhood, because

she  had  persuaded  herself  by  auto-suggestion  that  she  was  too  old  to  be

cured,  that  she  saw  no  "images,"  etc.  So  I  used  hypnosis  to  help  her  to

diminish the number of her washings, "so that the anxiety-feeling would be

banished"; and to train her to throw things on the ground and pick them up

again without washing her hands afterwards, etc.

In view of these considerations, if you feel disposed to go further into the

matter, I should be grateful if you would furnish me with more convincing

reasons why hypnotic treatment must be dispensed with; and explain how to

do without it, or with what to replace it in such cases. Were I convinced, I

would give it up as you have done, but what convinced you has, so far, not

convinced me. Si duo faciunt idem, non est idem.

Now I want to consider another important matter to which you alluded, but

only cursorily, and to put one question: behind the neurotic phantasies there

stands, you say, almost always (or always) a moral conflict which belongs to

the  present  moment.  That  is  perfectly  clear  to  me.  Research  and  therapy

coincide; their task is to search out the foundations and the rational solution

of  the  conflict.  Good.  But  can  the  rational  solution  always  be  found?

"Reasons  of  expediency"  so  often  bar  the  way,  varying  with  the  type  of

patient, for instance children, young girls and women from "pious" catholic

or protestant families. Again that accursed opportunism! A colleague of mine

was perfectly right when he began to give sexual enlightenment to a young

French patient, a boy who was indulging in masturbation. Whereupon, like

one possessed, in rushed a bigoted grandmother, and a disagreeable sequel

ensued. How to act in these and similar cases? What to do in cases where

there arises a moral conflict between love and duty (a conflict in married

life)?—or in general between instinct and moral duty? What to do in the case

of  a  girl  afflicted  with  hysterical  or  anxiety  symptoms,  needing  love  and

having no chance to marry, either because she cannot find a suitable man or

because, being "well-connected," she wants to remain chaste? Simply try to

get rid of the symptoms by suggestion? But that is wrong as soon as one

knows of a better way. How to reconcile these two consciences: that of the

man who does not want to confine his fidelity to truth within his own four

walls; and that of the doctor who must cure, or if he dare not cure accordingto his real convictions (owing to opportunist-motives), must at least procure

some alleviation? We live in the present, but with the ideas and ideals of the

future. That is our conflict. How resolve it?                                            IV

From Dr. Jung.

4th February, 1913.

You have put me in some perplexity by the questions in your yesterday's

letter. You have rightly grasped the spirit which dictated my last. I am glad

you, too, recognise this spirit. There are not very many who can boast of such

tolerance. I should deceive myself if I regarded my standpoint as that of a

practical physician. First and foremost I am a scientist; naturally that gives

me a different outlook upon many problems. In my last letter I certainly left

out of count the doctor's practical needs, but chiefly that I might show you on

what grounds we might be moved to relinquish hypnotic therapy. To remove

the  first  objection  at  once,  let  me  say  that  I  did  not  give  up  hypnotism

because I desired to avoid dealing with the basic motives of the human soul,

but rather because I wanted to battle with them directly and openly. When

once I understood what kind of forces play a part in hypnotism I gave it up,

simply  to  get  rid  of  all  the  indirect  advantages  of  this  method.  As  we

psychoanalysts see regretfully every day—and our patients also—we do not

work with the "transference to the doctor," but against it and in spite of it. It

is  just  not  upon  the faith  of  the  sick  man  that  we  can  build,  but  upon

his criticism. So much would I say at the outset upon this delicate question.

As your letter shows, we are at one in regard to the theoretical aspect of

treatment by suggestion. So we can now apply ourselves to the further task of

coming to mutual understanding about the practical question.

Your  remarks  on  the  physician's  dilemma—whether  to  be  magician  or

scientist—bring us to the heart of the discussion. I strive to be no fanatic—

although there are not a few who reproach me with fanaticism. I contend not

for the application of the psychoanalytic method solely and at all costs, but

for the recognition of every method of investigation and treatment. I was a

medical  practitioner  quite  long  enough  to  realise  that  practice  obeys,  and

should obey, other laws than does the search after truth. One might almost

say practice must first and foremost submit to the laws of opportunism. The

scientist does great injustice to the practitioner if he reproaches him for not

using the "one true" scientific method. As I said to you in my last letter: "A

truth is a truth, when it works." But on the other hand, the practitioner must

not reproach the scientist if in his search for truth and for newer and bettermethods, he makes trial of unusual ways. After all, it is not the practitioner

but the investigator, and the latter's patient, who will have to bear any injury

that may arise. The practitioner must certainly use those methods which he

knows how to use to greatest advantage, and which give him the best relative

results. My tolerance, indeed, extends, as you see, even to Christian Science.

But  I  deem  it  most  uncalled  for  that  Frank,  a  practising  doctor,  should

depreciate research in which he cannot participate, and particularly the very

line of research to which he owes his own method. It is surely time to cease

this running down of every new idea. No one asks Frank and all whom he

represents  to  become  psychoanalysts;  we  grant  them  the  right  to  their

existence, why should they always seek to cut ours short?

As my own "cures" show you, I do not doubt the effect of suggestion. Only I

had the idea that I could perhaps discover something still better. This hope

has been amply justified. Not for ever shall it be said—

"The good attained is oft of fairer still

The enemy, calling it vain illusion, falsehood's snare."

I confess frankly were I doing your work I should often be in difficulties if I

relied  only  on  psychoanalysis.  I  can  scarcely  imagine  a  general  practice,

especially in a sanatorium, with no other means than psychoanalysis. At Dr.

Bircher's  sanatorium  in  Zürich  the  principle  of  psychoanalysis  is  adopted

completely by several of the assistants, but a whole series of other important

educative  influences  are  also  brought  to  bear  upon  the  patients,  without

which  matters  would  probably  go  very  badly.  In  my  own  purely

psychoanalytic practice I have often regretted that I could not avail myself of

the other methods of re-education that are naturally at hand in an institution

—this, of course, only in special cases where one is dealing with extremely

uncontrolled, uneducated persons. Which of us has shown any disposition to

assert  that  we  have  discovered  a  panacea?  There  are  cases  in  which

psychoanalysis operates less effectively than any other known method. But

who has ever claimed psychoanalysis should be employed in every sort of

case, and on every occasion? Only a fanatic could maintain such a view.

Patients  for  whom  psychoanalysis  is  suitable  have  to  be  selected.  I

unhesitatingly send cases I think unsuitable to other doctors. As a matter of

fact  this  does  not  happen  often,  because  patients  have  a  way  of  sorting

themselves out. Those who go to an analyst usually know quite well why

they go to him and not to some one else. However, there are very many

neurotics well suited for psychoanalysis. In these matters every scheme mustbe looked at in due perspective. It is never quite wise to try to batter down a

stone  wall  with  your  head.  Whether  simple  hypnotism,  the  cathartic

treatment,  or  psychoanalysis  shall  be  used,  must  be  determined  by  the

conditions  of  the  case  and  the  preference  of  the particular doctor. Every

doctor will obtain the best results with the instrument he knows best.

But, barring exceptions, I must say definitely that for me, and for my patients

also, psychoanalysis proves itself better than any other method. This is not

merely a matter of feeling; from manifold experiences I know many cases can

indeed be cured by psychoanalysis which are refractory to all other methods

of treatment. I have many colleagues whose experience is the same, even men

engaged exclusively in practice. It is scarcely to be supposed that a method

altogether contemptible would meet with so much support.

When  once  psychoanalysis  has  been  applied  in  a  suitable  case,  it

is imperative that rational solutions of the conflicts should be found. The

objection is at once advanced that many conflicts are intrinsically incapable

of solution. That view is sometimes taken because only an external solution is

thought of—and that, at bottom, is no real solution at all. If a man cannot get

on with his wife he naturally thinks the conflict would be solved if he were to

marry some one else. If such marriages are examined they are seen to be no

solution  whatsoever.  The  old  Adam  enters  upon  the  new  marriage  and

bungles it just as badly as he did the earlier one. A real solution comes only

from within, and only then because the patient has been brought to a new

standpoint.

Where an external solution is possible no psychoanalysis is necessary; in

seeking  an  internal  solution  we  encounter  the  peculiar  virtues  of

psychoanalysis. The conflict between "love and duty" must be solved upon

that  particular  plane  of  character  where  "love  and  duty"  are  no  longer  in

opposition, for indeed they really are not so. The familiar conflict between

"instinct and conventional morality" must be solved in such a way that both

factors are taken satisfactorily into account, and this is only possible through

a change of character. This change psychoanalysis can bring about. In such

cases external solutions are worse than none at all. Naturally the particular

situation dictates which road the doctor must ultimately follow, and what is

then  his  duty.  I  regard  the  conscience-searching  question  of  the  doctor's

remaining  true  to  his  scientific  convictions  as  rather  unimportant  in

comparison with the incomparably weightier question as to how he can best

help  his  patient.  The  doctor must,  on  occasion,  be  able  to  play  theaugur. Mundus vult decipi—but the cure is no deception. It is true that there

is a conflict between ideal conviction and concrete possibility. But we should

ill prepare the ground for the seed of the future, were we to forget the tasks of

the present, and sought only to cultivate ideals. That is but idle dreaming. Do

not forget that Kepler cast horoscopes for money, and that countless artists

have been condemned to work for wages.                                            V.

From Dr. Loÿ.

9th February, 1913.

The  selfsame  passion  for  truth  possesses  us  both  when  we  think  of  pure

research, and the same desire to cure when we are considering therapy. For

the scientist, as for the doctor, we desire the fullest freedom in all directions,

fullest  freedom  to  select  and  use  the  methods  which  promise  the  best

fulfilment of their ends at any moment. Here we are at one; but there remains

a  postulate  we  must  establish  to  the  satisfaction  of  others  if  we  want

recognition for our views.

First and foremost there is a question that must be answered, an old question

asked  already  in  the  Gospels: What is Truth?  I  think  clear  definitions  of

fundamental  ideas  are  most  necessary.  How  shall  we  contrive  a  working

definition of the conception "Truth"? Perhaps an allegory may help us.

Imagine a gigantic prism extending in front of the sun, so that its rays are

broken  up,  but  suppose  man  entirely  ignorant  of  this  fact.  I  exclude  the

invisible, chemical and ultra-violet rays. Men who live in a blue-lit region

will say: "The sun sends forth blue light only." They are right and yet they are

wrong:  from  their  standpoint  they  are  capable  of  perceiving  only

a fragment of truth. And so too with the inhabitants of the red, yellow, and in-

between  regions.  And  they  will  all  scourge  and  slay  one  another  to

force their belief in their fragment upon the others—till, grown wiser through

travelling in each others' regions, they come to the harmonious agreement

that the sun sends out light of varying colours. That comprehends more truth,

but it is not yet the Truth. Only when the giant lens shall have recombined the

split-up rays, and when the invisible, chemical and heat rays have given proof

of their own specific effects, will a view more in accordance with the facts be

able to arise, and men will perceive that the sun emits white light which is

split up by the prism into differing rays with different peculiarities, which

rays can be recombined by the lens into one mass of white light.

This example shows sufficiently well that the road to Truth leads through far-

reaching  and  comparative  observations,  the  results  of  which  must  be

controlled  by  the  help  of  freely  chosen experiments,  until  well-grounded

hypotheses  and  theories  can  be  put  forward;  but  these  hypotheses  and

theories  will  fall  to  the  ground  as  soon  as  a  single  new  observation  orexperiment contradicts them.

The way is difficult, and in the end all man ever attains to is relative truth.

But such relative truth suffices for the time being, if it serves to explain the

most  important  actual  concatenations  of  the  past,  to  light  up  present

problems, to predict those of the future, so that we are then in a position to

achieve  adaptation  through  our  knowledge.  But absolute  truth  could  be

accessible  only  to  omniscience,  aware  of  all  possible  concatenations  and

combinations;  that  is  not  possible,  for  the  concatenations  and  their

combinations are infinite. Accordingly, we shall never know more than an

approximate  truth.  Should  new  relationships  be  discovered,  new

combinations  built  up,  then  the  picture  changes,  and  with  it  the  entire

possibilities in knowledge and power. To what revolutions in daily life does

not every new scientific discovery lead: how absurdly little was the beginning

of our first ideas of electricity, how inconceivably great the results! Time and

again it is necessary to repeat this commonplace, because one sees how life is

always made bitter for the innovators in every scientific field, and now is it

being made especially so for the disciples of the psychoanalytic school. Of

course, every one admits the truth of this platitude so long as it is a matter of

"academic" discussion, but only so long; just as soon as a concrete case has to

be  considered,  sympathies  and  antipathies  rush  into  the  foreground  and

darken judgment. And therefore the scientist must fight tirelessly, appealing

to logic and honour, for freedom of research in every field, and must not

permit authority, of no matter what political or religious tinge, to advance

reasons  of opportunism  to  destroy  or  restrict  this  freedom;  opportunist

reasons  may  be  and  are  in  place  elsewhere,  not  here.  Finally  we  must

completely disavow that maxim of the Middle Ages: "Philosophia ancilla

Theologiæ," and no less, too, the war-cries of the university class-rooms with

their partisanship of one or other religious or political party. All fanaticism is

the enemy of science, which must above all things be independent.

And when we turn from the search for Truth back once more to therapeutics,

we  see  immediately  that  here  too  we  are  in  agreement.  In  practice

expediency must rule: the doctor from the yellow region must adapt himself

to the sick in the yellow region, as must the doctor in the blue region, to his

patients; both have the same object in view. And the doctor who lives in the

white light of the sun must take into consideration the past experiences of his

patients from the yellow or blue region, in spite of, or perhaps rather because

of, his own wider knowledge. In such cases the way to healing will be longand difficult, may indeed lead more easily into a cul-de-sac, than in cases

where he has to do with patients who, like himself, have already come to a

knowledge of the white sunlight, or, one might say, when his patient-material

has  "already  sorted  itself  out."  With  such  sorted-out  material  the

psychoanalyst  can  employ  psychoanalysis  exclusively;  and  may  deem

himself happy in that he need not "play the augur." Now, what are these

psychoanalytic methods? If I understand you aright, from beginning to end it

is  a  question  of  dealing  directly  and  openly  with the  basic  forces  of  the

human soul, so that the analysed person, be he sick or sound or in some stage

between—for health and sickness flow over by imperceptible degrees into

one another—shall gradually have his eyes opened to the drama that is being

acted within him. He has to come to an understanding of the development of

the  hostile  automatisms  of  his  personality,  and  by  means  of  this

understanding he must gradually learn to free himself from them; he must

learn, too, how to employ and strengthen the favourable automatisms. He

must learn to make his self-knowledge real, and of practical use, to control

his soul's workings so that a balance may be established between the spheres

of  emotion  and  reason.  And  what  share  in  all  this  has  the

physician's suggestion?  I  can  scarcely  believe  that  suggestion  can  be

altogether avoided till the patient feels himself really free. Such freedom, it

goes without saying, is the main thing to strive for, and it must be active. The

sick man who simply obeys a suggestion, obeys it only just so long as the

"transference to the doctor" remains potent.

But if he wishes to be able to adjust himself to all circumstances he must

have fortified himself "from within." He should no longer need the crutches

of faith, but be capable of encountering all theoretical and practical problems

squarely, and of solving them by himself. That is surely your view? Or have I

not understood correctly?

I next ask, must not every single case be treated differently, of course within

the limits of the psychoanalytic method? For if every case is a case by itself, it

must indeed demand individual treatment.

"Il n'y a pas de maladies, il n'y a que des malades," said a French doctor

whose name escapes me. But on broad lines, what course, from a technical

point of view, does analysis take, and what deviations occur most frequently?

That I would gladly learn from you. I take for granted that all "augurs' tricks,"

darkened rooms, masquerading, chloroform, are out of the question.

Psychoanalysis—purged  so  far  as  is  humanly  possible  from  suggestiveinfluence—appears  to  have  an  essential  difference  from  Dubois'

psychotherapy. With Dubois, from the beginning conversation about the past

is forbidden, and "the moral reasons for recovery" placed in the forefront;

whilst psychoanalysis uses the subconscious material from the patient's past

as well as present, for present self-understanding. Another difference lies in

the conception of morality: morals are above all "relative." But what essential

forms  shall  they  assume  at  those  moments  when  one  can  hardly

avoid suggestion? You will say, the occasion must decide. Agreed, as regards

older people, or adults, who have to live in an unenlightened milieu. But if

one is dealing with children, the seed of the future, is it not a sacred duty to

enlighten  them  as  to  the  shaky  foundations  of  the  so-called  "moral"

conceptions of the past, which have only a dogmatic basis; is it not a duty to

educate them into full freedom by courageously unveiling Truth? I ask this

not so much with regard to the analysing doctor as to the teacher. May not the

creation of free schools be looked for as one task for the psychoanalyst?                                            VI.

From Dr. Jung.

11th February, 1913.

The idea of the relativity of "Truth" has been current for ages, but whether

true or not, it does not stand in the way of anything save the beliefs of dogma

and authority.

You ask me, or indeed tell me—what psychoanalysis is. Before considering

your views, permit me first to try and mark out the territory and definition of

psychoanalysis.  Psychoanalysis  is  primarily  just  a  method—but  a  method

complying  with  all  the  rigorous  demands  insisted  upon  to-day  by  the

conception "method." Let it be made plain at once that psychoanalysis is not

an anamnesis, as those who know everything without learning are pleased to

believe.  It  is  essentially  a  method  for  the  exploration  of  the  unconscious

associations, into which no question of the conscious self enters. Again, it is

not a kind of examination of the nature of an intelligence test, though this

mistake is common in certain circles. It is no cathartic method, abreacting

real and phantastic "traumata," with or without hypnosis. Psychoanalysis is a

method which makes possible the analytic reduction of the psychic content to

its simplest expression, and the discovery of the line of least resistance in the

development  of  a  harmonious  personality.  In  neurosis,  straightforward

direction of life's energies is lacking, because opposing tendencies traverse

and hinder psychological adaptation. Psychoanalysis, so far as our present

knowledge of it goes, thus appears to be simply a rational nerve-therapy.

For  the  technical  application  of  psychoanalysis  no  programme  can  be

formulated. There are only general principles, and, for the individual case,

working  rules.  (Here  let  me  refer  you  to  Freud's  work  in  volume  I.  of

the Internationale Zeitschrift für Ärztliche Psychoanalyse.) My one working

rule is to conduct the analysis as a perfectly ordinary, sensible conversation,

and to avoid all appearance of medical magic.

The  leading  principle  of  the  psychoanalytic  technique  is  to  analyse

the psychic material which offers itself then and there. Every interference on

the part of the analyst, with the object of inducing the analysis to follow some

systematic course, is a gross mistake in technique. So-called chance is the

law and the order of psychoanalysis.

Naturally in the beginning of the analysis the anamnesis and the diagnosiscome  first.  The  subsequent  analytic  process  develops  quite  differently  in

every case. To give rules is well-nigh impossible. All one can say is that very

frequently,  quite  at  the  beginning,  a  series  of  resistances  have  to  be

overcome, resistances against both method and man. Patients having no idea

of psychoanalysis must first be given some understanding of the method. In

those  who  already  know  something  of  it  there  are  very  often  many

misconceptions to set right, and frequently one has to deal also with many

reproaches cast by scientific criticism. In either case the misconceptions rest

upon  arbitrary  interpretations,  superficiality,  or  complete  ignorance  of  the

facts.

If the patient is himself a doctor his special knowledge may prove extremely

tiresome.  To  intelligent  colleagues  it  is  best  to  give  a  complete  theoretic

exposition. With foolish and limited persons you begin quietly with analysis.

In the unconscious of such folk there is a confederate that never refuses help.

From the analysis of the very earliest dreams the emptiness of the criticism is

obvious;  and  ultimately  of  the  whole  beautiful  edifice  of  supposedly

scientific scepticism nothing remains, save a little heap of personal vanity. I

have had amusing experiences here.

It is best to let the patient talk freely and to confine oneself to pointing out

connexions  here  and  there.  When  the  conscious  material  is  exhausted  we

come to the dreams, which furnish us with the subliminal material. If people

have no dreams, as they allege, or if they forget them, there is usually still

some conscious material that ought to be produced and discussed, but is kept

back owing to resistances. When the conscious is emptied then come the

dreams, which are indeed, as you know, the chief material of the analysis.

How the "Analysis" is to be made and what is to be said to patients depends,

firstly, upon the material to be dealt with; secondly, on the doctor's skill; and,

thirdly, on the patient's capacity. I must insist that no one ought to undertake

analysis  except  on  the  basis  of  a  sound  knowledge  of  the  subject;  that

necessitates an intimate understanding of the existing literature. Without this,

the work may be bungled.

I  do  not  know  what  else  to  tell  you  beforehand.  I  must  wait  for  further

questions. In regard to questions of morality and education let me say that

these belong to the later stages of the analysis, wherein they find—or should

find—solutions  for  themselves. You  cannot  compile  recipes  out  of

psychoanalysis.                                            VII

From Dr. Loÿ.

10th February, 1913.

You write that a solid knowledge of the psychoanalytic literature is necessary

for  initiation  into  psychoanalysis.  I  should  agree,  but  with  a  certain

reservation:  the  more  one  reads,  the  more  one  notices  how  many

contradictions there are among the different writers, and less and less does

one know—until one has had sufficient personal experience—to which view

to give adherence, since quite frequently assertions are made without any

proof.  For  example,  I  had  thought  (strengthened  in  the  view  by  my  own

experience of suggestion-therapy) that the transference to the doctor might be

an  essential  condition  in  the  patient's  cure.  But  you  write:  "We

psychoanalysts do not build upon the patient's faith, rather do we have to deal

with his criticism." And Stekel writes, on the other hand (Zentralblatt für

Psychoanalyse, 3rd year, vol. IV., p. 176, "Ausgänge der psychoanalytischen

Kuren"): "Love for the doctor can become a power essential to recovery.

Neurotics never get well for love of themselves. They recover out of love for

the doctor. They give him that pleasure." Here again, surely, stress is laid on

the power of suggestion? And yet Stekel too thinks he is a psychoanalyst pure

and simple. On the other hand, you say in your letter of Jan. 20th that "the

doctor's personality is one of the main factors in the cure." Should not this

expression be translated: "When the doctor inspires respect in the patient and

is  worthy  of  his  love,  the  patient  will  gladly  follow  his  example  and

endeavour to recover from his neurosis and fulfil his human duties in the

widest  sense"?  I  think  one  can  only  emerge  from  all  this  uncertainty  by

means of much personal experience, which will indicate also which way best

suits one's own personality and brings the greatest therapeutic success. This is

a further reason for undergoing analysis oneself, to recognise fully what one

is. I was decidedly in agreement with your definition of psychoanalysis in its

first (negative) portion: psychoanalysis is neither an anamnesis nor a method

of  examination  after  the  fashion  of  a  test  for  intelligence,  nor  yet

a psychocatharsis. In your second (positive) part, however, your definition:

"Psychoanalysis is a method of discovering the line of least resistance to the

harmonious development of the whole personality," seems to me valid for the

patient's inertia, but not for the releasing of the sublimated libido with a viewto the new direction of life. You consider that the neurosis causes a lack of

singleness  of  aim  in  life,  because  opposing  tendencies  hinder  psychic

adaptation.  True,  but  will  not  this  psychic  adaptation  eventuate  quite

differently according as the patient, when well, directs his life either to the

avoidance of pain merely (line of least resistance) or to the achievement of

the greatest pleasure?—In the first case he would be more passive, he would

merely reconcile himself "to the emptiness of reality" (Stekel, loc. cit., p.

187). In the second he would be "filled with enthusiasm" for something or

other or some person or other. But what will determine this choice of his as to

whether he will be passive rather than active in his "second life"? In your

view, will the determining factor manifest itself spontaneously in the course

of the analysis, and must the doctor carefully avoid swaying the balance to

one side or other by his influence? Or must he, if he does not renounce the

right to canalise the patient's libido in some particular direction, renounce the

right to be called a psychoanalyst, and is he to be regarded as "moderate" or

altogether  as  "wild"?  (Cf.  Furtmüller,  "Wandlungen  in  der  Freudschen

Schule," Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse, vols. IV., V., 3rd year, p. 191.) But I

think you have already answered this question, since in your last letter you

write: "Every interference on the part of the analyst is a gross mistake in

technique. So-called chance is the law and the order of psychoanalysis." But,

torn from its context, perhaps this does not quite give your whole meaning.

With regard to detailed explanation of the psychoanalytic method before the

beginning of the analysis, I think you agree with Freud and Stekel: give too

little rather than too much. For the knowledge instilled into a patient remains

more or less half-knowledge, and half-knowledge engenders "the desire to

know better" (than the analyst), which only impedes progress. So, after brief

explanation, first "let the patient talk," then and there point out connexions,

then after the exhaustion of the conscious material, take dreams.

But there another difficulty confronts me which I have already pointed out in

our talks: you find the patient adapting himself to the doctor's tone, language,

jargon, whether from conscious imitation, transference, or even resistance,

when  he  can  fight  the  analyst  with  his  own  weapons;  how  then  can  you

possibly  prevent  his  beginning  to  produce  all  manner  of  phantasies  as

supposedly  real  traumata  of  early  childhood,  and dreams  supposedly

spontaneous  which  are  in  reality,  though  not  designedly,  directly  or

indirectly suggested? I then told you that Forel ("Der Hypnotismus") made

his patients dream just what he wanted, and I have myself easily repeated theexperiment. But if the analyst desires to suggest nothing, should he remain

silent for the most part and let the patient speak—except that in interpreting

dreams he may lay before the patient his own interpretation?                                          VIII

From Dr. Jung.

18th February, 1913.

I  cannot  but  agree  with  your  observation  that  confusion  reigns  in

psychoanalytic literature. Just at this moment different points of view are

developing  in  the  theoretical  conception  of  the  analytic  results;  not  to

mention  many  individual  deviations.  Over  against  Freud's  almost

purely causal  conception,  there  has  developed,  apparently  in  absolute

contradiction, Adler's purely final view, but in reality the latter is an essential

complement of Freud's theory. I hold rather to a middle course, taking into

account  both  standpoints.  That  discord  still  reigns  round  the  ultimate

questions  of  psychoanalysis  need  not  surprise  us  when  we  consider  the

difficulty. The problem of the therapeutic effect of psychoanalysis is bound

up in particular with supremely difficult questions, so that it would indeed be

astonishing if we had yet reached final certitude. Stekel's statement to which

you refer is very characteristic. What he says about love for the doctor is

obviously true, but it is a simple affirmation, and not a goal or plumb-line of

the analytic therapy. If his statement were the goal, many cures, it is true,

would  be  possible,  but  also  many  calamities  might  result  which  are

avoidable. But the aim is so to educate the patient that he will get well for his

own sake and by reason of his own determination, rather than to procure his

doctor some sort of advantage; though of course it would be absurd from the

therapeutic standpoint not to allow the patient to get better because in doing

so he does the doctor a good turn also. It suffices if the patient knows it. But

we  must  not  prescribe  for  him  which  path  he  should  take  to  recovery.

Naturally  it  seems  to  me  (from  the  psychoanalytic  standpoint)  an

inadmissible use of suggestive influence if the patient is compelled to get

better out of love for the doctor. And indeed such compulsion may sometimes

take bitter revenge. The "you must and shall be saved" is no more to be

commended  in  nerve-therapy  than  in  any  other  department  of  life.  It

contradicts the principle of analytic treatment, which shuns all coercion and

desires to let everything grow up from within. I do not, as you know, object

to  influencing  by  use  of  suggestion  in  general,  but  merely  to  a  doubtful

motivation. If the doctor demands that his patient shall get well from love of

himself, the patient may easily reckon on reciprocal services and will withoutdoubt try to extort them. I can but utter a warning against any such method. A

far  stronger  motive  for  recovery—also  a  far  healthier  and  ethically  more

valuable one—consists in the patient's thorough insight into the real state of

affairs, the recognition of how things are now and how they ought to be. The

man of any sort of worth will then discern that he can hardly sit down at ease

in the quagmire of his neurosis.

With your rendering of what I said about the healing power of personality I

cannot entirely agree. I wrote that the doctor's personality has a power for

healing  because  the  patient  reads  the  doctor's  personality:  not  that  he

produces a cure through love of the doctor. The doctor cannot prevent the

patient's beginning to behave himself towards his conflicts just as the doctor

himself behaves, for nothing is finer than a neurotic's intuition. But every

strong transference serves this same purpose. If the doctor makes himself

charming, he buys off from the patient a series of resistances which he should

have  overcome,  and  whose  overcoming  will  certainly  have  to  be  gone

through later on. Nothing is won by this technique; at most the beginning of

the analysis is made easy for the patient (though this is not quite without its

use in certain cases). To be able to crawl through a barbed wire fence without

some enticing end in view testifies to an ascetic strength of will which you

can expect neither from the ordinary person nor from the neurotic. Even the

Christian religion, whose moral demands certainly reached a great height,

thought it no scorn to represent the near approach of the Kingdom of Heaven

as goal and reward of earthly pain. In my view, the doctor may well speak of

the rewards which follow the toils of analysis. But he must not depict himself

or  his  friendship,  in  hints  or  promises,  as  reward,  if  he  is  not  seriously

determined to keep his word.

In  regard  to  your  criticism  of  my  outline-definition  of  the  conception  of

psychoanalysis, it must be observed that the road over the steep mountain is

the line of least resistance only when a ferocious bull waits for you in the

pleasant  valley-road.  In  other  words,  the  line  of  least  resistance  is  a

compromise with all demands, and not with inertia alone. It is prejudice to

think that the line of least resistance coincides with the path of inertia. (That's

what we thought in the days when we dawdled over Latin exercises.) Inertia

is only an immediate advantage and leads to consequences which produce the

worst  resistances;  as  a  whole,  it  does  not  lie  in  the  direction  of  least

resistance. Life along the line of least resistance is not synonymous with a

man's regardless pursuit of his own egoistic desires. He who lives thus soonpainfully perceives that he is not moving along the line of least resistance, for

he is also a social being, and not merely a bundle of egoistic instincts, as

some people rather like to depict him. This is best seen among primitive men

and herd-animals, who all have a richly developed social sense. Without it,

indeed, the herd could not exist at all. Man as herd-animal has therefore by

no manner of means to subject himself to laws enforced on him from without;

he  carries  his  social  imperatives  within  himself, a  priori,  as  an  inborn

necessity.  As  you  see,  I  here  put  myself  in  decided  opposition  to  certain

views—I think quite unjustified—which have been put forth here and there

inside the psychoanalytic movement.

So  the  line  of  least  resistance  does  not  signify eo ipso  the  avoidance  of

unpleasure so much as the just balancing of unpleasure and pleasure. Painful

activity by itself leads to no result but exhaustion. Man must be able to take

pleasure in his life, or the struggle of life has no reward. What direction the

patient's future life should take is not ours to judge. We must not imagine we

know better than his own nature—or we prove ourselves educators of the

worst kind. Psychoanalysis is but a means of removing stones from the path,

and  in  no  way  a  method  (as  hypnotism  often  pretends  to  be)  of  putting

anything into the patient which was not there before. So we renounce any

attempt to give a direction, and occupy ourselves only with setting in proper

relief all that analysis brings into the light of day, in order that the patient

may see clearly, and be in a position to draw the appropriate conclusions.

Anything that he has not himself won, he does not in the long run believe in;

and all that he has received from authority keeps him still infantile. He must

rather be put in such a position as will enable him to take control of his own

life.  It  is  the  art  of  the  psychoanalyst  to  follow  the  patient's  apparently

mistaken  paths  without  prejudice,  and  thus  to  discover  his  strayed  and

separated sheep. Working on a system, according to a preconceived scheme,

we spoil the best results of the analysis. So I hold fast to the maxim you quote

from me: "Every interference on the part of the analyst is a gross mistake in

technique. So-called chance is the law and the order of psychoanalysis."

You surely recognise that the schoolmaster-view never releases us from the

attempt to correct Nature and the desire to force upon her our limited "truths."

In  nerve-therapy  we  get  so  many  wonderful  experiences—unforeseen  and

impossible  to  foresee—that  surely  we  ought  to  dismiss  all  hope  of  being

infallibly able to point out the right path. The roundabout way and even the

wrong way are necessary. If you deny this you must also deny that the errorsin the history of the whole world have been necessary. That indeed were a

world-conception fit for a schoolmaster. For psychoanalysis this view suits

not at all.

The question as to how much the analyst involuntarily suggests to the patient

is a very ticklish one. Undoubtedly that has a much more important place

than psychoanalysts have till now admitted. Experience has convinced us that

the patient rapidly avails himself of the ideas won through the analysis, and

of  whatever  comes  to  light  through  the  shaping  of  the  dreams.  You  may

obtain all manner of such impressions from Stekel's book: "Die Sprache des

Traumes"  ("The  Language  of  the  Dream").  I  had  once  a  most  instructive

experience:  a  very  intelligent  lady  had  from  the  beginning  extreme

transference  phantasies  which  appeared  in  well-recognised  erotic  forms.

Nevertheless she entirely declined to admit their existence. Of course she was

betrayed by the dreams in which my own person was hidden behind some

other figure, and often difficult to unveil. A long series of such dreams forced

me at last to say: "So you see it is always like that, and the person of whom

one has really dreamt is replaced and hidden by some one else in the manifest

dream." Till then the patient had obstinately contested this point. But this

time she could no longer evade it, and had to admit my rule—but only that

she might play me a trick. Next day she brought me a dream in which she and

I appeared in a manifest lascivious situation. I was naturally perplexed and

thought  of  my  rule.  Her  first  association  to  the  dream  was  the  malicious

question: "It's always true, isn't it, that the person of whom one is really

dreaming is replaced by some one else in the manifest dream-content?"

Clearly, she had made use of her experience to find a protective formula by

means  of  which  she  secured  the  open  expression  of  her  phantasies  in  an

apparently innocent way.

This example aptly shows how patients avail themselves of insight gained

during analysis; they use it symbolically. You get caught in your own net if

you  give  credence  to  the  idea  of  unalterable,  permanent  symbols.  That

has  already  happened  to  more  than  one  psychoanalyst.  It  is  therefore

fallacious to try to prove any particular theory from the dreams arising in the

course of analysis. For this purpose the only conclusive dreams are those

derived from demonstrably uninfluenced persons. In such cases one would

only have to exclude the possibility of telepathic thought-reading. But if you

concede  this  possibility  you  will  have  to  subject  very  many  things  to  a

rigorous re-examination and, among others, many judicial verdicts.But although we must do full justice to the force of suggestion, we must not

overrate it. The patient is no empty sack into which you may stuff whatever

you like; on the contrary, he brings his own predetermined contents which

strive obstinately against suggestion and always obtrude themselves afresh.

Through analytic "suggestions," only the outward form is determined, never

the  content—this  is  always  being  freshly  impressed  upon  my  notice.  The

form is the unlimited, the ever-changing; but the content is fixed, and only to

be  assailed  slowly  and  with  great  difficulty.  Were  it  not  so,  suggestion-

therapy would be in every respect the most effective, profitable, and easiest

therapy,—a real panacea. That, alas! it is not, as every honourable hypnotist

will freely admit.

To return to your question as to how far it is conceivable that patients may

deceive  the  doctor  by  making  use—perhaps  involuntarily—of  his

expressions: this is indeed a very serious problem. The analyst must exercise

all possible care and practise unsparing self-criticism if he would avoid, as far

as possible, being led into error by patients' dreams. It may be admitted that

they almost always use modes of expression in their dreams learnt in analysis

—some more, some less. Interpretations of earlier symbols will themselves

be used again as fresh symbols in later dreams. It happens not seldom, for

instance, that sexual situations which appear in symbolic form in the earlier

dreams, will appear "undisguised" in later ones, and here again they are the

symbolic expression of ideas of another character capable of further analysis.

The  not  infrequent  dream  of  incestuous  cohabitation  is  by  no  means  an

"undisguised"  content,  but  a  dream  as  freshly  symbolic  and  capable  of

analysis as all others. You surely only reach the paradoxical view that such a

dream is "undisguised" if you are pledged to the sexual theory of neurosis.

That the patient may mislead the doctor for a longer or shorter time by means

of deliberate deception and misrepresentation is possible; just as occasionally

happens in all other departments of medicine. Therewith the patient injures

himself most, since he has to pay for every deception or suppression, with

aggravated  or  additional  symptoms.  Deceptions  are  so  obviously

disadvantageous to himself that in the end he can scarcely avoid the definite

relinquishment of such a course.

The technique of analysis we can best postpone for oral discussion.                                            IX

From Dr. Loÿ.

23rd February, 1913.

From your letter of 16th February I want first to single out the end, where

you  so  admirably  assign  to  its  proper  place  the  power  of  suggestion  in

psychoanalysis: "The patient is no empty sack, into which you can cram what

you will; he brings his own predetermined content with him, with which one

has always to reckon afresh." With this I fully agree, my own experience

confirms it. And you add: "This content remains untouched by involuntary

analytical  suggestion,  but  its  form  is  altered,  proteus-fashion,  beyond

measure." So it becomes a matter of a sort of "mimicry" by which the patient

seeks to escape the analyst, who is driving him into a corner and therefore for

the moment seems to him an enemy. Until at last, through the joint work of

patient  and  analyst—the  former  spontaneously  yielding  up  his  psychic

content, the latter only interpreting and explaining—the analysis succeeds in

bringing so much light into the darkness of the patient's psyche that he can

see the true relationships and, without any preconceived plan of the analyst's,

can himself draw the right conclusions and apply them to his future life. This

new life will betake itself along the line of least resistance—or should we not

rather say, the least resistances, as a "compromise with all the necessities," in

a just balancing of pleasure and unpleasure? It is not we who must arbitrarily

seek to determine how matters stand for the patient and what will benefit

him; his own nature decides. In other words, we must assume the rôle of the

accoucheur who can bring out into the light of day a child already alive, but

who must avoid a series of mistakes if the child is to remain able to live and

the mother is not to be injured. All this is very clear to me, since it is only the

application to the psychoanalytic method of a general principle which should

have universal validity: never do violence to Nature. Hence I also see that the

psychoanalyst  must  follow  his  patient's  apparently  "wrong  roads"  if  the

patient is ever to arrive at his own convictions and be freed once and for all

from infantile reliance on authority. We ourselves as individuals have learnt

or can only learn by making mistakes how to avoid them for the future, and

mankind as a whole has created the conditions of its present and future stages

of development quite as much by frequent travel along wrong paths as along

the right road. Have not many neurotics—I do not know if you will agree, butI think so—become ill partly for the very reason that their infantile faith in

authority has fallen to pieces? Now they stand before the wreckage of their

faith, weeping over it, in dire distress because they cannot find a substitute

which shall show them clearly whither their life's course should now turn. So

they remain stuck fast betwixt infancy which they must unwillingly renounce,

and the serious duties of the present and future (the moral conflict). I see,

particularly in such cases, you are right in saying it is a mistake to seek to

replace the lost faith in authority by another similar faith, certain to be useful

only  so  long  as  the  belief  lasts.  This  applies  to  the  deliberate  use  of

suggestion in psychoanalysis, and the building upon the transference to the

doctor as the object of the analytic therapy. I am no longer in doubt about

your maxim: "Every interference on the analyst's part is a gross mistake in

technique.  So-called  chance  is  the  law  and  the  order  of  psychoanalysis."

Further, I am entirely in agreement with you when you say that altruism

necessarily must be innate in man considered as a herd-animal. The contrary

would be the thing to be wondered at.

I should be much disposed to agree that not the egoistic, but the altruistic

instincts are primary. Love and trust of the child for the mother who feeds it,

nurses, cherishes and pets it,—love of the man for his wife, regarded as the

going out towards another's personality,—love for offspring, care for it,—

love for kinsfolk, etc. The egoistic instincts owe their origin to the desire for

exclusive  possession  of  all  that  surrounds  love,  the  desire  to  possess  the

mother exclusively, in opposition to the father and the brothers and sisters,

the  desire  to  have  a  woman  for  himself  alone,  the  desire  to  possess

exclusively  ornaments,  clothing,  etc.  But  perhaps  you  will  say  I  am

paradoxical and that the instincts, egoistic or altruistic, arise together in the

heart of man, and that every instinct is ambivalent in nature. But I have to ask

if the feelings and instincts are really ambivalent? Are they exactly bipolar?

Are the qualities of all emotions altogether comparable? Is love really the

opposite of hate?

However that may be, in any case it is well that man bears the social law

within himself, as an inborn imperative; otherwise our civilised humanity

would fare badly, having to subject themselves to laws imposed on them

from outside only: they would be impervious to the inheritance of the earlier

religious faiths, and would soon fall into complete anarchy. Man would then

have to ask himself whether it would not be better to maintain by force an

extreme belief in religious authority such as prevailed in the Middle Ages.For  the  benefits  of  civilisation,  which  strove  to  grant  every  individual  as

much outward freedom as was consistent with the freedom of others, would

be well worth the sacrifice of free research. But the age of this use of force

against nature is past, civilised man has left this wrong track behind, not

arbitrarily, but obeying an inner necessity, and we may look joyfully towards

the future. Mankind, advancing in knowledge, will find its way across the

ruins of faith in authority to the moral autonomy of the individual.                                              X

From Dr. Jung.

March, 1913.

At  various  places  in  your  letters  it  has  struck  me  that  the  problem  of

"transference"  seems  to  you  particularly  critical.  Your  feeling  is  entirely

justified.  The  transference  is  indeed  at  present  the  central  problem  of

analysis.

You know that Freud regards the transference as the projection of infantile

phantasies upon the doctor. To this extent the transference is an infantile-

erotic relationship. All the same, viewed from the outside, superficially, the

thing by no means always looks like an infantile-erotic situation. As long as it

is  a  question  of  the  so-called  "positive"  transference,  the  infantile-erotic

character can usually be recognised without difficulty. But if it is a "negative"

transference, you can see nothing but violent resistances which sometimes

veil themselves in seemingly critical or sceptical dress. In a certain sense the

determining factor in such circumstances is the patient's relation to authority,

that is, in the last resort, to the father. In both forms of transference the doctor

is treated as if he were the father—according to the situation either tenderly

or with hostility. In this view the transference has the force of a resistance as

soon as it becomes a question of resolving the infantile attitude. But this form

of transference must be destroyed, inasmuch as the object of analysis is the

patient's moral autonomy. A lofty aim, you will say. Indeed lofty, and far off,

but still not altogether so remote, since it actually corresponds to one of the

predominating  tendencies  of  our  stage  of  civilisation,  namely,  that  urge

towards  individualisation  by  which  our  whole  epoch  deserves  to  be

characterised. (Cf. Müller-Lyer: "Die Familie.") If a man does not believe in

this orientation and still bows before the scientific causal view-point, he will,

of course, be disposed merely to resolve this hostility, and to let the patient

remain in a positive relationship towards the father, thus expressing the ideal

of  an  earlier  epoch  of  civilisation.  It  is  commonly  recognised  that  the

Catholic  Church  represents  one  of  the  most  powerful  organisations  based

upon this earlier tendency. I cannot venture to doubt that there are very many

individuals who feel happier under compulsion from others than when forced

to discipline themselves. (Cf. Shaw: "Man and Superman.") None the less,

we do our neurotic patients a grievous wrong if we try to force them all intothe category of the unfree. Among neurotics, there are not a few who do not

require any reminders of their social duties and obligations; rather are they

born or destined to become the bearers of new social ideals. They are neurotic

so long as they bow down to authority and refuse the freedom to which they

are destined. Whilst we look at life only retrospectively, as is the case in the

Viennese psychoanalytic writings, we shall never do justice to this type of

case and never bring the longed-for deliverance. For in that fashion we can

only educate them to become obedient children, and thereby strengthen the

very forces that have made them ill—their conservative retardation and their

submissiveness to authority. Up to a certain point this is the right way to take

with the infantile resistance which cannot yet reconcile itself with authority.

But the power which edged them out from their retrograde dependence on the

father is not at all a childish desire for insubordination, but the powerful urge

towards the development of an individual personality, and this struggle is

their imperative life's task. Adler's psychology does much greater justice to

this situation than Freud's.

In  the  one  case  (that  of  infantile  intractability)  the  positive  transference

signifies  a  highly  important  achievement,  heralding  cure;  in  the  other

(infantile submissiveness) it portends a dangerous backsliding, a convenient

evasion of life's duty. The negative transference represents in the first case an

increased resistance, thus a backsliding and an evasion of duty, but in the

second it is an advance of healing significance. (For the two types, cf. Adler's

"Trotz und Gehorsam.")

The transference then is, as you see, to be judged quite differently in different

cases.

The  psychological  process  of  "transference"—be  it  negative  or  positive—

consists in the libido entrenching itself, as it were, round the personality of

the doctor, the doctor accordingly representing certain emotional values. (As

you know, by libido I understand very much what Antiquity meant by the

cosmogenic  principle  of Eros;  in  modern  terminology  simply  "psychic

energy.")  The  patient  is  bound  to  the  doctor,  be  it  in  affection,  be  it  in

opposition,  and  cannot  fail  to  follow  and  imitate  the  doctor's  psychic

adaptations. To this he finds himself urgently compelled. And with the best

will in the world and all technical skill, the doctor cannot prevent him, for

intuition works surely and instinctively, in despite of the conscious judgment,

be it never so strong. Were the doctor himself neurotic, and inadequate in

response to the demands of the external life, or inharmonious within, thepatient  would  copy  the  defect  and  build  it  up  into  the  fabric  of  his  own

presentations: you may imagine the result.

Accordingly I cannot regard the transference as merely the transference of

infantile-erotic phantasies; no doubt that is what it is from one standpoint, but

I see also in it, as I said in an earlier letter, the process of the growth of

feeling and adaptation. From this standpoint the infantile erotic phantasies, in

spite of their indisputable reality, appear rather as material for comparison or

as  analogous  pictures  of  something  not  understood  as  yet,  than  as

independent  desires.  This  seems  to  me  the  real  reason  of  their  being

unconscious. The patient, not knowing the right attitude, tries to grasp at a

right relationship to the doctor by way of comparison and analogy with his

infantile experiences. It is not surprising that he gropes back for just the most

intimate relations of his childhood, to discover the appropriate formula for his

attitude to the doctor, for this relationship also is very intimate, and to some

extent  different  from  the  sexual  relationship,  just  as  is  that  of  the  child

towards its parents. This relationship—child to parent—which Christianity

has  everywhere  set  up  as  the  symbolic  formula  for  human  relationships,

provides a way of restoring to the patient that directness of ordinary human

emotion of which he had been deprived through the inroad of sexual and

social values (from the standpoint of power, etc.). The purely sexual, more or

less primitive and barbaric valuation, operates in far-reaching ways against a

direct,  simple  human  relationship,  and  thereupon  a  blocking  of  the  libido

occurs which easily gives rise to neurotic formations. By means of analysis of

the  infantile  portion  of  the  transference-phantasies,  the  patient  is  brought

back to the remembrance of his childhood's relationship, and this—stripped

of its infantile qualities—gives him a beautiful, clear picture of direct human

intercourse as opposed to the purely sexual valuation. I cannot regard it as

other than a misconception to judge the childish relationship retrospectively

and  therefore  as  exclusively  a  sexual  one,  even  though  a  certain  sexual

content can in no wise be denied to it.

Recapitulating, let me say this much of the positive transference:—

The patient's libido fastens upon the person of the doctor, taking the shape of

expectation, hope, interest, trust, friendship and love. Then the transference

produces  the  projection  upon  the  doctor  of  infantile  phantasies,  often  of

predominatingly erotic tinge. At this stage the transference is usually of a

decidedly  sexual  character,  in  spite  of  the  sexual  component  remaining

relatively unconscious. But this phase of feeling serves the higher aspect ofthe  growth  of  human  feeling  as  a  bridge,  whereby  the  patient  becomes

conscious of the defectiveness of his own adaptation, through his recognition

of the doctor's attitude, which is accepted as one suitable to life's demands,

and  normal  in  its  human  relationships.  By  help  of  the  analysis,  and  the

recalling of his childish relationships, the road is seen which leads right out

of those exclusively sexual or "power" evaluations of social surroundings

which were acquired in puberty and strongly reinforced by social prejudices.

This road leads on towards a purely human relation and intimacy, not derived

solely from the existence of a sexual or power-relation, but depending much

more upon a regard for personality. That is the road to freedom which the

doctor must show his patient.

Here indeed I must not omit to say that the obstinate clinging to the sexual

valuation would not be maintained so tenaciously if it had not also a very

deep significance for that period of life in which propagation is of primary

importance. The discovery of the value of human personality belongs to a

riper age. For young people the search for the valuable personality is very

often merely a cloak for the evasion of their biological duty. On the other

hand,  an  older  person's  exaggerated  looking  back  towards  the  sexual

valuation of youth, is an undiscerning and often cowardly and convenient

retreat from a duty which demands the recognition of personal values and his

own enrolment among the ranks of the priesthood of a newer civilisation. The

young neurotic shrinks back in terror from the extension of his tasks in life,

the old from the dwindling and shrinking of the treasures he has attained.

This conception of the transference is, you will have noted, most intimately

connected with the acceptance of the idea of biological "duties." By this term

you must understand those tendencies or motives in human beings giving rise

to civilisation, as inevitably as in the bird they give rise to the exquisitely

woven nest, and in the stag to the production of antlers. The purely causal,

not to say materialistic conception of the immediately preceding decades,

would conceive the organic formation as the reaction of living matter, and

this doubtless provides a position heuristically useful, but, as far as any real

understanding  goes,  leads  only  to  a  more  or  less  ingenious

and apparent reduction and postponement of the problem. Let me refer you

to Bergson's excellent criticism of this conception. From external forces but

half the result, at most, could ensue; the other half lies within the individual

disposition of the living material, without which it is obvious the specific

reaction-formation could never be achieved. This principle must be appliedalso in psychology. The psyche does not only react; it also gives its own

individual  reply  to  the  influences  at  work  upon  it,  and  at  least  half  the

resulting configuration and its existing disposition is due to this. Civilisation

is never, and again never, to be regarded as merely reaction to environment.

That shallow explanation we may abandon peacefully to the past century. It is

just  these  very  dispositions  which  we  must  regard  as  imperative  in  the

psychological  sphere;  it  is  easy  to  get  convincing  proof  daily  of  their

compulsive  power.  What  I  call  "biological  duty"  is  identical  with  these

dispositions.

In conclusion, I must deal with a matter which seems to have caused you

uneasiness, namely, the moral question. Among our patients we see many so-

called immoral tendencies, therefore the thought involuntarily forces itself

upon the psychotherapist as to how things would go if all these desires were

to be gratified. You will have discerned already from my earlier letters that

these desires must not be estimated too literally. As a rule it is rather a matter

of unmeasured and exaggerated demands, arising out of the patient's stored-

up libido, which have usurped a prominent position, usually quite against his

own wish. In most cases the canalisation of the libido for the fulfilment of

life's simple duties, suffices to reduce these exaggerated desires to zero. But

in some cases it must be recognised that such "immoral" tendencies are in no

way removed by analysis; on the contrary, they appear more often and more

clearly, hence it becomes plain that they belong to the individual's biological

duties. And this is particularly true of certain sexual claims, whose aim is an

individual valuation of sexuality. This is not a question for pathology, it is a

social question of to-day which peremptorily demands an ethical solution.

For many it is a biological duty to work for the solution of this question, to

discover some sort of practical solution. (Nature, it is well known, does not

content herself with theories.) To-day we have no real sexual morality, only a

legal attitude towards sexuality; just as the early Middle Ages had no genuine

morality for financial transactions, but only prejudices and a legal standpoint.

We are not yet sufficiently advanced in the domain of free sexual activity to

distinguish between a moral and an immoral relationship. We have a clear

expression  of  this  in  the  customary  treatment,  or  rather  ill-treatment,  of

unmarried motherhood. For a great deal of sickening hypocrisy, for the high

tide of prostitution, and for the prevalence of sexual diseases, we may thank

both  our  barbarous,  undifferentiated  legal  judgments  about  the  sexual

situation,  and  our  inability  to  develop  a  finer  moral  perception  of  theimmense psychologic differences that may exist in free sexual activity.

This reference to the existence of an exceedingly complicated and significant

problem  may  suffice  to  explain  why  we  by  no  means  seldom  meet  with

individuals among our patients who are quite specially called, because of

their spiritual and social gifts, to take an active part in the work of civilisation

—for this they are biologically destined. We must never forget that what to-

day is deemed a moral law will to-morrow be cast into the melting-pot and

transformed, so that in the near or distant future it may serve as the basis of a

new ethical structure. This much we ought to have learnt from the history of

civilisation, that the forms of morality belong to the category of transitory

things. The finest psychological tact is required with these critical natures, so

that  the  dangerous  corners  of  infantile  irresponsibility,  indolence  and

uncontrolledness  may  be  turned,  and  a  pure,  untroubled  vision  of  the

possibility of a moral autonomous activity made possible. Five per cent. on

money lent is fair interest, twenty per cent. is despicable usury. That point of

view we have to apply equally to the sexual situation.

So it comes about that there are many neurotics whose innermost delicacy of

feeling prevents their being at one with present-day morality, and they cannot

adapt themselves to civilisation as long as their moral code has gaps in it, the

filling up of which is a crying need of the age. We deceive ourselves greatly

if we suppose that many married women are neurotic only because they are

unsatisfied sexually or because they have not found the right man, or because

they still have a fixation to their infantile sexuality. The real ground of the

neurosis is, in many cases, the inability to recognise the work that is waiting

for them, of helping to build up a new civilisation. We are all far too much at

the standpoint of the "nothing-but" psychology; we persist in thinking we can

squeeze the new future which is pressing in at the door into the framework of

the old and the known. And thus the view is only of the present, never of the

future.  But  it  was  of  most  profound  psychological  significance  when

Christianity  first  discovered,  in  the  orientation  towards  the  future,  a

redeeming principle for mankind. In the past nothing can be altered, and in

the present little, but the future is ours and capable of raising life's intensity to

its highest pitch. A little space of youth belongs to us, all the rest of life

belongs to our children.

Thus does your question as to the significance of the loss of faith in authority

answer itself. The neurotic is ill not because he has lost his old faith, but

because he has not yet found a new form for his finest aspirations.                                  CHAPTER X

        ON THE IMPORTANCE OF THE UNCONSCIOUS IN

                                PSYCHOPATHOLOGY

When we speak of a thing as being "unconscious" we must not forget that

from  the  point  of  view  of  the  functioning  of  the  brain  a  thing  may  be

unconscious to us in two ways—physiologically or psychologically. I shall

only  deal  with  the  subject  from  the  latter  point  of  view.  So  that  for  our

purposes  we  may  define  the  unconscious  as  "the  sum  of  all  those

psychological events which are not apperceived, and so are unconscious."

The unconscious contains all those psychic events which, because of the lack

of  the  necessary  intensity  of  their  functioning,  are  unable  to  pass  the

threshold which divides the conscious from the unconscious; so that they

remain in effect below the surface of the conscious, and flit by in subliminal

phantom forms.

It  has  been  known  to  psychologists  since  the  time  of  Leibniz  that  the

elements—that is to say, the ideas and feelings which go to make up the

conscious mind, the so-called conscious content—are of a complex nature,

and  rest  upon  far  simpler  and  altogether  unconscious  elements;  it  is  the

combination of these which gives the element of consciousness. Leibniz has

already  mentioned  the perceptions  insensibles—those  vague  perceptions

which  Kant  called  "shadowy"  representations,  which  could  only  attain  to

consciousness in an indirect manner. Later philosophers assigned the first

place to the unconscious, as the foundation upon which the conscious was

built.

But this is not the place to consider the many speculative theories nor the

endless philosophical discussions concerning the nature and quality of the

unconscious. We must be satisfied with the definition already given, which

will  prove  quite  sufficient  for  our  purpose,  namely  the  conception  of  the

unconscious as the sum of all psychical processes below the threshold of

consciousness.

The question of the importance of the unconscious for psychopathology may

be  briefly  put  as  follows:  "In  what  manner  may  we  expect  to  find

unconscious psychic material behave in cases of psychosis and neurosis?"

In  order  to  get  a  better  grasp  of  the  situation  in  connexion  with  mental

disorders, we may profitably consider first how unconscious psychic materialbehaves in the case of normal people, especially trying to visualize what in

normal men is apt to be unconscious. As a preliminary to this knowledge we

must get a complete understanding of what is contained in the conscious

mind; and then, by a process of elimination we may expect to find what is

contained in the unconscious, for obviously—per exclusionem—what is in

the  conscious  cannot  be  unconscious.  For  this  purpose  we  examine  all

activities,  interests,  passions,  cares,  and  joys,  which  are  conscious  to  the

individual. All that we are thus able to discover becomes, ipso facto, of no

further moment as a content of the unconscious, and we may then expect to

find only those things contained in the unconscious which we have not found

in the conscious mind.

Let us take a concrete example: A merchant, who is happily married, father

of two children, thorough and painstaking in his business affairs, and at the

same time trying in a reasonable degree to improve his position in the world,

carries himself with self-respect, is enlightened in religious matters, and even

belongs to a society for the discussion of liberal ideas.

What can we reasonably consider to be the content of the unconscious in the

case of such an individual?

Considered  from  the  above  theoretical  standpoint,  everything  in  the

personality that is not contained in the conscious mind should be found in the

unconscious. Let us agree, then, that this man consciously considers himself

to possess all the fine attributes we have just described—no more, no less.

Then it must obviously result that he is entirely unaware that a man may be

not merely industrious, thorough, and painstaking, but that he may also be

careless, indifferent, untrustworthy; for some of these last attributes are the

common heritage of mankind and may be found to be an essential component

of  every  character.  This  worthy  merchant  forgets  that  quite  recently  he

allowed  several  letters  to  remain  unanswered  which  he  could  easily  have

answered at once. He forgets, too, that he failed to bring a book home which

his wife has asked him to get at the book-stall, where she had previously

ordered it, although he might easily have made a note of her wish. But such

occurrences are common with him. Therefore we are obliged to conclude that

he is also lazy and untrustworthy. He is convinced that he is a thoroughly

loyal subject; but for all that he failed to declare the whole of his income to

the assessor, and when they raise his taxes, he votes for the Socialists.

He believes himself to be an independent thinker, yet a little while back he

undertook a big deal on the Stock Exchange, and when he came to enter thedetails  of  the  transaction  in  his  books  he  noticed  with  considerable

misgivings that it fell upon a Friday, the 13th of the month. Therefore, he is

also superstitious and not free in his thinking.

So here we are not at all surprised to find these compensating vices to be an

essential content of the unconscious. Obviously, therefore, the reverse is true

—namely, that unconscious virtues compensate for conscious deficiencies.

The law which ought to follow as the result of such deductions would appear

to  be  quite  simple—to  wit,  the  conscious  spendthrift  is  unconsciously  a

miser; the philanthropist is unconsciously an egoist and misanthrope. But,

unfortunately, it is not quite so easy as that, although there is a basis of truth

in this simple rule. For there are essential hereditary dispositions of a latent or

manifest nature which upset the simple rule of compensation, and which vary

greatly in individual cases. From entirely different motives a man may, for

instance,  be  a  philanthropist,  but  the  manner  of  his  philanthropy  depends

upon  his  originally  inherited  disposition,  and  the  way  in  which  the

philanthropic  attitude  is  compensated  depends  upon  his  motives.  It  is  not

sufficient simply to know that a certain person is philanthropic in order to

diagnose an unconscious egoism. For we must also bring to such a diagnosis

a careful study of the motives involved.

In the case of normal people the principal function of the unconscious is to

effect a compensation and thus produce a balance. All extreme conscious

tendencies  are  softened  and  toned  down  through  an  effective  opposite

impulse in the unconscious. This compensating agency, as I have tried to

show  in  the  case  of  the  merchant,  maintains  itself  through  certain

unconscious, inconsequent activities, as it were, which Freud has very well

described as symptomatic acts (Symptom-handlungen).

To Freud we owe thanks also for having called attention to the importance of

dreams, for by means of them, also, we are able to learn much about this

compensating function. There is a fine historical example of this in the well-

known dream of Nebuchadnezzar in the fourth chapter of the Book of Daniel,

where Nebuchadnezzar at the height of his power had a dream which foretold

his downfall. He dreamed of a tree which had raised its head even up to

heaven and now must be hewn down. This is a dream which is obviously a

counterpoise to the exaggerated feeling of royal power.

Now considering states in which the mental balance is disturbed, we can

easily  see,  from  what  has  preceded,  wherein  lies  the  importance  of  the

unconscious for psychopathology. Let us ponder the question of where and inwhat manner the unconscious manifests itself in abnormal mental conditions.

The way in which the unconscious works is most clearly seen in disturbances

of a psychogenic nature, such as hysteria, compulsion neurosis, etc.

We have known for a long time that certain symptoms of these disturbances

are  produced  by  unconscious  psychic  events.  Just  as  clear,  but  less

recognised,  are  the  manifestations  of  the  unconscious  in  actually  insane

patients. As the intuitive ideas of normal men do not spring from logical

combinations of the conscious mind, so the hallucinations and delusions of

the insane arise, not out of conscious but out of unconscious processes.

Formerly, when we held a more materialistic view of psychiatry we were

inclined to believe that all delusions, hallucinations, stereotypic acts, etc.,

were  provoked  by  morbid  processes  in  the  brain  cells.  Such  a  theory,

however, ignores that delusions, hallucinations, etc., are also to be met with

in  certain  functional  disturbances,  and  not  only  in  the  case  of  functional

disturbances, but also in the case of normal people. Primitive people may

have visions and hear strange voices without having their mental processes at

all disturbed. To seek to ascribe symptoms of that nature directly to a disease

of the brain cells I hold to be superficial and unwarranted. Hallucinations

show very plainly how a part of the unconscious content can force itself

across the threshold of the conscious. The same is true of a delusion whose

appearance is at once strange and unexpected by the patient.

The  expression  "mental  balance"  is  no  mere  figure  of  speech,  for  its

disturbance is a real disturbance of that equilibrium which actually exists

between the unconscious and conscious content to a greater extent than has

heretofore been recognised or understood. As a matter of fact, it amounts to

this—that  the  normal  functioning  of  the  unconscious  processes  breaks

through into the conscious mind in an abnormal manner, and thereby disturbs

the adaptation of the individual to his environment.

If  we  study  attentively  the  history  of  any  such  person  coming  under  our

observation, we shall often find that he has been living for a considerable

time in a sort of peculiar individual isolation, more or less shut off from the

world of reality. This constrained condition of aloofness may be traced back

to certain innate or early acquired peculiarities, which show themselves in the

events  of  his  life.  For  instance,  in  the  histories  of  those  suffering  from

dementia præcox we often hear such a remark as this: "He was always of a

pensive disposition, and much shut up in himself. After his mother died he

cut  himself  off  still  more  from  the  world,  shunning  his  friends  andacquaintances." Or again, we may hear, "Even as a child he devised many

peculiar  inventions;  and  later,  when  he  became  an  engineer,  he  occupied

himself with most ambitious schemes."

Without discussing the matter further it must be plain that a counterpoise is

produced in the unconscious as a compensation to the one-sidedness of the

conscious  attitude.  In  the  first  case  we  may  expect  to  find  an  increasing

pressing  forward  in  the  unconscious,  of  a  wish  for  human  intercourse,  a

longing for mother, friends, relatives; while in the second case self-criticism

will try to establish a correcting balance. Among normal people a condition

never  arises  so  one-sided  that  the  natural  corrective  tendencies  of  the

unconscious entirely lose their value in the affairs of everyday life; but in the

case  of  abnormal  people,  it  is  eminently  characteristic  that  the  individual

entirely  fails  to  recognise  the  compensating  influences  which  arise  in  the

unconscious. He even continues to accentuate his one-sidedness; this is in

accord with the well-known psychological fact that the worst enemy of the

wolf is the wolf-hound, the greatest despiser of the negro is the mulatto, and

that the biggest fanatic is the convert; for I should be a fanatic were I to attack

a thing outwardly which inwardly I am obliged to concede as right.

The  mentally  unbalanced  man  tries  to  defend  himself  against  his  own

unconscious,  that  is  to  say,  he  battles  against  his  own  compensating

influences. The man already dwelling in a sort of atmosphere of isolation,

continues to remove himself further and further from the world of reality, and

the  ambitious  engineer  strives  by  increasingly  morbid  exaggerations  of

invention to disprove the correctness of his own compensating powers of

self-criticism. As a result of this a condition of excitation is produced, from

which  results  a  great  lack  of  harmony  between  the  conscious  and

unconscious attitudes. The pairs of opposites are torn asunder, the resulting

division or strife leads to disaster, for the unconscious soon begins to intrude

itself violently upon the conscious processes. Then odd and peculiar thoughts

and moods supervene, and not infrequently incipient forms of hallucination,

which clearly bear the stamp of the internal conflict.

These corrective impulses or compensations which now break through into

the  conscious  mind,  should  theoretically  be  the  beginning  of  the  healing

process,  because  through  them  the  previously  isolated  attitude  should

apparently be relieved. But in reality this does not result, for the reason that

the  unconscious  corrective  impulses  which  thus  succeed  in  making

themselves apparent to the conscious mind, do so in a form that is altogetherunacceptable to consciousness.

The isolated individual begins to hear strange voices, which accuse him of

murder and all sorts of crimes. These voices drive him to desperation and in

the  resulting  agitation  he  attempts  to  get  into  contact  with  the

surrounding milieu, and does what he formerly had anxiously avoided. The

compensation, to be sure, is reached, but to the detriment of the individual.

The pathological inventor, who is unable to profit by his previous failures, by

refusing to recognise the value of his own self-criticism, becomes the creator

of still more preposterous designs. He wishes to accomplish the impossible

but falls into the absurd. After a while he notices that people talk about him,

make unfavourable remarks about him, and even scoff at him. He believes a

far-reaching conspiracy exists to frustrate his discoveries and render them

objects of ridicule. By this means his unconscious brings about the same

results  that  his  self-criticism  could  have  attained,  but  again  only  to  the

detriment  of  the  individual,  because  the  criticism  is  projected  into  his

surroundings.

An especially typical form of unconscious compensation—to give a further

example—is the paranoia of the alcoholic. The alcoholic loses his love for his

wife; the unconscious compensation tries to lead him back again to his duty,

but only partially succeeds, for it causes him to become jealous of his wife as

if he still loved her. As we know, he may even go so far as to kill both his

wife and himself, merely out of jealousy. In other words, his love for his wife

has not been entirely lost, it has simply become subliminal; but from the

realm of the unconscious it can now only reappear in the form of jealousy.

We see something of a similar nature in the case of religious converts. One

who  turns  from  protestantism  to  catholicism  has,  as  is  well  known,  the

tendency  to  be  somewhat  fanatical.  His  protestantism  is  not  entirely

relinquished, but has merely disappeared into the unconscious, where it is

constantly  at  work  as  a  counter-argument  against  the  newly  acquired

catholicism. Therefore the new convert feels himself constrained to defend

the faith he has adopted in a more or less fanatical way. It is exactly the same

in  the  case  of  the  paranoiac,  who  feels  himself  constantly  constrained  to

defend himself against all external criticism, because his delusional system is

too much threatened from within.

The strange manner in which these compensating influences break through

into the conscious mind derives its peculiarities from the fact that they have

to struggle against the resistances already existing in the conscious mind, andtherefore present themselves to the patient's mind in a thoroughly distorted

manner.  And  secondly,  these  compensating  equivalents  are  obliged

necessarily to present themselves in the language of the unconscious—that is,

in material of a heterogeneous and subliminal nature. For all the material of

the conscious mind which is of no further value, and can find no suitable

employment, becomes subliminal, such as all those forgotten infantile and

phantastic creations that have ever entered the heads of men, of which only

the legends and myths still remain. For certain reasons which I cannot discuss

further here, this latter material is frequently found in dementia præcox.

I hope I may have been able to give in this brief contribution, which I feel to

be unfortunately incomplete, a glimpse of the situation as it presents itself to

me of the importance of the unconscious in psychopathology. It would be

impossible in a short discourse to give an adequate idea of all the work that

has already been done in this field.

To sum up, I may say that the function of the unconscious in conditions of

mental  disturbance  is  essentially  a  compensation  of  the  content  of  the

conscious mind. But because of the characteristic condition of one-sidedness

of the conscious striving in all such cases, the compensating correctives are

rendered useless. It is, however, inevitable that these unconscious tendencies

break through into the conscious mind, but in adapting themselves to the

character of the one-sided conscious aims, it is only possible for them to

appear in a distorted and unacceptable form.                                CHAPTER XI

A CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUDY OF PSYCHOLOGICAL TYPES

It is well known that in their general physiognomy hysteria and dementia

præcox present a striking contrast, which is seen particularly in the attitude of

the  sufferers  towards  the  external  world.  The  reactions  provoked  in  the

hysteric surpass the normal level of intensity of feeling, whilst this level is

not reached at all by the precocious dement. The picture presented by these

contrasted illnesses is one of exaggerated emotivity in the one, and extreme

apathy in the other, with regard to the environment. In their personal relations

this difference is very marked. Abstraction creates some exceptions here, for

we remain in affective rapport with our hysterical patients, which is not the

case in dementia præcox.

The opposition between these two nosological types is also seen in the rest of

their symptomatology. From the intellectual point of view the products of

hysterical imagination may be accounted for in a very natural and human way

in  each  individual  case  by  the  antecedents  and  individual  history  of  the

patient; while the inventions of the precocious dement, on the contrary, are

more nearly related to dreams than to normal consciousness, and they display

moreover an incontestably archaic tendency, wherein mythological creations

of primitive imagination are more in evidence than the personal memories of

the  patient.  From  the  physical  point  of  view  we  do  not  find  in  dementia

præcox  those  symptoms  so  common  in  the  hysteric,  which  simulate  well

known or severe organic affections.

All  this  clearly  indicates  that  hysteria  is  characterised  by  a  centrifugal

tendency of the libido, whilst in dementia præcox its tendency is centripetal.

The  reverse  occurs,  however,  where  the  illness  has  fully  established  its

compensatory effects. In the hysteric the libido is always hampered in its

movements of expansion and forced to regress upon itself; one observes that

such individuals cease to partake in the common life, are wrapped up in their

phantasies, keep their beds, or are unable to live outside their sick-rooms, etc.

The precocious dement, on the contrary, during the incubation of his illness

turns away from the outer world in order to withdraw into himself; but when

the period of morbid compensation arrives, he seems constrained to draw

attention to himself, and to force himself upon the notice of those around

him, by his extravagant, insupportable, or directly aggressive conduct.I propose to use the terms "extroversion" and "introversion" to describe these

two opposite directions of the libido, further qualifying them, however, as

"regressive"  in  morbid  cases  where  phantasies,  fictions,  or  phantastic

interpretations, inspired by emotivity, falsify the perceptions of the subject

about things, or about himself. We say that he is extroverted when he gives

his fundamental interest to the outer or objective world, and attributes an all-

important and essential value to it: he is introverted, on the contrary, when

the objective world suffers a sort of depreciation, or want of consideration,

for  the  sake  of  the  exaltation  of  the  individual  himself,  who  then

monopolising all the interest, grows to believe no one but himself worthy of

consideration. I will call "regressive extroversion" the phenomenon which

Freud calls "transference" (Übertragung), by which the hysteric projects into

the objective world the illusions, or subjective values of his feelings. In the

same  way  I  shall  call  "regressive  introversion,"  the  opposite  pathological

phenomenon which we find in dementia præcox, where the subject himself

suffers these phantastical transfigurations.

It  is  obvious  that  these  two  contrary  movements  of  the  libido,  as  simple

psychic mechanisms, may play a part alternately in the same individual, since

after  all  they  serve  the  same  purpose  by  different  methods—namely,  to

minister  to  his  well-being.  Freud  has  taught  us  that  in  the  mechanism  of

hysterical  transference  the  individual  aims  at  getting  rid  of  disagreeable

memories or impressions, in order to free himself from painful complexes, by

a process of "repression." Conversely in the mechanism of introversion, the

personality tends to concentrate itself upon its complexes, and with them, to

isolate  itself  from  external  reality,  by  a  process  which  is  not  properly

speaking "repression," but which would be better rendered perhaps by the

term "depreciation" (Entwertung) of the objective world.

The existence of two mental affections so opposite in character as hysteria

and dementia præcox, in which the contrast rests on the almost exclusive

supremacy  of  extroversion  or  introversion,  suggests  that  these  two

psychological types may exist equally well in normal persons, who may be

characterised  by  the  relative  predominance  of  one  or  other  of  the  two

mechanisms. Psychiatrists know very well that before either illness is fully

declared, patients already present the characteristic type, traces of which are

to be found from the earliest years of life. As Binet pointed out so well, the

neurotic only accentuates and shews in relief the characteristic traits of his

personality. One knows, of course, that the hysterical character is not simplythe product of the illness, but pre-existed it in a measure. And Hoch has

shown by his researches into the histories of his dementia præcox patients,

that  this  is  also  the  case  with  them;  dissociations  or  eccentricities  were

present before the onset of the illness. If this is so, one may certainly expect

to meet the same contrast between psychological temperaments outside the

sphere of pathology. It is moreover easy to cull from literature numerous

examples which bear witness to the actual existence of these two opposite

types of mentality. Without pretending to exhaust the subject, I will give a

few striking examples.

In my opinion, we owe the best observations on this subject to the philosophy

of William James. He lays down the principle that no matter what may be the

temperament of a "professional philosopher," it is this temperament which he

feels himself forced to express and to justify in his philosophy. And starting

from this idea, which is altogether in accord with the spirit of psychoanalysis,

divides  philosophers  into  two  classes:  the  "tender-minded,"  who  are  only

interested in the inner life and spiritual things; and the "tough-minded," who

lay most stress on material things and objective reality. We see that these two

classes are actuated by exactly opposite tendencies of the libido: the "tender-

minded" represent introversion, the "tough-minded" extroversion.

James says that the tender-minded are characterised by rationalism; they are

men of principles and of systems, they aspire to dominate experience and to

transcend it by abstract reasoning, by their logical deductions, and purely

rational  conceptions.  They  care  little  for  facts,  and  the  multiplicity  of

phenomena hardly embarrasses them at all: they forcibly fit data into their

ideal constructions, and reduce everything to their a priori premises. This

was the method of Hegel in settling beforehand the number of the planets. In

the domain of mental pathology we again meet this kind of philosopher in

paranoiacs, who, without being disquieted by the flat contradictions presented

by experience, impose their delirious conceptions on the universe, and find

means  of  interpreting  everything,  and  according  to  Adler  "arranging"

everything, in conformity with their morbidly preconceived system.

The other traits which James depicts in this type follow naturally from its

fundamental  character.  The  tender-minded  man,  he  says,  is  intellectual,

idealist, optimist, religious, partisan of free-will, a monist, and a dogmatist.

All these qualities betray the almost exclusive concentration of the libido

upon the intellectual life. This concentration upon the inner world of thought

is nothing else than introversion. In so far as experience plays a rôle withthese philosophers, it serves only as an allurement or fillip to abstraction, in

response to the imperative need to fit forcibly all the chaos of the universe

within well-defined limits, which are, in the last resort, the creation of a spirit

obedient to its subjective values.

The tough-minded man is positivist and empiricist. He regards only matters

of fact. Experience is his master, his exclusive guide and inspiration. It is

only empirical phenomena demonstrable in the outside world which count.

Thought is merely a reaction to external experience. In the eyes of these

philosophers principles are never of such value as facts; they can only reflect

and describe the sequence of phenomena and cannot construct a system. Thus

their  theories  are  exposed  to  contradiction  under  the  overwhelming

accumulation of empirical material. Psychic reality for the positivist limits

itself to the observation and experience of pleasure and pain; he does not go

beyond  that,  nor  does  he  recognise  the  rights  of  philosophical  thought.

Remaining  on  the  ever-changing  surface  of  the  phenomenal  world,  he

partakes himself of its instability; carried away in the chaotic tumult of the

universe, he sees all its aspects, all its theoretical and practical possibilities,

but he never arrives at the unity or the fixity of a settled system, which alone

could  satisfy  the  idealist  or  tender-minded.  The  positivist  depreciates  all

values in reducing them to elements lower than themselves; he explains the

higher by the lower, and dethrones it, by showing that it is "nothing but such

another thing," which has no value in itself.

From  these  general  characteristics,  the  others  which  James  points  out

logically follow. The positivist is a sensualist, giving greater value to the

specific realm of the senses than to reflection which transcends it. He is a

materialist  and  a  pessimist,  for  he  knows  only  too  well  the  hopeless

uncertainty of the course of things. He is irreligious, not being in a state to

hold firmly to the realities of the inner world as opposed to the pressure of

external facts; he is a determinist and fatalist, only able to show resignation; a

pluralist,  incapable  of  all  synthesis;  and  finally  a  sceptic,  as  a  last  and

inevitable consequence of all the rest.

The expressions, therefore, used by James, show clearly that the diversity of

types is the result of a different localisation of the libido; this libido is the

magic power in the depth of our being, which, following the personality,

carries  it  sometimes  towards  internal  life,  and  sometimes  towards  the

objective world. James compares, for example, the religious subjectivism of

the idealist, and the quasi-religious attitude of the contemporary empiricist:"Our esteem for facts has not neutralised in us all religiousness. It is itself

almost religious. Our scientific temper is devout."

A second parallel is furnished by Wilhelm Ostwald, who divides "savants"

and men of genius into classics and romantics. The latter are distinguished by

their  rapid  reactions,  their  extremely  prompt  and  abundant  production  of

ideas and projects, some of which are badly digested and of doubtful value.

They are admirable and brilliant masters, loving to teach, of a contagious

ardour and enthusiasm, which attracts many pupils, and makes them founders

of  schools,  exercising  great  personal  influence.  Herein  our  type  of

extroversion  is  easily  recognised.  The  classics  of  Ostwald  are,  on  the

contrary, slow to react; they produce with much difficulty, are little capable

of teaching or of exercising direct personal influence, and lacking enthusiasm

are  paralysed  by  their  own  severe  criticism,  living  apart  and  absorbed  in

themselves, making scarcely any disciples, but producing works of finished

perfection which often bring them posthumous fame. All these characteristics

correspond to introversion.

We find a further very valuable example in the æsthetic theory of Warringer.

Borrowing from A. Riegl his expression "Volonté d'art absolue" to express

the internal force which inspires the artist, he distinguishes two forms, viz.

sympathy  (Einfühlung)  and  abstraction;  and  the  term  which  he  employs

indicates that here, too, we witness the activity of the push of the libido, the

stirring  of  the élan  vital.  "In  the  same  way,"  says  Warringer,  "as  the

sympathetic  impulse  finds  its  satisfaction  in  organic  beauty,  so  abstract

impulse discovers beauty in the inorganic, which is the negation of all life, in

crystallised forms, and in a general manner wherever the severity of abstract

law reigns." Whilst sympathy represents the warmth of passion which carries

it into the presence of the object in order to assimilate it and penetrate it with

emotional values; abstraction, on the other hand, despoils the object of all

that could recall life, and grasps it by purely intellectual thought, crystallised

and fixed into the rigid forms of law,—the universal, the typical. Bergson

also  makes  use  of  these  images  of  crystallisation,  solidification,  etc.,  to

illustrate the essence of intellectual abstraction.

Warringer's  "abstraction"  represents  the  process  which  I  have  already

remarked  as  a  consequence  of  introversion,  namely,  the  exaltation  of  the

intellect,  in  the  place  of  the  depreciated  reality  of  the  external  world.

"Sympathy" corresponds in fact to extroversion, for, as Lipps has pointed out,

"What I perceive sympathetically in an object is, in a general manner life, andlife is power, internal work, effort, and execution. To live, in a word, is to act,

and to act is to experience intimately the force which we give out; experience

creates activity, which is essentially of a spontaneous character." "Æsthetic

enjoyment," said Warringer, "is the enjoyment of one's own self projected

into the "object," a formula which corresponds absolutely with our definition

of transference. This æsthetic conception does not refer to the positivist in

James's sense; it is rather the attitude of the idealist for whom psychological

reality  only  is  interesting,  and  worthy  of  consideration."  Warringer  adds,

"what is essential lies not in the gradation of the feeling, but pre-eminently in

the feeling itself; that is to say, the inner movement, the intimate life, the

unfolding  of  the  subject's  own  activity;  the  value  of  a  line  or  of  a  form,

depends in our eyes on the biological value it holds for us; that which gives

beauty is solely our own vital feeling, which we unconsciously project into

it." This view corresponds exactly with my own way of understanding the

theory of the libido, in attempting to keep the true balance between the two

psychological opposites of introversion and extroversion.

The polar opposite of sympathy is abstraction. The impulse of abstraction is

conceived  by  Warringer  "as  the  result  of  a  great  internal  conflict  of  the

human soul in the presence of the external world, and from the religious

standpoint,  it  corresponds  to  a  strong  transcendental  colouring  of  all  the

representations man has made to himself of reality." We recognise clearly in

this definition the primordial tendency to introversion. To the introverted type

the  universe  does  not  appear  beautiful  and  desirable,  but  disquieting,  and

even dangerous; it is a manifestation against which the subject puts himself

on the defensive; he entrenches himself in his inner fastness, and fortifies

himself  therein  by  the  invention  of  geometrical  figures,  full  of  repose,

perfectly clear even in their minutest details, the primitive magic power of

which assures him of domination over the surrounding world.

"The need of abstraction is the origin of all art," says Warringer. Here is a

great  principle,  which  gains  weighty  confirmation  from  the  fact  that

precocious dements reproduce forms and figures which present the closest

analogy to those of primitive humanity, not only in their thoughts but also in

their drawings.

We  should  recall  that  Schiller  had  already  tried  to  formulate  the  same

presentation in what he calls the naïve and sentimental types. The latter is in

quest of nature, whilst the former is itself "all nature." Schiller also saw that

these two types result from the predominance of psychological mechanismswhich might be met with in one and the same individual. "It is not only in the

same poet," he said, "but even in the same work that these two types of

mentality are found united.... The naïve poet pursues only nature and feeling

in  their  simplicity,  and  all  his  effort  is  limited  to  the  imitation  and

reproduction of reality. The sentimental poet, on the contrary, reflects the

impression he receives from objects. The object here is allied to an idea, and

the poetic power of the work depends on this alliance." These quotations

shew what types Schiller had in view, and one recognises their fundamental

identity with those with which we are here dealing.

We find another instance in Nietzsche's contrast between the minds of Apollo

and of Dionysus. The example which Nietzsche uses to illustrate this contrast

is instructive—namely, that between a dream and intoxication. In a dream the

individual is shut up in himself, in intoxication, on the contrary, he forgets

himself  to  the  highest  degree,  and,  set  free  from  his  self-consciousness,

plunges  into  the  multiplicity  of  the  objective  world.  To  depict  Apollo,

Nietzsche borrows the words of Schopenhauer, "As upon a tumultuous sea,

which disgorges and swallows by turns, lost to view in the mountains of

foaming waves, the mariner remains seated tranquilly on his plank, full of

confidence in his frail barque; so individual man, in a world of troubles, lives

passive  and  serene,  relying  with  confidence  on  the  principle  of

'individuation.'"  "Yes,"  continues  Nietzsche,  "we  might  say  that  the

unshakeable  confidence  in  this  principle,  and  the  calm  security  of  those

whom it has inspired, have found in Apollo their most sublime expression,

and  we  may  always  recognise  in  him  the  most  splendid  and  divine

personification of the principle of making an individual." The Apollien state,

as Nietzsche conceives it, is consequently the withdrawal into oneself, that is,

introversion.  Conversely  in  the  Dionysian  state,  psychic  intoxication,

indicates in his view the unloosening of a torrent of libido which expends

itself upon things. "This is not only," says Nietzsche, "the alliance of man

with  man,  which  finds  itself  confirmed  afresh  under  the  Dionysian

enchantment; it is alienated Nature, hostile or enslaved, which also celebrates

her reconciliation with her prodigal child,—man. Spontaneously Earth offers

her gifts and the wild beasts from rock and desert draw near peacefully. The

car  of  Dionysus  is  lost  under  flowers  and  garlands;  panthers  and  tigers

approach under his yoke."

If we change Beethoven's "Hymn of Praise" into a picture, and giving rein to

our imagination, contemplate the millions of beings prostrated and tremblingin the dust, at such a moment the Dionysian intoxication will be near at hand.

Then is the slave free; then all the rigid and hostile barriers which poverty

and arbitrary or insolent custom have established between man and man are

broken down. Now, by means of this gospel of universal harmony, each feels

himself not only reunited, reconciled, fused with his neighbour, but actually

identified with him, as if the veil of "Maïa was torn away, nothing remaining

of it but a few shreds floating before the mystery of the Primordial Unity." It

would be superfluous to add comment to these quotations.

In concluding this series of examples culled outside my own special domain,

I will quote the linguistic hypothesis of Finck, where we also see the duality

in  question.  The  structure  of  language,  according  to  Finck,  presents  two

principal types: in one the subject is generally conceived as active: "I see

him," "I strike him down;" in the other the subject experiences and feels, and

it is the object which acts: "He appears to me," "He succumbs to me." The

first  type  clearly  shews  the  libido  as  going  out  of  the  subject,—this  is  a

centrifugal  movement;  the  second  as  coming  out  of  the  object,—this

movement is centripetal. We meet with this latter introverted type especially

in the primitive languages of the Esquimaux.

In the domain of psychiatry also these two types have been described by Otto

Gross, who distinguishes two forms of mental debility: the one a diffuse and

shallow consciousness, the other a concentrated and deep consciousness. The

first is characterised by weakness of the consecutive function, the second by

its  excessive  reinforcement.  Gross  has  recognised  that  the  consecutive

function is in intimate relation with affectivity, from which we might infer

that he is dealing once more with our two psychological types. The relation

he establishes between maniac depressive insanity and the state of diffuse or

extended  and  shallow  mental  disease  shows  that  the  latter  represents  the

extroverted type; and the relation between the psychology of the paranoiac

and  repressed  mentality,  indicates  the  identity  of  the  former  with  the

introverted type.

After the foregoing considerations no one will be astonished to find that in

the domain of psychoanalysis we also have to reckon with the existence of

these two psychological types.

On  the  one  side  we  meet  with  a  theory  which  is  essentially  reductive,

pluralist, causal and sensualist; this is Freud's standpoint. This theory limits

itself  rigidly  to  empirical  facts,  and  traces  back  complexes  to  their

antecedents and their elemental factors. It regards the psychological life asbeing  only  an  effect,  a  reaction  to  the  environment,  and  accords  the

greatest rôle and the largest place to sensation. On the other side we have the

diametrically opposed theory of Adler which is an entirely philosophical and

finalistic one. In it phenomena are not reducible to earlier and very primitive

factors, but are conceived as "arrangements," the outcome of intentions and

of ends of an extremely complex nature. It is no longer the view of causality

but of finality which dominates researches: the history of the patient and the

concrete influences of the environment are of much less importance than the

dominating principles, the "fictions directrices," of the individual. It is not

essential  for  him  to  depend  upon  the  object,  and  to  find  in  it  his  fill  of

subjective enjoyment, but to protect his own individuality and to guarantee it

against the hostile influences of the environment.

Whilst  Freud's  psychology  has  for  its  predominant  note  the  centrifugal

tendency,  which  demands  its  happiness  and  satisfaction  in  the  objective

world, in that of Adler the chief rôle belongs to the centripetal movement,

which tends to the supremacy of the subject, to his triumph and his liberty, as

opposed to the overwhelming forces of existence. The expedient to which the

type described by Freud has recourse is "infantile transference," by means of

which he projects phantasy into the object and finds a compensation for the

difficulties of life in this transfiguration. In the type described by Adler what

is characteristic is, on the contrary, the "virile protest," personal resistance,

the  efficacious  safeguard  which  the  individual  provides  for  himself,  in

affirming and stubbornly enclosing himself in his dominating ideas.

The  difficult  task  of  elaborating  a  psychology  which  should  pay  equal

attention to the two types of mentality belongs to the future.                                CHAPTER XII

                      THE PSYCHOLOGY OF DREAMS

A dream is a psychic structure which at first sight appears to be in striking

contrast with conscious thought, because judging by its form and substance it

apparently does not lie within the continuity of development of the conscious

contents,  it  is  not  integral  to  it,  but  is  a  mere  external  and  apparently

accidental occurrence. Its mode of genesis is in itself sufficient to isolate a

dream  from  the  other  contents  of  the  conscious,  for  it  is  a  survival  of  a

peculiar  psychic  activity  which  takes  place  during  sleep,  and  does  not

originate in the manifest and clearly logical and emotional continuity of the

event experienced.

But a careful observer should have no difficulty in discovering that a dream is

not entirely severed from the continuity of the conscious, for in almost every

dream certain details are found which have their origin in the impressions,

thoughts, or states of mind of one of the preceding days. In so far a certain

continuity does exist, albeit a retrograde one. But any one keenly interested

in the dream problem cannot have failed to observe that a dream has also

a progressive continuity—if such an expression be permitted—since dreams

occasionally exert a remarkable influence upon the conscious mental life,

even  of  persons  who  cannot  be  considered  superstitious  or  particularly

abnormal. These occasional after-effects are usually seen in a more or less

distinct change in the dreamer's frame of mind.

It  is  probably  in  consequence  of  this  loose  connection  with  the  other

conscious contents, that the recollected dream is so extremely unstable. Many

dreams baffle all attempts at reproduction, even immediately after waking;

others can only be remembered with doubtful accuracy, and comparatively

few can be termed really distinct and clearly reproduceable. This peculiar

reaction with regard to recollection may be understood by considering the

characteristics  of  the  various  elements  combined  in  a  dream.  The

combination  of  ideas  in  dreams  is  essentially phantastic;  they  are  linked

together in a sequence which, as a rule, is quite foreign to our current way of

thinking, and in striking contrast to the logical sequence of ideas which we

consider to be a special characteristic of conscious mental processes.

It  is  to  this  characteristic  that  dreams  owe  the  common  epithet  of

"meaningless." Before pronouncing this verdict, we must reflect that dreamsand their chains of ideas are something that we do not understand. Such a

verdict would therefore be merely a projection of our non-comprehension

upon its object. But that would not prevent its own peculiar meaning being

inherent in a dream.

In spite of the fact that for centuries endeavours have been made to extract a

prophetic  meaning  from  dreams,  Freud's  discovery  is  practically  the  first

successful attempt to find their real significance. His work merits the term

"scientific," because he has evolved a technique which, not only he, but many

other investigators also assert achieves its object, namely, the understanding

of the meaning of the dream. This meaning is not identical with the one

which the manifest dream content seems to indicate.

This is not the place for a critical discussion of Freud's psychology of dreams.

But I will try to give a brief summary of what may be regarded as more or

less established facts of dream psychology to-day.

The first question we must discuss is, whence do we deduce the justification

for attributing to dreams any other significance than the one indicated in the

unsatisfying fragmentary meaning of the manifest dream content?

As regards this point a particularly weighty argument is the fact that Freud

discovered  the  hidden  meaning  of  dreams  by empiric  and

not deductive methods. A further argument in favour of a possible hidden, as

opposed to the manifest meaning of dreams, is obtained by comparing dream-

phantasies with other phantasies (day-dreams and the like) in one and the

same individual. It is not difficult to conceive that such day-phantasies have

not merely a superficial, concrete meaning, but also a deeper psychological

meaning.  It  is  solely  on  account  of  the  brevity  that  I  must  impose  upon

myself, that I do not submit materials in proof of this. But I should like to

point out that what may be said about the meaning of phantasies, is well

illustrated by an old and widely diffused type of imaginative story, of which

Æsop's Fables are typical examples, wherein, for instance, the story is some

objectively impossible phantasy about the deeds of a lion and an ass. The

concrete superficial meaning of the fable is an impossible phantasm, but the

hidden  moral  meaning  is  plain  upon  reflection.  It  is  characteristic  that

children are pleased and satisfied with the exoteric meaning of the story.

However, the best argument for the existence of a hidden meaning in dreams

is provided by conscientious application of the technical procedure to solve

the manifest dream content.

This  brings  us  to  our  second  main  point,  viz.—the  question  of  analyticprocedure. Here again I desire neither to defend nor to criticise Freud's views

and discoveries, but rather to confine myself to what seem to me to be firmly

established facts.

The fact that a dream is a psychic structure, does not give us the slightest

ground  for  assuming  that  it  obeys  laws  and  designs  other  than  those

applicable to any other psychic structure. According to the maxim: principia

explicandi  prœter  necessitatem  non  sunt  multiplicanda,  we  have  to  treat

dreams,  in  analysis,  just  as  any  other  psychic  structure,  until  experience

teaches us some better way.

We know that every psychic construction considered from the standpoint of

causality, is the resultant of previous psychic contents. Moreover, we know

also that every psychic structure, considered from the standpoint of finality,

has its own peculiar meaning and purpose in the actual psychic process. This

standard  must  also  be  applied  to  dreams.  When,  therefore,  we  seek  a

psychological explanation of a dream, we must first know what were the

preceding  experiences  out  of  which  it  is  combined.  We  must  trace  the

antecedents of every element in the dream picture. For example: some one

dreams "that he is walking in a street, a child is running in front of him, who

is suddenly run over by a motor-car." We will trace the antecedents of this

dream-picture, with the aid of the dreamer's recollections.

He recognises the street as one down which he had walked on the previous

day. The child he acknowledges as his brother's child, whom he had seen on

the previous evening when visiting his brother. The motor accident reminds

him of an accident that had actually occurred a few days before, but of which

he had only read an account in a newspaper. Popular opinion is known to be

satisfied with this kind of explanation. People say: "Oh, that is why I dreamt

such and such a thing!"

Obviously  this  explanation  is  absolutely  unsatisfactory  from  a  scientific

standpoint. The dreamer walked down many streets on the previous day; why

was this particular one selected? He had read about several accidents; why

did he select just this one? The mere disclosure of an antecedent is by no

means sufficient; for a plausible determination of the dream presentation can

only  be  obtained  from  the  competition  of  various  determinants.  The

collection  of  additional  material  proceeds,  according  to  the  principle  of

recollection that has been called the Association Method. The result, as will

easily be understood, is the admission of a mass of multifarious and quite

heterogeneous material, having apparently nothing in common but the fact ofits evident associative connection with the dream contents, since it has been

reproduced by means of this content.

How far the collection of such material should go, is an important question

from the technical point of view. Since the entire psychic content of a life

may be ultimately disclosed from any single starting point, theoretically the

whole previous life-experience might be found in every dream. But we only

need to assemble just so much material as is absolutely necessary in order to

comprehend the dream's meaning. The limitation of the material is obviously

an  arbitrary  proceeding,  according  to  that  principle  of  Kant's  whereby

to comprehend is "to perceive to the extent necessary for our purpose." For

instance, when undertaking a survey of the causes of the French Revolution,

we could, in amassing our material, include not only the history of medieval

France  but  also  that  of  Rome  and  Greece,  which  certainly  would  not  be

"necessary for our purpose," since we can comprehend the historical genesis

of the Revolution from much more limited material.

Except for the aforesaid arbitrary limitation, the collecting of material lies

outside the investigator's discretion. The material gathered must now be sifted

and  examined,  according  to  principles  which  are  always  applied  to  the

examination of historical or any empirical scientific material. The method is

an  essentially  comparative  one,  that  obviously  cannot  be  applied

automatically,  but  is  largely  dependent  upon  the  skill  and  aim  of  the

investigator.

When a psychological fact has to be explained, it must be remembered that

psychological  data  necessitate  a  twofold  point  of  view,  namely,  that

of causality and that of finality. I use the word finality intentionally, in order

to  avoid  confusion  with  the  idea  of  "teleology."  I  use  finality  to  denote

immanent psychological teleology. In so far as we apply the view point of

causality to the material that has been associated with the dream, we reduce

the manifest dream content to certain fundamental tendencies or ideas. These,

as one would expect, are elementary and universal in character.

For instance, a young patient dreams as follows: "I am standing in a strange

garden, and pluck an apple from a tree. I look about cautiously, to make sure

no one sees me."

The associated dream material is a memory of having once, when a boy,

plucked a couple of pears surreptitiously from another person's garden.

The feeling of having a bad conscience, which is a prominent feature in the

dream, reminds him of a situation he experienced on the previous day. Hemet a young lady in the street—a casual acquaintance—and exchanged a few

words  with  her.  At  that  moment  a  gentleman  passed  whom  he  knew,

whereupon  our  patient  was  suddenly  seized  with  a  curious  feeling  of

embarrassment, as if he had done something wrong. He associated the apple

with the scene in Paradise, together with the fact that he had never really

understood why the eating of the forbidden fruit should have been fraught

with such dire consequences for our first parents. This had always made him

feel angry; it seemed to him an unjust act of God, for God had made men as

they were, with all their curiosity and greed.

Another  association  was,  that  sometimes  his  father  had  punished  him  for

certain  things  in  a  way  that  seemed  to  him  incomprehensible.  The  worst

punishment had been bestowed after he had secretly watched girls bathing.

That led up to the confession that he had recently begun a love affair with a

housemaid, but had not yet carried it through to a conclusion. On the day

before the dream he had had a rendezvous with her.

Upon  reviewing  this  material  we  see  that  the  dream  contains  a  very

transparent reference to the last-named incident. The connecting associative

material shows that the apple episode is palpably meant for an erotic scene.

For various other reasons, too, it may be considered extremely probable that

this experience of the previous day is operative even in this dream. In the

dream the young man plucks the apple of Paradise, which in reality he has

not yet plucked. The remainder of the material associated with the dream is

concerned  with  another  experience  of  the  previous  day,  namely,  with  the

peculiar feeling of a bad conscience, which seized the dreamer when he was

talking to his casual lady acquaintance; this, again, was connected with the

fall  of  man  in  Paradise,  and  finally  with  an  erotic  misdemeanour  of  his

childhood,  for  which  his  father  had  punished  him  severely.  All  these

associations are linked together by the idea of guilt.

In the first place we will consider this material from Freud's view-point of

causality; in other words, we will "interpret" it, to use Freud's expression. A

wish has been left unfulfilled from the day before the dream. In the dream

this wish is realised in the symbolical apple scene. But why is this realisation

disguised and hidden under a symbolic image instead of being expressed in a

distinctly sexual thought? Freud would refer to the unmistakable sense of

guilt shown up by the material, and say the morality that has been inculcated

in the young man from childhood is bent on repressing such wishes, and to

that  end  brands  the  natural  craving  as  immoral  and  reprehensible.  Thesuppressed immoral thought can therefore only achieve expression by means

of a symbol. As these thoughts are incompatible with the moral content of the

conscious ego, a psychic factor adopted by Freud called the Censor, prevents

this wish from passing undisguised into consciousness.

Reviewing the dream from the standpoint of finality, which I contrast with

that of Freud, does not—as I wish to establish explicitly—involve a denial of

the  dream's causæ,  but  rather  a  different  interpretation  of  the  associative

material collected around the dream. The material facts remain the same, but

the standard by which they are measured is altered. The question may be

formulated simply as follows: What is this dream's purpose? What should it

effect? These questions are not arbitrary, in as much as they may be applied

to  every  psychic  activity.  Everywhere  the  question  of  the  "why"  and

"wherefore" may be raised.

It is clear that the material added by the dream to the previous day's erotic

experience, chiefly emphasises the sense of guilt in the erotic act. The same

association has already been shown to be operative in another experience of

the previous day, in the meeting with his casual lady acquaintance, when the

feeling of a bad conscience was automatically and inexplicably aroused, as if,

in  that  instance,  too,  the  young  man  had  done  something  wrong.  This

experience also plays a part in the dream, which is even intensified by the

association of additional, appropriate material; the erotic experience of the

day before, being depicted by the story of the Fall which was followed by

such a severe punishment.

I  maintain  that  there  exists  in  the  dreamer  an  unconscious  propensity

or tendency  to  conceive  his  erotic  experiences  as  guilty.  It  is  most

characteristic  that  the  association  with  the  Fall  of  Man  should  ensue,  the

young man having never really grasped why the punishment should have

been  so  drastic.  This  association  throws  light  upon  the  reasons  why  the

dreamer did not think simply, "I am doing what is not right." Obviously he

does not know that he might condemn his own conduct as morally wrong.

This is actually the case. His conscious belief is that his conduct does not

matter in the least morally, as all his friends were acting in the same way;

besides, for other reasons too, is unable to understand why a fuss should be

made about it.

Whether this dream should be considered full or void of meaning depends

upon  a  very  important  question,  viz.  whether  the  standpoint  of  morality,

handed down to us through the ages by our forefathers is held to be full orvoid of meaning. I do not wish to wander off into a philosophical discussion

of this question, but would merely observe that mankind must obviously have

had very strong reasons for devising this morality, otherwise it would be truly

incomprehensible why such restraints should be imposed upon one of man's

strongest  cravings.  If  we  attach  due  value  to  this  fact,  we  are  bound  to

pronounce this dream to be full of meaning, for it reveals to the young man

the  necessity  of  facing  his  erotic  conduct  boldly  from  the  view  point  of

morality. Primitive races have in some respects extremely strict legislation

concerning sexuality. This fact proves that sexual morality is a not-to-be-

neglected factor in the soul's higher functions, but deserves to be taken fully

into account. In the case in question it should be added, that the young man—

influenced by his friends' example—somewhat thoughtlessly let himself be

guided exclusively by his erotic cravings, unmindful of the fact that man is a

morally  responsible  being  and  must  perforce  submit—voluntarily  or

involuntarily—to a morality that he himself has created.

In this dream we can discern a compensating function of the unconscious,

consisting in the fact that those thoughts, propensities, and tendencies of a

human personality, which in conscious life are too seldom recognised, come

spontaneously into action in the sleeping state, when to a large extent the

conscious process is disconnected.

The question might certainly be raised, of what use is this to the dreamer if he

does not understand the dream?

To this I must remark that to understand is not an exclusively intellectual

process,  for—as  experience  proves—man  may  be  influenced—nay,  even

very  effectually  convinced—by  innumerable  things,  of  which  he  has  no

intellectual understanding. I will merely remind my readers of the efficacy of

religious symbols.

The  example  given  above  might  suggest  the  thought  that  the  function  of

dreams is a distinctly "moral" one. Such it appears to be in this case, but if we

recall the formula according to which dreams contain the subliminal materials

of a given moment, we cannot speak simply of a "moral" function. For it is

worthy of note that the dreams of those persons whose actions are morally

unexceptionable, bring materials to light that might well be characterised as

"immoral" in the current meaning of that term. Thus it is significant that St.

Augustine was glad that God did not hold him responsible for his dreams.

The  unconscious  is  the  unknown  of  a  given  moment,  therefore  it  is  not

surprising that all those aspects that are essential for a totally different pointof view should be added by dreams to the conscious psychological factors of

a  given  moment.  It  is  evident  that  this  function  of  dreams  signifies  a

psychological  adjustment,  a  compensation  essential  for  properly  balanced

action. In the conscious process of reflection it is indispensable that, so far as

possible, we should realise all the aspects and consequences of a problem, in

order to find the right solution. This process is continued automatically in the

more  or  less  unconscious  state  of  sleep,  wherever—as  our  previous

experience  seems  to  show—all  those  other  points  of  view  occur  to  the

dreamer (at least by way of allusion) that during the day were underestimated

or even totally ignored; in other words, were comparatively unconscious.

As regards the much-discussed symbolism of dreams, the value attached to it

varies  according  to  whether  the  standpoint  of  causality  or  of  finality  is

adopted. According to Freud's causal view point it proceeds from a craving,

viz.  from  the  suppressed  dream-wish.  This  craving  is  always  somewhat

simple and primitive, and is able to disguise itself under manifold forms. For

instance, the young man in question might just as well have dreamt that he

had to open a door with a key, or that he had to travel by aeroplane, or that he

was kissing his mother, etc. From this standpoint all those things would have

had the same meaning. In this way, the typical adherents of Freud's school

have come to the point of interpreting—to give a gross instance—almost all

long objects in dreams as phallic symbols.

From the view-point of finality, the various dream pictures have each their

own peculiar value. For instance, if the young man, instead of dreaming of

the apple scene, had dreamt he had to open a door with a key, the altered

dream  picture  would  have  furnished  associative  material  of  an  essentially

different character; that, again, would have resulted in the conscious situation

being supplemented by associations of a totally different kind from those

connected with the apple scene. From this point of view, it is the diversity of

the dream's mode of expression that is full of meaning, and not the uniformity

in its significance. The causal view-point tends by its very nature towards

uniformity of meaning, that is, towards a fixed significance of symbols. On

the other hand, the final view-point perceives in an altered dream picture, the

expression  of  an  altered  psychological  situation.  It  recognises  no  fixed

meaning  of  symbols.  From  this  standpoint  all  the  dream  pictures  are

important in themselves, each one having a special significance of its own, to

which it owes its inclusion in the dream. Keeping to our previous example,

we  see  that  from  the  standpoint  of  finality  the  symbol  in  this  dream  isapproximately equivalent to a parable; it does not conceal, but it teaches. The

apple scene recalls vividly the sense of guilt, at the same time disguising the

real deed of our first parents.

It is obvious we reach very dissimilar interpretations of the meaning of the

dream,  according  to  the  point  of  view  adopted.  The  question  now  arises,

which is the better or truer version? After all, for us therapeuts it is a practical

and  not  a  merely  theoretical  necessity  that  leads  us  to  seek  for  some

comprehension of the meaning of dreams. In treating our patients we must for

practical reasons endeavour to lay hold of any means that will enable us to

train them effectually. It should be quite evident from the foregoing example,

that  the  material  associated  with  the  dream  has  opened  up  a  question

calculated to make many matters clear to the young man, which, hitherto, he

has heedlessly overlooked. But by disregarding these things he was really

overlooking something in himself, for he possesses a moral standard and a

moral need just like any other man. By trying to live without taking this fact

into  consideration,  his  life  is  one-sided  and  incomplete,  so  to  say  inco-

ordinate; with the same consequences for the psychological life as a one-

sided and incomplete diet would have for the physical. In order to develop a

person's individuality and independence to the uttermost, we need to bring to

fruition  all  those  functions  that  have  hitherto  attained  but  little  conscious

development  or  none  at  all.  In  order  to  achieve  this  aim,  we  must  for

therapeutic reasons enter into all those unconscious aspects of things brought

forward by the dream material. This makes it abundantly clear that the view-

point of finality is singularly important as an aid to the practical development

of the individual.

The view-point of causality is obviously more in accord with the scientific

spirit of our time, with its strictly causalistic reasoning. Much may be said for

Freud's  view  as  a  scientific  explanation  of  dream  psychology.  But  I

must dispute its completeness, for the psyche cannot be conceived merely

from  the  causal  aspect,  but  necessitates  also  a  final  view-point.  Only  a

combination of both points of view—which has not yet been attained to the

satisfaction  of  the  scientific  mind,  owing  to  great  difficulties  both  of  a

practical and theoretical nature—can give us a more complete conception of

the essence of dreams.


I would like to treat briefly of some further problems of dream psychology,

that  border  on  the  general  discussion  of  dreams.  Firstly,  as  tothe classification of dreams; I do not wish to overestimate either the practical

or theoretical significance of this question. I investigate yearly some 1500-

2000 dreams, and this experience enables me to state that typical dreams

actually do exist. But they are not very frequent, and from the view-point of

finality they lose much of the importance which attaches to them as a result

of the fixed significance of symbols according to the causal view-point. It

seems to me that the typical themes of dreams are of far greater importance,

for they permit of a comparison with the themes of mythology. Many of these

mythological themes—in the study of which Frobenius has rendered notable

service—are also found in dreams, often with precisely the same significance.

Unfortunately the limited time at my disposal, does not permit me to lay

detailed materials before you: this has been done elsewhere. But I desire to

emphasise the fact that the comparison of the typical themes of dreams with

those  of  mythology  obviously  suggests  the  idea  (already  put  forward  by

Nietzsche) that from a phylogenetic point of view dream-thought should be

conceived as an older form of thought. Instead of multiplying examples in

explanation of my meaning, I will briefly refer you to our specimen dream.

As  you  remember,  that  dream  introduced  the  apple  scene  as  a  typical

representation of erotic guilt. The gist of its purport is: "I am doing wrong in

acting like this." But it is characteristic that a dream never expresses itself in

a logically abstract way, but always in the language of parable or simile. This

peculiarity  is  also  a  characteristic  feature  of  primitive  languages,  whose

flowery idioms always strike us. If you call to mind the writings of ancient

literature—e.g. the language of simile in the Bible—you will find that what

nowadays is expressed by means of abstract expressions, could then only be

expressed  by  means  of  simile.  Even  such  a  philosopher  as  Plato  did  not

disdain to express certain fundamental ideas by means of concrete simile.

Just as the body bears traces of its phylogenetic development, so also does

the human mind. There is therefore nothing surprising in the possibility of the

allegories of our dreams being a survival of archaic modes of thought.

The theft of the apple in our example is a typical theme of dreams, often

recurring  with  various  modifications.  It  is  also  a  well-known  theme  in

mythology, and is found not only in the story of the Garden of Eden, but in

numerous  myths  and  fables  of  all  ages  and  climes.  It  is  one  of  those

universally  human  symbols,  which  can  reappear  in  any  one,  at  any  time.

Thus,  dream  psychology  opens  up  a  way  to  a  general  comparative

psychology, from which we hope to attain the same sort of understanding ofthe development and structure of the human soul, as comparative anatomy

has given us concerning the human body.                              CHAPTER XIII

                  THE CONTENT OF THE PSYCHOSES                              INTRODUCTION

My short sketch on the Content of the Psychoses which first appeared in the

series of "Schriften zur Angewandten Seelenkunde" under Freud's editorship

was designed to give the non-professional but interested public some insight

into the psychological point of view of recent psychiatry. I chose by way of

example a case of the mental disorder known as Dementia Præcox, which

Bleuler calls Schizophrenia. Statistically this extensive group contains by far

the largest number of cases of psychosis. Many psychiatrists would prefer to

limit it, and accordingly make use of other nomenclature and classification.

From the psychological standpoint the change of name is unimportant, for it

is of less value to know what a thing is called than to know what it is. The

cases of mental disorder sketched in this essay belong to well-known and

frequently  occurring  types,  familiar  to  the  alienist.  The  facts  will  not  be

altered  if  these  disorders  are  called  by  some  other  name  than  dementia

præcox.

I  have  presented  my  view  of  the  psychological  basis  in  a  work  whose

scientific validity has been contested upon all sorts of grounds. For me it is

sufficient  justification  that  a  psychiatrist  of  Bleuler's  standing  has  fully

accepted, in his great monograph on the disease, all the essential points in my

work. The difference between us is as to the question whether, in relation to

the  anatomical  basis,  the  psychological  disorders  should  be  regarded  as

primary or secondary. The resolution of this weighty question depends upon

the  general  problem  as  to  whether  the  prevailing  dogma  in  psychiatry

—"disorders of the mind are disorders of the brain"—presents a final truth or

not. This dogma leads to absolute sterility as soon as universal validity is

ascribed  to  it.  There  are  undoubted  psychogenic  mental  diseases  (the  so-

called hysterical) which are properly regarded as functional in contrast with

organic  diseases  which  rest  upon  demonstrable  anatomical  changes.

Disorders  of  the  brain  should  only  be  called  organic  when  the  psychic

symptoms depend upon an undoubtedly primary disease of the brain. Now in

dementia præcox this is by no means a settled question. Definite anatomical

changes  are  present,  but  we  are  very  far  from  being  able  to  relate  the

psychological  symptoms  to  these  changes.  We  have,  at  least,  positive

information  as  to  the  functional  nature  of  early  schizophrenic  conditions;

moreover the organic character of paranoia and many paranoid forms is still

in  great  uncertainty.  This  being  so  it  is  worth  while  to  inquire  whether

manifestations of degeneration could not also be provoked by psychologicaldisturbance of function. Such an idea is only incomprehensible to those who

smuggle  materialistic  preconceptions  into  their  scientific  theories.  This

question  does  not  even  rest  upon  some  fundamental  and  arbitrary

spiritualism, but upon the following simple reflection. Instead of assuming

that some hereditary disposition, or a toxæmia, gives rise directly to organic

processes  of  disease,  I  incline  to  the  view  that  upon  the  basis  of

predisposition, whose nature is at present unknown to us, there arises a non-

adaptable psychological function which can proceed to develop into manifest

mental disorder; this may secondarily determine organic degeneration with its

own train of symptoms. In favour of this conception is the fact that we have

no proof of the primary nature of the organic disorder, but overwhelming

proofs exist of a primary psychological fault in function, whose history can

be  traced  back  to  the  patient's  childhood.  In  perfect  agreement  with  this

conception is the fact that analytic practice has given us experience of cases

where patients on the borderline of dementia præcox have been brought back

to normal life.

Even  if  anatomical  lesions  or  organic  symptoms  were  constantly  present,

science ought not to imagine the psychological standpoint could advisedly be

neglected,  or  the  undoubted  psychological  relationship  be  given  up  as

unimportant. If, for instance, carcinoma were to prove an infectious disease

the peculiar growth and degenerative process of carcinomatous cells would

still be a constant factor requiring investigation on its own account. But, as I

have  said,  the  correlation  between  the  anatomical  findings  and  the

psychological picture of the disease is so loose that it is extremely desirable

to study the psychological side of it thoroughly.                                        PART I

Psychiatry is the stepchild of medicine. All the other branches of medicine

have  one  great  advantage  over  it—the  scientific  methods  can  be  applied;

there  are  things  to  be  seen,  and  felt,  physical  and  chemical  methods  of

investigation to be followed: the microscope shows the dreaded bacillus, the

surgeon's  knife  halts  at  no  difficulty  and  gives  us  glimpses  of  most

inaccessible  organs  of  vital  importance.  Psychiatry,  which  engages  in  the

exploration of the mind, stands ever at the door seeking in vain to weigh and

measure as in the other departments of science. We have long known that we

have to do with a definite organ, the brain; but only beyond the brain, beyond

the morphological basis do we reach what is important for us—the mind; as

indefinable  as  it  ever  was,  still  eluding  any  explanation,  no  matter  how

ingenious. Former ages, endowing the mind with substance, and personifying

every incomprehensible occurrence in nature, regarded mental disorder as the

work of evil spirits; the patient was looked upon as one possessed, and the

methods  of  treatment  were  such  as  fitted  this  conception.  This  mediæval

conception  occasionally  gains  credence  and  expression  even  to-day.  A

classical  example  is  the  driving  out  of  the  devil  which  the  elder  Pastor

Blumhardt  carried  out  successfully  in  the  famous  case  of  Gottlieb  in

Deltus. To the honour of the Middle Ages let it also be said that there are to

be found early evidences of a sound rationalism. In the sixteenth century at

the Julius Hospital in Würzburg mental patients were already treated side by

side with others physically ill, and the treatment seems to have been really

humane. With the opening of the modern era, and with the dawn of the first

scientific ideas, the original barbaric personification of the unknown Great

Power gradually disappeared. A change arose in the conception of mental

disease in favour of a more philosophic moral attitude. The old view that

every misfortune was the revenge of the offended gods returned new-clothed

to fit the times. Just as physical diseases can, in many cases, be regarded as

self-inflicted  on  account  of  negligence,  mental  diseases  were  likewise

considered to be due to some moral injury, or sin. Behind this conception the

angry godhead also stood. Such views played a great rôle, right up to the

beginning of last century, especially in Germany. In France, however, about

the same time a new idea was appearing, destined to sway psychiatry for a

hundred  years.  Pinel,  whose  statue  fittingly  stands  at  the  gateway  of  theSalpetrière in Paris, took away the chains from the insane and thus freed them

from the symbol of the criminal. In a very real way he formulated for the

world the humane and scientific conception of modern times. A little later

Esquirol and Bayle discovered that certain forms of insanity ended in death,

after a relatively short time, and that certain constant changes in the brain

could  be  demonstrated post  mortem.  Esquirol  had  described  as  an  entity

general paralysis of the insane, or as it was popularly called "softening of the

brain,"  a  disease  which  is  always  bound  up  with  chronic  inflammatory

degeneration  of  the  cerebral  matter.  Thus  was  laid  the  foundation  of  the

dogma which you will find repeated in every text-book of psychiatry, viz.

"diseases  of  the  mind  are  diseases  of  the  brain."  Confirmation  of  this

conception was added about the same time by Gall's discoveries which traced

partial or complete loss of the power of speech—a psychical capacity—to a

lesion in the region of the left lower frontal convolution. Somewhat later this

view proved to be of general applicability. Innumerable cases of extreme

idiocy or other intense mental disorders were found to be caused by tumours

of the brain. Towards the end of the nineteenth century Wernicke (recently

deceased) localised the speech centre in the left temporal lobe. This epoch-

making discovery raised hopes to the highest pitch. It was expected that at no

distant  day  every  characteristic  and  every  psychical  activity  would  be

assigned a place in the cortical grey matter. Gradually, increased attempts

were made to trace the primary mental changes in the psychoses back to

certain  parallel  changes  in  the  brain.  Meynert,  the  famous  Viennese

psychiatrist,  described  a  formal  scheme  in  which  the  alteration  in  blood-

supply  in  certain  regions  was  to  play  the  chief  part  in  the  origin  of  the

psychoses.  Wernicke  made  a  similar  but  far  more  ingenious  attempt  at  a

morphological explanation of psychical disorders. The visible result of this

tendency is seen in the fact that even the smallest and least renowned asylum

has, to-day, its anatomical laboratory where cerebral sections are cut, stained,

and  microscoped.  Our  numerous  psychiatric  journals  are  full  of

morphological contributions, investigations into the structure and distribution

of cells in the cortex, and other varying source of disorders in the different

mental diseases.

Psychiatry has come into fame as gross materialism. And quite rightly, for it

is  on  the  road—or  rather  reached  it  long  ago—to  put  the  organ,  the

instrument, above function. Function has become the dependent accessory of

its organs, the mind the dependent accessory of the brain. In modern mentaltherapy the mind has been the loser, whilst great progress has been made in

cerebral anatomy; of the mind we know less than nothing. Current psychiatry

behaves like a man who thinks he can unriddle the meaning and importance

of a building by a mineralogical investigation of its stones. Let us attempt to

realise in which mental diseases obvious changes in the brain are found, and

what is their proportion.

In the last four years we have received 1325 patients at Burgholzi; 331 a year.

Of these 9 per cent. suffered from congenital psychic anomalies. By this is

understood a certain inborn defect of the psyche. Of these 9 per cent., about a

quarter were imbeciles. Here we meet certain changes in the brain such as

microcephalus, hydrocephalus, malformations or absence of portions of the

brain. The remaining three-quarters of these congenital defects present no

typical changes in the brain.

Three per cent. of our patients suffer from epileptic mental troubles. In the

course of epilepsy there arises gradually a typical degeneration of the brain.

The degeneration is, however, only discoverable in severe cases and when the

disease  has  existed  for  some  time.  If  the  attacks  have  only  existed  for  a

relatively short time, not more than a few years, the brain as a rule shows

nothing. Seventeen per cent. of our patients suffer from progressive paralysis

and senile dementia. Both diseases present characteristic changes in the brain.

In paralysis there is most extensive shrinkage of the brain, so that the cortex

is  often  reduced  by  one  half.  The  frontal  portions  of  the  brain  more

especially, may be reduced to a third of the normal weight. There is a similar

destruction of substance in senile decay.

Fourteen per cent. of the patients annually received are cases of poisoning, at

least 13 per cent. of these being due to alcohol. As a rule in slight cases

nothing is to be found in the brain; in only a relatively few severe cases is

there shrinkage of the cortex, generally of slight degree. The number of these

severe  cases  amounts  to  less  than  1  per  cent.  of  the  yearly  cases  of

alcoholism.

Six  per  cent.  of  the  patients  suffer  from  so-called  maniacal  depressive

insanity which includes the maniacs and the melancholics. The essence of

this disease is readily intelligible to the public. Melancholia is a condition of

abnormal sadness without disorder of intelligence or memory. Mania is the

opposite, the rule being an abnormally excited state with great restlessness;

likewise without deep disturbance of intelligence and memory. In this disease

there are no demonstrable morphological changes in the brain.Forty-five per cent. of the patients suffer from the real and common mental

disease called dementia præcox. The name is a very unhappy one, for the

dementia  is  not  always  precocious,  nor  in  all  cases  is  there  dementia.

Unfortunately the disease is too often incurable; even in the best cases, in

those  that  recover,  where  the  outside  public  would  not  observe  any

abnormality, there is always present some defect in the emotional life. The

picture presented by the disease is extraordinarily diverse; generally there is

some disorder of feeling, frequently delusions and hallucinations. As a rule

there is nothing to be found in the brain. Even in cases of a most severe type,

lasting for years, an intact brain is not infrequently found post mortem. In a

few cases only certain slight changes are present which, however, cannot as

yet be reduced to any law.

To sum up: in round figures a quarter of our insane patients show more or

less  clearly  extensive  changes  and  destruction  of  the  brain,  while  three-

fourths  have  a  brain  which  seems  to  be  generally  unimpaired  or  at  most

exhibit such changes as give no explanation of the psychological disturbance.

These  figures  offer  the  best  possible  proof  that  the  purely  morphological

view-point of modern psychiatry leads only very indirectly, if at all, to the

understanding of the mental disorder, which is our aim. We must take into

account  the  fact  that  those  mental  diseases  which  show  the  most  marked

disturbances of the brain end in death; for this reason the chronic inmates of

the asylum form its real population, consisting of some 70 to 80 per cent. of

cases of dementia præcox, that is, of patients in whom anatomical changes

are practically non-existent. The psychiatry of the future must come to grips

with the core of the thing; the path is thus made clear—it can only be by way

of psychology. Hence in our Zürich clinic we have entirely discarded the

anatomical view and turned to the psychological investigation of insanity. As

most  of  our  patients  suffer  from  dementia  præcox  we  were  naturally

concerned with this as our chief problem.


The  older  asylum  physicians  paid  great  attention  to  the  psychological

precursors of mental disorder, just as the public still does, following a true

instinct.  We  accepted  this  hint  and  carefully  investigated  the  previous

psychological history wherever possible. Our trouble was richly rewarded,

for we often found, to our surprise, that the disease broke out at a moment of

some great emotion which, in its turn, had arisen in a so-called normal way.

We found, moreover, that in the mental disease which ensued a number ofsymptoms  occurred  which  it  was  quite  labour  in  vain  to  study  from  the

morphological  standpoint.  These  same  symptoms,  however,  were

comprehensible  when  considered  from  the  standpoint  of  the  individual's

previous history. Freud's fundamental investigations into the psychology of

hysteria and dreams afforded us the greatest stimulus and help in our work.

A few instances of the latest method in psychiatry will make the subject

clearer than mere dry theory. In order to bring home to you the difference in

our conception I will first describe the medical history in the older fashion,

and subsequently give the solution characteristic of the new departure.

The case to be considered is that of a cook aged 32; she had no hereditary

taint,  was  always  industrious  and  conscientious,  and  had  never  been

noticeable  for  eccentric  behaviour  or  the  like.  Quite  recently  she  became

acquainted with a young man whom she wished to marry. From that time on

she began to show certain peculiarities. She often spoke of his not liking her

much, was frequently out of sorts, ill-tempered, and sat alone brooding; once

she ornamented her Sunday hat very strikingly with red and green feathers,

another day she bought a pair of pince-nez in order to wear them when she

went out walking with her fiancé. One day the sudden idea that her teeth were

rather ugly would not let her rest, and she resolved to get a plate, although

there was no absolute need. She had all her teeth out under an anæsthetic.

The night after the operation she suddenly had a severe anxiety-attack. She

cried and moaned that she was damned for ever, for she had committed a

great sin; she should not have allowed her teeth to be extracted. People must

pray for her, that God might pardon her sin. In vain her friends attempted to

talk her out of her fears, to assure her that the extraction of teeth was really

no sin; it availed nothing. At day-break she became somewhat quieter; she

worked throughout the day. On following nights the attacks were repeated.

When consulted by the patient I found her quiet, but she wore a rather vacant

expression. I talked to her about the operation, and she assured me it was not

so dreadful to have teeth extracted, but still it was a great sin, from which

position, despite every persuasion, she could not be moved. She continually

repeated in plaintive, pathetic tones, "I should not have allowed my teeth to

be extracted; oh yes, that was a great sin which God will never forgive me."

She gave the impression of real insanity. A few days later her condition grew

worse, and she had to be brought into the asylum. The anxiety-attack had

extended and was persistent, and the mental disorder lasted for months.

The history shows a series of entirely unrelated symptoms. Why all the queerstory of the hat and pince-nez? Why those anxiety-attacks? Why this delusion

that the extraction of her teeth was an unpardonable sin? Nothing here is

clear.  The  morphologically-minded  psychiatrist  would  say:  This  is  just  a

typical case of dementia præcox; it is the essence of insanity, of madness, to

talk of nothing but mysteries; the standpoint of the diseased mind towards the

world is displaced, is "mad." What is no sin for the normal, the patient finds a

sin.  It  is  a  bizarre  delusion  characteristic  of  dementia  præcox.  The

extravagant  lamentation  about  this  supposed  sin  is  what  is  known  as

"inadequate" emotional emphasis. The queer ornamentation of the hat, the

pince-nez, are bizarre notions such as are very common in these patients.

Somewhere  in  the  brain  certain  cells  have  fallen  into  disorder,  and

manufacture illogical, senseless ideas of one kind and another which are quite

without  psychological  meaning.  The  patient  is  obviously  a

hereditary degenerate with a weak brain, having a kink which is the origin of

the disorder. For some reason or other the disease has suddenly broken out. It

could just as easily have broken out at any other time. Perhaps we should

have had to capitulate to these arguments had real psychological analysis not

come to our aid. In filling up the certificate required for her removal to the

asylum,  it  transpired  that  many  years  ago  she  had  had  an  affair  which

terminated; her lover left her with an illegitimate child. Nobody had been told

of this. When she was again in love a dilemma arose, and she asked herself,

What will this new lover say about it? At first she postponed the marriage,

becoming  more  and  more  worried,  and  then  the  eccentricities  began.  To

understand these we must immerse ourselves in the psychology of a naïve

soul. If we have to disclose some painful secret to a beloved person we try

first to strengthen his love in order to obtain beforehand a guarantee of his

forgiveness. We do it by flattery or by caresses, or we try to impress the value

of our own personality in order to raise it in the eyes of the other. Our patient

decked herself out with beautiful feathers, which to her simple taste seemed

precious. The wearing of "pince-nez" increases the respect of children even

of a mature age. And who does not know people who will have their teeth

extracted, out of pure vanity, in order that they may wear a plate to improve

their appearance?

After such an operation most people have a slight, nervous reaction, and then

everything becomes more difficult to bear. This was, as a matter of fact, just

the  moment  when  the  catastrophe  did  occur,  in  her  terror  lest  her  fiancé

should break with her when he heard of her previous life. That was the firstanxiety-attack. Just as the patient had not acknowledged her secret in all these

years,  so  she  now  sought  to  guard  it,  and  shifted  the  fear  in  her  guilty

conscience on to the extraction of the teeth; she thus followed a method well

known to us, for when we dare not acknowledge some great sin we deplore

some small sin with the greater emphasis.

The problem seemed insoluble to the weak and sensitive mind of the patient,

hence the affect became insurmountably great; this is the mental desire as

presented from the psychological side. The series of apparently meaningless

events, the so-called madness, have now a meaning; a significance appertains

to the delusions, making the patient more human to us. Here is a person like

ourselves, beset by universal human problems, no longer merely a cerebral

machine  thrown  out  of  gear.  Hitherto  we  thought  that  the  insane  patient

revealed  nothing  to  us  by  symptoms,  save  the  senseless  products  of  his

disordered cerebral cells, but that was academic wisdom reeking of the study.

When  we  penetrate  into  the  human  secrets  of  our  patients,  we  recognise

mental disease to be an unusual reaction to emotional problems which are in

no wise foreign to ourselves, and the delusion discloses the psychological

system upon which it is based.

The light which shines forth from this conception seems to us so enormously

powerful because it forces us into the innermost depths of that tremendous

disorder  which  is  most  common  in  our  asylums,  and  hitherto  least

understood; by reason of the craziness of the symptoms it is the type that

strikes the public as madness in excelsis.

The case which I have just sketched is a simple one. It is transparent. My

second  example  is  somewhat  more  complicated.  It  is  the  case  of  a  man

between 30 and 40 years of age; he is a foreign archæologist of great learning

and most unusual intelligence. He was a precocious boy of quite excellent

character, great sensitiveness and rare gifts. Physically he was small, always

weakly,  and  a  stammerer.  He  grew  up  and  was  educated  abroad,  and

afterwards  studied  for  several  terms  at  B——.  So  far  there  had  been  no

disorder of any kind. On the completion of his university career he became

zealously absorbed in his archæological work, which gradually engulfed him

to such an extent that he was dead to the world and all its pleasures. He

worked  incessantly,  and  buried  himself  entirely  in  his  books.  He  became

quite unsociable; before, awkward and shy in society, he now fled from it

altogether, and saw no one beyond a few friends. He thus led the life of a

hermit devoted entirely to science. A few years later, on a holiday tour, herevisited B——, where he remained a few days. He walked a great deal in the

environs  of  the  town.  His  few  acquaintances  now  found  him  somewhat

strange, taciturn, and nervous. After a somewhat protracted walk he seemed

tired, and said that he did not feel very well. He then remarked he must get

himself  hypnotised,  he  felt  his  nerves  unsteady.  On  top  of  this  he  was

attacked  by  physical  illness,  viz.  inflammation  of  the  lungs.  Very  soon  a

peculiar state of excitement supervened which led to suicidal ideas. He was

brought to the asylum, where for weeks he remained in an extremely excited

state. He was completely deranged, and did not know where he was; he spoke

in broken sentences which no one could understand. He was often so excited

and  aggressive  that  it  took  several  attendants  to  hold  him.  He  gradually

became quieter, and one day came to himself, as if waking out of a long,

confused dream. He soon completely regained his health, and was discharged

as cured. He returned to his home and again immersed himself in books. In

the following years he published several remarkable works, but, as before, his

life was that of a hermit living entirely in his books and dead to the world. He

then  gradually  acquired  the  name  of  a  dried-up  misanthrope,  lost  to  all

meaning of the beauty of life. A few years after his first illness a brief holiday

brought him again to B——. As before he took his solitary walks in the

environs. One day he was suddenly overcome by a faint feeling, and lay

down  in  the  street.  He  was  carried  into  a  neighbouring  house  where  he

immediately  became  extremely  excited.  He  began  to  perform  gymnastics,

jumped over the rails of the bed, turned somersaults in the room, began to

declaim in a loud, voice, sang his own improvisations, etc. He was again

brought to the asylum. The excitement continued. He extolled his wonderful

muscles, his beautiful figure, his enormous strength. He believed that he had

discovered a natural law by which a wonderful voice could be developed. He

regarded himself as a great singer, and a marvellous reciter, and at the same

time he was a great inspired poet and composer to whom verse and melody

came spontaneously.

All this was in pitiable and very remarkable contrast to reality. He is a small

weakly man of unimposing build, with poorly developed muscles betraying at

the first glance the atrophying effect of his studious life. He is unmusical, his

voice is weak and he sings out of tune; he is a bad speaker, because of his

stutter. For weeks he occupied himself in the asylum with peculiar jumping,

and  contortions  of  the  body  which  he  called  gymnastics,  he  sang  and

declaimed. Then he became more quiet and dreamy, often stared thoughtfullyin front of him for a long time, now and then sang a love song which, despite

its want of musical expression, betrayed a pretty feeling for love's aspirations.

This  also  was  in  complete  contrast  with  the  dryness  and  isolation  of  his

normal life. He gradually became accessible for lengthy conversations.

We  will  break  off  the  history  of  the  disease  here,  and  sum  up  what  is

furnished so far by observation of the patient.

In the first illness the delirium broke out unexpectedly, and was followed by

a mental disorder with confused ideas and violence which lasted for several

weeks. Complete recovery appeared to have taken place. Six years later there

was  a  sudden  outbreak  of  mania,  grandiose  delusions,  bizarre  actions,

followed by a twilight-stage gradually leading to recovery. Here we again see

a  typical  case  of  dementia  præcox,  of  the  katatonic  variety,  especially

characterised by peculiar movements and actions. In psychiatry the views

obtaining at present would regard this as localised cellular disease of some

part  of  the  cortex,  exhibiting  confusional  states,  delusions  of  grandeur,

peculiar  contortions  of  the  muscles,  or  twilight-states,  which  taken  all

together have as little psychological meaning as the bizarre shapes of a drop

of lead thrown into water.

This is not my view. It was certainly no accidental freak of the brain-cells

that created the dramatic contrasts shown in the second illness. We can see

that  these  contrasts,  the  so-called  grandiose  delusions,  were  very  subtly

determined by the deficiencies in the patient's personality. Without doubt,

any  one  of  us  would  naturally  regard  these  deficiencies  seriously  in

ourselves.  Who  would  not  have  the  desire  to  find  compensation  for  the

aridness of his profession and of his life in the joys of poetry and music and

to restore to his body the natural power and beauty stolen from it by the

study's atmosphere? Do we not recall with envy the energy of a Demosthenes

who,  despite  his  stammering,  became  a  great  orator?  If  our  patient  thus

fulfilled  the  obvious  gaps  in  his  physical  and  mental  life  by  delusional

wishes, the supposition is warranted that the whispered love-song which he

sang from time to time filled up a painful blank in his being, which became

more painful the more it was concealed. The explanation is not far to seek. It

is simply the old story, born anew in every human soul, in a guise befitting

the destined creature's highest sensibilities.

When our patient was a student he learnt to know and love a girl-student.

Together they made many excursions in the environs of the town, but his

exceeding timidity and bashfulness (the lot of the stammerer) never permittedhim an opportunity of getting out the appropriate words. Moreover, he was

poor  and  had  nothing  to  offer  her  but  hopes.  The  time  came  for  the

termination of his studies; she went away, and he also, and they never saw

one another again. And not long afterwards he heard she had married some

one else. Then he relinquished his hopes, but he did not know that Eros never

emancipates his slaves.

He buried himself in abstract learning, not to forget, but to work for her in his

thoughts. He wanted to keep the love in his heart quite secret, and never to

betray  that  secret.  He  would  dedicate  his  works  to  her  without  her  ever

knowing it. The compromise succeeded, but not for long. Once he travelled

through  the  town  where  he  heard  she  lived—it  seems  to  have  been  an

accident that he travelled through that town. He did not leave the train, which

only  made  a  short  halt  there.  From  the  window  he  saw  standing  in  the

distance  a  young  woman  with  a  little  child,  and  thought  it  was  she.

Impossible to say whether it was really so or not. He does not think he felt

any peculiar feeling at that moment; anyway he gave himself no trouble to

ascertain whether it was she, which makes the presumption strong that it was

not really she. The unconscious wanted to be left in peace with its illusion.

Shortly afterwards he again came to B——, the place of old memories. Then

he  felt  something  strange  stir  in  his  soul,  an  uneasy  feeling,  akin  to

Nietzsche's—

"Not for long shalt thou thirst, O burning heart!

There is promise in the air,

Winds come to me from unknown mouths—

The healing coolness comes."

Civilised  man  no  longer  believes  in  demons,  he  calls  in  the  doctor.  Our

patient wanted to be hypnotised. Then madness overcame him. What was

going on in him?

He  answered  this  question  in  broken  sentences,  with  long  pauses,  in  that

twilight-stage that heralds convalescence. I give as faithfully as may be his

own words. When he fell ill he suddenly lost the well-regulated world and

found himself in the chaos of an overmastering dream, a sea of blood and

fire;  the  world  was  out  of  joint;  everywhere  conflagration,  volcanic

outbreaks,  earthquakes,  mountains  fell  in,  followed  by  enormous  battles

where the peoples fell upon one another; he became involved more and more

in the battle of nature, he was right in the midst of those fighting, wrestling,

defending himself, enduring unutterable misery and pain; gradually he wasexalted and strengthened by a strange calming feeling that some one was

watching his struggles, that his loved one saw all from afar. That was the

time when he showed real violence to the attendants. He felt his strength

increasing and saw himself at the head of great armies which he would lead

to victory. Then more great battles and at length victory. He would try to get

his loved one as prize of victory. As he drew near her the illness ceased, and

he awoke from a long dream.

His daily life again began to follow the regular routine. He shut himself up in

his work and forgot the abyss within himself. A few years later he is again at

B—— Demon or Destiny? Again he followed the old trail and again was

overborne by old memories. But this time he was not immersed in the depths

of confusion. He remained orientated and en rapport with his surroundings.

The struggle was considerably milder, but he did gymnastics, practised the

arts, and made good his deficiencies; then followed the dreamy stage with the

love-songs, corresponding to the period of victory in the first psychosis. In

this state, according to his own words, he had a dreamlike feeling as if he

stood upon the borders of two worlds and knew not whether truth stood on

the right or on the left. He told me, "It is said she is married, but I believe she

is not, but is still waiting for me; I feel that it must be so. It is ever to me as if

she were not married, and as if success were yet attainable."

Our patient here portrayed but a pale copy of the scene in the first attack of

psychosis, when he, the victor, stood before his mistress. In the course of a

few weeks after this conversation the scientific interests of the patient again

began  to  predominate.  He  spoke  with  obvious  unwillingness  about  his

intimate life, he repressed it more and more, and finally turned away from it

as if it did not belong to himself. Thus gradually the gate of the under-world

became closed. There remained nothing but a certain tense expression, and a

look which, though fixed on the outer world, was turned inwards at the same

time; and this alone hinted at the silent activity of the unconscious, preparing

new  solutions  for  his  insoluble  problem.  This  is  the  so-called  cure  in

dementia præcox.

Hitherto we psychiatrists used not to be able to suppress a laugh when we

read an artist's attempts to portray a psychosis. These attempts have been

generally  regarded  as  quite  useless,  for  the  writer  introduces  into  his

conception of the psychosis psychological relationships quite foreign to the

clinical picture of the disease. But the artist has not simply proceeded to copy

a  case  out  of  a  psychiatric  text-book;  he  knows  as  a  rule  better  than  thepsychiatrist.

The case which I have sketched is not unique, it is typical of a whole class for

which the artist Spitteler has created a model of universal validity; the model

is Imago. I may take for granted that you know his book of that name. The

psychological gulf, however, between the creation of the artist and the insane

person is great. The world of the artist is one of solved problems; the world

of reality, that of unsolved problems. The mental patient is a faithful image of

this  reality.  His  solutions  are  unsatisfying  illusions,  his  cure  a  temporary

giving up of the problem, which yet goes on working in the depths of the

unconscious, and at the appointed time again rises to the surface and creates

new illusions with new scenery; part of the history of mankind is here seen

abridged.

Psychological  analysis  is  far  from  being  able  to  explain  in  complete  and

illuminating  fashion  all  cases  of  the  disease  with  which  we  are  here

concerned.  On  the  contrary,  the  majority  remain  obscure  and  difficult  to

understand, and chiefly because only a certain proportion of patients recover.

Our last patient is noteworthy because his return to a normal state afforded us

a  survey  of  the  period  of  his  illness.  Unfortunately  the  advantage  of  this

standpoint is not always possible to us, for a great number of persons never

find their way back from their dreams. They are lost in the maze of a magic

garden where the same old story is repeated again and again in a timeless

present. For patients the hands of the clock of the world remain stationary;

there is no time, no further development. It makes no difference to them

whether they dream for two days or thirty years. I had a patient in my ward

who was five years without uttering a word, in bed, and entirely buried in

himself. For years I visited him twice daily, and as I reached his bedside I

could see at once that there was no change. One day I was just about to leave

the room when a voice I did not recognise called out—"Who are you? What

do you want here?" I saw with astonishment that it was the dumb patient who

had suddenly regained his voice, and obviously his senses also. I told him I

was his doctor, whereupon he asked angrily, why was he kept a prisoner here,

and why did no one ever speak to him? He said this in an injured voice just

like  a  normal  person  whom  one  had  neglected  for  a  couple  of  days.  I

informed him that he had been in bed quite speechless for five years and had

responded  to  nothing,  whereat  he  looked  at  me  fixedly  and  without

understanding. Naturally I tried to discover what had gone on in him during

these  five  years,  but  could  learn  nothing.  Another  patient  with  a  similarsymptom,  when  asked  why  he  had  remained  silent  for  years,  maintained,

"Because I wanted to spare the German language." These examples show that

it is often impossible to lift the veil of the secret, for the patients themselves

have neither interest nor pleasure in explaining their strange experiences, in

which as a rule they realise nothing peculiar.

Occasionally the symptoms themselves are a sign-post to the understanding

of the psychology of the disease.

We had a patient who was for thirty-five years an inmate at Burghölzli. For

decades she lay in bed, she never spoke or reacted to anything, her head was

always bowed, her back bent and the knees somewhat drawn up. She was

always making peculiar rubbing movements with her hands, so as to give rise

during the course of years to thick horny patches on her hands. She kept the

thumb and index finger of her right hand together as in the movement of

sewing.  When  she  died  I  tried  to  discover  what  she  had  been  formerly.

Nobody in the asylum recalled ever having seen her out of bed. Only our

chief attendant had a memory of having seen her sitting in the same attitude

as that she afterwards took up in bed, at which time she was making rapid

movements of extension of the arm across the right knee; it was said of her

that she was sewing shoes, later that she was polishing shoes. As time went

on the movements became more limited till finally there remained but a slight

rubbing  movement,  and  only  the  finger  and  thumb  retained  the  sewing

position. In vain I consulted our old attendant, she knew nothing about the

patient's  previous  history.  When  the  seventy-year-old  brother  came  to  the

funeral I asked him what had been the cause of his sister's illness; he told me

that she had had a love-affair, but for various reasons it had come to nothing.

The girl had taken this so to heart that she became low-spirited. In answer to

a query about her lover it was found that he was a shoemaker.

Unless you see here some strange play of accident, you must agree that the

patient had kept the memory-picture of her lover unaltered in her heart for

thirty-five years.

One  might  easily  think  that  these  patients  who  give  an  impression  of

imbecility are only burnt-out ruins of humanity. But such is probably not the

case. One can often prove directly that such patients register everything going

on around them even with a certain curiosity, and have an excellent memory

for it all. This is the reason why many patients become for a time pretty

sensible again, and develop mental powers which one believed they had long

since lost. Such intervals occur occasionally during serious physical disease,or just before death. We had a patient with whom it was impossible to carry

on a sane conversation; he only produced a mad medley of delusions and

words. He once fell seriously ill physically, and I expected it would be very

difficult to treat him. Not at all. He was quite changed, he became friendly

and amiable, and carried out all his doctor's orders patiently and gratefully.

His eyes lost their evil darting looks, and shone quietly and understandingly.

One morning I came to his room with the usual greeting: "Good morning.

How are you getting on?" The patient answered me in the well-known way:

"There again comes one of the dog and monkey troupe wanting to play the

Saviour." Then I knew his physical trouble was over. From that moment the

whole of his reason was as if "blown away" again.

From these observations we see that reason still survives, but is pushed away

into some corner by the complete preoccupation of the mind with diseased

thoughts.

Why is the mind compelled to exhaust itself in the elaboration of diseased

nonsense?  On  this  difficult  question  our  new  insight  throws  considerable

light. To-day we can say that the pathological images dominate the interests

of the patient so completely, because they are simply derivatives of the most

important questions that used to occupy the person when normal—what in

insanity is now an incomprehensible maze of symptoms used to be fields of

vital interest to the former personality.

I will cite as an example a patient who was twenty years in the asylum. She

was always a puzzle to the physicians, for the absurdity of her delusions

exceeded anything that the boldest imagination could create.

She was a dressmaker by trade, born in 1845, of very poor family. Her sister

early  went  wrong  and  was  finally  lost  in  the  swamp  of  prostitution.  The

patient herself led an industrious, respectable, reserved life. She fell ill in

1886 in her 39th year—at the threshold of the age when so many a dream is

brought to naught. Her illness consisted in delusions and hallucinations which

increased rapidly, and soon became so absurd that no one could understand

her wishes and complaints. In 1887 she came to the asylum. In 1888 her

statements, so far as the delusions were concerned, were not intelligible. She

maintained such monstrous things as that: "At night her spinal marrow had

been torn out; pains in the back had been caused by substances that went

through the walls and were covered with magnetism." "The monopoly fixed

the  sorrows  which  are  not  in  the  body  and  do  not  fly  about  in  the  air."

"Excursions are made by breathing in chemistry, and by suffocation regionsare destroyed."

In 1892 the patient styled herself the "Bank Note Monopoly, Queen of the

Orphans, Proprietress of the Burghölzli Asylum;" she said: "Naples and I

must provide the world with macaroni" (Nudel).

In 1896 she became "Germania and Helvetia from exclusively pure butter";

she also said, "I am Noah's Ark, the boat of salvation and respect."

Since then the disease has greatly increased; her last creation is the delusion

that she is the "lily red sea monster and the blue one."

These  instances  will  show  you  how  far  the  incomprehensibility  of  such

pathological formations go. Our patient was for years the classic example of

meaningless  delusional  ideas  in  dementia  præcox;  and  many  hundreds  of

medical  students  have  received  from  the  demonstration  of  this  case  a

permanent impression of the sinister power of insanity. But even this case has

not withstood the newer technique of psychoanalysis. What the patient says is

not at all meaningless; it is full of significance, so that he who has the key can

understand without overmuch difficulty.

Time  does  not  allow  me  to  describe  the  technique  by  means  of  which  I

succeeded in lifting the veil of her secret. I must content myself by giving a

few examples to make the strange changes of thought and of speech in this

patient clear to you.

She  said  of  herself  that she  was  Socrates.  The  analysis  of  this  delusion

presented  the  following  ideas:  Socrates  was  the  wisest  man,  the  man  of

greatest learning; he was infamously accused, and had to die in prison at the

hands of strange men. She was the best dressmaker, but "never unnecessarily

cut a thread, and never allowed a piece of material to lie about on the floor."

She worked ceaselessly, and now she has been falsely accused, wicked men

have shut her up, and she will have to die in the asylum.

Therefore she is Socrates; this is, as you see, simple metaphor, based upon

obvious analogy. Take another example: "I am the finest professor and the

finest artist in the world."

The  analysis  furnishes  the  remarks  that  she  is  the  best  dressmaker  and

chooses  the  most  beautiful  models  which  show  up  well  and  waste  little

material;  she  puts  on  the  trimming  only  where  it  can  be  seen.  She  is  a

professor, and an artist in her work. She makes the best clothes and calls

them absurdly "The Schnecke Museum-clothes." Her customers are only such

persons  as  frequent  the  Schnecke  House  and  the  Museum  (the  Schnecke

House is the aristocratic club. It is near the Museum and the Library, anotherrendezvous of the aristocratic set of Zürich), for she is the best dressmaker

and makes only Schnecke Museum clothing.

The patient also calls herself Mary Stuart. Analysis showed the same analogy

as with Socrates: innocent suffering and death of a heroine.

"I am the Lorelei." Analysis: This is an old and well-known song: "I know

not what it means," etc. Whenever she wants to speak about her affairs people

do not understand her, and say they don't know what it means; hence she is

the Lorelei.

"I am Switzerland." Analysis: Switzerland is free, no one can rob Switzerland

of her freedom. The patient does not belong to the asylum, she would be free

like Switzerland, hence she is Switzerland.

"I am a crane." Analysis: In the "Cranes of Ibykus" it is said: "Whosoever is

free of sin and fault shall preserve the pure soul of a child." She has been

brought innocent to the asylum and has never committed a crime—hence she

is a crane.

"I am Schiller's Bell." Analysis: Schiller's Bell is the greatest work of the

great  master.  She  is  the  best  and  most  industrious  dressmaker,  and  has

achieved the highest rung in the art of dressmaking—hence she is Schiller's

Bell.

"I  am  Hufeland."  Analysis:  Hufeland  was  the  best  doctor.  She  suffers

intolerably in the asylum and is moreover treated by the worst doctors. She is,

however, so prominent a personality that she had a claim to the best doctors,

that is to a doctor like Hufeland—hence she is Hufeland.

The patient used the expression "I am" in a very arbitrary way. Sometimes it

meant "it belongs to me" or "it is proper for me"; sometimes it means "I

should have." This is seen from the following analysis:

"I am the master-key." Analysis: The master-key is the key that opens all the

doors of the asylum. Properly, according to all rights, the patient should long

since have obtained this key for she has been for many years "the proprietress

of  the  Burghölzli  Asylum."  She  expresses  this  reflection  very  much

simplified in the sentence, "I am the master-key."

The chief content of her delusions is concentrated in the following words:—

"I am the monopoly." Analysis: The patient means the banknote monopoly,

which has belonged to her for some time. She believes that she possesses the

monopoly  of  the  entire  bank  notes  of  the  world,  thus  creating  enormous

riches for herself, in compensation for the poverty and lowliness of her lot.

Her parents died early; hence she is the Queen of the Orphans. Her parentslived and died in great poverty. Her blessings are extended to them also, the

dreamlike  delusions  of  the  patient  benefit  them  in  many  ways.  She  says

textually: "My parents are clothed by me, my sorely-tried mother, full of

sorrow—I sat with her at table—covered in white with superfluity."

This is another of these malleable hallucinations which the patient had daily.

It is one of those scenes of wish-fulfilment, with poverty on one side and

riches  on  the  other,  recalling  Hauptmann's  Hannele;  more  especially  that

scene where Gottwald says: "She was clothed in rags—now she is bedeckt in

silken robes; and she ran about barefoot—now she has shoes of glass to her

feet. Soon she will live in a golden castle and eat each day of baked meats.

Here has she lived on cold potatoes...."

The  wish-fulfilments  of  our  patient  go  even  further.  Switzerland  has  to

furnish her with an income of 150,000 francs. The Director of the Burghölzli

owes  her  80,000  francs  damages  for  wrongful  incarceration.  She  is  the

proprietress of a distant island with silver mines, the "mightiest silver island

in the world." Therefore she is also the greatest orator, possesses the most

wonderful eloquence, for, as she says, "Speech is silver, silence gold." To her

all the beautiful landed estates belong—all the rich quarters, towns and lands,

she is the proprietress of a world, even a "threefold proprietress of the world."

Whilst  poor  Hannele  was  only  elevated  to  the  side  of  the  Heavenly

Bridegroom,  our  patient  has  the  "Key  of  Heaven,"  she  is  not  only  the

honoured earthly queens Mary Stuart and Queen Louise of Prussia, but she is

also the Queen of Heaven, the Mother of God as well as the Godhead. Even

in  this  earthly  world  where  she  was  but  a  poor,  ill-regarded  homely

dressmaker she attained fulfilments of her human wishes, for she had taken

three husbands from the best families in the town and her fourth was the

Emperor Francis. From these marriages there were two phantom children—a

little boy and a little girl. Just as she clothed, fed and feasted her parents, so

she provided for the future of her children. To her son she bequeathed the

great bazaar of Zürich, therefore her son is a "Zur," for the proprietor of

a Bazaar is a "Zur." The daughter resembles her mother; hence she becomes

the proprietress of the asylum and takes her mother's place so that the mother

is  released  from  captivity.  The  daughter  therefore  receives  the  title  of

"Agency of Socrates," for she replaces Socrates in captivity.

These instances by no means exhaust the delusional fancies of the patient.

But they will give you some idea, I hope, of the richness of her inner life

although she was apparently so dull and apathetic, or, as was said imbecile,and sat for twenty years in her workroom, where she mechanically repaired

her linen, occasionally uttering a complex of meaningless fragments which

no one had hitherto been able to understand. Her odd lack of words can now

be seen in another light; they are fragments of enigmatical inscriptions, of

fairy-story phantasies, which have escaped from the hard world to found a

world of their own. Here the tables are ever laden, and a thousand feasts are

celebrated in golden palaces. The patient can only spare a few mysterious

symbols for the gloomy dim shores of reality; they need not be understood,

for our understanding has not been necessary for her for this long time.

Nor is this patient at all unique. She is one of a type. Similar phantasies are

always found in patients of this kind, though not always in such profusion.

The parallels with Hauptmann's Hannele show that here likewise the artist

has shown us the way with the free creation of his own phantasy. From this

coincidence,  which  is  not  accidental,  we  may  conclude  that  there  is

something common both to the artist and the insane and not to them alone.

Every human being has also within himself that restless creative phantasy

which is ever engaged in assuaging the harshness of reality. Whoever gives

himself unsparingly and carefully to self-observation, will realise that there

dwells within him something which would gladly hide and cover up all that is

difficult and questionable in life, and thus procure an easy and free path.

Insanity grants the upper hand to this something. When once it is uppermost,

reality is more or less quickly driven out. It becomes a distant dream, and the

dream which enchains the patient wholly or in part, and often for life, has

now the attributes of reality. We normal persons, who have to do entirely

with reality, see only the products of disordered fancy, but not the wealth of

that side of the mind which is turned away from us. Unfortunately only too

often no further knowledge reaches us of the things which are transpiring on

that other side, because all the bridges are broken down which unite this side

with that.

We do not know to-day whether these new views are of universal or only of

limited  validity;  the  more  carefully  and  perseveringly  we  examine  our

patients,  the  more  we  shall  meet  cases,  which,  despite  apparent  total

imbecility,  will  yet  afford  us  at  least  some  fragmentary  insight  into  the

obscurities of the psychical life. This life is far removed from that mental

poverty which the prevailing theories were compelled to accept.

However far we are from being able to understand fully the concatenations of

that obscure world, at least we may maintain, with complete assurance, thatin  dementia  præcox  there  is  no  symptom  which  can  be  described  as

psychologically  baseless  and  meaningless.  The  most  absurd  things  are  in

reality symbols of ideas which are not only generally understandable, but also

universally  operative  in  the  human  heart.  In  insanity  we  do  not  discover

anything new and unknown, but we look at the foundation of our own being,

the source of those life-problems in which we are all engaged.

Part II.

The number of psychoanalytic investigations into the psychology of dementia

præcox has considerably increased since the publication of my book upon the

subject.  When,  in  1903,  I  made  the  first  analysis  of  a  case  of  dementia

præcox,  there  dawned  on  me  a  premonition  of  the  possibilities  of  future

discoveries in this sphere. This has been confirmed.

Freud first submitted a case of paranoid dementia to closer psychological

investigation. This he was enabled to do by means of an analytic technique

perfected through his rich experiences with neurotics. He selected the famous

autobiography  of  P.  Schreber,  "Denkwürdigkeiten  eines  Nervenkranken."

The patient could not be analysed personally, but having published his most

interesting autobiography all the material wanted for an analysis was to be

found in it.

In this study Freud shows out of what infantile forms of thought and instincts

the delusional system was built up. The peculiar delusions which the patient

had about his doctor whom he identified with God or with a god-like being,

and certain other surprising and really blasphemous ideas, Freud was able to

reduce most ingeniously to his infantile relationship to his father. This case

also presented similar bizarre and grotesque concatenations of ideas to the

one I have described. As the author himself says, his work confines itself to

the  task  of  pointing  out  those  universally  existent  and  undifferentiated

foundations  out  of  which  we  may  say  every  psychological  formation  is

historically developed. This reductive analytical process did not, however,

furnish  such  enlightening  results  in  regard  to  the  rich  and  surprising

symbolism in patients of this kind as we had been accustomed to expect from

the  same  method  in  the  realm  of  the  psychology  of  hysteria.  In  reading

certain works of the Zürich school, for example,

Maeder, Spielrein, Nelken, Grebelskaja, Itten, one is powerfully impressed

by the enormous symbol-formation in dementia præcox.

Some  of  the  authors  still  proceed  essentially  by  the  method  of  analytic

reduction, tracing back the complicated delusional formation into its simplerand more universal components, as I have done in the preceding pages. One

cannot, however, resist the feeling that this method hardly does justice to the

fulness and the almost overpowering wealth of phantastic symbol-formation,

although  it  does  undoubtedly  throw  a  light  upon  the  subject  in  certain

directions.

Let me illustrate with an example. We should be thankful for a commentary

upon  "Faust"  which  traced  back  all  the  diverse  material  of  Part  II.  to  its

historical sources, or for a psychological analysis of Part I. which pointed out

how the dramatic conflict corresponds to a personal conflict in the soul of the

poet;  we  should  be  glad  of  an  exposition  which  pointed  out  how  this

subjective conflict is itself based upon those ultimate and universal human

things which are nowise foreign to us since we all carry the seeds of them in

our hearts. Nevertheless we should be a little disappointed. We do not read

"Faust" just in order to discover that also we are, in all things, "human, all too

human." Alas, we know that but too well already. Let any one who has not

yet learnt it go for a little while out into the world and look at it without

preconceptions and with open eyes. He will turn back from the might and

power of the "too human," hungrily he will pick up his "Faust," not to find

again what he has just left, but to learn how a man like Goethe shakes off

these elemental human things and finds freedom for his soul. When we once

know who was the "Proktophantasmist," to what chronological events the

mass of symbols in Part II. relates, how it is all intimately bound up with the

poet's own soul and conditioned by it, we come to regard this determination

as less important than the problem itself—what does the poet mean by his

symbolic  creation?  Proceeding  purely  reductively,  one  discovers  the  final

meaning in these universal human things; and demands nothing further from

an explanation than that the unknown and complicated shall be reduced to the

known  and  simple.  I  should  like  to  designate  this  kind  of  understanding

as retrospective understanding. But there is another kind of understanding,

which is not analytic reduction, but is of a synthetic or constructive nature. I

would  designate  this prospective  understanding,  and  the  corresponding

method as the Constructive method.

It is common knowledge that present-day scientific explanation rests upon

the basis of the causal principle. Scientific explanation is causal explanation.

We  are  therefore  naturally  inclined,  whenever  we  think  scientifically,  to

explain causally, to understand a thing and to regard it as explained whenever

it is reduced analytically to its cause and general principle. In so far Freud'spsychological method of interpretation is strictly scientific.

If we apply this method to "Faust" it must become clear that something more

is required for a true understanding. It will even seem to us that we have not

gathered the poet's deepest meaning if we only see in it universal foregone

human conclusions. What we really want to find out is how this man has

redeemed himself as an individual, and when we arrive at this comprehension

then we shall also understand the symbol given by Goethe. It is true we may

then  fall  into  the  error  that  we  understand  Goethe  himself.  But  let  us  be

cautious  and  modest,  simply  saying  we  have  thereby  arrived  at  an

understanding of ourselves. I am thinking here of Kant's thought-compelling

definition of comprehension, as "the realisation of a thing to the extent which

is sufficient for our purpose."

This understanding is, it is true, subjective, and therefore not scientific for

those to whom science and explanation by the causal principle are identical.

But the validity of this identification is open to question. In the sphere of

psychology I must emphasise my doubt on this point.

We  speak  of  "objective"  understanding  when  we  have  given  a  causal

explanation. But at bottom, understanding is a subjective process upon which

we confer the quality "objective" really only to differentiate it from another

kind of understanding which is also a psychological and subjective process,

but upon which, without further ado, we bestow the quality "subjective." The

attitude of to-day only grants scientific value to "objective" understanding on

account  of  its  universal  validity.  This  standpoint  is  incontestably  correct

wherever it is not a question of the psychological process itself, and hence it

is valid in all sciences apart from pure psychology.

To interpret Faust objectively, i.e. from the causal standpoint, is as though a

man were to consider a sculpture from the historical, technical and—last but

not  least—from  the  mineralogical  standpoint.  But  where  lurks  the real

meaning of the wondrous work? Where is the answer to that most important

question:  what  aim  had  the  artist  in  mind,  and  how  are  we  ourselves  to

understand his work subjectively? To the scientific spirit this seems an idle

question which anyhow has nothing to do with science. It comes furthermore

into  collision  with  the  causal  principle,  for  it  is  a  purely  speculative

constructive  view.  And  the  modern  world  has  overthrown  this  spirit  of

scholasticism.

But if we would approach to an understanding of psychological things we

must remember the fact of the subjective conditioning of all knowledge. Theworld is as we see it and not simply objective; this holds true even more of

the mind. Of course it is possible to look at the mind objectively, just as at

Faust, or a Gothic Cathedral. In this objective conception there is comprised

the whole worth and worthlessness of current experimental psychology and

psychoanalysis.  The  scientific  mind,  thinking  causally,  is  incapable  of

understanding  what  is  ahead;  it  only  understands  what  is  past,  that  is,

retrospective.  Like  Ahriman,  the  Persian  devil,  it  has  the  gift  of  After-

Knowledge. But this spirit is only one half of a complete comprehension. The

other more important half is prospective or constructive; if we are not able to

understand what lies ahead, then nothing is understood. If psychoanalysis,

following Freud's orientation, should succeed in presenting an uninterrupted

and  conclusive  connection  between  Goethe's  infantile  sexual  development

and his work, or, following Adler, between the infantile struggle for power

and the adult Goethe and his work, an interesting proposition would have

been solved—we should have learnt how a masterpiece can be reduced to the

simplest thinkable elements, which are universal, and to be found working

within the depths of everything and everybody. But did Goethe construct his

work to this end? Was it his intention that it should be thus conceived?

It must be sufficiently clear that such an understanding, though undoubtedly

scientific, would be entirely, utterly, beside the mark. This statement is valid

for  psychology  in  general.  To  understand  the  psyche  causally,  means  to

understand but half of it. The causal understanding of Faust enlightens us as

to how it became a finished work of art, but reveals nothing of the living

meaning of the poet. That meaning only lives if we experience it, in and

through ourselves. In so far as our actual present life is for us something

essentially new and not a repetition of all that has gone before, the great value

of such a work is to be seen, not in its causal development, but in its living

reality for our own lives. We should be indeed depreciating a work like Faust

if  we  were  only  to  regard  it  as  something  that  has  been  perfected  and

finished; it is only understood when conceived as a becoming and as an ever

new-experiencing.

Thus we must regard the human psyche. Only on one side is the mind a Has

Been, and as such subordinate to the causal principle. On the other side the

mind is a Becoming that can only be grasped synthetically or constructively.

The causal standpoint asks how it is this actual mind has become what it

appears to-day? The constructive standpoint asks how a bridge can be built

from this actual psyche to its own future?Just as the causal method finally reaches the general principles of human

psychology by the analysis and reduction of individual events, so does the

constructive  standpoint  reach  aims  that  are  general  by  the  synthesis  of

individual tendencies. The mind is a point of passage and thus necessarily

determined  from  two  sides.  On  the  one  side  it  offers  a  picture  of  the

precipitate of the past, and on the other side a picture of the germinating

knowledge of all that is to come, in so far as the psyche creates its own

future.

What has been is, on the one hand, the result and apex of all that was—as

such it appears to the causal standpoint; on the other hand, it is an expression

of all that is to be. The future is only apparently like the past, but in its

essence always new and unique, (the causal standpoint would like to invert

this sentence) thus the actual formula is incomplete, germlike so to say, in

relation to what is to be.

To get any conception of this expression of what is to be we are forced to

apply a constructive interest to it. I almost felt myself tempted to say, "a

scientific interest." But modern science is identical with the causal principle.

So long as we consider the actual mind causally, that is scientifically, we

elude the mind as a Becoming. This other side of the psyche can never be

grasped by the exclusive use of the causal principle, but only by means of the

constructive  standpoint.  The  causal  standpoint  reduces  things  to  their

elements, the constructive standpoint elaborates them into something higher

and more complicated. This latter standpoint is necessarily a speculative one.

Constructive  understanding  is,  however,  differentiated  from  scholastic

speculation  because  it  imposes  no  general  validity,  but  only  subjective

validity. When the speculative philosopher believes he has comprehended the

world  once  for  all  by  his  System,  he  deceives  himself;  he  has  only

comprehended himself and then naïvely projected that view upon the world.

In reaction against this, the scientific method of the modern world has almost

put an end to speculation and gone to the other extreme. It would create an

"objective" psychology. In opposition to such efforts, the stress which Freud

has  placed  upon  individual  psychology  is  of  immortal  merit.  The

extraordinary  importance  of  the  subjective  in  the  development  of  the

objective mental process was thus first brought adequately into prominence.

Subjective speculation lays no claim to universal validity, it is identical with

constructive  understanding.  It  is  a  subjective  creation,  which,  looked  at

externally, easily seems to be a so-called infantile phantasy, or at least anunmistakable derivative of it; from an objective standpoint it must be judged

as such, in so far as objective is regarded as identical with scientific or causal.

Looked  at  from  within,  however,  constructive  understanding  means

redemption.

"Creation—that  is  the  great  redemption  from  suffering  and  easiness  of

living."


Starting  from  these  considerations  as  to  the  psychology  of  those  mental

patients to whom the Schreber case belongs, we must, from the "objective-

scientific"  standpoint,  reduce  the  structural  phantasy  of  the  patient  to  its

simple and most generally valid elements. This Freud had done. But that is

only  half  of  the  work  to  be  done.  The  other  half  is  the  constructive

understanding  of  Schreber's  system.  The  question  is:  What  end,  what

freedom, did the patient hope to achieve by the creation of his system?

The scientific thinker of to-day will regard this question as inappropriate. The

psychiatrist  will  certainly  smile  at  it,  for  he  is  thoroughly  assured  of  the

universal validity of his causalism, he knows the psyche merely as something

that  is  made,  descendent,  reactive.  Not  uncommonly  there  lurks  the

unconscious prejudice that the psyche is a brain-secretion.

Looking  at  such  a  morbid  system  without  preconception,  and  asking

ourselves  what  goal  this  delusional  system  is  aiming  at,  we  see,  in  fact,

firstly, that it is endeavouring to get at something, and secondly, that the

patient also devotes all his will-power to the service of the system. There are

patients  who  develop  their  delusions  with  scientific  thoroughness,  often

dragging in an immense material of comparison and proof. Schreber certainly

belongs to this class. Others do not proceed so thoroughly and learnedly, but

content  themselves  with  heaping  up  synonymous  expressions  for  that  at

which they are aiming. The case of the patient I have described, who assumes

all kinds of titles, is a good instance of this.

The  patient's  unmistakable  striving  to  express  something  through  and  by

means of his delusion Freud conceives retrospectively, as the satisfaction of

his infantile wishes by means of imagination. Adler reduces it to the desire

for power.

For  him  the  delusion-formation  is  a  "manly  protest,"  a  means  of  gaining

security for himself against his menaced superiority. Thus characterised, this

struggle  is  likewise  infantile  and  the  means  employed—the  delusional

creation—is infantile because insufficient for its purpose; one can thereforeunderstand why Freud declines to accept Adler's point of view. Freud, rightly

on the whole, subsumes this infantile struggle for power under the concept of

the infantile wish.

The constructive standpoint is different. Here the delusional system is neither

infantile nor, upon the whole, eo ipso pathological but subjective, and hence

justified  within  the  scope  of  the  subjective.  The  constructive  standpoint

absolutely  denies  the  conception  that  the  subjective  phantasy-creation  is

merely an infantile wish, symbolically veiled; or that it is merely that in a

higher degree; it denies that it is a convulsive and egoistic adhesion to the

fiction of its own superiority, in so far as these are to be regarded as finalistic

explanations. The subjective activity of the mind can be judged from without,

just  as  one  can,  in  the  end,  so  judge  everything.  But  this  judgment  is

inadequate, because it is the very essence of the subjective that it cannot be

judged objectively. We cannot measure distance in pints. The subjective can

be only understood and judged subjectively, that is, constructively. Any other

judgment is unfair and does not meet the question.

The  absolute  credit  which  the  constructive  standpoint  confers  upon  the

subjective, naturally seems to the "scientific" spirit as an utter violation of

reason. But this scientific spirit can only take up arms against it so long as the

constructive  is  not  avowedly subjective.  The  constructive  comprehension

also analyses,  but  it  does  not reduce.  It  decomposes  the  delusion

into typical components. What is to be regarded as the type at a given time is

shown from the attainment of experience and knowledge reached at that time.

Even  the  most  individual  delusional  systems  are  not  absolutely  unique,

occurring only once, for they offer striking and obvious analogies with other

systems.  From  the  comparative  analysis  of  many  systems  the  typical

formations  are  drawn.  If  one  can  speak  of  reduction  at  all,  it  is  only  a

question of reduction to general type, but not to some universal principle

obtained  inductively  or  deductively,  such  as  "Sexuality"  or  "Struggle  for

Power."  This  paralleling  with  other  typical  formations  only  serves  for  a

widening of the basis upon which the construction is to be built. If one were

to proceed entirely subjectively one would go on constructing in the language

of the patient and in his mental range. One would arrive at some structure

which was illuminating to the patient and to the investigator of the case but

not to the outer scientific public. The public would be unable to enter into the

peculiarities  of  the  speech  and  thought  of  the  individual  case  in  question

without further help.The  works  of  the  Zürich  school  referred  to  contain  careful  and  detailed

expositions of individual material. In these materials there are very many

typical  formations  which  are  unmistakably analogies  with mythological

formations. There arose from the perception of this relationship a new and

valuable source for comparative study. The acceptance of the possibility of

such a comparison will not be granted immediately, but the question is only

whether the materials to be compared really are similar or not. It will also be

contended that pathological and mythological formations are not immediately

comparable.  But  this  objection  must  not  be  raised a  priori,  for  only  a

conscientious comparison can determine whether any true parallelism exists

or not. At the present moment all we know is that they are both structures of

the  imagination  which,  like  all  such  products,  rest  essentially  upon  the

activity  of  the  unconscious.  Experience  must  teach  us  whether  such  a

comparison is valid. The results hitherto obtained are so encouraging that

further work along these lines seems to me most hopeful and important. I

made  practical  use  of  the  constructive  method  in  a  case  which  Flournoy

published in the Archives de Psychologie, although he offered no opinion as

to its nature at that time.

The  case  dealt  with  a  rather  neurotic  young  lady  who,  in  Flournoy's

publication,  described  how  surprised  she  was  at  the  connected  phantasy-

formations  which  penetrated  from  the  unconscious  into  the  conscious.  I

subjected these phantasies, which the lady herself reproduced in some detail,

to my constructive methods and gave the results of these investigations in my

book, "The Psychology of the Unconscious."

This  book  has,  I  regret  to  say,  met  with  many  perhaps  inevitable

misunderstandings. But I have had one precious consolation, for my book

received the approval of Flournoy himself, who published the original case

which he knew personally. It is to be hoped that later works will make the

standpoint of the Zürich school intelligible to a wider public. Whoever, by

the  help  of  this  work,  has  taken  the  trouble  to  grasp  the  essence  of  the

constructive method, will readily imagine how great are the difficulties of

investigation,  and  how  much  greater  still  are  the  difficulties  of  objective

presentation of such investigations.

Among the many difficulties and opportunities for misunderstanding I should

like to adduce one difficulty which is especially characteristic. In an intensive

study  of  Schreber's  or  any  similar  case,  it  will  be  discovered  that  these

patients are consumed by the desire for a new world-philosophy which maybe of the most bizarre kind. Their aim is obviously to create a system such as

will  help  them  in  the  assimilation  of  unknown  psychical

phenomena, i.e. enable them to adapt their own unconscious to the world.

This arrangement produces a subjective system which must be considered as

a necessary transition-stage on the path to the adaptation of their personality

in regard to the world in general. But the patient remains stationary at this

transitory  stage  and  assumes  his  subjective  view  is  the  world's,  hence  he

remains ill. He cannot free himself from his subjectivism and does not find

the  link  to  objective  thinking, i.e.  to  society.  He  does  not  reach  the  real

summit  of  self-understanding,  for  he  remains  with  a  merely  subjective

understanding of himself. But a mere subjective understanding is not real and

adequate. As Feuerbach says: Understanding is only real when it is in accord

with that of some other rational beings. Then it becomes objective and the

link with life is reached.

I am convinced that not a few will raise the objection that in the first place the

psychological process of adaptation does not proceed by the method of first

creating a world-philosophy; secondly, that it is in itself a sign of unhealthy

mental disposition even to make the attempt to adapt oneself by way of a

"world-philosophy."

Undoubtedly there are innumerable persons who are capable of adaptation

without  creating  any  preliminary  philosophy.  If  they  ever  arrive  at  any

general theory of the world it is always subsequently. But, on the other hand,

there are just as many who are only able to adapt themselves by means of a

preliminary  intellectual  formulation.  To  everything  which  they  do  not

understand they are unable to adapt themselves. Generally it comes about that

they  do  adapt  themselves  just  in  so  far  as  they  can  grasp  the  situation

intellectually. To this latter group seem to belong all those patients to whom

we have been giving our consideration.

Medical experience has taught us that there are two large groups of functional

nervous disorders. The one embraces all those forms of disease which are

designated hysterical, the other all those forms which the French school has

designated psychasthenic.  Although  the  line  of  demarcation  is  rather

uncertain, one can mark off two psychological types which are obviously

different; their psychology is diametrically opposed. I have called these—

the Introverted  and Extroverted  types.  The  hysteric  belongs  to  the  type

of Extroversion,  the  psychasthenic  to  the  type  of Introversion,  as  does

dementia  præcox,  in  so  far  as  we  know  it  to-day.  Thisterminology, Introversion and Extroversion, is bound up with my way of

regarding mental phenomena as forms of energy. I postulate a hypothetical

fundamental  striving  which  I  designate libido.  In  the  classical  use  of  the

word, libido  never  had  an  exclusively  sexual  connotation  as  it  has  in

medicine. The word interest, as Claparède once suggested to me, could be

used  in  this  special  sense,  if  this  expression  had  to-day  a  less  extensive

application. Bergson's concept, élan vital, would also serve if this expression

were  less  biological  and  more  psychological.  Libido  is  intended  to  be  an

energising expression for psychological values. The psychological value is

something active and determining; hence it can be regarded from the energic

standpoint without any pretence of exact measurement.

The  introverted  type  is  characterised  by  the  fact  that  his  libido  is  turned

towards his own personality to a certain extent—he finds within himself the

unconditioned value. The extroverted type has his libido to a certain extent

externally; he finds the unconditioned value outside himself. The introvert

regards everything from the aspect of his own personality; the extrovert is

dependent upon the value of his object. I must emphasise the statement that

this  question  of  types  is the  question  of  our  psychology,  and  that  every

further  advance  must  probably  proceed  by  way  of  this  question.  The

difference between these types is almost alarming in extent. So far there is

only one small preliminary communication by myself on this theory of type,

which is particularly important for the conception of dementia præcox. On

the  psychiatric  side  Gross  has  called  attention  to  the  existence  of  two

psychological  types.  His  two  types  are  (1)  those  with  limited  but  deep

consciousness, and (2) those with broad but superficial consciousness. The

former correspond to my introverted and the latter to my extroverted type. In

my  article  I  have  collected  some  other  instances  among  which  I  would

especially call attention to the striking description of the two types given by

William  James  in  his  book  on  "Pragmatism."  Fr.  Th.  Vischer  has

differentiated  the  two  types  very  wittily  by  her  division  of  the  learned

into  "reason-mongers,"  and  "matter-mongers."  In  the  sphere  of

psychoanalysis Freud follows the psychology of Extraversion, Adler that of

Introversion. The irreconcilable opposition between the views of Freud and

those of Adler (see especially his book "Über den nervösen Charakter") is

readily  explained  by  the  existence  of  two  diametrically  opposed

psychological  types  which  view  the  same  things  from  entirely  different

aspects. An Extrovert can hardly, or only with great difficulty, come to anyunderstanding with an Introvert, on any delicate psychological question.

An Extrovert can hardly conceive the necessity which compels the Introvert

to conquer the world by means of a system. And yet this necessity exists,

otherwise we should have no philosophical systems and dogmas, presumed to

be universally valid. Civilised humanity would be only empiricists and the

sciences  only  the  experimental  sciences.  Causalism  and  empiricism  are

undoubtedly mighty forces in our present-day mental life but it may come to

be otherwise.

This difference in type is the first great obstacle which stands in the way of

an understanding concerning fundamental conceptions of our psychology. A

second objection arises from the circumstance that the constructive method,

faithful to itself, must adapt itself to the lines of the delusion. The direction

along which the patient develops his morbid thoughts has to be accepted

seriously, and followed out to its end; the investigator thus places himself at

the  standpoint  of  the  psychosis.  This  procedure  may  expose  him  to  the

suspicion  of  being  deranged  himself;  or  at  least  risks  a  misunderstanding

which is considered terribly disgraceful—he may himself have some world-

philosophy!  The  confirmation  of  such  a  possibility  is  as  bad  as  being

"unscientific." But every one has a world-philosophy though not every one

knows he has. And those who do not know it have simply an unconscious and

therefore inadequate and archaic philosophy. But everything psychological

that is allowed to remain in the mind neglected and not developed, remains in

a primitive state. A striking instance of how universal theories are influenced

by  unconscious  archaic  points  of  view  has  been  furnished  by  a  famous

German historian whose name matters to us not at all. This historian took it

for  granted  that  once  upon  a  time  people  propagated  themselves  through

incest, for in the first human families the brother was assigned to the sister.

This theory is wholly based upon his still unconscious belief in Adam and

Eve as the first and only parents of mankind. It is on the whole better to

discover for oneself a modern world-philosophy, or at least to make use of

some decent system which will prevent any errors of that kind.

One could put up with being despised as the possessor of a world-philosophy;

but there is a greater danger. The public may come to believe the philosophy,

beaten out by the constructive method, is to be regarded as a theoretical and

objectively valid insight into the meaning of the world in general.

I must now again point out that it is an obstinate, scholastic misunderstanding

not  to  be  able  to  distinguish  between  a  world-philosophy  which  is  onlypsychological,  and  an  extra-psychological  theory,  which  concerns  the

objective thing. It is absolutely essential that the student of the results of the

constructive method should be able to draw this distinction. In its first results

the constructive method does not produce anything that could be called a

scientific  theory;  it  furnishes  the psychological  lines  of  development,

a path so to say. I must here refer the reader to my book, "Psychology of the

Unconscious."

The analytic reductive method has the advantage of being much simpler than

the  constructive  method.  The  former  reduces  to  well-known  universal

elements  of  an  extremely  simple  nature.  The  latter  has,  with  extremely

complicated material, to construct the further path to some often unknown

end. This obliges the psychologist to take full account of all those forces

which  are  at  work  in  the  human  mind.  The  reductive  method  strives  to

replace  the  religious  and  philosophical  needs  of  man,  by  their  more

elementary  components,  following  the  principle  of  the  "nothing  but,"  as

James so aptly calls it. But to construct aright, we must accept the developed

aspirations  as  indispensable  components,  essential  elements,  of  spiritual

growth.  Such  work  extends  far  beyond  empirical  concepts  but  that  is  in

accordance with the nature of the human soul which has never hitherto rested

content with experience alone. Everything new in the human mind proceeds

from speculation. Mental development proceeds by way of speculation, never

by way of limitation to mere experience. I realise that my views are parallel

with those of Bergson, and that in my book the concept of the libido which I

have  given,  is  a  concept  parallel  to  that  of  "élan  vital";  my  constructive

method  corresponds  to  Bergson's  "intuitive  method."  I,  however,  confine

myself to the psychological side and to practical work. When I first read

Bergson a year and a half ago I discovered to my great pleasure everything

which I had worked out practically, but expressed by him in consummate

language and in a wonderfully clear philosophic style.

Working speculatively with psychological material there is a risk of being

sacrificed to the general misunderstanding which bestows the value of an

objective theory upon the line of psychological evolution thus elaborated. So

many people feel themselves in this way at pains to find grounds whether

such  a  theory  is  correct  or  not.  Those  who  are  particularly  brilliant  even

discover that the fundamental concepts can be traced back to Heraclitus or

some  one  even  earlier.  Let  me  confide  to  these  knowing  folk  that  the

fundamental ideas employed in the constructive method stretch back evenbeyond any historical philosophy, viz. to the dynamic "views" of primitive

peoples. If the result of the constructive method were scientific theory, it

would go very ill with it, for then it would be a falling back to the deepest

superstition.  But  since  the  constructive  method  results  in  something  far

removed  from  scientific  theory  the  great  antiquity  of  the  basic  concepts

therein  must  speak  in  favour  of  its  extreme  correctness.  Not  until  the

constructive method has presented us with much practical experience can we

come to the construction of a scientific theory, a theory of the psychological

lines  of  development.  But  we  must  first  of  all  content  ourselves  with

confirming these lines individually.            FOREWORD TO CHAPTER XIV

This essay was originally written in 1913, when I limited myself entirely to

presenting an essential part of the psychological point of view inaugurated

by Freud. A few months ago my Swiss publisher asked for a second and

revised edition. The many and great changes which the last few years have

brought about in our understanding of the psychology of the unconscious

necessitated a substantial enlargement of my essay. In this new edition some

expositions about Freud's theories are shortened, whilst Adler's psychological

views  are  more  fully  considered,  and—so  far  as  the  scope  of  this  paper

permits—a general outline of my own views are given. I must at the outset

draw the reader's attention to the fact that this is no longer an easy "popular"

scientific paper, but a presentation making great demands upon the patience

and  attention  of  the  reader.  The  material  is  extremely  complicated  and

difficult. I do not for a moment deceive myself into thinking this contribution

is in any way conclusive or adequately convincing. Only detailed scientific

treatises about the various problems touched upon in these pages could really

do justice to the subject. Any one who wishes to go deeply into the questions

that are raised here must be referred to the special literature of the subject.

My attention is solely to give the orientation in regard to the newest concepts

of the inner nature of unconscious psychology. I consider the subject of the

unconscious to be specially important and opportune at this moment. In my

opinion, it would be a great loss if this problem, concerning every one so

closely as it does, were to disappear from the horizon of the educated lay

public, by being interned in some inaccessible specialised scientific journal.

The  psychological  events  that  accompany  the  present  war—the  incredible

brutalisation  of  public  opinion,  the  epidemic  of  mutual  calumnies,  the

unsuspected mania for destruction, the unexampled flood of mendacity, and

man's incapacity to arrest the bloody demon—are they not, one and all, better

adapted than anything else, to force obtrusively the problem of the chaotic

unconscious—which  slumbers  uneasily  beneath  the  ordered  world  of

consciousness,—before the eyes of every thinking individual? This war has

inexorably shown to the man of culture that he is still a barbarian. It testifies

also what an iron scourge awaits him, if ever again it should occur to him to

make his neighbour responsible for his own bad qualities. The psychology of

the individual corresponds to the psychology of nations. What nations do,each individual does also, and as long as the individual does it, the nation will

do  it  too.  A  metamorphosis  in  the  attitude  of  the  individual  is  the  only

possible beginning of a transformation in the psychology of the nation. The

great problems of humanity have never been solved by universal laws, but

always and only by a remodelling of the attitude of the individual. If ever

there was a time when self-examination was the absolutely indispensable and

the only right thing, it is now, in the present catastrophic epoch. But he who

bethinks  himself  about  his  own  being  strikes  against  the  confines  of  the

unconscious, which indeed contains precisely that which it is most needful

for him to know.

C. G. Jung.

Küsnacht-Zürich,

March, 1917.                              CHAPTER XIV

    THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS PROCESSES

Being a Survey of the Modern Theory and Method of Analytical Psychology

                I.—THE BEGINNINGS OF


                        PSYCHOANALYSIS

In common with other sciences, psychology had to go through its scholastic-

philosophic stage, and to some extent this has lasted on into the present time.

This  philosophic  psychology  has  incurred  our  condemnation  in  that  it

decides ex cathedra what is the nature of the soul, and whence and how it

derives  its  attributes.  The  spirit  of  modern  scientific  investigation  has

summarily disposed of all these phantasies and in their place has established

an  exact  empiric  method.  We  owe  to  this  our  present-day  experimental

psychology or "psychophysiology," as the French call it. This new direction

originated  with  Fechner,  that  Janus-minded  spirit,  who  in  his

remarkable Psychophysik  (1860)  embarked  on  the  mighty  enterprise  of

introducing  the  physical  standpoint  into  the  conception  of  psychical

phenomena.  The  whole  idea  of  this  work—and  not  least  its  astonishing

mistakes—proved  most  fruitful  in  results.  For  Wundt,  Fechner's  young

contemporary,  carried  on  his  work,  and  it  is  Wundt's  great  erudition,

enormous power of work and genius for elaborating methods of experimental

research, which have given to modern psychology its prevailing direction.

Until quite recently experimental psychology remained essentially academic.

The first notable attempt to utilise some few at any rate of its innumerable

experimental methods in the service of practical psychology came from the

psychiatrists  of  the  former  Heidelberg  school  (Kræpelin,  Aschaffenburg,

etc.); it is quite intelligible that the psychotherapists should be the first to feel

the urgent need for more exact knowledge of psychic processes.

Next came pedagogy, making its own demands upon psychology. Out of this

has  recently  grown  up  an  "experimental  pedagogy,"  and  in  this  field

Neumann in Germany and Binet in France have rendered signal services. The

physician,  the  so-called  "nerve-specialist,"  has  the  most  urgent  need  of

psychological knowledge if he would really help his patients, for neurotic

disturbances, such as hysteria, and all things classed as "nervousness," are of

psychic origin, and necessarily demand psychic treatment. Cold water, light,