be attained. If a plant is to unfold its specific nature to the full, it must first

be able to grow in the soil in which it is planted.

[761] Individuation is always to some extent opposed to collective norms,

since it means separation and differentiation from the general and a building

up of the particular—not a

particularity that is sought out, but one that is already ingrained in the

psychic constitution. The opposition to the collective norm, however, is

only apparent, since closer  examination shows that the individual

standpoint is not antagonistic to it, but only differently oriented. The

individual way can never be directly opposed to the collective norm,

because the opposite of the collective norm could only be another, but

contrary, norm. But the individual way can, by  definition, never be a

norm. A norm is the product of the totality of individual ways, and its

justification and beneficial  effect are contingent upon the existence of

individual ways that need from time to time to orient to a norm. A norm

serves no purpose when it possesses absolute validity. A real conflict with the

collective norm arises only when an individual way is raised to a norm,

which is the actual aim of extreme  individualism. Naturally this aim is

pathological and inimical to life. It has, accordingly, nothing to do with

individuation,  which, though it may strike out on an individual bypath,

precisely on that account needs the norm for its orientation (q.v.) to

society and for the vitally necessary relationship of  the individual to

society. Individuation, therefore, leads to a natural esteem for the collective

norm, but if the orientation  is  exclusively collective the norm becomes

increasingly superfluous and morality goes to pieces. The more a man’s

life is shaped by the collective norm, the greater is his  individual

immorality.

[762] Individuation is practically the same as the development of  

consciousness out  of the original state of identity (q.v.). It is

thus an extension of the sphere of consciousness, an enriching of conscious

psychological life.

[763] 30. INFERIOR function. This term is used to denote the function that

lags behind in the process of differentiation (q.v.). Experience shows that it

is practically impossible, owing to adverse  circumstances in general,  for

anyone to  develop all his psychological functions simultaneously. The

demands of society compel a man to apply himself first and foremost to the

differentiation of the function with which he is best equipped by nature, orwhich will secure him the greatest social success. Very frequently, indeed

as a general rule, a man identifies more or less completely with the most

favoured and hence the most developed function. It is this that gives rise to

the various psychological types (q.v.). As a consequence of this one-sided

development, one or more  functions are necessarily retarded. These

functions may  properly be called inferior in a psychological but not

psychopathological sense, since they are in no way morbid  but merely

backward as compared with the favoured function.

[764] Although the inferior function may be conscious as a phenomenon, its

true significance nevertheless remains unrecognized. It behaves like many

repressed or insufficiently appreciated contents, which are partly conscious

and partly unconscious, just as, very often, one knows a certain person from

his outward appearance but does not know him as he really is. Thus in

normal cases the inferior function remains conscious, at least in its effects;

but in a neurosis it sinks wholly or in part into the unconscious. For, to the

degree that the greater share of libido (q.v.) is taken up by the favoured

function, the inferior function undergoes a regressive  development; it

reverts to the archaic (q.v.) stage and  becomes incompatible with the

conscious, favoured function. When a function that should normally be

conscious lapses into the unconscious, its specific energy passes into the

unconscious too. A function such as feeling possesses the energy with

which it is endowed by nature; it is a  well-organized living system that

cannot under any circumstances be wholly deprived of its energy. So with

the inferior function: the energy left to it passes into the unconscious

and activates it in an unnatural way, giving rise to fantasies (q.v.) on a

level with the archaicized function. In order to  extricate the inferior

function from the unconscious by  analysis, the unconscious fantasy

formations that have now been activated must be brought to the surface.

The conscious realization of these fantasies brings the inferior function to

consciousness and makes further development possible.

[765] 31. INSTINCT. When I speak of instinct in this work or elsewhere, I

mean what is commonly understood by this word, namely, an impulsion

towards certain activities. The impulsion can come from an inner or outer

stimulus which triggers off the mechanism of instinct psychically, or from

organic sources which lie outside the sphere of psychic causality. Every

psychic phenomenon is instinctive that does  not arise from voluntary

causation but from dynamic  impulsion, irrespective of whether thisimpulsion comes  directly from  organic, extra-psychic sources, or  from

energies that are merely released by voluntary intention—in the latter case

with the qualification that the end-result exceeds the effect voluntarily

intended. In my view, all psychic processes whose energies are not under

conscious control are  instinctive. Thus affects (q.v.) are as much

instinctive  processes as they are feeling (q.v.) processes. Psychic

processes which under ordinary circumstances are functions  of the will

(q.v.), and thus entirely under conscious control,  can,  in abnormal

circumstances, become instinctive processes

when supplied with unconscious energy. This phenomenon  occurs

whenever the sphere of consciousness is restricted by  the repression of

incompatible contents, or when, as a result  of fatigue, intoxication, or

morbid cerebral conditions in general, an abaissement du niveau mental

(Janet)  ensues—when, in a word, the most strongly feeling-toned

processes are no longer, or not yet, under conscious control. Processes that

were once conscious but in time have become automatized I would reckon

among the automatic processes  rather than the instinctive. Nor do they

normally behave like instincts, since in normal circumstances they never

appear as impulsions. They do so only when supplied with an energy

which is foreign to them.

[766] 32. INTELLECT. I call directed thinking (q.v.) intellect.

[767] 33. INTROJECTION. This term was introduced by Avenarius

66 to correspond with projection (q.v.). The expulsion of a  subjective

  content into an object, which is what Avenarius meant, is expressed

  equally well by the term projection, and it would therefore be better to

  reserve the term projection for this process. Ferenczi has now defined

    introjection as the opposite of projection, namely as an indrawing of the

  object  into the subjective sphere of interest, while projection is an

    expulsion of subjective contents into the object. “Whereas the paranoiac

  expels from his ego emotions which have become  disagreeable, the

  neurotic helps himself to as large a portion of the outer world as his ego

  can ingest, and makes this an object of unconscious fantasies.”

67 The first mechanism is projection, the second introjection. Introjection is

  a sort of “diluting process,” an “expansion of

the circle of interest.” According to Ferenczi, the process is a normal one.

[768] Psychologically speaking, introjection is a process of assimilation

(q.v.), while projection is a process of dissimilation. Introjection is anassimilation of object to subject, projection a dissimilation of object from

subject through the expulsion of a subjective content into the object (v.

Projection, active). Introjection is a process of extraversion (q.v.), since

assimilation to the object requires empathy (q.v.) and an investment of the

object with libido (q.v.). A passive and an active introjection may be

distinguished: transference phenomena in the treatment of the  neuroses

belong to the former category, and, in general, all cases where the object

exercises a compelling influence on the subject, while empathy as a process

of adaptation belongs to the latter category.

[769] 34. INTROVERSION means an inward-turning of libido (q.v.), in

the sense of a negative relation of subject to object. Interest does not move

towards the object but withdraws from it into the subject. Everyone whose

attitude is  introverted thinks, feels, and acts in a way that clearly

demonstrates that the subject is the prime motivating factor and that the

object is of

secondary importance. Introversion may be intellectual or emotional, just as

it can be characterized by sensation or intuition (qq.v.). It is active when

the subject voluntarily shuts himself off from the object, passive when he

is unable to restore to the object the libido streaming back from it. When

introversion is habitual, we speak of an introverted type (q.v.).

[770] 35. INTUITION (L. intueri, ‘to look at or into’). I regard intuition

as a basic psychological function (q.v.). It is  the function that mediates

perceptions in  an unconscious  way.  Everything, whether outer or inner

objects or their relationships, can be the focus of this perception. The

peculiarity of intuition is that it is neither sense perception, nor feeling,

nor intellectual inference, although it may also appear in these forms. In

intuition a content presents itself whole and complete, without our being

able to explain or discover how this content came into existence. Intuition

is a  kind of instinctive apprehension, no matter of what contents.  Like

sensation (q.v.), it is an irrational (q.v.) function of perception. As with

sensation, its contents have the character of being “given,” in contrast to the

“derived” or “produced” character of thinking and feeling (qq.v.) contents.

Intuitive knowledge possesses an intrinsic certainty and conviction, which

enabled Spinoza (and Bergson) to uphold the scientia  intuitiva as the

highest form of knowledge. Intuition shares  this quality with sensation

(q.v.), whose certainty rests on its physical foundation. The certainty of

intuition rests equally on a definite state of psychic “alertness” of whoseorigin the subject is unconscious.

[771] Intuition may be subjective or objective: the first is a perception of

unconscious psychic data originating in the  subject, the second is a

perception of data dependent on subliminal perceptions of the object and on

the feelings and thoughts they evoke. We may also distinguish concrete

and abstract forms of intuition, according to the degree of participation on

the part of sensation. Concrete intuition  mediates perceptions concerned

with the actuality of things,  abstract intuition mediates perceptions of

ideational connections. Concrete intuition is a reactive process, since it

responds directly to the given facts; abstract intuition, like  abstract

sensation, needs a certain element of direction, an act of the will, or an aim.

[772] Like sensation, intuition is a characteristic of infantile and primitive

psychology. It counterbalances the powerful sense impressions of the child

and the primitive by  mediating perceptions of mythological images, the

precursors of ideas (q.v.). It stands in a compensatory relationship to

sensation and, like it, is the matrix out of which thinking and feeling develop

as rational functions. Although intuition is an  irrational function, many

intuitions can afterwards be broken down into their component elements

and their origin thus brought into harmony with the laws of reason.

[773] Everyone whose general attitude (q.v.) is oriented by intuition belongs

to the intuitive type (q.v.).

68 Introverted and extraverted intuitives may be distinguished according to

  whether intuition is directed inwards, to the inner vision, or outwards, to

  action and achievement. In abnormal cases intuition is in large measure

  fused together with the contents of the collective unconscious (q.v.) and

  determined  by them, and this may make the intuitive type appear

  extremely irrational and beyond comprehension.

[774] 36. IRRATIONAL. I use this term not as denoting  something

contrary to reason, but something beyond reason, something, therefore, not

grounded on reason. Elementary facts come into this category; the fact, for

example, that the earth has a moon, that chlorine is an element, that

water reaches its greatest density at four degrees centigrade, etc. Another

irrational fact is chance, even though it may be possible to demonstrate a

rational causation after the event.

69

[775] The irrational is an existential factor which, though it may be pushed

further and further out of sight by an  increasingly elaborate rationalexplanation, finally makes the explanation so complicated that it passes our

powers of comprehension, the limits of rational thought being reached long

before the whole of the world could be encompassed by the laws of reason.

A

completely rational explanation of an object that actually exists (not one that

is merely posited) is a Utopian ideal. Only an object that is posited can be

completely explained on  rational grounds, since it does not contain

anything beyond  what has been posited by rational thinking. Empirical

science,  too, posits objects that are confined within rational bounds,

because by deliberately excluding the accidental it does not consider the

actual object as a whole, but only that part of it which has been singled out

for rational observation.

[776] In this sense thinking is a directed function, and so is feeling (qq.v.).

When these functions are concerned not with a rational choice of objects, or

with the qualities and interrelations of objects, but with the perception of

accidentals which the actual object never lacks, they at once  lose the

attribute of directedness and, with it, something of their rational character,

because they then accept the accidental. They begin to be irrational. The

kind of thinking or feeling that is directed to the perception of accidentals,

and is therefore irrational, is either intuitive or sensational. Both intuition

and sensation (qq.v.) are functions that find  fulfilment in the absolute

perception of the flux of events. Hence, by their very nature, they will

react to every possible  occurrence and be attuned to the absolutely

contingent, and

must therefore lack all rational direction. For this reason I call them irrational

functions, as opposed to thinking and feeling, which find fulfilment only

when they are in complete harmony with the laws of reason.

[777] Although the irrational as such can never become the  object of

science, it is of the greatest importance for a practical psychology that the

irrational factor should be correctly appraised. Practical psychology stirs

up many problems that are not susceptible of a rational solution, but can

only be settled irrationally, in a way not in accord with the laws of reason.

The expectation or exclusive conviction that there must be a rational way of

settling every  conflict can  be an insurmountable obstacle to finding a

solution of an irrational nature.

[778] 37. LIBIDO. By libido I mean psychic energy.

70 Psychic energy is the intensity of a psychic process, itspsychological

value. This does not imply an assignment of value, whether  moral,

aesthetic, or intellectual; the psychological value is already implicit in its

determining power, which expresses  itself in definite psychic effects.

Neither do I understand libido as a psychic force, a misconception that has

led many critics astray. I do not hypostatize the concept of energy, but use it

to denote intensities or values. The question as to whether or not a specific

psychic force exists has nothing to do with the concept of libido. I often use

“libido” promiscuously with “energy.” The justification for calling psychic

energy libido is fully gone into in the works cited in the footnote.

[779] 38. OBJECTIVE LEVEL. When I speak of

interpreting a dream or fantasy on the objective level, I mean  that the

persons or situations appearing in it are referred to objectively real persons

or situations, in contrast to  interpretation on the subjective level (q.v.),

where the persons  or situations refer exclusively to subjective factors.

Freud’s interpretation of dreams is almost entirely on the objective level,

since the dream wishes refer to real objects, or to sexual processes which fall

within the physiological, extra-psychological sphere.

[780] 39. ORIENTATION. I use this term to denote the general principle

governing an attitude (q.v.). Every attitude  is oriented by a certain

viewpoint, no matter whether this viewpoint is conscious or not. A power

attitude (v. Power-complex) is oriented by the power of the ego (q.v.) to

hold its own against unfavourable influences and conditions.  A thinking

attitude is oriented by the principle of logic as its supreme law; a sensation

attitude is oriented by the sensuous perception of given facts.

[781] 40. PARTICIPATION MYSTIQUE is a term derived  from Lévy-

Bruhl.

71 It denotes a peculiar kind of psychological connection with objects, and

  consists in the fact that the subject cannot clearly distinguish himself

  from the object but is bound to it by a  direct relationship which

  amounts to partial identity (q.v.). This identity results from an a priori

  oneness of subject and object. Participation mystique is a vestige of

  this primitive condition. It does not apply to the whole subject-object

  relationship

but only to certain cases where this peculiar tie occurs. It is a phenomenon

that is best observed among primitives, though it

is found very frequently among civilized peoples, if not with  the sameincidence and intensity. Among civilized peoples it usually occurs between

persons, seldom between a person and a thing. In the first case it is a

transference relationship, in which the object (as a rule) obtains a sort of

magical—i.e. absolute—influence over the subject. In the second case there

is a similar influence on the part of the thing, or else an identification

(q.v.) with a thing or the idea of a thing.

41. PERSONA, V. SOUL.

[782] 42. POWER-COMPLEX. I occasionally use this term to denote the

whole complex of ideas and strivings which seek  to  subordinate  all  other

influences to  the  ego (q.v.), no matter whether these influences have their

source in people and objective conditions or in the subject’s own impulses,

thoughts, and feelings.

[783] 43. PROJECTION means the expulsion of a subjective content into

an object; it is the opposite of introjection (q.v.). Accordingly it is a process

of dissimilation (v. Assimilation), by which a subjective content becomes

alienated from the subject and is, so to speak, embodied in the object. The

subject gets rid of painful, incompatible contents by projecting them, as also

of positive values which, for one reason or another—self-depreciation, for

instance—are  inaccessible to him. Projection results from the archaic

identity (q.v.) of subject and object, but is properly so called only when the

need to dissolve the identity with the object has already arisen. This need

arises when the identity becomes a disturbing factor, i.e., when the absence

of the projected content is a hindrance to adaptation and its withdrawal into

the subject has become desirable. From this moment the

previous partial identity acquires the character of projection.  The term

projection therefore signifies a state of identity that has become noticeable,

an object of criticism, whether it be the self-criticism of the subject or the

objective criticism of another.

[784] We may distinguish passive and active projection. The passive form

is the customary form of all pathological and

many normal projections; they are not intentional and are  purely

automatic occurrences. The active form is an essential component of the act

of empathy (q.v.). Taken as a whole, empathy is a process of introjection,

since it brings the object into intimate relation with the subject. In order to

establish  this relationship, the subject detaches a content—a feeling, for

instance—from himself, lodges it in the object, thereby animating it, and in

this way draws the object into the sphere of the subject. The active form ofprojection is, however, also  an  act  of  judgment, the aim  of  which  is to

separate the subject from the object. Here a subjective judgment is detached

from the subject as a valid statement and lodged in the object; by this act

the subject distinguishes himself from the object. Projection, accordingly, is

a process of introversion (q.v.) since, unlike introjection, it does not lead

to ingestion and  assimilation but to differentiation and separation of

subject from object. Hence it plays a prominent role in paranoia, which

usually ends in the total isolation of the subject.

43a. PSYCHE, V. SOUL.

[785] 44. RATIONAL. The rational is the reasonable, that which accords

with reason. I conceive reason as an attitude (q.v.) whose principle it is to

conform thought, feeling, and

action to objective values. Objective values are established by the everyday

experience of external facts on the one hand, and of inner, psychological

facts on the other. Such experiences, however, could not represent objective

“values” if they were  “valued” as such by the subject, for that would

already amount to an act of reason. The rational attitude which permits us to

declare objective values as valid at all is not the work of the individual

subject, but the product of human history.

[786] Most objective values—and reason itself—are firmly  established

complexes of ideas handed down through the ages. Countless generations

have laboured at their organization with the same necessity with which the

living organism reacts to the average, constantly recurring environmental

conditions, confronting them with corresponding functional complexes, as

the eye, for instance,  perfectly corresponds to the nature of light. One

might, therefore, speak of a pre-existent, metaphysical, universal “Reason”

were it not that the adapted reaction of the

living organism to average environmental influences is the  necessary

condition of its existence—a thought already expressed by Schopenhauer.

Human reason, accordingly, is nothing other than the expression of man’s

adaptability to average occurrences, which have gradually become deposited

in firmly established complexes of ideas that constitute our  objective

values. Thus the laws of reason are the laws that designate and govern the

average, “correct,” adapted attitude (q.v.). Everything is “rational” that

accords with these laws, everything that contravenes them is “irrational”

(q.v.).

[787] Thinking and feeling (qq.v.) are rational functions in so faras they are decisively influenced by reflection. They

function most perfectly when they are in the fullest possible accord with the

laws of reason. The irrational functions, sensation and intuition (qq.v.), are

those whose aim is pure perception; for, as far as possible, they are forced

to dispense  with the rational (which presupposes the exclusion of

everything that is outside reason) in order to attain the most  complete

perception of the general flux of events.

[788] 45. REDUCTIVE means “leading back.” I use this term to denote a

method of psychological interpretation which  regards the unconscious

product not as a symbol (q.v.) but semiotically, as a sign or symptom of an

underlying process.  Accordingly, the reductive method traces the

unconscious product  back  to its elements, no  matter  whether  these  be

reminiscences  of  events  that  actually  took  place,  or  elementary psychic

processes. The reductive method is oriented backwards, in contrast to the

constructive (q.v.) method, whether in the purely historical sense or in the

figurative sense of tracing complex, differentiated factors back to something

more general and more elementary. The interpretive methods of both Freud

and Adler are reductive, since in both cases there is a reduction to the

elementary processes of wishing or striving, which in the last resort are of an

infantile or physiological nature. Hence the unconscious  product

necessarily acquires the character of an inauthentic expression to which the

term “symbol” is not properly applicable. Reduction has a disintegrative

effect on the real significance of the unconscious product, since this is

either traced back to its historical antecedents and thereby  annihilated,  or 

 integrated  once  again  with  the  same  elementary process from which it

arose.

[789] 46. SELF.

72 As an empirical concept, the self designates the whole  range of

  psychic phenomena in man. It expresses the unity of the personality as a

  whole. But in so far as the total  personality, on account of its

  unconscious component, can be only in part conscious, the concept of the

  self is, in part, only potentially empirical and is to that extent a postulate.

  In other  words, it encompasses both the experienceable and the

    inexperienceable (or the not yet experienced). It has these qualities in

  common with very many scientific concepts that are more names than

  ideas. In so far as psychic totality, consisting of both conscious and

  unconscious contents, is a postulate, it is a transcendental concept, for it    presupposes the existence of unconscious factors on empirical grounds

  and thus characterizes an entity that can be described only in part but, for

  the other part, remains at present unknowable and illimitable.

[790] Just as conscious as well as unconscious phenomena are to be met

with in practice, the self as psychic totality also has a conscious as well as

an unconscious aspect. Empirically, the self appears in dreams, myths, and

fairytales in the figure of the “supraordinate personality” (v. EGO), such

as a king, hero, prophet, saviour, etc., or in the form of a totality symbol,

such as the circle, square, quadratura circuli, cross, etc. When it represents

a complexio oppositorum, a union of opposites, it can also appear as a

united duality, in the form, for instance, of tao as the interplay of yang and

yin, or of the hostile brothers, or of the hero and his adversary (arch-

enemy, dragon), Faust and Mephistopheles, etc. Empirically, therefore, the

self appears as a play of light and shadow, although conceived as a totality

and unity in which the opposites are united. Since such a concept is

irrepresentable—tertium non datur—it is transcendental on  this account

also. It would, logically considered,

be a vain speculation were it not for the fact that it designates symbols of

unity that are found to occur empirically.

[791] The self is not a philosophical idea, since it does not predicate its own

existence, i.e., does not hypostatize itself. From the intellectual point of

view it is only a working hypothesis. Its empirical symbols, on the other

hand, very often possess a distinct numinosity, i.e., an a priori emotional

value, as in the case of the mandala,73 “Deus est circulus …,”

74 the Pythagorean tetraktys,

75 the quaternity,

76 etc. It thus proves to be an archetypal idea (v. Idea;  Image), which

  differs from other ideas of the kind in that it occupies a central position

  befitting the significance of its content and its numinosity.

[792] 47. SENSATION. I regard sensation as one of the  basic

psychological functions (q.v.). Wundt likewise reckons  it among the

elementary psychic phenomena.

77 Sensation is the psychological function that mediates the perception of

  a physical stimulus. It is, therefore, identical with perception. Sensation

  must be strictly distinguished from feeling (q.v.), since the latter is an

  entirely different process, although it may associate itself with sensation

  as “feeling-tone.” Sensation is related not only to external stimuli but to

  inner ones, i.e., to changes in the internal organic processes.

[793] Primarily,  therefore,  sensation  is sense  perception—perception

mediated by the sense organs and

“body-senses” (kinaesthetic, vasomotor sensation, etc.). It is,  on the one

hand, an element of ideation, since it conveys to the mind the perceptual

image of the external object; and on the other hand, it is an element of

feeling, since through the perception of bodily changes it gives feeling the

character of an affect (q.v.). Because sensation conveys bodily changes to

consciousness, it is also a representative of physiological impulses. It is not

identical with them, being merely a perceptive function.

[794] A distinction must be made between sensuous or concrete (q.v.)

sensation and abstract (q.v.) sensation. The first includes all the above-

mentioned forms of sensation, whereas the second is a sensation that is

abstracted or separated from the other psychic elements. Concrete sensation

never appears in “pure” form, but is always mixed up with ideas, feelings,

thoughts. Abstract sensation is a differentiated kind of perception, which

might be termed “aesthetic” in so far as, obeying its own principle, it

detaches itself from all contamination with the different elements in the

perceived object and from all admixtures of thought and feeling, and thus

attains a degree of purity beyond the reach of concrete  sensation. The

concrete sensation of a flower, on the other hand, conveys a perception not

only of the flower as such, but also of the stem, leaves, habitat, and so on. Itis also instantly mingled with feelings of pleasure or dislike which the sight

of the flower evokes, or with simultaneous olfactory perceptions, or with

thoughts about its botanical  classification, etc. But abstract sensation

immediately picks out the most salient sensuous attribute of the flower, its

brilliant redness, for instance, and makes this the sole or at  least the

principal content of consciousness, entirely detached  from all other

admixtures. Abstract sensation is found chiefly

among artists. Like every abstraction, it is a product of  functional

differentiation (q.v.), and there is nothing primitive about it. The primitive

form of a function is always concrete,  i.e., contaminated (v. Archaism;

Concretism). Concrete sensation is a reactive phenomenon, while abstract

sensation, like every abstraction, is always associated with the will (q.v.),

i.e., with a sense of direction. The will that is directed to abstract

sensation is an expression and application of the aesthetic

sensation attitude.

[795] Sensation is strongly developed in children and primitives, since in

both cases it predominates over thinking  and feeling, though not

necessarily over intuition (q.v.). I  regard sensation as conscious, and

intuition as unconscious,  perception. For me sensation and intuition

represent a pair of opposites, or two mutually compensating functions, like

thinking and feeling. Thinking and feeling as independent functions are

developed, both ontogenetically and phylogenetically, from sensation (and

equally, of course, from intuition as the necessary counterpart of sensation).

A person whose-whole attitude (q.v.) is oriented by sensation belongs to the

sensation type (q.v.).

[796] Since sensation is an elementary phenomenon, it is given a priori,

and, unlike thinking and feeling, is not subject to rational laws. I therefore

call it an irrational (q.v.) function, although reason contrives to assimilate a

great many  sensations into a rational context. Normal sensations are

proportionate, i.e., they correspond approximately to the intensity of the

physical stimulus. Pathological sensations are  disproportionate, i.e., either

abnormally weak or abnormally  strong. In the former case they are

inhibited, in the latter

exaggerated. The inhibition is due to the predominance of  another

function; the exaggeration is the result of an abnormal fusion with another

function, for instance with undifferentiated thinking or feeling. It ceases as

soon as the function with which sensation is fused is differentiated in itsown right. The psychology of the neuroses affords instructive examples of

this, since we often find a strong sexualization (Freud) of other functions,

i.e., their fusion with sexual sensations.

[797] 48. SOUL. [Psyche, personality, persona, anima.] I  have been

compelled, in my investigations into the structure of the unconscious, to

make a conceptual distinction between soul and psyche. By psyche I

understand the totality of all  psychic  processes, conscious as  well  as

unconscious. By  soul,  on the other hand, I understand a clearly

demarcated  functional complex that can best be described as a

“personality.” In order to make clear what I mean by this, I must introduce

some further

points of view. It is, in particular, the phenomena of  somnambulism,

double consciousness, split personality, etc., whose investigation we owe

primarily to the French school,

78 that have enabled us to accept the possibility of a plurality  of

    personalities in one and the same individual.

[Soul as a functional complex or “personality”]

[798] It is at once evident that such a plurality of personalities can never

appear in a normal individual. But, as  the above-mentioned phenomena

show, the possibility of a dissociation of personality must exist, at least in

the germ, within the range of the normal. And, as a matter of fact, any

moderately acute psychological observer will be able to

demonstrate, without much difficulty, traces of  character-splitting in

normal individuals. One has only to  observe  a  man rather closely, under

varying conditions, to see that a change from one milieu to another brings

about a striking alteration of personality, and on each occasion a  clearly

defined character emerges that is noticeably different  from the previous

one. “Angel abroad, devil at home” is a formulation of the phenomenon of

character-splitting derived from everyday experience. A particular milieu

necessitates a particular attitude (q.v.). The longer this attitude lasts, and the

more often it is required, the more habitual it becomes. Very many people

from the educated classes have to move in two totally different milieus—the

domestic circle and the world of  affairs. These two totally different

environments demand two totally different attitudes, which, depending on

the degree of the ego’s identification (q.v.) with the attitude of the moment,

produce a duplication of character. In accordance with social conditions and

requirements, the social character is oriented  on the one hand by theexpectations and demands of society, and on the other by the social aims

and aspirations of the individual. The domestic character is, as a rule,

moulded by emotional demands and an easy-going acquiescence for the

sake of comfort and convenience; whence it frequently happens

that men who in public life are extremely energetic, spirited,  obstinate,

wilful and ruthless appear good-natured, mild, compliant, even weak, when

at home and in the bosom of the family. Which is the true character, the real

personality? This question is often impossible to answer.

[799] These reflections show that even in normal individuals character-

splitting is by no means an impossiblity. We are, therefore, fully justified in

treating personality

dissociation as a problem of normal psychology. In my view the answer to

the above question should be that such a man has no real character at all:

he is not individual (q.v.) but collective (q.v.), the plaything of

circumstance and general expectations. Were he individual, he would have

the same  character despite the variation of attitude. He would not be

identical with the attitude of the moment, and he neither would nor could

prevent his individuality (q.v.) from expressing itself just as clearly in one

state as in another. Naturally he is individual, like every living being, but

unconsciously so. Because of his more or less complete identification with

the attitude of the moment, he deceives others, and often himself, as to his

real character. He puts on a mask, which he knows is in keeping with his

conscious intentions, while it also meets the requirements and fits the

opinions of society, first one motive and then the other gaining the upper

hand.

[Soul as persona]

[800] This mask, i.e., the ad hoc adopted attitude, I have  called the

persona,

79 which was the name for the masks worn by actors in antiquity. The

  man who identifies with this mask I would call “personal” as opposed to

    “individual.”

[801] The two above-mentioned attitudes represent two  collective

personalities, which may be summed up quite  simply under the name

“personae.” I have already suggested that the real individuality is different

from both. The persona  is thus a functional complex that comes into

existence for reasons of adaptation or personal convenience, but is by no

means identical with the individuality. The persona isexclusively concerned with the relation to objects. The  relation of the

individual

to the object must be sharply distinguished from the relation to the subject.

By the “subject” I mean first of all those vague,  dim stirrings, feelings,

thoughts, and sensations which flow in on us  not  from  any  demonstrable 

continuity of  conscious  experience of the object, but well up like a

disturbing, inhibiting, or at times helpful, influence from the dark inner

depths, from the background and underground vaults of consciousness, and

constitute, in their totality, our perception of the life of the unconscious. The

subject, conceived as the “inner object,” is the unconscious. Just as there is a

relation to the outer object, an outer attitude, there is a relation to the inner

object, an inner attitude. It is readily understandable that this inner attitude,

by reason of its extremely intimate and inaccessible nature, is far more

difficult to discern than the outer attitude, which is immediately perceived

by everyone. Nevertheless, it does not seem to me impossible to formulate it

as a concept. All those allegedly accidental inhibitions, fancies, moods,

vague feelings, and scraps of fantasy that hinder concentration and disturb

the peace of mind even of the most normal man, and that are rationalized

away as being due to bodily causes and suchlike, usually have their origin,

not in the reasons consciously ascribed to them, but in  perceptions of

unconscious processes. Dreams naturally  belong to this class of

phenomena, and, as we all know, are often traced back to such external

and superficial causes as indigestion, sleeping on one’s back, and so forth,

in spite of the fact that these explanations can never stand up to searching

criticism. The attitude of the individual in these  matters is extremely

varied. One man will not allow himself to be disturbed in the slightest by his

inner processes—he can ignore them completely; another man is just as

completely at

their mercy—as soon as he wakes up some fantasy or other,  or a

disagreeable feeling, spoils his mood for the whole day; a vaguely unpleasant

sensation puts the idea into his head that he is suffering from a secret

disease, a dream fills him with gloomy forebodings, although ordinarily he

is not  superstitious. Others, again, have only periodic access to  these

unconscious stirrings, or only to a certain category of them. For one man

they may never have reached  consciousness at all as anything worth

thinking about, for another they are a worrying problem he broods on daily.

One man takes them asphysiological, another attributes them to the behaviour of his neighbours,

another finds in them a religious revelation.

[802] These entirely different ways of dealing with the  stirrings of the

unconscious are just as habitual as the attitudes to the outer object. The inner

attitude, therefore, is correlated with just as definite a functional complex as

the outer attitude. People who, it would seem, entirely overlook their inner

psychic processes no more lack a typical inner attitude than the people who

constantly overlook the outer object and the reality of facts lack a typical

outer one. In all the latter cases, which are by no means uncommon, the

persona is characterized by a lack of relatedness, at times even a blind

inconsiderateness, that yields only to the harshest blows of  fate. Not

infrequently, it is just these people with a rigid persona who possess an

attitude to the unconscious processes which is extremely susceptible and

open to influence.  Inwardly they are as weak, malleable, and “soft-

centered” as they are inflexible and unapproachable outwardly. Their inner

attitude, therefore, corresponds to a personality that is  diametrically

opposed to the outer personality. I know a man, for instance, who blindly and

pitilessly destroyed the

happiness of those nearest to him, and yet would interrupt  important

business journeys just to enjoy the beauty of a forest scene glimpsed from

the carriage window. Cases of this kind are doubtless familiar to everyone,

so I need not give further examples.

[Soul as anima]

[803] We can, therefore, speak of an inner personality with  as much

justification as, on the grounds of daily experience, we speak of an outer

personality. The inner personality is the way one behaves in relation to one’s

inner psychic processes; it is the inner attitude, the characteristic face, that

is turned towards the unconscious. I call the outer attitude, the outward face,

the persona; the inner attitude, the inward face, I call the anima.

80 To the degree that an attitude is habitual, it is a well-knit  functional

  complex with which the ego can identify itself more or less. Common

  speech expresses this very graphically:  when a man has an habitual

  attitude to certain situations, an habitual way of doing things, we say he

  is quite another man when doing this or that. This is a practical

    demonstration of the autonomy of the functional complex represented

  by the habitual attitude: it is as though another personality had taken

  possession of the individual, as though “another spirit had got into him.”  The same autonomy that very often characterizes the outer attitude is

  also claimed by the inner attitude, the anima. It is one of the most

  difficult educational feats to change the persona, the outer attitude, and it

  is just as difficult to change the anima, since its structure is usually

  quite as well-knit as the persona’s. Just as the persona is an entity that

  often seems to constitute the whole character of a man, and may even

    accompany him unaltered throughout his entire life,

the anima is a clearly defined entity with a character that, very  often, is

autonomous and immutable. It therefore lends itself  very readily to

characterization and description.

[804] As to the character of the anima, my experience confirms the rule that

it is, by and large, complementary to the character of the persona. The anima

usually contains all those  common human qualities which the conscious

attitude lacks. The tyrant tormented by bad dreams, gloomy forebodings,

and inner fears is a typical figure. Outwardly ruthless, harsh,  and

unapproachable, he jumps inwardly at every shadow, is at the mercy of every

mood, as though he were the feeblest and most impressionable of men. Thus

his anima contains all those fallible human qualities his persona lacks. If the

persona is intellectual, the anima will quite certainly be sentimental. The

complementary character of the anima also affects the sexual character, as

I have proved to myself beyond a doubt. A very feminine woman has a

masculine soul, and a very masculine

man has a feminine soul. This contrast is due to the fact that a man is not in

all things wholly masculine, but also has certain feminine traits. The more

masculine his outer attitude is, the more his feminine traits are obliterated:

instead, they appear in his unconscious. This explains why it is just those

very virile men who are most subject to characteristic weaknesses;  their

attitude to the unconscious has a womanish weakness  and

impressionability. Conversely, it is often just the most feminine women

who, in their inner lives, display an intractability, an obstinacy, and a

wilfulness that are to be found with comparable intensity only in a man’s

outer attitude. These are masculine traits which, excluded from the womanly

outer attitude, have become qualities of her soul.

[805] If, therefore, we speak of the anima of a man, we must logically

speak of the animus of a woman, if we are to give the soul of a woman its

right name. Whereas logic and  objectivity are usually the predominant

features of a man’s outer attitude, or are at least regarded as ideals, in thecase of a woman it is feeling. But in the soul it is the other way round:

inwardly it is the man who feels, and the woman who reflects. Hence a

man’s greater liability to total despair, while  a woman can always find

comfort and hope; accordingly a man is more likely to put an end to

himself than a woman. However much a victim of social circumstances a

woman may be, as a prostitute for instance, a man is no less a victim of

impulses from the unconscious, taking the form of alcoholism and other

vices.

[806] As to its common human qualities, the character of the anima can

be deduced from that of the persona. Everything that should normally be in

the outer attitude, but is conspicuously absent, will invariably be found in

the inner attitude. This is a fundamental rule which my experience has borne

out over and over again. But as regards its individual qualities, nothing can

be deduced about them in this way. We can only be certain that when a

man is identical with his  persona, his individual qualities will be

associated with the anima. This association frequently gives rise in dreams

to the  symbol of psychic pregnancy, a symbol that goes back to the

primordial image (q.v.) of the hero’s birth. The child that is to  be born

signifies the individuality, which, though present, is not yet conscious. For

in the same way as the persona, the instrument of

adaptation to the environment, is strongly influenced by  environmental

conditions, the  anima is  shaped  by the unconscious and its qualities. In a

primitive milieu the

persona necessarily takes on primitive features, and the anima similarly takes

over the archaic (q.v.) features of the unconscious as well as its symbolic,

prescient character. Hence the “pregnant,” “creative” qualities of the inner

attitude.

[807] Identity (q.v.) with the persona automatically leads to an unconscious

identity with the anima because, when the ego is not differentiated from the

persona, it can have no conscious relation to the unconscious processes.

Consequently, it is these processes, it is identical with them. Anyone who is

himself his outward role will infallibly succumb to the inner processes; he

will either frustrate his outward role by absolute inner necessity or else

reduce it to absurdity, by a process of enantiodromia (q.v.). He can no

longer keep to his individual way, and his life runs into one deadlock after

another. Moreover, the anima is inevitably projected upon a real object, with

which he gets into a relation of almost total dependence. Every reactiondisplayed by this object has an immediate, inwardly enervating effect on

the subject. Tragic ties are often formed in this way (v. Soul-image).

[808] 49. SOUL-IMAGE [Anima / Animus].

81 The soul-image is a specific image (q.v.) among those produced by the

    unconscious. Just as  the persona (v. Soul), or  outer attitude, is

    represented in dreams by images of definite persons who possess the

    outstanding qualities of the persona in especially marked form, so in a

  man the soul, i.e., anima, or  inner attitude, is represented in the

  unconscious by definite persons with the corresponding qualities. Such

  an image is called a “soul-image.” Sometimes these images are of quite

    unknown or mythological figures. With men the anima is

usually personified by the unconscious as a woman; with women the

animus is personified as a man. In every case where the individuality

(q.v.) is unconscious, and therefore associated with the soul, the soul-image

has the character of the same sex. In all cases where there is an identity (q.v.)

with the persona, and the soul accordingly is unconscious, the soul-image is

transferred to a real person. This

person is the object of intense love or equally intense hate (or fear). The

influence of such a person is immediate and absolutely compelling, because

it always provokes an affective response. The affect (q.v.) is due to the fact

that a real, conscious adaptation to the person representing the soul-image is

impossible. Because an objective relationship is non-existent and out of the

question, the libido (q.v.) gets dammed up and explodes in an outburst of

affect. Affects always occur where there is a failure of adaptation. Conscious

adaptation to the person representing the soul-image is  impossible

precisely because the subject is unconscious of the soul. Were he conscious

of it, it could be distinguished from the object, whose immediate effects

might then be mitigated, since the potency of the object depends on the

projection (q.v.) of the soul-image.

[809] For a man, a woman is best fitted to be the real bearer of his soul-

image, because of the feminine quality of his soul; for a woman it will be a

man. Wherever an impassioned,  almost magical, relationship exists

between the sexes, it is invariably a question of a projected soul-image.

Since these relationships are very common, the soul must be unconscious

just as frequently—that is, vast numbers of people must be quite unaware

of the way they are related to their inner psychic processes. Because this

unconsciousness is always  coupled with complete identification with thepersona, it

follows that this identification must be very frequent too. And in actual fact

very many people are wholly identified with  their outer attitude and

therefore have no conscious relation to their inner processes. Conversely, it

may also happen that the soul-image is not projected but remains with the

subject, and this results in an identification with the soul because the subject

is then convinced that the way he relates to his inner processes is his real

character. In that event the persona, being unconscious, will be projected on

a person of the same sex, thus providing a foundation for many cases of

open or latent homosexuality, and of father-transferences in men or mother-

transferences in women. In such cases there is always a defective adaptation

to external reality and a lack of relatedness, because identification with the

soul produces an attitude predominantly oriented to the perception of inner

processes, and the object is deprived of its determining power.

[810] If the soul-image is projected, the result is an absolute affective tie

to the object. If it is not projected, a relatively unadapted state develops,

which Freud has described as narcissism. The projection  of the soul-

image offers a release from preoccupation with one’s inner processes so long

as the behaviour of the object is in harmony with the soul-image. The subject

is then in a position to live out his persona and develop it further. The

object, however, will scarcely be able to meet the demands of the soul-

image indefinitely, although there are many women who, by completely

disregarding their own lives, succeed in representing their husband’s soul-

image for a very long time. The biological feminine instinct assists them in

this. A man may unconsciously do the same for his wife, though this will

prompt him to deeds which finally exceed his capacities

whether for good or evil. Here again the biological masculine instinct is a

help.

[811] If the soul-image is not projected, a thoroughly morbid relation to

the unconscious gradually develops. The  subject is increasingly

overwhelmed by unconscious contents, which his inadequate relation to the

object makes him powerless to assimilate or put to any kind of use, so that

the whole subject-object relation only deteriorates further. Naturally these

two attitudes represent the two extremes between which the more normal

attitudes lie. In a normal man the soul-image is not distinguished by any

particular clarity, purity, or depth, but is apt to be rather blurred. In men with

a  good-natured and unaggressive persona, the soul-image has a  rathermalevolent character. A good literary example of this is the daemonic woman

who is the companion of Zeus in  Spitteler’s Olympian Spring. For an

idealistic woman, a depraved man is often the bearer of the soul-image;

hence the “saviour fantasy” so frequent in such cases. The same thing

happens with men, when the prostitute is surrounded with the halo of a soul

crying for succour.

[812] 50. SUBJECTIVE LEVEL. When I speak of

interpreting  a dream  or fantasy on the subjective level, I mean  that the

persons or situations appearing in it refer to subjective  factors entirely

belonging to the subject’s own psyche. As we know, the psychic image of an

object is never exactly like the object—at most there is a near resemblance.

It is the product of sense perception

and apperception (q.v.), and these are processes that are  inherent in the

psyche and are merely stimulated by the object. Although the evidence of

our senses is found to coincide very largely with the qualities of the

object, our

apperception is conditioned by unpredictable  subjective influences which

render a correct knowledge of the object  extraordinarily difficult.

Moreover, such a complex psychic factor as a man’s character offers only

a few points d’appui for pure sense perception. Knowledge of human

character requires empathy (q.v.), reflection, intuition (q.v.). As a result of

these complications, our final judgment is always of very doubtful value, so

that the image we form of a human object  is, to a very large extent,

subjectively conditioned. In practical psychology, therefore, we would do

well to make a rigorous distinction between the image or imago of a man

and his real existence. Because of its extremely subjective origin, the imago

is frequently more an image of a subjective functional complex than of the

object itself. In the analytical treatment  of unconscious products it is

essential that the imago should not be assumed to be identical with the

object; it is better to regard it as an image of the subjective relation to the

object. That is what is meant by interpretation on the subjective level.

[813] Interpretation of an unconscious product on the  subjective level

reveals the presence of subjective judgments and tendencies of which the

object is made the vehicle. When, therefore, an object-imago appears in an

unconscious product, it is not on that account the image of a real object; it

is far more likely that we are dealing with a subjective functional complex

(v. Soul, pars. 798ff.). Interpretation on the subjective level allows us totake a broader psychological view not only of dreams but also of literary

works, in which the individual figures then appear as representatives of

relatively autonomous functional complexes in the psyche of the author.

[814] 51. SYMBOL. The concept of a symbol should in my view be strictly

distinguished from that of a sign. Symbolic and semiotic meanings are

entirely different things. In his book on symbolism, Ferrero

82 does not speak of symbols in the strict sense, but of signs.

For instance, the old custom of handing over a piece of turf at the sale of a

plot of land might be described as “symbolic” in the vulgar sense of the

word, but actually it is purely semiotic in character. The piece of turf is a

sign, or token, standing for the whole estate. The winged wheel worn by

railway officials is not a symbol of the  railway, but a sign that

distinguishes the personnel of the  railway system. A symbol always

presupposes that the chosen expression is the best possible description or

formulation of a relatively unknown fact, which is none the less known to

exist or is postulated as existing. Thus, when the badge of a railway official is

explained as a symbol, it amounts to saying that this man has something to do

with an unknown system that cannot be differently or better expressed than by

a winged wheel.

[815] Every view which interprets the symbolic expression as an analogue

or an abbreviated designation for a known thing is semiotic. A view which

interprets the symbolic expression as the best possible formulation of a

relatively unknown thing, which for that reason cannot be more clearly or

characteristically represented, is symbolic. A view which  interprets the

symbolic expression as an intentional paraphrase or transmogrification of a

known thing is allegoric. The interpretation of the cross as a symbol of

divine love is semiotic, because “divine love” describes the  fact to be

expressed better and more aptly than a cross, which can have many other

meanings. On the other hand, an interpretation of the cross is symbolic

when it puts the cross beyond all conceivable explanations, regarding it as

expressing an as yet unknown and incomprehensible fact of a mystical or

transcendent, i.e., psychological, nature, which  simply finds itself most

appropriately represented in the cross.

[816] So long as a symbol is a living thing, it is an  expression for

something that cannot be characterized in any  other or better way. The

symbol is alive only so long as it is pregnant with meaning. But once its

meaning has been born  out of it, once that expression is found whichformulates the  thing sought, expected, or divined even better than the

hitherto accepted symbol, then the symbol is dead, i.e., it possesses only

an historical significance. We may still go on speaking of it as a symbol, on

the tacit assumption that we are speaking of it as it was before the better

expression was born out of it. The way in which St. Paul and the earlier

speculative mystics speak of the cross shows that for them it was still a

living symbol which expressed the inexpressible in unsurpassable form. For

every esoteric interpretation the symbol is dead, because esotericism has

already given it (at least ostensibly) a better expression,  whereupon it

becomes merely a conventional sign for  associations that are more

completely and better known elsewhere. Only from the exoteric standpoint

is the symbol a living thing.

[817] An expression that stands for a known thing remains a mere sign and

is never a symbol. It is, therefore, quite  impossible to create a living

symbol, i.e., one that is pregnant with meaning, from known associations.

For what is thus produced never contains more than was put into it.

Every psychic product, if it is the best possible expression at the moment

for a fact as yet unknown or only relatively known,

may be regarded as a symbol, provided that we accept the expression as

standing for something that is only divined and not yet clearly conscious.

Since every scientific theory contains an hypothesis, and is therefore an

anticipatory  description  of something still  essentially unknown,  it is  a

symbol. Furthermore, every psychological expression is a  symbol if we

assume that it states or signifies something more and other than itself which

eludes our present knowledge.  This assumption is absolutely tenable

wherever a consciousness exists which is attuned to the deeper meaning of

things. It is untenable only when this same consciousness has itself devised

an expression which states exactly what it is  intended to state—a

mathematical term, for instance. But for  another consciousness this

limitation does not exist. It can take the mathematical term as a symbol for

an unknown psychic fact which the term was not intended to express but is

concealed within it—a fact which is demonstrably not known to the man

who devised the semiotic expression and which therefore could not have

been the object of any conscious use.

[818] Whether a thing is a symbol or not depends chiefly on the attitude

(q.v.) of the observing consciousness; for instance, on whether it regards a

given fact not merely as such  but also as an expression for somethingunknown. Hence it is quite possible for a man to establish a fact which

does not appear in the least symbolic to himself, but is profoundly so to

another consciousness. The converse is also true. There are  undoubtedly

products whose symbolic character does not depend merely on the attitude

of the observing consciousness, but manifests itself spontaneously in the

symbolic effect they have on the  observer. Such products are so

constituted that they would lack any kind of meaning were not a symbolic

one conceded to them. Taken as a bare fact, a triangle with an eye enclosed

in it is so meaningless that it is impossible for the observer to regard it as a

merely accidental piece of foolery. Such a figure immediately conjures up a

symbolic interpretation. This effect  is reinforced by the widespread

incidence of the same figure in identical form, or by the particular care that

went into its production, which is an expression of the special value placed

upon it.

[819] Symbols that do not work in this way on the observer  are either

extinct, i.e., have been superseded by a better formulation, or are products

whose symbolic nature depends entirely on the attitude of the observing

consciousness. The attitude that takes a given phenomenon as symbolic

may be called, for short, the symbolic attitude. It is only partially justified

by the actual behaviour of things; for the rest, it is the outcome of a

definite view of the world which assigns meaning to events, whether great

or small, and attaches to this meaning a greater value than to bare facts. This

view of things stands opposed to another view which lays the accent on

sheer facts and subordinates meaning to them. For the latter attitude there

can be no symbols whatever when the symbolism depends exclusively on

the mode of observation. But even for such an attitude symbols do exist—

those, namely, that prompt the observer to conjecture a hidden meaning. A

bull-headed god can certainly be explained as a man’s body with a bull’s

head on it. But this explanation can hardly hold its own against the symbolic

explanation, because the symbolism is too arresting to be overlooked. A

symbol that forcibly obtrudes its symbolic nature on us need not be a living

symbol. It may have a merely historical or philosophical significance, and

simply arouses intellectual or aesthetic interest. A symbol really lives only

when it is the best and highest expression for something divined but not yet

known to the observer. It then compels his unconscious participation and

has a life-giving and life-enhancing effect. As Faust says: “How differently

this new sign works upon me!”83

[820] The living symbol formulates an essential unconscious factor, and

the more widespread this factor is, the more general is the effect of the

symbol, for it touches a corresponding chord in every psyche. Since, for a

given epoch, it is the best possible expression for what is still unknown, it

must be the product of the most complex and differentiated minds of that

age. But in order to have such an effect at all, it must embrace  what  is

common  to a large  group  of men. This can never be what is most

differentiated, the highest attainable, for only a very few attain to that or

understand it. The common factor must be something that is  still so

primitive that its ubiquity cannot be doubted. Only  when the symbol

embraces that and expresses it in the highest possible form is it of general

efficacy. Herein lies the potency  of the living, social symbol and its

redeeming power.

[821] All that I have said about the social symbol applies equally to the

individual symbol. There are individual psychic products whose symbolic

character is so obvious that they at once compel a symbolic interpretation.

For the  individual they have the same functional significance that the

social symbol has for a larger human group. These products never have an

exclusively conscious or an exclusively unconscious source, but arise from

the equal collaboration of both. Purely unconscious products are no more

convincingly symbolic per se than purely conscious ones; it is the symbolic

attitude of the observing consciousness that endows them both with the

character of a symbol. But they can be conceived equally well as causally

determined facts, in much the same way as one  might regard the red

exanthema of scarlet fever as a “symbol” of the disease. In that case it is

perfectly correct to speak of a “symptom” and not of a “symbol.” In my view

Freud is quite justified when, from his standpoint, he speaks of symptomatic84 rather than symbolic actions, since for him these  phenomena are not

  symbolic in the sense here defined, but are  symptomatic signs of a

  definite and generally known underlying process. There are, of course,

  neurotics who  regard their unconscious products, which are mostly

  morbid  symptoms, as symbols of supreme importance. Generally,

  however, this is not what happens. On the contrary, the neurotic of today

  is only too prone to regard a product that  may actually be full of

    significance as a mere “symptom.”

[822] The fact that there are two distinct and mutually contradictory views

eagerly advocated on either side  concerning the meaning or

meaninglessness of things shows  that processes obviously exist which

express no particular  meaning, being in fact mere consequences, or

symptoms; and that there are other processes which bear within them a

hidden meaning, processes which are not merely derived from something but

which seek to become something, and are therefore symbols. It is left to our

discretion and our critical  judgment to decide whether the thing we are

dealing with is a symptom or a symbol.

[823] The symbol is always a product of an extremely complex nature, since

data from every psychic function have  gone into its making. It is,

therefore, neither rational nor irrational (qq.v.). It certainly has a side

that accords with

reason, but it has another side that does not; for it is composed not only of

rational but also of irrational data  supplied by pure inner and outer

perception. The profundity and pregnant significance of the symbol appeal

just as strongly to thinking as to feeling (qq.v.), while its peculiar plastic

imagery, when shaped into sensuous form, stimulates sensation as much  as

intuition  (qq.v.). The  living symbol  cannot come to birth in a dull or

poorly developed mind, for such a mind will be content with the already

existing symbols  offered by established tradition. Only the passionate

yearning of a highly developed mind, for which the traditional symbol is no

longer the unified expression of the rational and the irrational, of the

highest and the lowest, can create a new symbol.

[824] But precisely because the new symbol is born of  man’s highest

spiritual aspirations and must at the same time spring from the deepest

roots of his being, it cannot be a onesided product of  the most highly  

differentiated mental functions but must derive equally from the lowest and

most primitive levels of the psyche. For this collaboration of  opposingstates to be possible at all, they must first face one another in the fullest

conscious opposition. This necessarily  entails a violent disunion with

oneself, to the point where  thesis and antithesis negate one another,

while the ego is forced to acknowledge its absolute participation in both.

If there is a subordination of one part, the symbol will be predominantly

the product of the other part, and, to that extent, less a symbol than a

symptom—a symptom of the suppressed antithesis. To the  extent,

however, that a symbol is merely a symptom, it also lacks a redeeming

effect, since it fails to express the full right of all parts of the psyche to exist,

being a constant reminder  of the suppressed antithesis even though

consciousness may not take this fact into account. But when there is full

parity of the opposites, attested by the ego’s absolute participation in both,

this necessarily leads to a suspension of the will (q.v.), for the will can no

longer operate when every motive has an  equally strong countermotive.

Since life cannot tolerate a standstill, a damming up of vital energy results,

and this would lead to an insupportable condition did not the tension of

opposites produce a new, uniting function that transcends  them. This

function arises quite naturally from the regression of libido (q.v.) caused by

the blockage. All progress having been rendered temporarily impossible by

the total division of the will, the libido streams backwards, as it were, to its

source. In other words, the neutralization and inactivity of consciousness

bring about an activity of the unconscious,  where  all the  differentiated

functions have their common, archaic root, and where all contents exist in a

state of promiscuity of which the primitive mentality still shows numerous

vestiges.

[825] From the activity of the unconscious there now  emerges a new

content, constellated by thesis and antithesis in equal measure and standing in

a compensatory (q.v.) relation to both. It thus forms the middle ground on

which the opposites can be united. If, for instance, we conceive the

opposition to be sensuality versus spirituality, then the mediatory content

born out of the unconscious provides a welcome means of expression for

the spiritual thesis, because of its rich spiritual associations, and also for the

sensual antithesis, because of its sensuous imagery. The ego, however, torn

between thesis and antithesis, finds in the middle ground its own counterpart,

its sole and unique means of expression, and it eagerly seizes on this in

order to be delivered from its division. The energy created by the tension of

opposites therefore flows into the mediatory product and protects it fromthe conflict which immediately breaks out again, for both the opposites are

striving to get the new product on their side. Spirituality wants to make

something spiritual out of it, and sensuality something sensual; the one

wants to turn it into science or art, the other into sensual experience. The

appropriation or dissolution of  the mediatory product by either side is

successful only if the ego is not completely divided but inclines more to one

side or the other. But if one side succeeds in winning over and dissolving the

mediatory product, the ego goes along with it, whereupon an identification

of the ego with the most favoured function (v. Inferior Function) ensues.

Consequently, the process of division will be repeated later on a higher plane.

[826] If, however, as a result of the stability of the ego, neither side

succeeds in dissolving the mediatory product, this is sufficient demonstration

that it is superior to both. The stability of the ego and the superiority of

the mediatory  product to both thesis and antithesis are to my mind

correlates, each conditioning the other. Sometimes it seems as though the

stability of the inborn individuality (q.v.) were the  decisive factor,

sometimes as though the mediatory product possessed a superior power that

determines the ego’s absolute stability. In reality it may be that the stability

of the one and the superior power of the other are two sides of the same coin.

[827] If the mediatory product remains intact, it forms the raw material for

a process not of dissolution but of  construction, in which thesis and

antithesis both play their part. In this way it becomes a new content that

governs the

whole attitude, putting an end to the division and forcing the energy of the

opposites into a common channel. The standstill is overcome and life can

flow on with renewed power towards new goals.

[828] I have called this process in its totality the transcendent function,

“function” being here understood not as a basic function but as a complex

function made up of other functions, and “transcendent” not as denoting a

metaphysical quality but merely the fact that this function facilitates a

transition from one attitude to another. The raw material shaped by thesis

and antithesis, and in the shaping of which the opposites are united, is the

living symbol. Its profundity of meaning is inherent in the raw material

itself, the very stuff of the psyche, transcending time and dissolution; and its

configuration by the opposites ensures its  sovereign power over all the

psychic functions.

[829] Indications of the process of symbol-formation are to be found in thescanty records of the conflicts experienced by the founders of religion during

their initiation period, e.g., the struggle between Jesus and Satan, Buddha

and Mara, Luther and the devil, Zwingli and his previous worldly life; or

the regeneration of Faust through the pact with the devil. In Zarathustra we

find an excellent example of the suppressed antithesis in the “Ugliest Man.”

52. SYNTHETIC, V. CONSTRUCTIVE.

[830] 53. THINKING. This I regard as one of the four  basic

psychological functions (q.v.). Thinking is the  psychological function

which, following its own laws, brings  the contents of ideation into

conceptual connection with one

another. It is an apperceptive (q.v.) activity, and as such may be divided into

active and passive thinking.  Active thinking  is  an act of the will (q.v.),

passive thinking is a mere occurrence. In the former case, I submit the

contents of ideation to a  voluntary act of judgment; in the latter,

conceptual  connections establish themselves of their own accord, and

judgments are formed that may even contradict my intention. They are not

consonant with my aim and therefore, for me, lack any sense of direction,

although I may afterwards recognize their directedness through an act of

active apperception. Active thinking, accordingly, would correspond to my

concept of directed thinking.

85 Passive thinking was inadequately described in my previous work as

  “fantasy thinking.”

86 Today I would call it intuitive thinking.

[831] To my mind, a mere stringing together of ideas, such as is described

by certain psychologists as associative thinking,

87 is not thinking at all, but mere ideation. The term “thinking” should, in

  my view, be confined to the linking up of ideas by means of a concept,

  in other words, to an act of judgment, no matter whether this act is

  intentional or not.

[832] The capacity for directed thinking I call intellect; the capacity for

passive or undirected thinking I call intellectual intuition. Further, I call

directed thinking a rational (q.v.) function, because it arranges the contents

of ideation under concepts in accordance with a rational norm of which I

am conscious. Undirected thinking is in my view an irrational (q.v.)

function, because it arranges and judges the contents of ideation by norms of

which I am not conscious and therefore cannot recognize as being in accord

with reason.Subsequently I may be able to recognize that the intuitive act of judgment

accorded with reason, although it came about in a way that appears to me

irrational.

[833] Thinking that is governed by feeling (q.v.) I do not  regard as

intuitive thinking, but as a thinking dependent on  feeling; it does not

follow its own logical principle but is subordinated to the principle of

feeling. In such thinking the laws of logic are only ostensibly present; in

reality they are suspended in favour of the aims of feeling.

[834] 53a. THOUGHT. Thought is the specific content or material of the

thinking function, discriminated by thinking (q.v.).

54. TRANSCENDENT FUNCTION, V. SYMBOL, pars.

825–28.

[835] 55. TYPE. A type is a specimen or example which reproduces in a

characteristic way the character of a species or class. In the narrower sense

used in this particular work, a type is a characteristic specimen of a general

attitude (q.v.) occurring in many individual forms. From a great number of

existing or possible attitudes I have singled out four; those, namely, that

are primarily  oriented by the four basic  psychological functions (q.v.):

thinking, feeling, sensation, intuition (qq.v.). When any of these attitudes is

habitual, thus  setting  a  definite stamp on  the  character of an  individual

(q.v.), I speak of a psychological type. These function-types, which one can

call the thinking, feeling, sensation, and intuitive types, may be divided into

two classes according to  the quality of the basic function, i.e., into the

rational and the irrational (qq.v.). The thinking and feeling types belong to

the former class, the sensation and intuitive types to the latter. A further

division into two classes is permitted by the predominant trend of the

movement of libido (q.v.), namely introversion and extraversion (qq.v.). All

the basic types can belong equally well to one or the other of these classes,

according to the predominance of the introverted or extraverted attitude.

88 A thinking type may belong either to the introverted or to the extraverted

  class, and the same holds good for the other  types. The distinction

  between rational and irrational types is simply another point of view

  and has nothing to do with introversion and extraversion.

[836] In my previous contributions to typology

89 I did not differentiate the thinking and feeling types from the introverted

  and extraverted types, but identified the  thinking type with the

    introverted, and the feeling type with  the  extraverted. But  a more  thorough investigation of the material has shown me that we must treat

  the introverted and extraverted types as categories over and above the

    function-types. This differentiation, moreover, fully accords  with

    experience, since, for example, there are undoubtedly  two kinds of

  feeling types, the attitude of the one being oriented more by his feeling-

  experience [= introverted feeling type], the other more by the object [=

  extraverted feeling type].

[837] 56. UNCONSCIOUS. The concept of the unconscious is for me an

exclusively psychological concept,  and not a philosophical concept of a

metaphysical nature. In  my view the unconscious is a psychological

borderline concept, which covers all psychic contents or processes that are

not conscious, i.e., not related to the ego (q.v.) in any

perceptible way. My justification for speaking of the  existence of

unconscious processes at all is derived simply and solely from experience,

and in particular from  psychopathological experience, where we have

undoubted proof that, in a case of hysterical amnesia, for example, the ego

knows nothing of the existence of numerous psychic complexes, and the next

moment a simple hypnotic procedure is sufficient to bring the lost contents

back to memory.

[838] Thousands of such experiences justify us in speaking of the existence

of unconscious psychic contents. As to the  actual state an unconscious

content is in when not attached to  consciousness, this is something that

eludes all possibility of cognition. It is therefore quite pointless to hazard

conjectures about it. Conjectures linking up the unconscious state with

cerebration and physiological processes belong equally to the  realm of

fantasy. It is also impossible to specify the range of the unconscious, i.e.,

what contents it embraces. Only experience can decide such questions.

[839] We know from experience that conscious contents  can become

unconscious through loss of their energic value. This is the normal process

of “forgetting.” That these contents  do not simply get lost below the

threshold of consciousness  we know from the experience that

occasionally, under  suitable conditions, they can emerge from their

submersion decades later, for instance in dreams, or under hypnosis, or in the

form of cryptomnesia,

90 or through the revival of associations with the forgotten content. We

  also know that conscious contents can fall below  the threshold of

    consciousness through “intentional forgetting,” or what Freud calls the    repression of a painful content, with no appreciable loss of value. A

  similar effect is

produced by a dissociation of the personality, i.e., the disintegration of

consciousness as the result of a violent affect (q.v.) or nervous shock, or

through the collapse of the personality in schizophrenia (Bleuler).

[840] We know  from experience, too, that  sense perceptions which, either

because of their slight intensity or because of the deflection of attention, do

not reach conscious apperception (q.v.), none the less become psychic

contents through unconscious apperception, which again may be

demonstrated by hypnosis, for example. The same thing may happen with

certain judgments or other associations which remain unconscious because

of their low energy charge or because of the deflection of attention. Finally,

experience also teaches  that there are  unconscious  psychic associations—

mythological  images  (q.v.), for instance—which have never been the object

of consciousness and must  therefore  be wholly  the  product  of

unconscious activity.

[841] To this extent, then, experience furnishes points  d’appui for the

assumption of unconscious contents. But it can tell us nothing about what

might possibly be an unconscious content. It is idle to speculate about this,

because  the range of what could be an unconscious content is simply

illimitable. What is the lowest limit of subliminal sense perception? Is there

any way of measuring the scope and  subtlety of unconscious

associations? When is a forgotten content totally obliterated? To these

questions there is no answer.

[842] Our experience so far of the nature of unconscious contents permits

us, however, to make one general

classification. We can distinguish a personal unconscious, comprising all

the acquisitions of personal life, everything  forgotten, repressed,

subliminally perceived, thought, felt.  But, in addition to these personal

unconscious contents, there are other contents which do not originate in

personal acquisitions but in the inherited possibility of psychic functioning

in general, i.e., in the inherited structure of the  brain.  These are the

mythological associations, the motifs and images that can spring up anew

anytime anywhere, independently of historical tradition or migration. I call

these contents the collective unconscious. Just as conscious  contents are

engaged in a definite activity, so too are the unconscious contents, as

experience confirms. And just as conscious psychic activity creates certainproducts, so unconscious psychic activity produces dreams, fantasies (q.v.),

etc. It is idle to speculate on how great a share  consciousness has in

dreams. A dream presents itself to us: we do not consciously create it.

Conscious reproduction, or even the perception of it, certainly alters the

dream in many ways, without, however, doing away with the basic fact of the

unconscious source of creative activity.

[843] The functional relation of the unconscious processes to consciousness

may be described as compensatory (q.v.), since experience shows that 

they  bring to the  surface the subliminal material that is constellated by the

conscious situation, i.e., all those contents which could not be missing from

the picture if everything were conscious. The compensatory function of the

unconscious becomes more obvious the more one-sided the

conscious attitude (q.v.) is; pathology furnishes numerous examples of this.

[844] 57. WILL. I regard the will as the amount of psychic energy at the

disposal of consciousness. Volition would,  accordingly, be an energic

process that is released by  conscious motivation. A psychic process,

therefore, that is  conditioned by unconscious motivation I would not

include  under the concept of the will. The will is a psychological

phenomenon that owes its existence to culture and moral education, but is

largely lacking in the primitive mentality.                                EPILOGUE

[845] In our age, which has seen the fruits of the French Revolution

—“Liberté, Egalité,  Fraternité”—growing into a  broad social movement

whose aim is not merely to raise or lower political rights to the same

general level, but, more hopefully, to abolish unhappiness altogether by

means of external regulations and egalitarian reforms—in such an age it is

indeed a thankless task to speak of the complete inequality of the elements

composing a nation. Although it is certainly a fine thing that every man

should stand equal before the law, that every man should have his political

vote, and that no man, through hereditary social position and privilege,

should have unjust advantage over his brother, it is distinctly less fine

when the idea of equality is extended to other walks of life. A man must

have a very clouded vision, or view human  society from a very misty

distance, to cherish the notion that the uniform regulation of life would

automatically ensure a uniform distribution of happiness. He must be pretty

far gone  in delusion if he imagines that equality of income, or equal

opportunities for all, would have approximately the same value for everyone.

But, if he were a legislator, what would he do about all those people whose

greatest opportunities lie not without, but within? If he were just, he would

have to give at least twice as much money to the one man as to the other,

since to the one it means much, to the other little. No social legislation will

ever be able to overcome the psychological differences between men, this

most necessary factor for generating the vital energy of a human society. It

may serve a useful purpose, therefore, to speak of the heterogeneity of

men. These differences involve such different requirements

for happiness that no legislation, however perfect, could afford them even

approximate satisfaction. No outward form  of life could be devised,

however equitable and just it might appear, that would not involve injustice

for one or the other human type. That, in spite of this, every kind of

enthusiast—political,

social, philosophical, or religious—is busily endeavouring to  find those

uniform external conditions which would bring  with them greater

opportunities for the happiness of all seems to me connected with a general

attitude to life too exclusively oriented by the outer world.

[846] It is not possible to do more than touch on this far-reaching question

here, since such considerations lie outside the scope of this book. We arehere concerned only with the psychological problem, and the existence of

different typical attitudes is a problem of the first order, not only for

psychology  but  for  all departments of  science and  life  in  which man’s

psychology plays a decisive role. It is, for instance, obvious to anyone of

ordinary intelligence that  every philosophy that is not just a history of

philosophy depends on a personal psychological premise. This premise

may be of a purely individual nature, and indeed is generally regarded as

such if any psychological criticism is made at all.  The matter is then

considered settled. But this is to overlook the fact that what one regards as

an individual prejudice is by no means so under all circumstances, since the

standpoint of a particular philosopher often has a considerable following. It is

acceptable to his followers not because they echo him without thinking, but

because it is something they can fully understand and appreciate. Such an

understanding would be impossible if the philosopher’s standpoint were

determined only individually, for it is quite certain in that case that he

would be neither fully understood nor even tolerated. The peculiarity of

the standpoint which is understood and acknowledged by his followers must

therefore correspond to a typical personal attitude, which in the same or a

similar form has many representatives in a society. As a rule, the partisans of

either side attack each other purely externally, always seeking out the chinks

in their opponent’s armour. Squabbles of this kind are usually fruitless. It

would be of considerably greater value if the dispute were transferred to the

psychological realm, from which it arose in the first place. The shift of

position would soon show a diversity of psychological attitudes, each with

its own right to existence,  and each contributing to the setting up of

incompatible theories. So long as one tries to settle the dispute by external

compromises, one merely satisfies the modest demands of shallow minds

that

have never yet been enkindled by the passion of a principle. A  real

understanding  can,  in my view,  be reached  only when the  diversity of

psychological premises is accepted.

[847] It is a fact, which is constantly and overwhelmingly apparent in my

practical work, that people are virtually  incapable of understanding and

accepting any point of view other than their own. In small things a general

superficiality of outlook, combined with a none too common forbearance

and tolerance and an equally rare goodwill, may help to build a bridge over

the chasm which lack of understanding opens between man and man. Butin more important matters, and especially those concerned with ideals, an

understanding  seems,  as  a  rule, to  be  beyond  the bounds of possibility.

Certainly strife and misunderstanding will always be among the props of

the tragicomedy of human existence, but it is none the less undeniable that

the advance of civilization has

led from the law of the jungle to the establishment of courts of justice and

standards of right and wrong which are above the contending parties. It is

my conviction that a basis for the settlement of conflicting views would be

found in the recognition of different types of attitude—a recognition not

only of the existence of such types, but also of the fact that every man is

so imprisoned in his type that he is simply  incapable of fully

understanding another standpoint. Failing a  recognition of this exacting

demand, a violation of the other standpoint is practically inevitable. But just

as the contending parties in a court of law refrain from direct violence

and submit their claims to the justice of the law and the impartiality of the

judge, so each type, conscious of his own partiality, should refrain from

heaping abuse, suspicion, and indignity upon his opponent.

[848] In considering the problem of typical attitudes, and in presenting them

in outline, I have endeavoured to direct the eye of my readers to this picture

of the many possible ways of viewing life, in the hope that I may have

contributed my small  share to the knowledge of the almost infinite

variations and gradations of individual psychology. No one, I trust,  will

draw the conclusion from my description of types that I believe the four or

eight types here presented to be the only ones that exist. This would be a

serious misconception, for I have no doubt whatever that these attitudes

could also be considered

and classified from other points of view. Indeed, there are indications of

such possibilities in this book, as for instance  Jordan’s classification in

terms of activity. But whatever the criterion for a classification of types may

be, a comparison of the various forms of habitual attitudes will result in an

equal number of psychological types.

[849] However easy it may be to regard the existing attitudes from other

viewpoints than the one here adopted, it  would be difficult to adduce

evidence against the existence of psychological types. I have no doubt at all

that my opponents will be at some pains to strike the question of types off

the scientific agenda, since the type problem must, to say the least of it, be a

very unwelcome obstacle for every theory of complex psychic processes thatlays claim to general validity. Every theory of complex psychic processes

presupposes a  uniform human psychology, just as scientific theories in

general presuppose that nature is fundamentally one and the same. But in

the case of psychology there is the peculiar condition that, in the making

of its theories, the psychic process is not merely an object but at the same

time the subject. Now if one assumes that the subject is the same in all

individual cases, it can also be assumed that the subjective  process of

theory-making, too, is the same everywhere. That this is not so, however, is

demonstrated most impressively by  the existence of the most diverse

theories about the nature of complex psychic processes. Naturally, every

new theory is ready to assume that all other theories were wrong, usually

for the sole reason that its author has a different subjective view from his

predecessors. He does not realize that the  psychology he sees is his

psychology, and on top of that is the psychology of his type. He therefore

supposes that there can  be only one true explanation of the psychic

process he is investigating, namely the one that agrees with his type. All

other views—I might almost say all seven other views—which, in their way,

are just as true as his, are for him mere aberrations. In the interests of the

validity of his own  theory,  therefore,  he will  feel a  lively but  very

understandable distaste for any view that establishes the existence of different

types of human psychology, since his own view would then

lose, shall we say, seven-eighths of its truth. For, besides his own theory, he

would have to regard seven other theories of the same process

as equally true, or, if that is saying too much, at least grant a second theory a

value equal to his own.

[850] I am quite convinced that a natural process which is very largely

independent of human psychology, and can therefore be viewed only as an

object, can have but one true explanation. But I am equally convinced that

the explanation of a complex psychic process which cannot be objectively

registered by any apparatus must necessarily be only the one which that

subjective process itself produces. In other words, the author of the concept

can produce only just such a concept as corresponds to the psychic process

he is endeavouring to explain; but it will correspond only when the process

to be explained coincides with the process occurring in the author himself.

If neither the process to be explained, nor any analogy of it, were to be

found in the author, he would be confronted with a complete enigma,

whose explanation he  would have to leave to the man who himselfexperienced the process. If I have a vision, for instance, no objectively

registering apparatus will enable me to discover how it originated; I can

explain its origin only as I myself understand it. But in this “as I myself

understand it” lies the partiality, for at best my explanation will start from

the way the visionary process presents itself to me. By what right do I

assume that the visionary process presents itself in the same or a similar

way to everyone?

[851] With some show of reason, one will adduce the uniformity of human

psychology at all times and places as an  argument in favour of this

generalization of a subjective

judgment. I myself am so profoundly convinced of the uniformity of the

psyche that I have even summed it up in the  concept of the collective

unconscious, as a universal and homogeneous substratum whose uniformity

is such that one finds the same myth and fairytale motifs in all corners of

the earth, with the result that an uneducated American Negro dreams of

motifs from Greek mythology

1 and a Swiss clerk re-experiences in his psychosis the vision of an Egyptian

  Gnostic.

2 But this fundamental homogeneity is offset by an equally  great

  heterogeneity of the

conscious psyche. What immeasurable distances lie between  the

consciousness of a primitive, a Periclean Athenian, and a modern European!

What a difference even between the consciousness of a learned professor

and that of his spousel What, in any case, would our world be like if there

existed a uniformity of minds? No, the notion of a uniformity of the

conscious psyche is an academic chimera, doubtless simplifying the task of

a university lecturer when facing his pupils, but collapsing into nothing in

the face of reality. Quite  apart from the differences among individuals

whose  innermost natures are separated by stellar distances, the types,  as

classes of individuals, are themselves to a very large extent different from

one another, and it is to the existence of these types that we must ascribe the

differences of views in general.

[852] In order to discover the uniformity of the human psyche, I have to

descend into the very foundations of consciousness. Only there do I find that

in which all are alike. If I build my theory on what is common to all, I

explain the psyche in terms of its foundation and origin. But that does

nothing to explain its historical and individual differentiation. With such atheory I ignore the peculiarities of the conscious

psyche. I actually deny the whole other side of the psyche, its differentiation

from the original germinal state. I reduce man to his phylogenetic prototype,

or I dissolve him into his  elementary processes; and when I try to

reconstruct him again, in the former case an ape will emerge, and in the

latter a welter of elementary processes engaged in aimless and meaningless

reciprocal activity.

[853] No doubt an explanation of the psyche on the basis of its uniformity is

not only possible but fully justified. But if I want to project a picture of the

psyche in its totality, I must bear in mind the diversity of psyches, since

the conscious individual psyche belongs just as much to a general picture of

psychology as does its unconscious foundation. In my  construction of

theories, therefore, I can, with as much right,  proceed from the fact of

differentiated psyches, and consider the same process from the standpoint of

differentiation which I considered before from the standpoint of uniformity.

This naturally leads me to a view diametrically opposed to the former

one. Everything which in that view was left out of the  picture as an

individual

variant now becomes important as a starting-point for further

differentiations; and everything which previously had a special value on

account of its uniformity now appears valueless, because merely collective.

From this angle I shall always be intent on where a thing is going to, not

where it comes from; whereas from the former angle I never bothered about

the goal but only about the origin. I can, therefore, explain the same

psychic process with two contradictory and  mutually exclusive theories,

neither of which I can declare to be wrong, since the rightness of one is

proved by the uniformity of the psyche, and the rightness of the other by its

diversity.

[854] This brings us to the great difficulty which the reading of my earlier

book

3 only aggravated, both for the scientific public and for the layman, with

the result that many otherwise competent heads  were thrown into

  confusion. There I made an attempt to present both views with the help of

case material. But since reality neither consists of theories nor follows

them, the two views, which we are bound to think of as divided, are

  united within it. Each is a product of the past and carries a future

  meaning, and of neither can it be said with certainty whether it is an endor a beginning. Everything that is alive in the  psyche shimmers in

  rainbow hues. For anyone who thinks there is only one true explanation

of a psychic process, this vitality of psychic contents, which necessitates

two  contradictory theories, is a matter for despair, especially if he  is

  enamoured of simple and uncomplicated truths, incapable  maybe of

  thinking both at the same time.

[855] On the other hand, I am not convinced that, with these two ways

of looking at the psyche—the reductive and constructive as I have called

them

4—the possibilities of explanation are exhausted. I believe  that other

equally “true” explanations of the psychic process can still be put forward,

just as many in fact as there are types. Moreover, these explanations will

agree as well or as ill with one another as the types themselves in their

personal relations. Should, therefore, the existence of typical differences of

human psyches be granted—and I confess I see no reason why it should not

be granted—the

scientific theorist is confronted with the disagreeable dilemma  of either

allowing several contradictory theories of the same process to exist side by

side, or of making an attempt, foredoomed at the outset, to found a sect

which claims for

itself the only correct method and the only true theory. Not only does the

former possibility encounter the extraordinary  difficulty of an inwardly

contradictory “double-think” operation, it also contravenes one of the first

principles of  intellectual morality: principia explicandi non sunt

multiplicanda praeter necessitatem.

5 But in the case of psychological theories the necessity of a plurality of

explanations is given from the start, since, in  contrast to any other

scientific theory, the object of psychological explanation is consubstantial

with the subject:  one psychological process has to explain another. This

serious  difficulty has already driven thoughtful persons to remarkable

subterfuges, such as the assumption of an “objective intellect”  standing

outside the psychic process and capable of contemplating the subordinate

psyche objectively, or the similar assumption that the intellect is a faculty

which can stand outside itself and contemplate itself. All these expedients

are supposed to create a sort of extra-terrestrial Archimedean point by

means of which the intellect can lift itself off its own hinges. I understand

very well the profound human need for convenient solutions, but I do notsee why  truth should bow to this need. I can also understand that,

aesthetically, it would be far more satisfactory if, instead of the paradox of

mutually contradictory explanations, we could reduce the psychic process to

the simplest possible instinctive foundation and leave it at that, or if we

could credit it with a metaphysical goal of redemption and find peace in that

hope.

[856] Whatever we strive to fathom with our intellect will end in paradox

and relativity, if it be honest work and not a petitio principii in the interests

of convenience. That an intellectual understanding of the psychic process

must end in paradox and relativity is simply unavoidable, if only for the

reason that the intellect is but one of many psychic functions  which is

intended by nature to serve man in constructing of  his images of the

objective

world. We should not pretend to understand the world only by the intellect;

we apprehend it just as much by feeling. Therefore the judgment of the

intellect is, at best, only a half-truth, and must, if it is honest, also admit its

inadequacy.

[857] To deny the existence of types is of little avail in the face of the facts.

In view of their existence, therefore, every theory of psychic processes has

to submit to being evaluated in its turn as itself a psychic process, as the

expression of a specific type of human psychology with its own justification.

Only from these typical self-representations of the psyche can the materials

be collected which will co-operate to form a higher synthesis.                                APPENDIX

      FOUR PAPERS ON PSYCHOLOGICAL

                                  TYPOLOGY

                                            1      A CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUDY OF

                    PSYCHOLOGICAL TYPES

1

[858] It is well known that in their general aspects hysteria  and

schizophrenia present a striking contrast, which is particularly evident in

the attitude of the patients to the external world. In their relations to the

object, the hysteric displays as a rule an intensity of feeling that surpasses

the normal, while in the schizophrenic the normal level is not reached at

all. The clinical picture is exaggerated emotivity in the one, and extreme

apathy in the other, with regard to the  environment. In their personal

relations this difference is  marked by the fact that we can remain in

affective rapport with our hysterical patients, which is not the case in

schizophrenia. The contrast between the two types of illness  is also

observable in the rest of their symptomatology. So far as the intellectual

symptoms of hysteria are concerned, they are fantasy products which may

be accounted for in a natural  and human way by the antecedents and

individual history of

the patient; in schizophrenia, on the contrary, the fantasy products are more

nearly related to dreams than to the psychology of the waking state. They

have, moreover, a distinctly archaic character, the mythological creations of

the primitive imagination being far more in evidence than the personal

memories of the patient. Finally, the physical symptoms so common in

hysteria, which simulate well-known and impressive organic illnesses, are

not to be found in the clinical picture of schizophrenia.

[859] All this clearly indicates that hysteria is characterized by a centrifugal

movement of libido, while in schizophrenia  the movement is more

centripetal. The reverse obtains,  however, when the illness has fully

established its  compensatory effects. In the hysteric the libido is then

hampered in its movement of expansion and is forced to regress upon itself;

the patients cease to partake in the common life, are wrapped up in their

daydreams, keep to their beds, remain shut up in their sickrooms, etc. During

the incubation of his illness the schizophrenic likewise turns away from the

outer world in order to withdraw into himself, but when the period of morbid

compensation arrives, he seems constrained to draw attention to himself, to

force himself upon the notice of those around him, by his extravagant,insupportable, or directly aggressive behaviour.

[860] I propose to use the terms extraversion and introversion to describe

these two opposite movements of  libido, further qualifying them as

regressive in pathological cases where delusional ideas, fictions, or fantastic

interpretations, all inspired by emotivity, falsify the judgment of the patient

about things or about himself. We speak of extraversion when he gives

his whole interest to the outer

world, to the object, and attributes an extraordinary importance and value

to it. When, on the contrary, the objective world sinks into the shadow, at

it were, or undergoes a devaluation, while the individual occupies the

centre of his own interest and becomes in his own eyes the only person

worthy of consideration, it is a case of  introversion. I call regressive

extraversion the phenomenon which Freud calls transference, when the

hysteric projects upon the object his own illusions and subjective valuations.

In the same way, I call regressive introversion the opposite phenomenon

which we find in schizophrenia, when these fantastic ideas refer to the subject

himself.

[861] It is obvious that these two contrary movements of libido, as simple

psychic mechanisms, may operate alternately in the same individual, since

after all they serve the same purpose by different methods—namely, to

minister to his well-being.

Freud has taught us that in the mechanism of hysterical extraversion the

personality seeks to get rid of disagreeable memories and impressions, and

to free itself from its complexes, by a process of repression. The individual

clings to the object in order to forget these painful contents and leave

them behind him. Conversely, in the mechanism  of introversion, the

libido concentrates itself wholly on the complexes, and seeks to detach and

isolate the personality from external reality. This psychological process is

associated with a phenomenon which is not properly speaking “repression,”

but would be better rendered by the term “devaluation” of the objective

world.

[862] To this extent, extraversion and introversion are two modes of psychic

reaction which can be observed in the same

individual. The fact, however, that two such contrary disturbances as hysteria

and schizophrenia are characterized by the predominance of the mechanism

of extraversion or of introversion suggests that there may also be normal

human types who are distinguished by the predominance of one or other ofthe two mechanisms. And indeed, psychiatrists know very well that long

before the illness is fully established, the hysterical patient as well as the

schizophrenic is marked by the predominance of his specific type, which

reaches back into the earliest years of childhood.

[863] As Binet has pointed out so aptly,

1a a neurosis simply emphasizes and throws into excessive  relief the

characteristic traits of a personality. It has long been known that the so-called

hysterical character is not simply the product of the manifest neurosis, but

predated it to a certain extent. And Hoch has shown the same thing by his

researches into the histories of schizophrenic patients; he speaks of a

“shut-in” personality

2 which was present before the onset of the illness. If this is so, we may

  certainly expect to find the two types outside the sphere of pathology.

There are moreover numerous witnesses in literature to the existence of

the two types of mentality. Without pretending to exhaust the subject, I

will give a few striking examples.

[864] So far as my limited knowledge goes, we have to thank William

James for the best observations in this respect.

He lays

down the principle: “Of whatever temperament a professional philosopher is,

he tries, when philosophizing, to sink the fact of his temperament.”

3 And starting from this idea, which is altogether in accord with the spirit

of psychoanalysis, he divides philosophers into two classes: the “tender-

minded” and the “tough-minded,” or, as we might also call them, the

  “spiritually-minded” and the  “materially-minded.” The very terms

clearly reveal the opposite movements of the libido. The first class direct

their libido to the world of thought, and are predominantly introverted;

the second direct it to material things and  objective reality, and are

  extraverted.

[865] James characterizes the “tender-minded” first of all as rationalistic,

“going by principles.”

4 They are the men of principles and systems; they aspire to  dominate

  experience and to transcend it by abstract reasoning,  by  their logical

  deductions and purely rational concepts. They care little for facts, and the

  multiplicity of empirical phenomena hardly bothers or disconcerts them

at all; they forcibly fit the data into their ideal constructions, and reduce

everything to their a priori premises. This was the method of Hegel in  settling beforehand the number of the planets. In the domain of pathology

we again meet this kind of philosopher in paranoiacs, who, unperturbed by

all factual evidence to the contrary, impose their delirious conceptions on

the universe, and find a means of interpreting everything, and according to

Adler “arranging” everything, in conformity with their  preconceived

  system.

[866] The other characteristics of this type which James  enumerates

follow logically from these premises. The  “tender-minded” man  is

“intellectualistic, idealistic,  optimistic, religious, free-willist, monistic,

dogmatical.”

5 All these qualities betray the almost exclusive concentration of libido upon

his intellectual life. This concentration on the

inner world of thought is nothing else than introversion. In so  far as

experience plays any role with these philosophers, it serves only as a fillip

to abstraction, to the imperative need to fit the multiplicity and chaos of

events  into an order which,  in  the last resort, is the creation of purely

subjective thinking.

[867] The “tough-minded” man, on the other hand, is empirical, “going by

facts.” Experience is his master, facts are his guide and they colour all his

thinking. It is only tangible  phenomena in the outside world that count.

Thought is merely a reaction to external experience. For him principles are

always of less value than facts; if he has any, they merely reflect and

describe the flux of events, and are incapable of forming a system. Hence

his theories are liable to inner  contradiction and get overlaid by the

accumulation of empirical material. Psychic reality limits itself for him to

observation and to the experience of pleasure and pain; he does not go

beyond that, nor does he recognize the rights of philosophical thought.  

Remaining on  the  ever-changing  surface of the phenomenal world, he

himself partakes of its instability; he sees all its aspects, all its theoretical

and practical possibilities, but he never arrives at the unity of a settled

system, which alone could satisfy the tender-minded.  The tough-minded

man is reductive. As James so excellently says: “What is higher is explained

by what is lower and treated for ever as a case of ‘nothing but’—nothing but

something else of a quite inferior sort.”

6

[868] From these general characteristics, the others which James points out

logically follow. The tough-minded man is “sensationalistic,” giving morevalue to the senses than to reflection. He is “materialistic and pessimistic,”

for he knows

only too well the uncertainty and hopeless chaos of the course of things. He is

“irreligious,” being incapable of asserting the realities of his inner world

against the pressure of external  facts; a fatalist, because resigned; a

pluralist, incapable of all synthesis; and finally a sceptic, as a last and

inevitable consequence of all the rest.

7

[869] The expressions, therefore, used by James show  clearly that the

difference between the types is the result of a different localization of the

libido, this “magical power” in the depth of our being, which, depending on

the individual, is directed sometimes to our inner life, sometimes to the

objective world. Contrasting the religious subjectivism of the solipsist with

the contemporary empirical attitude, James says: “But our esteem for facts

has not neutralized in us all religiousness. It is itself almost religious. Our

scientific temper is devout.”

8

[870] A second parallel is furnished by Wilhelm Ostwald,

9 who divides men of genius into “classics” and “romantics.” The romantics

are distinguished by their rapid reactions, their abundant production of

ideas, some of which are badly digested and of doubtful value. They are

brilliant teachers, of a compelling ardour, and collect round them a large

and enthusiastic circle of students, on whom they exert great  personal

  influence. This type is obviously identical with our extraverted type. The

classics, on the contrary, are slow to react; they produce with much

  difficulty, paralyzed by their own severe self-criticism; they have no love

for teaching, and are in fact mostly bad teachers, lacking enthusiasm;

living apart and absorbed in themselves, they exercise little direct

personal influence, making scarcely any disciples, but producing works of

finished perfection which often bring them only posthumous fame. This

type is an unmistakable introvert.

[871] We find a third, very valuable parallel in the aesthetic  theory of

Wilhelm Worringer.

10 Borrowing A. Riegl’s expression “absolute artistic volition”

11 to designate the internal force which inspires the artist, he distinguishes

  two forms: abstraction and empathy. He speaks  of the urge to

    abstraction and the urge to empathy, thereby making clear the libidinal  nature of these two forms, the stirring of the élan vital. “In the same

  way,” says Worringer, “as the urge to empathy finds its gratification in

  organic beauty, so the urge to abstraction discovers beauty in the

    inorganic, the negation of all life, in crystalline forms or, generally

  speaking, wherever the severity of abstract law reigns.”

12 Empathy is a movement of libido towards the object in  order to

    assimilate it and imbue it with emotional values; abstraction withdraws

  libido from the object, despoils it of all that could recall life; leaching

  out, as it were, its intellectual content, and crystallizing from the lye

  the typical elements  that conform to law, which are either

  superimposed on the object or are its very antithesis. Bergson also

  makes use of these images of crystallization and rigidity to illustrate

  the nature of intellectual abstraction and clarification.

[872] Worringer’s “abstraction” represents that process  which we have

already encountered as a consequence of introversion—the exaltation of the

intellect to offset the devaluation of external reality. “Empathy” corresponds

to

extraversion, as Theodor Lipps had already pointed out.  “What I feel

myself into is life in general, and life is power, inner work, effort, and

accomplishment. To live, in a word, is to act, and to act is to experience

the expenditure of my  forces. This activity is by its very nature an

activity of the will.”

13 “Aesthetic enjoyment,” says Worringer, “is objectified self-enjoyment,”

14 a formula that accords very well with our definition of extraversion.

  But Worringer’s conception of aesthetics is not vitiated by any “tough-

    mindedness,” and so he is fully capable of appreciating the value of

  psychological realities. Hence Worringer says: “The crucial factor is thus 

  not  so much the tone of the feeling as the feeling itself, the inner

  movement, the inner life, the subject’s inner activity.”

15 And again: “The value of a line or of a form consists in the vital value

  which it holds for us. It acquires its beauty only  through the vital

  feeling which we unconsciously project into it.”

16 These statements correspond exactly to my own view of the theory of

  libido, which seeks to maintain the balance  between the two

  psychological opposites of extraversion and introversion.

[873] The counterpole of empathy is abstraction. According to Worringer,“the urge to abstraction is the outcome of a great inner uneasiness inspired

in man by the phenomena of the external world, and its religious counterpart

is the strongly transcendental colouring of all ideas. We might describe this

state as an immense spiritual dread of space…. This same feeling of fear

may also be assumed to be the root of artistic creation.”

17 We recognize in this definition the primary tendency  towards

    introversion. To the introverted type the universe  does not appear

  beautiful and desirable, but disquieting and  even dangerous; he

  entrenches himself in his inner fastness,  securing himself by the

  invention of regular geometrical figures full of repose, whose primitive,

  magical power assures him of domination over the surrounding world.

[874] “The urge to abstraction is the origin of all art,” says Worringer.

18 This idea finds weighty confirmation in the fact that  schizophrenics

  produce forms and figures showing the closest analogy with those of

  primitive humanity, not only in their thoughts but also in their drawings.

[875] In  this connection it would be unjust not to recall that  Schiller

attempted a similar formulation in his naïve and sentimental types.

19 The naïve poet “is Nature, the sentimental seeks her,” he  says. The

  naïve poet expresses primarily himself, while the  sentimental is

    primarily influenced by the object. For Schiller, a perfect example of the

  naïve poet is Homer. “The naïve poet follows simple Nature and sensation

  and confines himself to a mere copying of reality.”

20 “The sentimental poet,” on the contrary “reflects on the  impression

  objects make on him, and on that reflection alone depends the emotion

  with which he is exalted, and which likewise exalts us. Here the object

  is related to an idea, and on this relation alone depends his poetic power.”

21 But Schiller also saw that these two types result from the predominance

  of psychological mechanisms which might be  present in the same

  individual. “It is not only in the same

poet,” he says, “but even in the same work that these two categories are

frequently found united.”

22 These quotations show what types Schiller had in mind,  and one

  recognizes their basic identity with those we have been discussing.

[876] We find another parallel in Nietzsche’s contrast between

the Apollinian and the Dionysian.

23 The example which Nietzsche uses to illustrate this  contrast is    instructive—namely, that between dream and intoxication. In a dream

  the individual is shut up in himself, it is the most intimate of all psychic

  experiences; in intoxication he is liberated from himself, and, utterly

  self-forgetful, plunges into the multiplicity of the objective world. In

  his picture of Apollo, Nietzsche borrows the words of Schopenhauer:

  “As upon a tumultuous sea, unbounded in every direction, the mariner

  sits full of confidence in his frail barque, rising and falling amid the

  raging mountains

of waves, so the individual man, in a world of troubles, sits

passive and serene, trusting to the principium individuationis.”

24“Yes,” continues Nietzsche, “one might say that the  unshakable

confidence in this principle, and the calm security of those whom it has

inspired, have found in Apollo their most sublime expression, and one

might describe Apollo himself as the glorious divine image of the principle

of individuation.”

25

[877] The Apollinian state, therefore, as Nietzsche  conceives it, is a

withdrawal into oneself, or introversion. Conversely the Dionysian state is

the unleashing of a torrent of libido into things. “Not only,” says Nietzsche,

“is the bond

between man and man reconfirmed in the Dionysian  enchantment, but

alienated Nature, hostile or enslaved, celebrates once more her feast of

reconciliation with her prodigal son—Man. Liberally the earth proffers her

gifts, and the wild beasts from rock and desert draw near peacefully. The

car of Dionysos is heaped with flowers and garlands; panthers and tigers

stride beneath his yoke. Transform Beethoven’s Ode to Joy into a painting,

and give free rein to your imagination as the awestruck millions prostrate

themselves in the dust: thus you approach the Dionysian intoxication. Now

is the slave free, now all the rigid, hostile barriers which necessity, caprice,

or shameless fashion have set up between man and man are broken down.

Now, with this gospel of universal harmony, each feels himself not only

united, reconciled, merged with his neighbour, but one with him, as though

the veil of Maya had been torn away, and nothing remained of it but a

few shreds floating before the mystery of the Primal Unity.”

26 Any commentary on this passage would be superfluous.

[878] In concluding this series of examples drawn from outside my own

special field of study, I would still like to mention a parallel from thesphere of linguistics, which likewise illustrates our two types. This is Franz

Finck’s hypothesis concerning the structure of language.

27 According to Finck, there are two main types of linguistic structure. The

  one is represented in general by the transitive verbs: I see him, I kill him,

  etc. The

other is represented by the intransitive verbs: He appears before me, he dies

at my feet. The first type clearly shows a centrifugal movement of libido

going out from the subject; the second, a centripetal movement of libido

coming in from

the object. The latter, introverting type of structure is found particularly

among the primitive languages of the Eskimos.

[879] Finally, in the domain of psychiatry our two types  have been

described by Otto Gross.

28 He distinguishes two forms of inferiority: a type with a diffuse and

  shallow consciousness, and another with a  contracted and deep

    consciousness. The first is characterized by the weakness, the second by

  the intense activity, of the “secondary function.” Gross recognized that

  the secondary function is closely connected with affectivity, from which

  it is not difficult to see that once again our two types are meant. The

  relation he established between manic-depressive insanity and the type

  with a shallow consciousness  shows that  we are dealing with

    extraversion, while the relation between  the psychology of the

    paranoiac and the type with a contracted consciousness indicates the

  identity with introversion.

[880] After the foregoing considerations it will come as a  surprise to

nobody to learn that in the domain of  psychoanalysis we also have to

reckon with the existence of these two psychological types. On the one

side we have a theory which is essentially reductive, pluralistic, causal, and

sensualistic. This is the theory of Freud, which is strictly  limited to

empirical facts, and traces back complexes to their antecedents and to more

simple elements. It regards psychological life as consisting in large measure

of reactions, and accords the greatest role to sensation. On the other side we

have the diametrically opposed theory of Adler,

29 which is thoroughly intellectualistic, monistic, and  finalistic. Here

  psychological phenomena are not reduced to  antecedent and more

  simple elements, but are conceived as

“arrangements,” as the outcome of intentions and aims of a  complexnature. Instead of the causa efficiens we have the causa finalis. The

previous history of the patient  and the  concrete influences of the

environment are of much less importance than his dominating principles,

his “guiding fictions.”

It is not his striving for the object and his subjective pleasure in it that are

the determining factors, but the securing of the individual’s power in the

face of the hostile environmental influences.

[881] While the dominant note in Freudian psychology is a  centrifugal

tendency, a striving for pleasure in the object, in Adler’s it is a centripetal

striving for the supremacy of the subject, who wants to be “on top,” to

safeguard his power, to defend himself against the overwhelming forces of

existence. The expedient to which the type described by Freud resorts is the

infantile transference of subjective fantasies into the  object, as a

compensatory reaction to the difficulties of life. The characteristic recourse

of the type described by Adler is, on the contrary, “security,” “masculine

protest,” and the stubborn reinforcement of the “guiding fiction.”

[882] The difficult task of creating a psychology which will be equally fair to

both types must be reserved for the future.

                                            2                    PSYCHOLOGICAL TYPES

1

[883] From ancient  times there have been numerous attempts to reduce

the manifold differences between human individuals to definite categories,

and on the other hand to break down the apparent uniformity of mankind

by a sharper characterization of certain typical differences. Without wishing

to go too deeply into the history of these attempts, I would like to call

attention to the fact that the oldest categories known to us originated with

physicians. Of these perhaps the most important was Claudius Galen, the

Greek physician who lived in the second century A.D. He distinguished four

basic temperaments: the sanguine, the  phlegmatic, the choleric, and the

melancholic. The underlying idea goes back to the fifth century B.C., to the

teachings of Hippocrates, that the human body was composed of the four

elements, air, water, fire, and earth. Corresponding to these elements, four

substances were to be found in the living body, blood, phlegm, yellow bile,

and black bile; and it was Galen’s idea that, by the varying admixture of

these four substances, men could be divided into four classes. Those in

whom there was a preponderance of blood belonged to the sanguine type; a

preponderance of phlegm produced the phlegmatic; yellow bile produced the

choleric,  and black bile the  melancholic. As  our language shows, these

differences of temperament have

passed into history, though they have, of course, long since  been

superseded as a physiological theory.

[884] To Galen undoubtedly belongs the credit for having  created a

psychological classification of human beings which  has endured for two

thousand years, a classification based on  perceptible differences of

emotionality or affectivity. It is interesting to note that the first attempt at a

typology was concerned with the emotional behaviour of man—obviously

because affectivity is the commonest and most striking feature of behaviour

in general.

[885] Affects, however, are by no means the only distinguishing mark of

the human psyche. Characteristic data  can be expected from other

psychological phenomena as well,  the only requirement being that we

perceive and observe other functions as clearly as we do affects. In earlier

centuries, when the concept “psychology” as we know it today was entirely

lacking, all psychic functions other than affects were veiled in darkness,just as they still seem to be scarcely discernible subtleties for the great

majority of people today. Affects can be seen on the surface, and that is

enough for the unpsychological man—the man for whom the psyche of his

neighbour presents no problem. He is satisfied with seeing other people’s

affects; if he sees none, then the other person is psychologically invisible to

him because, apart from  affects, he can perceive nothing in the other’s

consciousness.

[886] The reason why we are able to discover other functions besides

affects in the psyche of our fellow men is that we ourselves have passed

from an “unproblematical” state of consciousness to a problematical one.

If we judge others only by affects, we show that our chief, and perhaps

only, criterion is affect. This means that the same criterion is also applicable

to our own psychology, which amounts to saying that our psychological

judgment is neither objective nor independent but is enslaved to affect.

This truth holds  good for the majority of men, and on it rests the

psychological possibility of murderous wars and the constant threat of their

recurrence. This must always be so as long as we judge the people “on the

other side” by our own affects. I call such a  state of consciousness

“unproblematical” because it has obviously never become a problem to

itself. It becomes a problem only when a doubt arises as to whether

affects—including our own affects—offer a satisfactory basis  for

psychological judgments. We are always

inclined to justify ourselves before anyone who holds us responsible for an

emotional action by saying that we acted only on an outburst of affect and

are not usually in that condition. When it concerns ourselves we are glad to

explain the affect as an exceptional condition of diminished responsibility

but are loath to make the same allowance for others. Even if this is a not

very edifying attempt to exculpate our beloved ego, there is still something

positive in the feeling of justification such an excuse affords: it is an attempt

to distinguish oneself from one’s own affect, and hence one’s fellow man

from his affect. Even if my excuse is only a subterfuge, it is nevertheless

an attempt to cast doubt on the validity of affect  as  the sole index  of 

personality,  and to  appeal to other psychic functions  that are just as

characteristic of it as the affect, if not more so. When a man judges us by

our affects, we readily accuse him of lack of understanding,  or even

injustice. But this puts us under an obligation not to judge others by their

affects either.[887] For this purpose the primitive, unpsychological man,  who regards

affects in himself and others as the only essential criterion, must develop a

problematical state of consciousness in which other factors besides affects

are recognized as valid. In this problematical state a paradoxical judgment

can be  formed: “I am this affect” and “this affect is not me.” This

antithesis expresses a splitting of the ego, or rather, a splitting of the psychic

material that constitutes the ego. By recognizing myself as much in my

affect as in something else that is not my affect, I differentiate an affective

factor from other psychic factors, and in so doing I bring the affect down

from its original heights of unlimited power into its proper place in the

hierarchy of psychic functions. Only when a man  has performed this

operation on himself, and has  distinguished between the various psychic

factors in himself, is he in a position to look around for other criteria in

his psychological judgment of others, instead of merely falling back on

affect. Only in this way is a really objective  psychological judgment

possible.

[888] What we call “psychology” today is a science that can be pursued

only on the basis of certain historical and moral premises laid down by

Christian education during the last two thousand years. A saying like “Judge

not, that ye be not judged,” inculcated by religion, has created the possibility

of a will which strives, in the last resort, for simple objectivity of

judgment. This objectivity, implying no mere indifference to  others but

based on the principle of excusing others as we do  ourselves, is the

prerequisite for a just judgment of our fellow men. You wonder perhaps why

I dwell so insistently on this question of objectivity, but you would cease to

wonder if ever you should try to classify people in practice. A man of

pronounced sanguine temperament will tell you that at bottom he is deeply

melancholic; a choleric, that his only fault consists in his having always

been too phlegmatic. But a classification in the validity of which I alone

believe is about as helpful as a universal church of which I am the sole

member. We have, therefore, to find criteria which can be accepted as

binding not only by the judging subject but also by the judged object.

[889] In complete contrast to the old system of  classification by

temperaments, the new typology begins with the explicit agreement neither

to allow oneself to be judged by affect nor to judge others by it, since no

one can declare himself finally identical with his affect. This creates a

problem, because it follows that, where affects are concerned, the generalagreement which science demands can never be  reached. We must,

therefore, look around for other factors as a criterion—factors to which we

appeal when we excuse ourselves for an emotional action. We say perhaps:

“Admittedly I said this or that in a state of affect, but of course I was

exaggerating and no harm was meant.” A very naughty child who has

caused his mother a lot of trouble might say: “I didn’t mean to, I didn’t

want to hurt you, I love you too much.”

[890] Such explanations appeal to the existence of a  different kind of

personality from the one that appeared in the  affect. In both cases the

affective personality appears as something inferior that seized hold of the

real ego and obscured it. But often the personality revealed in the affect is a

higher and better one, so much so that, regrettably, one cannot remain on

such a pinnacle of perfection. We all know those sudden fits of generosity,

altruism, self-sacrifice, and

similar “beautiful gestures” for which, as an ironical observer might remark,

one does not care to be held responsible—perhaps a reason why so many

people do so little good.

[891] But whether the affective personality be high or low, the affect is

considered an exceptional state whose qualities are represented either as a

falsification of the “real” personality or

as not belonging to it as an authentic attribute. What then is this “real”

personality? Obviously, it is partly that which  everyone distinguishes in

himself as separate from affect, and  partly that in everyone which is

dismissed as inauthentic in the judgment of others. Since it is impossible

to deny the pertinence of the affective state to the ego, it follows that the

ego is the same ego whether in the affective state or in the  so-called

“authentic” state, even though it displays a  differential attitude to these

psychological happenings. In the affective state it is unfree, driven, coerced.

By contrast, the normal state is a state of free will, with all one’s powers

at one’s disposal. In other words, the affective state is  unproblematical,

while the normal state is problematical: it comprises both the problem and

possibility of free choice. In  this latter state an understanding becomes

possible, because in it alone can one discern one’s motives and gain self-

knowledge. Discrimination is the sine qua non of  cognition. But

discrimination means splitting up the contents of consciousness into discrete

functions. Therefore, if we wish to define the psychological peculiarity of a

man in terms that will satisfy not only our own subjective judgment butalso the object judged, we must take as our criterion that state or attitude

which is felt by the object to be the conscious,  normal condition.

Accordingly, we shall make his conscious

motives our first concern, while eliminating as far as possible  our own

arbitrary interpretations.

[892] Proceeding thus we shall discover, after a time, that in spite of the

great variety of conscious motives and  tendencies, certain groups of

individuals can be distinguished  who are characterized by a striking

conformity of motivation. For example, we shall come upon individuals who

in all their judgments, perceptions, feelings, affects, and actions feel external

factors to be the predominant motivating force, or who at least give weight

to them no matter whether causal or final motives are in question. I will

give some examples of what I mean. St. Augustine: “I would not believe

the Gospel if the authority of the Catholic Church did not compel it.”

2 A dutiful daughter: “I could not allow myself to think anything that would

be displeasing to my father.” One man finds a piece of modern music

beautiful because everybody else pretends it is beautiful. Another marries in

order to please his parents but very much against his own interests. There

are people who contrive to make themselves ridiculous in order to amuse

others; they even prefer to make butts of themselves rather than remain

unnoticed. There are not a few who in everything they do or don’t do have

but one motive in mind: what will others think of them? “One need not be

ashamed of a thing if nobody knows about it.” There are some who can

find happiness only when it excites the envy of others; some who make

trouble for themselves in order to enjoy the sympathy of their friends.

[893] Such examples could be multiplied  indefinitely.  They  point to a

psychological peculiarity that can be sharply  distinguished from another

attitude which, by contrast, is motivated chiefly by internal or subjective

factors. A person

of this type might say: “I know I could give my father the  greatest

pleasure if I did so and so, but I don’t happen to think that way.” Or: “I see

that the weather has turned out bad, but in spite of it I shall carry out my

plan.” This type does not travel for pleasure but to execute a preconceived

idea. Or: “My book is probably incomprehensible, but it is perfectly clear

to me.” Or, going to the other extreme: “Everybody thinks I could do

something, but I know perfectly well I can do nothing.” Such a man can be

so ashamed of himself that he literally dares not meet people. There are somewho feel happy only when they are quite sure nobody knows about it, and to

them a thing is disagreeable just because it is pleasing to everyone else.

They seek the good where no one would think of finding it. At every step

the sanction of the subject must be obtained, and without it nothing can be

undertaken  or  carried out. Such a person would have replied to St.

Augustine: “I would believe the Gospel if the authority of the  Catholic

Church did not compel it.” Always he has to prove that everything he does

rests on his own decisions and  convictions,  and never because he is

influenced by  anyone, or  desires to please or conciliate some person or

opinion.

[894] This attitude characterizes a group of individuals whose motivations

are derived chiefly from the subject, from inner necessity. There is, finally, a

third group, and here it is hard to say whether the motivation comes chiefly

from within or without.

This group is the most numerous and includes the less differentiated normal

man, who is considered normal either  because he allows himself no

excesses or because he has no  need of them. The normal man is, by

definition, influenced as much from within as from without. He constitutes

the extensive middle group, on one side of which are those whose

motivations are determined mainly by the external object, and, on the

other, those whose motivations are determined from within. I call the first

group extraverted, and the second group introverted. The terms scarcely

require elucidation as they explain themselves from what has already been

said.

[895] Although there are doubtless individuals whose type  can be

recognized at first glance, this is by no means always the case. As a rule,

only careful observation and weighing of  the evidence permit a sure

classification. However simple and clear the fundamental principle of the

two opposing attitudes may be, in actual reality they are complicated and

hard to make out, because every individual is an exception to the rule. Hence

one can never give a description of a type, no matter how complete, that

would apply to more than one individual, despite the fact that in some ways

it aptly characterizes thousands of others. Conformity is one side of a man,

uniqueness is the other. Classification does not explain the  individual

psyche. Nevertheless, an understanding of psychological types opens the

way to a better understanding of human psychology in general.

[896] Type differentiation often begins very early, so early that in somecases one must speak of it as innate. The earliest sign of extraversion in a

child is his quick adaptation to the  environment, and the extraordinary

attention he gives to objects and especially to the effect he has on them.

Fear of  objects is minimal; he lives and moves among them with

confidence. His apprehension is quick but imprecise. He appears to develop

more rapidly than the introverted child,  since he is less reflective and

usually without fear. He feels no barrier between himself and objects, and

can therefore play with them freely and learn through them. He likes to carry

his

enterprises to the extreme and exposes himself to risks.  Everything

unknown is alluring.

[897] To reverse the picture, one of the earliest signs of introversion in a

child is a reflective, thoughtful manner,  marked shyness and even fear of

unknown objects. Very early there appears a tendency to assert himself over

familiar  objects, and attempts are made to master them. Everything

unknown is regarded with mistrust; outside influences are usually met

with violent resistance. The child wants his own  way, and under no

circumstances will he submit to an alien rule he cannot understand. When

he asks questions, it is not from curiosity or a desire to create a sensation,

but because he wants names, meanings, explanations to give him subjective

protection against the object. I have seen an introverted child who made his

first attempts to walk only after he had learned the names of all the objects in

the room he might touch. Thus  very early in an introverted child the

characteristic defensive  attitude can be noted which the adult introvert

displays towards the object; just as in an extraverted child one can very

early observe a marked assurance and initiative, a happy trustfulness in his

dealings with objects. This is indeed the basic feature of the extraverted

attitude: psychic life is, as it were, enacted outside the individual in objects

and objective  relationships. In extreme cases there is even a sort of

blindness for his own individuality. The introvert, on the contrary, always

acts as though the object possessed a  superior power over him against

which he has to defend himself. His real world is the inner one.

[898] Sad though it is, the two types are inclined to speak very badly of

one another. This fact will immediately strike anyone who investigates the

problem. And the reason is that

the psychic values have a diametrically opposite localization for the two

types. The introvert sees everything that is in any way valuable for him in thesubject; the extravert sees it in the object. This dependence on the object

seems to the introvert a  mark of the greatest inferiority, while to the

extravert the preoccupation with the subject seems nothing but infantile

auto-eroticism. So it is not surprising that the two types often come into

conflict. This does not, however, prevent most men from marrying women of

the opposite type. Such marriages  are very valuable as psychological

symbioses so long as the partners do not attempt a mutual “psychological”

understanding. But this

phase of understanding belongs to the normal development of every marriage

provided the partners have the necessary leisure or the necessary urge to

development—though even if both these are present real courage is needed

to risk a rupture of the marital peace. In favourable circumstances this

phase enters automatically into the lives of both types, for the reason that

each type is an example of one-sided development. The one develops only

external relations and neglects the inner; the other develops inwardly but

remains outwardly at a standstill. In time the need arises for the individual to

develop what has been neglected. The development takes the form of a

differentiation of certain functions, to which I must now turn in view of

their importance for the type problem.

[899] The conscious psyche is an apparatus for adaptation and orientation,

and consists of a number of different psychic functions. Among these we

can distinguish four basic ones: sensation, thinking, feeling, intuition.

Under sensation I include all perceptions by means of the sense organs; by

thinking I mean the function of intellectual cognition and the

forming of logical conclusions; feeling is a function of subjective valuation;

intuition I take as perception by way of the unconscious, or perception of

unconscious contents.

[900] So far as my experience goes, these four basic functions seem to me

sufficient to express and represent the  various modes of conscious

orientation. For complete orientation all four functions should contribute

equally: thinking should facilitate cognition and judgment, feeling should tell

us how and to what extent a thing is important or  unimportant for us,

sensation should convey concrete reality  to us through seeing, hearing,

tasting, etc., and intuition should enable us to divine the hidden possibilities

in the background, since these too belong to the complete picture of a given

situation.

[901] In reality, however, these basic functions are seldom  or neveruniformly differentiated and equally at our disposal. As a rule one or the

other function occupies the foreground,  while the rest remain

undifferentiated in the background.  Thus there are many people who

restrict themselves to the  simple perception of concrete reality, without

thinking about it or taking feeling values into account. They bother just as

little about the possibilities hidden in a situation. I describe such people as

sensation types. Others are exclusively oriented by what they  think, and

simply cannot adapt to a situation which they are  unable to understand

intellectually. I call such people thinking types. Others, again, are guided in

everything entirely by feeling. They merely ask themselves whether a thing

is pleasant or unpleasant, and orient themselves by their feeling impressions.

These are the feeling types. Finally, the intuitives concern themselves neither

with ideas nor with feeling

reactions, nor yet with the reality of things, but surrender  themselves

wholly to the lure of possibilities, and abandon every situation in which

no further possibilities can be scented.

[902] Each of these types represents a different kind of one-sidedness,

but one which is linked up with and complicated in a peculiar way by the

introverted or extraverted attitude. It was because of this complication that I

had to mention these function-types, and this brings us back to the question

of the one-sidedness of the introverted and extraverted attitudes. This one-

sidedness would lead to a complete loss of psychic balance if it were not

compensated  by an unconscious counterposition. Investigation of the

unconscious has shown, for example, that alongside or behind the introvert’s

conscious attitude there is an unconscious  extraverted attitude which

automatically compensates his conscious one-sidedness.

[903] Though one can, in practice, intuit the existence of a  general

introverted or extraverted attitude, an exact scientific  investigator cannot

rest content with an intuition but must concern himself with the actual

material presented. We then  discover that no individual is simply

introverted or extraverted, but that he is so in one of his functions. Take a

thinking type, for example: most of the conscious material he presents for  

observation consists of thoughts,  conclusions,  reflections, as well as

actions, affects, valuations, and perceptions of an intellectual nature, or at

least the material is directly dependent on intellectual premises. We must

interpret  the nature of his general attitude from the peculiarity of this

material. The material presented by a feeling type will be of a different kind,that is, feelings and emotional contents of all

sorts, thoughts, reflections, and perceptions dependent on  emotional

premises. Only from the peculiar nature of his feelings shall we be able to

tell to which of the attitude-types he belongs. That

is why I mention these function-types here, because in individual cases the

introverted and extraverted attitudes can never be demonstrated per se; they

appear only as the  peculiarity of the predominating conscious function.

Similarly, there is no general attitude of the unconscious, but only typically

modified forms of unconscious functions, and  only through the

investigation of the unconscious functions and their peculiarities can the

unconscious attitude be scientifically established.

[904] It is hardly possible to speak of typical unconscious  functions,

although in the economy of the psyche one has to attribute some function to

the unconscious. It is best, I think, to express oneself rather cautiously in this

respect, and I would not go beyond the statement that the unconscious, so

far as we can see at present, has a compensatory function to consciousness.

What the unconscious is in itself is an idle speculation. By its very nature

it is beyond all cognition. We  merely postulate its existence from its

products, such as dreams and fantasies. But it is a well-established fact of

scientific experience that dreams, for example, practically always have a

content that could correct the conscious attitude, and this justifies us in

speaking of a compensatory function of the unconscious.

[905] Besides this general function, the unconscious also  possesses

functions that can become conscious under other conditions. The thinking

type, for instance, must necessarily repress and exclude feeling as far as

possible, since nothing

disturbs thinking so much as feeling, and the feeling type  represses

thinking, since nothing is more injurious to feeling than thinking. Repressed

functions lapse into the unconscious. Just as only one of the four sons of

Horus had a human head,

3 so as a rule only one of the four basic functions is fully conscious and

  differentiated enough to be freely manipulable  by the will, the others

  remaining partially or wholly unconscious. This “unconsciousness” does

not mean that a thinking type, for instance, is not conscious of his

  feelings. He knows his feelings very well, in so far as he is capable of

  introspection, but he denies them any validity and declares they have no

influence over him. They therefore come upon him against his will, andbeing spontaneous and autonomous, they finally appropriate to themselves

the validity which his consciousness denies them. They are activated by

unconscious stimulation, and form indeed a sort of counterpersonality whose

existence can be established only  by analysing the products of the

unconscious.

[906] When a function is not at one’s disposal, when it is felt as something

that disturbs the differentiated function,  suddenly appearing and then

vanishing again fitfully, when it has an obsessive character, or remains

obstinately in hiding when most needed—it then has all the qualities of a

quasi-unconscious function. Other peculiarities may be noted: there is always

something inauthentic about it, as it contains elements that do not properly

belong to it. Thus the unconscious feelings of the thinking type are of a

singularly fantastic nature, often in grotesque contrast to the excessively

rationalistic intellectualism of his conscious attitude. His conscious thinking

is purposive and controlled, but his feeling  is impulsive, uncontrolled,

moody, irrational, primitive, and just as archaic as the feelings of a savage.

[907] The same is true of every function that is repressed  into the

unconscious. It remains undeveloped, fused together  with elements not

properly belonging to it, in an archaic condition—for the unconscious is the

residue of unconquered nature in us, just as it is also the matrix of our

unborn future. The undeveloped functions are always the seminal ones, so it

is no wonder that sometime in the course of life the need will be felt to

supplement and alter the conscious attitude.

[908] Apart from the qualities I have mentioned, the  undeveloped

functions possess the further peculiarity that, when the conscious attitude

is introverted, they are  extraverted and vice versa. One could therefore

expect to find extraverted feelings in an introverted intellectual, and this was

aptly expressed by just such a type when he said: “Before dinner I am a

Kantian, but after dinner a Nietzschean.” In his habitual attitude, that is to

say, he is an intellectual, but under  the stimulating influence of a good

dinner a Dionysian wave breaks through his conscious attitude.

[909] It is just here that we meet with a great difficulty in diagnosing the

types. The observer sees both the manifestations of the conscious attitude

and the autonomous phenomena of the unconscious, and he will be at a loss

as to what he should

ascribe to the conscious and what to the unconscious. A  differential

diagnosis can be based only on a careful study of  the qualities of theobserved material. We must try to discover which phenomena result from

consciously chosen motives and which are spontaneous; and it must also

be established  which of them are adapted, and which of them have an

unadapted, archaic character.

[910] It will now be sufficiently clear that the qualities of  the main

conscious function, i.e., of the conscious attitude as a whole, are in strict

contrast to those of the unconscious attitude. In other words, we can say

that between the  conscious and the unconscious there is normally an

opposition. This opposition, however, is not perceived as a conflict so long

as the conscious attitude is not too one-sided and not too remote from that

of the unconscious. But if the  contrary should be the case, then the

Kantian will be  disagreeably surprised by his Dionysian counterpart,

which  will begin to develop highly unsuitable impulses. His

consciousness will then feel obliged to suppress these  autonomous

manifestations, and thus the conflict situation is  created. Once the

unconscious gets into active opposition to consciousness, it simply refuses

to be suppressed. It is true that certain manifestations which consciousness

has marked down are not particularly difficult to suppress, but then the

unconscious impulses simply seek other outlets that are less  easy to

recognize. And once these false safety valves are opened, one is already

on the way to neurosis. The indirect outlets can, of course, each be made

accessible to understanding by analysis and subjected again to conscious

suppression. But that does not extinguish their instinctual dynamism; it is

merely pushed still further into the background, unless an understanding of

the indirect route  taken by the unconscious impulses brings with it an

understanding of the one-sidedness of the conscious attitude. The one should

alter the other, for it was just this  one-sidedness that activated the

unconscious opposition in the first place, and insight into the unconscious

impulses is useful only when it effectively compensates that one-sidedness.

[911] The alteration of the conscious attitude is no light matter, because

any habitual attitude is essentially a more or less conscious ideal, sanctified

by custom and historical tradition, and

founded on the bedrock of one’s innate temperament. The  conscious

attitude is always in the nature of a Weltanschauung, if it is not explicitly a

religion. It is this that  makes the type problem so important. The

opposition between the types is not merely an external conflict between

men, it is the source of endless inner conflicts; the cause not  only ofexternal disputes and dislikes, but of nervous ills and psychic suffering. It is

this fact, too, that obliges us physicians  constantly to widen our medical

horizon and to include within it not only general  psychological standpoints  

but also questions concerning one’s views of life and the world.

[912] Within the space of a lecture I cannot, of course, give you any idea of

the depth and scope of these problems. I must content myself with a general

survey of the main facts and their implications. For a fuller elaboration of

the whole problem I must refer you to my book Psychological Types.

[913] Recapitulating, I would like to stress that each of the two general

attitudes, introversion and extraversion, manifests itself in a special way in an

individual through the  predominance of one of the four basic functions.

Strictly speaking, there are no introverts and extraverts pure and simple, but

only introverted and extraverted function-types,  such as thinking types,

sensation types, etc. There are thus at  least eight clearly distinguishable

types. Obviously one could  increase this number at will if each of the

functions were split into three subgroups, which would not be impossible

empirically. One could, for example, easily divide thinking

into its three well-known forms: intuitive and speculative,  logical and

mathematical, empirical and positivist, the last being mainly dependent on

sense perception. Similar subgroups could be made of the other functions, as

in the case of intuition, which has an intellectual as well as an emotional and

sensory aspect. In this way a large number of types could be established,

each new division becoming increasingly subtle.

[914] For the sake of completeness, I must add that I do not regard the

classification of types according to introversion and extraversion and the

four basic functions as the only possible one. Any other psychological

criterion could serve just as well as a classifier, although, in my view, no

other possesses so great a practical significance.                                            3

  A PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF TYPES

1

[915] Character is the fixed individual form of a human being. Since this

form is compounded of body and mind, a general characterology must

teach the significance of both physical and psychic features. The enigmatic

oneness of the living organism has as its corollary the fact that bodily traits

are not merely physical, nor mental traits merely psychic. The continuity of

nature knows nothing of those antithetical distinctions which the human

intellect is forced to set up as aids to understanding.

[916] The distinction between  mind and body is an artificial dichotomy,

an act of discrimination based far more on the peculiarity of intellectual

cognition than on the nature  of things. In fact, so intimate is the

intermingling of bodily and psychic traits that not only can we draw far-

reaching inferences as to the constitution of the psyche from the constitution

of the body, but we can also infer from psychic  peculiarities the

corresponding bodily characteristics. It is true that the latter process is far

more difficult, not because the body is less influenced by the psyche than

the psyche by the body, but for quite another reason. In taking the psyche as

our starting-point, we work from the relatively unknown to the known;

while in the opposite case we have the advantage of

starting from something known, that is, from the visible body. Despite all the

psychology we think we possess today, the psyche is still infinitely more

obscure to us than the visible surface of the body. The psyche is still a

foreign, barely explored country of

which we have only indirect knowledge, mediated by conscious functions

that are open to almost endless possibilities of deception.

[917] This being so, it seems safer to proceed from outside inwards, from

the known to the unknown, from the body to the psyche. Thus all attempts

at characterology have started from the outside world; astrology, in ancient

times, even started from interstellar space in order to arrive at those lines of

fate whose beginnings lie in the human heart. To the same  class of

interpretations from outward signs belong palmistry,  Gall’s phrenology,

Lavater’s physiognomy, and—more  recently—graphology, Kretschmer’s

physiological types, and Rorschach’s klexographic method. As we can see,there are  any number of paths leading from outside inwards, from the

physical to the psychic, and it is necessary that research should follow this

direction until the elementary psychic facts are established with sufficient

certainty. But once having  established these facts, we can reverse the

procedure. We can then put the question: What are the bodily correlatives

of a given psychic condition? Unfortunately we are not yet far enough

advanced to give even an approximate answer. The first requirement is to

establish the primary facts of psychic life, and this is far from having been

accomplished. Indeed, we have only just begun the work of compiling an

inventory of the psyche, not always with great success.

[918] Merely to establish the fact that certain people have  this or that

physical appearance is of no significance if it does not allow us to infer a

psychic correlative. We have learned  something only when we have

determined what psychic attributes go with a given bodily constitution. The

body means as little to us without the psyche as the latter without the body.

But when we try to infer a psychic correlative from a physical characteristic,

we are proceeding—as already stated—from the known to the unknown.

[919] I must, unfortunately, stress this point, since  psychology is the

youngest of the sciences and therefore the  one that suffers most from

preconceived opinions. The fact that we have only recently discovered

psychology tells us plainly enough that it has taken us all this time to

make a clear distinction between ourselves and the content of our minds.

Until this could

be done, it was impossible to study the psyche objectively. Psychology, as

a science, is actually our most recent acquisition; up to now it has been

just as fantastic and arbitrary as was natural science in the Middle Ages. It

was believed that psychology could be created as it were by  decree—a

prejudice under which we are still labouring. Psychic life is, after all, what

is most immediate to us, and apparently what we know most about. Indeed,

it is more than familiar, we yawn over it. We are irritated by the banality of

its everlasting commonplaces; they bore us to extinction and  we do

everything in our power to avoid thinking about them. The psyche being

immediacy itself, and we ourselves being the psyche, we are almost forced

to assume that we know it through and through in a way that cannot be

doubted or questioned. That is why each of us has his own private opinion

about psychology and is even convinced that he

knows more about it than anyone else. Psychiatrists, because  they muststruggle with their patients’ relatives and guardians whose “understanding”

is proverbial, are perhaps the first to become aware as a professional group

of that blind prejudice which encourages every man to take himself as his

own best authority in psychological matters. But this of course does not

prevent the psychiatrist also from becoming a “know-all.” One of them

even went so far as to confess: “There are only two normal people in this

city—Professor B. is the other.”

[920] Since this is how matters stand in psychology today, we must bring

ourselves to admit that what is closest to us, the psyche, is the very thing

we know least about, although it seems to be what we know best of all, and

furthermore that everyone else probably understands it better than we do

ourselves. At any rate that, for a start, would be a most useful  heuristic

principle. As I have said, it is just because the psyche is so close to us that

psychology has been discovered so late. And because it is still in its initial

stages as a science, we lack the concepts and definitions with which to grasp

the facts. If concepts are lacking, facts are not; on the contrary, we are

surrounded—almost buried—by facts. This is in striking contrast to the state

of affairs in other sciences, where the facts have first to be unearthed. Here

the classification of primary data results in the formation of descriptive

concepts covering certain

natural orders, as, for example, the grouping of the elements in chemistry

and of plant families in botany. But it is quite different in the case of the

psyche. Here an empirical and descriptive method merely plunges us into

the ceaseless stream of subjective psychic happenings, so that whenever

any sort of generalizing concept emerges from this welter of impressions it

is usually nothing more than a symptom.

Because we ourselves are psyches, it is almost impossible to us to give free

rein to psychic happenings without being dissolved in them and thus robbed

of our ability to recognize distinctions and make comparisons.

[921] This is one difficulty. The other is that the more we turn from spatial

phenomena to the non-spatiality of the  psyche, the more impossible it

becomes to determine anything by exact measurement. It becomes difficult

even to  establish the facts. If, for example, I want to emphasize the

unreality of something, I say that I merely “thought” it. I say: “I would never

even have had this thought unless such and  such had happened; and

besides, I never think things like that.” Remarks of this kind are quite

usual, and they show how nebulous psychic facts are, or rather, howvague they appear subjectively—for in reality they are just as objective and

just as definite as any other events. The truth is that I actually did think

such and such a thing, regardless of the conditions and provisos I attach to

this process. Many people have to wrestle with themselves in order to

make this perfectly obvious admission, and it often costs them a great

moral effort. These, then, are the difficulties we encounter when we draw

inferences about the state of affairs in the psyche from the known things

we observe outside.

[922] My more limited field of work is not the clinical study of external  

characteristics, but the investigation and classification of the psychic data

which may be inferred from  them. The first result of this work is a

phenomenology of the  psyche, which  enables us to  formulate a

corresponding theory about its structure. From  the empirical application of

this structural theory there is finally developed a psychological typology.

[923] Clinical studies are based on the description of symptoms, and the

step from this to a phenomenology of the psyche is comparable to the step

from a purely symptomatic pathology

to the pathology of cellular and metabolic processes. That is to say, the

phenomenology of the psyche brings into view those psychic processes in

the background which underlie the  clinical symptoms. As is generally

known, this knowledge is  obtained by the application of analytical

methods. We have today a working knowledge of the psychic processes

that produce psychogenic symptoms, and have thus laid the foundations for

a theory of complexes. Whatever else may be taking place in the obscure

recesses of the psyche—and there are notoriously many opinions about this

—one thing is certain: it is the complexes (emotionally-toned contents

having a certain amount of autonomy) which play the most important part

here. The term “autonomous complex” has  often met with opposition,

unjustifiably, it seems to me, because the active contents of the unconscious

do behave in a way I cannot describe better than by the word “autonomous.”

The term is meant to indicate the capacity of the complexes to  resist

conscious intentions, and to come and go as they please. Judging by all we

know about them, they are psychic entities which are outside the control of

the conscious mind. They have been split off from consciousness and lead

a separate existence in the dark realm of the unconscious, being at all

times ready to hinder or reinforce the conscious functioning.

[924] A deeper study of the complexes leads logically to the problem oftheir origin, and as to this a number of  different theories are current.

Theories apart, experience shows that complexes always contain something

like a conflict, or at least are either the cause or the effect of a

conflict. At any rate the characteristics of conflict—shock,  upheaval,

mental agony, inner strife—are peculiar to the complexes. They are the

“sore spots,” the bêtes noires, the “skeletons in the cupboard” which we

do not like to remember and  still  less  to  be reminded  of by others,  but

which frequently come back to mind unbidden and in the  most

unwelcome fashion. They always contain memories, wishes, fears, duties,

needs, or insights which somehow we can never really grapple with, and

for this reason they  constantly interfere with our conscious life in a

disturbing and usually a harmful way.

[925] Complexes obviously represent a kind of inferiority in the broadest

sense—a statement I must at once qualify by saying

that to have complexes does not necessarily indicate  inferiority. It only

means that something discordant,  unassimilated, and antagonistic exists,

perhaps as an obstacle, but also as an incentive to greater effort, and so,

perhaps, to  new possibilities of achievement. In this sense, therefore,

complexes are focal or nodal points of psychic life which we would not

wish to do without; indeed, they should not be missing, for otherwise

psychic activity would come to a fatal  standstill. They point to the

unresolved problems in the individual, the places where he has suffered a

defeat, at least for the time being, and where there is something he cannot

evade or overcome—his weak spots in every sense of the word.

[926] These characteristics of the complex throw a significant light on its

origin. It obviously arises from the clash between a demand of adaptation

and the individual’s constitutional inability to meet the challenge. Seen in

this

light, the complex is a valuable symptom which helps us to diagnose an

individual disposition.

[927] Experience shows us that complexes are infinitely  varied, yet

careful comparison reveals a relatively small  number of typical primary

forms, which are all built upon the first experiences of childhood. This must

necessarily be so, because the individual disposition is already a factor in

infancy; it is innate, and not acquired in the course of life. The  parental

complex is therefore nothing but the first manifestation of a clash between

reality and the individual’s constitutional inability to meet the demands itmakes upon him. The primary form of the complex cannot be other than a

parental complex, because the parents are the first reality with which the child

comes into conflict.

[928] The existence of a parental complex therefore tells us little or nothing

about the peculiar constitution of the individual. Practical experience soon

teaches us that the crux of the matter does not lie in the presence of a

parental complex, but rather in the special way in which the complex works

itself out in the individual’s life. And here we observe the most striking

variations, though only a very small number can be attributed to the special

nature of the parental influence. There are often several children who are

exposed to the same influence, and yet each of them reacts to it in a

totally different way.

[929] I therefore turned my attention to these differences, telling myself

that it is through them that the peculiarities of the individual dispositions

may be discerned. Why, in a neurotic family, does one child react with

hysteria, another with a compulsion neurosis, the third with a psychosis,

and

the fourth apparently not at all? This problem of the “choice of neurosis,”

which Freud was also faced with, robs the parental complex as such of its

aetiological significance, and shifts the inquiry to the reacting individual

and his special disposition.

[930] Although Freud’s attempts to solve this problem leave me entirely

dissatisfied, I am myself unable to answer the question. Indeed, I think it

premature to raise the question of the choice of neurosis at all. Before we

tackle this extremely difficult problem we need to know a great deal more

about the way the individual reacts. The question is: How does a person

react to an obstacle? For instance, we come to a brook over which there is

no bridge. It is too broad to step across, so we must jump. For this purpose

we have at our disposal a complicated functional system, namely, the

psychomotor system. It is fully developed and needs only to be triggered

off. But before this happens, something of a purely psychic nature takes

place: a decision is made about what is to be done. This is followed by

those crucial events which settle the matter in some way and vary with each

individual. But, significantly enough, we rarely if ever  recognize these

events as characteristic, for as a rule we do not see ourselves at all or only

as a last resort. That is to say, just as the psychomotor apparatus is habitually

at our disposal for jumping, there is an exclusively psychic apparatus readyfor use in making decisions, which functions by habit and  therefore

unconsciously.

[931] Opinions differ widely as to what this apparatus is like. It is certain

only that every individual has his accustomed way of making decisions and

dealing with difficulties. One person will say he jumped the brook for fun;

another, that there was no alternative; a third, that every obstacle he meets

challenges him to overcome it. A fourth did not jump the brook because he

dislikes useless effort, and a  fifth refrained because he saw no urgent

necessity to get to the other side.

[932] I have purposely chosen this commonplace example  in order to

demonstrate how irrelevant such motivations seem.

They appear so futile that we are inclined to brush them aside  and to

substitute our own explanation. And yet it is just these variations that give

us valuable insights into the individual psychic systems of adaptation. If

we observe, in other situations of life, the person who jumped the brook

for fun, we shall probably find that for the most part everything he does or

omits to do can be explained in terms of the pleasure it gives him. We shall

observe  that the one who jumped  because he saw no alternative goes

through life cautiously and apprehensively, always deciding faute de mieux.

And so on. In all these cases special psychic systems are in readiness to

execute the decisions. We can easily imagine that the  number of these

attitudes is legion. The individual attitudes are certainly as inexhaustible

as the variations of crystals,  which may nevertheless be recognized as

belonging to one or  another system. But just as crystals show basic

uniformities  which are relatively simple, these attitudes show certain

fundamental peculiarities which allow us to assign them to definite groups.

[933] From earliest times attempts have been made to classify individuals

according to types, and so to bring order into the chaos. The oldest attempts

known to us were made by oriental astrologers who devised the so-called

trigons of the

four elements—air, water, earth, and fire. The air trigon in the horoscope

consists of the three aerial signs of the zodiac, Aquarius, Gemini, Libra;

the fire trigon is made up of Aries, Leo, Sagittarius. According to this age-

old view, whoever is born in these trigons shares in their aerial or fiery

nature and  will have a corresponding temperament and fate. Closely

connected with this ancient cosmological scheme is the  physiological

typology of antiquity, the division into four temperaments corresponding tothe four humours. What was first represented by the signs of the zodiac was

later expressed in the physiological language of Greek medicine, giving us

the classification into the phlegmatic, sanguine, choleric, and melancholic.

These are simply designations for the secretions of the body. As is well

known, this typology lasted at least seventeen hundred years. As for the

astrological type theory,  to the astonishment of the enlightened it still

remains intact today, and is even enjoying a new vogue.

[934] This historical retrospect may serve to assure us that our

modern attempts to formulate a theory of types are by no means new and

unprecedented, even though our scientific conscience does not permit us to

revert to these old, intuitive ways of thinking. We must find our own answer

to this problem, an answer which satisfies the need of science. And here we

meet the chief difficulty of the problem of types—that is, the question of

standards or criteria. The astrological criterion was simple and objective: it

was given by the constellations at birth. As to the way characterological

qualities could be correlated with the zodiacal signs and the planets, this is

a question which reaches back into the grey  mists of prehistory and

remains unanswerable. The Greek  classification according to the four

physiological

temperaments took as its criteria the appearance and  behaviour of the

individual, exactly as we do today in the case of physiological typology. But

where shall we seek our criterion for a psychological theory of types?

[935] Let us return to the example of the four people who had to cross a

brook. How and from what standpoints are we to classify their habitual

motivations? One person does it for fun, another does it because not to do it

is more troublesome, a third doesn’t do it because he has second thoughts,

and so  on.  The list of possibilities seems both endless  and useless for

purposes of classification.

[936] I do not know how other people would set about this task. I can only

tell you how I myself have tackled it, and I must bow to the charge that my

way of solving the problem is the outcome of my personal prejudice. This

objection is so entirely true that I would not know how to defend myself. I

can only point happily to old Columbus, who, following his  subjective

assumptions, a false hypothesis, and a route  abandoned by modern

navigation, nevertheless discovered  America.  Whatever  we  look  at, and

however we look at it, we see only through our own eyes. For this reason

science is never made by one man, but many. The individual merelyoffers his own contribution, and it is only in this sense that I dare to speak of

my way of seeing things.

[937] My  profession  has  always obliged  me  to  take account  of the

peculiarities of individuals, and the special circumstance that in the course

of I don’t know how many years I have had to treat innumerable married

couples and have been faced

with the task of making husband and wife plausible to each  other has

emphasized the need to establish certain average truths. How many times,

for instance, have I not had to say: “Look here, your wife has a very active

nature, and it cannot be expected that her whole life should centre on

housekeeping.” That is a sort of statistical truth, and it holds the beginnings

of a type theory: there are active natures and passive natures. But this time-

worn truth did not satisfy me.  My next attempt was to say that some

persons are reflective and others are unreflective, because I had observed that

many apparently passive natures are in reality not so much passive as given

to forethought. They first consider a situation and then act, and because

they do this habitually they miss opportunities where immediate action

without reflection is called for, thus coming to be prejudged as passive. The

persons who did not reflect always seemed to me to jump headfirst into a

situation without any forethought, only to reflect afterwards that they had

perhaps landed themselves in  a swamp. Thus they could be considered

“unreflective,” and this seemed a more appropriate word than “active.”

Forethought is in certain cases a very important form of  activity, a

responsible course of action as compared with the unthinking, short-lived

zeal of the mere busybody. But I soon discovered that the hesitation of the

one was by no means always forethought, and that the quick action of the

other was not necessarily want of reflection. The hesitation equally often

arises from a habitual timidity, or at least from a customary shrinking back

as if faced with too great a task; while immediate action is frequently made

possible by a predominating self-confidence in relation to the object. This

observation caused me to formulate these typical differences  in the

following way: there is a whole class of men who, at  the moment of

reaction to a given situation, at first draw back

a little as if with an unvoiced “No,” and only after that are able to react;

and there is another class who, in the same situation, come out with an

immediate reaction, apparently quite confident that their behaviour is self-

evidently right. The former class would therefore be characterized by anegative relation to the object, and the latter by a positive one.

[938] The former class corresponds to the introverted and the second to the

extraverted attitude. But these two terms in themselves signify as little as the

discovery of Molière’s bourgeois gentilhomme that he ordinarily spoke in

prose. They acquire meaning and value only when we know all the other

characteristics that go with the type.

[939] One cannot be introverted or extraverted without being so in every

respect. For example, to be “introverted”  means that everything in the

psyche happens as it must happen according to the law of the introvert’s

nature. Were  that not so, the statement that a certain individual is

“introverted” would be as irrelevant as the statement that he is six feet tall, or

that he has brown hair, or is brachycephalic. These statements contain no

more than the facts they express. The term “introverted” is incomparably

more exacting. It means that the consciousness as well as the unconscious

of  the introvert must have certain definite qualities, that his  general

behaviour, his relation to people, and even the course of his life show certain

typical characteristics.

[940] Introversion or extraversion, as a typical attitude, means an essential

bias which conditions the whole psychic process, establishes the habitual

mode of reaction, and thus determines not only the style of behaviour but

also the quality

of subjective experience. Not only that, it determines the kind  of

compensation the unconscious will produce.

[941] Once we have established the habitual mode of reaction it is bound to

hit the mark to a certain extent, because habit is, so to speak, the central

switchboard from which outward behaviour is regulated and by which

specific  experiences are shaped. A certain kind of behaviour brings

corresponding results, and the subjective understanding of these results

gives rise to experiences which in turn influence  our behaviour, in

accordance with the saying “Every man is the maker of his own fate.”

[942] While there can be little doubt that the habitual mode of reaction brings

us to the central point, the delicate question remains as to whether or not we

have satisfactorily  characterized it by the term “introverted” or

“extraverted.” There can be a honest difference of opinion about this even

among those with an intimate knowledge of this special field. In my book on

types I have put together everything I could find in support of my views,

though I expressly stated that I do not imagine mine to be the only true orpossible typology.

[943] The contrast between introversion and extraversion is simple enough,

but simple formulations are unfortunately the most open to doubt. They all

too easily cover up the actual complexities and so deceive us. I speak here

from my own experience, for scarcely had I published the first formulation

of my criteria

2 when I discovered to my dismay that somehow or other I had been taken

in by them. Something was amiss. I had tried to explain too much in too

simple a way, as often happens in the first joy of discovery.

[944] What struck me now was the undeniable fact while people may be

classed as introverts or extraverts, this does  not account for the

tremendous differences between  individuals in either class. So great,

indeed, are these  differences that I was forced to doubt whether I had

observed correctly in the first place. It took nearly ten years of observation

and comparison to clear up this doubt.

[945] The question as to where the tremendous differences  among

individuals of the same type came from entangled me  in unforeseen

difficulties which for a long time I was unable to master. To observe and

recognize the differences gave me comparatively little trouble, the root of

my difficulties being now, as before, the problem of criteria. How was I to

find suitable terms for the characteristic differences? Here I realized for the

first time how young psychology really is. It is still little more than a chaos

of arbitrary opinions and dogmas, produced for the most part in the study or

consulting room by spontaneous generation from the isolated and Jove-like

brains of learned professors, with complete lack of  agreement. Without

wishing to be irreverent, I cannot refrain from confronting the professor of

psychology with, say, the psychology of women, of the Chinese, or of the

Australian  aborigines. Our psychology must get down to brass tacks,

otherwise we simply remain stuck in the Middle Ages.

[946] I realized that no sound criteria were to be found in the chaos of

contemporary psychology, that they had first to be created, not out of thin

air, but on the basis of the invaluable preparatory work done by many men

whose names no history of psychology will pass over in silence.

[947] Within the limits of a lecture I cannot possibly  mention all the

separate observations that led me to pick out certain

psychic functions as criteria for the differences under discussion. I will only

state very broadly what the essential differences are, so far as I have beenable to ascertain them. An introvert, for example, does not simply draw

back and hesitate before the object, but he does so in a quite definite way.

Moreover he does not behave just like every other introvert, but again in a

way peculiar to himself. Just as the lion strikes down his enemy or his prey

with his fore-paw, in which his specific strength resides, and not with his

tail like  the crocodile, so our habitual mode of reaction is normally

characterized by the use of our most reliable and efficient function, which

is an expression of our particular strength. However, this does not prevent

us from reacting occasionally in a way that reveals our specific weakness.

According to  which function predominates, we shall seek out certain

situations while avoiding others, and shall thus have experiences specific to

ourselves and different from those of other people. An intelligent man will

adapt to the world  through his intelligence, and not like a sixth-rate

pugilist, even though now and then, in a fit of rage, he may make use of his

fists. In the struggle for existence and adaptation everyone instinctively uses

his most developed function,  which thus becomes the criterion of his

habitual mode of reaction.

[948] How are we to sum up these functions under general concepts, so that

they can be distinguished from the welter of merely individual events? A

rough typization of this kind has long since existed in social life, in the

figures of the peasant, the worker, the artist, the scholar, the fighter, and so

forth, or

in the various professions. But this sort of typization has little or nothing to

do with psychology, for, as a well-known savant once maliciously remarked,

there are certain scholars who are no more than “intellectual porters.”

[949] A type theory must be more subtle. It is not enough, for example, to

speak of intelligence, for this is too general  and too vague a concept.

Almost any kind of behaviour can be called intelligent if it works smoothly,

quickly, effectively and to a purpose. Intelligence, like stupidity, is not a

function but a modality; the word tells us no more than how a function is

working, not what is functioning. The same holds true of  moral and

aesthetic criteria. We must be able to designate what it is that functions

outstandingly in the individual’s habitual way

of reacting. We are thus forced to revert to something that at first glance

looks alarmingly like the old faculty psychology of the eighteenth century.

In reality, however, we are only returning to ideas current in daily speech,

perfectly accessible and comprehensible to everyone. When, for instance, Ispeak of “thinking,” it is only the philosopher who does not know what it

means; no layman will find it incomprehensible. He uses the word every

day, and always in the same general sense, though it is true he would be at

a loss if suddenly called upon to give an unequivocal definition of thinking.

The same is true of “memory” or “feeling.” However difficult it is to

define these purely psychological concepts scientifically,  they  are easily

intelligible in current speech. Language is a storehouse of concrete images;

hence concepts which are too abstract and nebulous do not easily take root

in it, or quickly die out again for lack of contact with reality. But thinking

and  feeling are such insistent realities that every language above  the

primitive level has absolutely unmistakable expressions

for them. We can therefore be sure that these expressions coincide with

quite definite psychic facts, no matter what the scientific definition of these

complex facts may be. Everyone knows, for example, what consciousness

means, and nobody  can doubt that it coincides with a definite psychic

condition, however far science may be from defining it satisfactorily.

[950] And so it came about that I simply took the concepts expressed in

current speech as designations for the corresponding psychic functions, and

used them as my criteria in judging the differences between persons of the

same attitude-type. For instance, I took thinking, as it is  generally

understood, because I was struck by the fact that many people habitually

do more thinking than others, and  accordingly give more weight to

thought when making important decisions. They also use their thinking in

order to understand the world and adapt to it, and whatever happens to them

is subjected to consideration and reflection or at least subordinated to some

principle sanctioned by thought. Other  people conspicuously neglect

thinking in favour of emotional factors, that is, of feeling. They invariably

follow a policy dictated by feeling, and it takes an extraordinary situation

to make them reflect. They form an unmistakable contrast to the other type,

and the difference

is most striking when the two are business partners or are married to each

other. It should be noted that a person may give preference to thinking

whether he be extraverted or introverted, but he will use it only in the way

that is characteristic of his attitude-type, and the same is true of feeling.

[951] The predominance of one or the other of these functions does not

explain all the differences that occur. What

I call the thinking and feeling types comprise two groups of persons whoagain have something in common which I cannot designate except by the

word rationality. No one will dispute that thinking is essentially rational, but

when we come to feeling, weighty objections may be raised which I would

not like to brush aside. On the contrary, I freely admit that this problem of

feeling has been one that has caused me much brain-racking. However, as I

do not want to overload my lecture with the various existing definitions of

this concept, I shall confine myself briefly to my own view. The chief

difficulty is that the word “feeling” can be used in all sorts of different ways.

This is especially true in German, but is noticeable to some extent in English

and French as well. First of all, then, we must make a careful distinction

between  feeling and sensation, which is a sensory function. And in the

second place we must recognize that a feeling of regret is something quite

different from a “feeling” that the weather will change or that the price of

our aluminum shares will go up. I have therefore proposed using feeling as a

proper term in the first example, and dropping it—so far as its psychological

usage is concerned—in the second. Here we should speak of sensation

when sense impressions are involved, and of intuition if we are dealing

with a kind of perception which  cannot be traced back directly to

conscious sensory experience. Hence I define sensation as perception via

conscious sensory functions, and intuition as perception via  the

unconscious.

[952] Obviously we could argue until Doomsday about the fitness of these

definitions, but ultimately it is only a question of terminology. It is as if we

were debating whether to call a certain animal a leopard or a panther, when

all we need to know is what name we are giving to what. Psychology is

virgin territory, and its terminology has still to be fixed. As  we know,

temperature can be measured according to Réaumur, Celsius, or Fahrenheit,

but we must indicate which system we are using.

[953] It  is  evident, then,  that  I  take  feeling  as a  function per  se and

distinguish it from sensation and intuition. Whoever confuses these last

two functions with feeling in the strict sense is obviously not in a position

to acknowledge the rationality of feeling. But once they are distinguished

from  feeling, it becomes quite clear that feeling values and feeling

judgments—indeed, feelings in general—are not only rational but can also

be as logical, consistent and discriminating as thinking. This may seem

strange to the thinking type, but it is easily explained when we realize  that

in a person with a differentiated thinking function the feeling function isalways less developed, more primitive, and therefore contaminated with

other functions, these being precisely the functions which are not rational,

not logical, and not discriminating or  evaluating, namely, sensation and

intuition. These two are by  their very nature opposed to the rational

functions. When we think, it is in order to judge or to reach a conclusion,

and when we feel it is in order to attach a proper value to  something.

Sensation and intuition, on the other hand, are perceptive functions—they

make us aware of what is happening, but do not interpret or evaluate it.

They do not proceed selectively, according to principles, but are simply

receptive to what happens. But “what happens” is essentially  irrational.

There is no inferential method by which it could ever be proved that there

must be so and so many planets, or so and so many species of warm-

blooded animals. Irrationality is a vice where thinking and feeling are

called

for, rationality is a vice where sensation and intuition should be trusted.

[954] Now there are many people whose habitual reactions are irrational

because they are based either on sensation or on intuition. They cannot be

based on both at once, because sensation is just as antagonistic to intuition

as thinking is to feeling. When I try to assure myself with my eyes and ears

of what is actually happening, I cannot at the same time give way to

dreams and fantasies about what lies around the corner. As this is just what

the intuitive type must do in order to give the necessary free play to his

unconscious or to the object, it is easy to see that the sensation type is at the

opposite pole to the intuitive. Unfortunately, time does not allow me to go

into the interesting variations which the extraverted or introverted attitude

produces in the irrational types.

[955] Instead, I would like to add a word about the effects  regularly

produced on the other functions when preference is given to one function.

We know that a man can never be  everything at  once,  never  quite

complete. He always develops certain qualities at the expense of others,

and wholeness is never attained. But what happens to those functions which

are  not consciously brought into daily use and are not developed  by

exercise? They remain in a more or less primitive and infantile state,

often only half conscious, or even quite  unconscious. These relatively

undeveloped functions constitute a specific inferiority which is characteristic

of each type and is an integral part of his total character. The one-sided

emphasis on thinking is always accompanied by an inferiority of feeling, anddifferentiated sensation is injurious to intuition and vice versa.

[956] Whether a function is differentiated or not can easily be recognized

from its strength, stability, consistency,  reliability, and adaptedness. But

inferiority in a function is often not so easy to recognize or to describe.

An essential  criterion is its lack of self-sufficiency and consequent

dependence on people and circumstances, its disposing us to moods and

crotchetiness, its unreliable use, its suggestible and labile character. The

inferior function always puts us at a disadvantage because we cannot direct

it, but are rather its victims.

[957] Since I must restrict myself here to a mere sketch of  the ideas

underlying a psychological theory of types, I must  forgo a detailed

description of each type. The total result of my work in this field up to the

present is the establishing of two general attitude-types, extraversion and

introversion, and  four function-types, thinking, feeling, sensation, and

intuition.  Each of these function-types varies according to the general

attitude and thus eight variants are produced.

[958] I have often been asked, almost accusingly, why I speak of four

functions and not of more or fewer. That there are exactly four was a result

I arrived at on purely empirical grounds. But as the following consideration

will show, these  four together produce a kind of totality. Sensation

establishes what is actually present, thinking enables us to recognize its

meaning, feeling tells us its value, and intuition points to possibilities as

to whence it came and whither it is going in a given situation.  In this way

we can orient ourselves with respect to

the immediate world as completely as when we locate a place geographically

by latitude and longitude. The four functions are somewhat like the four

points of the compass; they are

just as arbitrary and just as indispensable. Nothing prevents our shifting the

cardinal points as many degrees as we like in one direction or the other, or

giving them different names. It  is merely a question of convention and

intelligibility.

[959] But one thing I must confess: I would not for anything dispense

with this compass on my psychological voyages of discovery. This is not

merely for the obvious, all-too-human reason that everyone is in love with

his own ideas. I value the type theory for the objective reason that it

provides a system of comparison and orientation which makes  possible

something that has long been lacking, a critical psychology.                                            4                PSYCHOLOGICAL TYPOLOGY

1

[960] Ever since the early days of science, it has been a  notable

endeavour of the reflective intellect to interpose gradations between the two

poles of the absolute similarity and dissimilarity of human beings. This

resulted in a number of types, or “temperaments” as they were then called,

which classified similarities and dissimilarities into regular categories. The

Greek philosopher Empedocles attempted to impose order on the chaos of

natural phenomena by dividing them into the four elements: earth, water, air,

and fire. It was above all the physicians of ancient times who applied this

principle of order, in conjunction with the related doctrine of  the four

qualities, dry, moist, cold, warm, to human beings, and thus tried to reduce

the bewildering diversity of mankind to orderly groups. Of these physicians

one of the most  important was Galen, whose use of these teachings

influenced medical science and the treatment of the sick for nearly seventeen

hundred years. The very names of the Galenic temperaments betray their

origin in the pathology of the four  “humours.” Melancholic denotes a

preponderance of black bile, phlegmatic a preponderance of phlegm or

mucus (the Greek word phlegma means fire, and phlegm was regarded as the

end-product of inflammation), sanguine a preponderance  of blood, and

choleric a preponderance of choler, or yellow bile.

[961] Our modern conception of “temperament” has certainly become much

more psychological, since in the course of man’s development over the last

two thousand years  the “soul” has freed itself from any conceivable

connection with cold agues and fevers, or secretions of mucus and bile.

Not even the doctors

of today would equate a temperament, that is, a certain kind of emotional

state or excitability, directly with the constitution of the blood or lymph,

although their profession and their exclusive approach to human beings from

the side of physical illness tempt them, more often than the layman, to

regard the psyche as an end-product dependent on the physiology of the

glands. The “humours” of present-day medicine are no longer the old body-

secretions, but the more subtle hormones, which influence “temperament”

to an outstanding degree, if we define this as the sum-total of emotional

reactions. The whole make-up of the body, its constitution in the broadest

sense, has  in fact  a very  great deal  to do with the psychologicaltemperament, so much that we  cannot blame the doctors if they regard

psychic phenomena as largely dependent on the body. Somewhere the psyche

is  living body, and the living  body is animated matter;  somehow  and

somewhere there is an undiscoverable unity of psyche and body which

would need investigating psychically as well as physically; in other words,

this unity must be as dependent on the body as it is on the psyche so far as

the investigator is concerned. The materialism of the nineteenth century gave

the  body first place and relegated the psyche to the rank of  something

secondary and derived, allowing it no more substantiality than that of a so-

called “epiphenomenon.” What proved to be a good working hypothesis,

namely,  that psychic  phenomena are conditioned by physical processes,

became a philosophical presumption with the advent of materialism.

Any serious science of the living organism will reject this presumption;

for on the one hand it will constantly bear in mind that living matter is an

as yet unsolved mystery, and on the other hand it will be objective enough

to recognize that for us there is a completely unbridgeable gulf between

physical and psychic phenomena, so that the psychic realm is  no less

mysterious than the physical.

[962] The materialistic presumption became possible only in recent times,

after man’s conception of the psyche had, in the course of many centuries,

emancipated itself from the old  view and developed in an increasingly

abstract direction. The ancients could still see body and psyche together, as

an undivided unity, because they were closer to that primitive world where

no moral rift yet ran through the personality, and the

pagan could still feel himself indivisibly one, childishly  innocent and

unburdened by responsibility. The ancient Egyptians could still enjoy the

naïve luxury of a negative confession of sin: “I have not let any man go

hungry. I have not made anyone weep. I have not committed murder,” and so

on. The Homeric heroes wept, laughed, raged, outwitted and killed each

other in a world where these things were taken as natural and self-evident by

men and gods alike, and the Olympians amused themselves by passing their

days in a state of amaranthine irresponsibility.

[963] It was on this  archaic  level that  pre-philosophical  man lived and

experienced the world. He was entirely in the grip of his emotions. All

passions that made his blood boil and his heart pound, that accelerated his

breathing or took his breath away, that “turned his bowels to water”—all this

was a manifestation of the “soul.” Therefore he localized the soul inthe region of the diaphragm (in Greek phren, which also means mind)

2 and the heart. It was only with the first philosophers that the seat of reason

began to be assigned to the head. There are still Negroes today whose

  “thoughts” are localized principally in the belly, and the Pueblo Indians

  “think” with their hearts—“only madmen think with their heads,” they say.

3 On this level consciousness is essentially passion and the experience of

  oneness. Yet, serene and tragic at once, it was just this archaic man who,

having started to think, invented that dichotomy which Nietzsche laid at

the door of Zarathustra: the discovery of pairs of opposites, the division

into odd and even, above and below, good and evil. It was the work of the

old Pythagoreans, and it was their doctrine of moral responsibility and

the grave metaphysical consequences of sin that gradually, in the course of

the centuries, percolated through to all strata of the population, chiefly

  owing to the spread of the Orphic and Pythagorean mysteries. Plato even

used the parable of the white and black horses

4 to illustrate the intractability and polarity of the human psyche, and,

still earlier, the mysteries proclaimed the doctrine of the good rewarded

in the Hereafter

and of the wicked punished in hell. These teachings cannot be dismissed as

the mystical humbug of “backwoods” philosophers, as Nietzsche claimed,

or as so much sectarian  cant, for already in the sixth century B.C.

Pythagoreanism was something like a state religion throughout Graecia

Magna. Also, the ideas underlying its mysteries never died  out, but

underwent a philosophical renaissance in the second century B.C., when

they exercised the strongest influence on the Alexandrian world of thought.

Their collision with Old Testament prophecy then led to what one can call

the beginnings of Christianity as a world religion.

[964] From Hellenistic syncretism there now arose a classification of man

into types which was entirely alien to the “humoral” psychology of Greek

medicine. In the philosophical sense, it established gradations between the

Parmenidean poles of light and darkness, of above and below. It classified

men into hylikoi, psychikoi, and pneumatikoi—material, psychic, and

spiritual beings. This  classification is not, of course, a scientific

formulation of similarities and dissimilarities; it is a critical system of values

based not on the behaviour and outward appearance of man as a phenotype,

but on definitions of an ethical, mystical, and philosophic kind. Although

it is not exactly a “Christian” conception it nevertheless forms an integralpart of early  Christianity at the time of St. Paul. Its very existence is

incontrovertible proof of the split that had occurred in the original unity

of man as a being entirely in the grip of his emotions. Before this, he

was merely alive and there, the plaything of experience, incapable of any

reflective analysis concerning his origins and his destination. Now, suddenly,

he found himself confronted by three fateful factors and endowed with body,

soul, and spirit, to each of which he had moral obligations. Presumably it

was already decided at birth whether he would pass his life in the hylic or

the pneumatic state, or in the indeterminate centre between the two. The

ingrained dichotomy of the Greek mind had now become acute, with the

result that the accent shifted significantly to  the psychic and spiritual,

which was unavoidably split off from the hylic realm of the body. All the

highest and ultimate  goals lay in man’s moral destination, in a spiritual,

supramundane end-state, and the separation of the hylic realm broadened into

a

cleavage between world and spirit. Thus the original, suave  wisdom

expressed in the Pythagorean pairs of opposites

became a passionate moral conflict. Nothing, however, is so  apt to

challenge our self-awareness and alertness as being at war with oneself.

One can hardly think of any other or more  effective means of waking

humanity out of the irresponsible and innocent half-sleep of the primitive

mentality and bringing it to a state of conscious responsibility.

[965] This process is called cultural development. It is, at  any rate, a

development of man’s powers of discrimination and capacity for judgment,

and of consciousness in general.  With the increase of knowledge and

enhanced critical  faculties the foundations were laid for the whole

subsequent  development of the human mind in terms of intellectual

achievement. The particular mental product that far surpassed  all the 

achievements of  the ancient  world was science.  It closed the rift between

man and nature in the sense that, although he was separated from nature,

science enabled him to find his rightful place again in the natural order. His

special metaphysical position, however, had to be jettisoned—so far as it

was not secured by belief in the traditional religion—whence arose the

notorious conflict between “faith and knowledge.” At all events, science

brought about a  splendid rehabilitation of matter, and in this respect

materialism may even be regarded as an act of historical justice.

[966] But one absolutely essential field of experience, the human psycheitself, remained for a very long time the preserve of metaphysics, although

increasingly serious attempts were made after the Enlightment to open it

up to  scientific investigation. They began, tentatively, with the  sense

perceptions, and gradually ventured into the domain of associations. This

line of research paved the way for

experimental psychology, and it culminated in the  “physiological

psychology” of Wundt. A more descriptive  kind of psychology, with

which the medical men soon made contact, developed in France. Its chief

exponents were Taine,  Ribot, and Janet. It was characteristic of this

scientific  approach that it broke down the psyche into particular

mechanisms or processes. In face of these attempts, there were some who

advocated what we today would call a “holistic” approach—the systematic

observation of the psyche as a whole. It seems as if this trend originated in a

certain type of biography, more particularly the kind that an earlier age,

which also had its good points, used to describe as “curious lives.” In this

connection I think of Justinus Kerner and his Seeress of Prevorst, and the

case of the elder Blumhardt and his medium Gottliebin Dittus.

5 To be historically fair, however, I should not forget the medieval Acta

  Sanctorum.

6

[967] This  line of research has been continued in more  recent

investigations associated with the names of William James, Freud, and

Theodore Flournoy. James and his friend Flournoy, a Swiss psychologist,

made an attempt to describe the whole phenomenology of the psyche and

also to view it as a totality. Freud, too, as a doctor, took as his point of

departure the wholeness and indivisibility of the human personality, though,

in keeping with the spirit of the age, he  restricted himself to the

investigation of instinctive mechanisms and individual processes. He also

narrowed the picture of man to the wholeness of an essentially “bourgeois”

collective person, and this necessarily led to philosophically  onesided

interpretations. Freud, unfortunately, succumbed to  the medical man’s

temptation to trace everything psychic to

the body, in the manner of the old “humoral” psychologists, not without

rebellious gestures at those metaphysical preserves of which he had a holy

dread.

[968] Unlike Freud, who after a proper psychological start reverted to the

ancient assumption of the sovereignty of the physical constitution, trying toturn everything back in theory into instinctual processes conditioned by the

body, I start with the assumption of the sovereignty of the psyche. Since

body and psyche somewhere form a unity, although in their manifest natures

they are so utterly different, we cannot but attribute to the one as to the

other a substantiality of its own. So long as we have no way of knowing that

unity, there is no alternative but  to  investigate  them separately and,  for  the

present, treat them as though they were independent of each other, at least

in their structure. That they are not so, we can see for ourselves every day.

But if we were to stop at that, we would never be in a position to make out

anything about the psyche at all.

[969] Now if we assume the sovereignty of the psyche, we exempt ourselves

from the—at present—insoluble task of  reducing everything psychic to

something definitely physical. We can then take the manifestations of the

psyche as expressions of its intrinsic being, and try to establish certain

conformities or types. So when I speak of a psychological typology, I

mean by this the formulation of the structural elements of the psyche and

not a description of the psychic  emanations of a particular type of

constitution. This is covered by, for instance, Kretschmer’s researches into

body-structure and character.

[970] I have given a detailed description of a purely  psychological

typology in my book Psychological Types. My investigation was based on

twenty years of work as a doctor, which brought me into contact with people

of all classes from all the great nations. When one begins as a young

doctor, one’s head is still full of clinical pictures and diagnoses. In the

course of the years, impressions of quite another kind accumulate. One is

struck by the enormous diversity of  human  individuals, by the  chaotic

profusion of individual cases, the special circumstances of whose lives and

whose special characters produce clinical pictures that, even supposing one

still felt any desire to do so, can be squeezed into the straitjacket of a

diagnosis only by force. The fact that the disturbance can be given such and

such a name appears  completely irrelevant beside the overwhelming

impression one has that all clinical  pictures are so many mimetic or

histrionic demonstrations of certain definite character traits.  The

pathological problem upon which everything turns has virtually nothing to

do with the clinical picture, but is essentially an expression of character.

Even the complexes, the “nuclear elements” of a neurosis, are beside the

point, being mere concomitants of a certain characterological disposition.This can be seen most easily in the relation of the patient to his parental

family. He is, let us say, one of four siblings, is neither the eldest nor the

youngest, has had the same education and conditioning as the others. Yet he

is sick and they are sound. The anamnesis shows that a whole series of

influences to which the others were exposed as well as he, and

from which indeed they all suffered, had a pathological effect on him alone

—at least to all appearances. In reality these  influences were not

aetiological factors in his case either, but prove to be false explanations. The

real cause of the neurosis

lies in the peculiar way he responded to and assimilated the  influences

emanating from the environment.

[971] By comparing many such cases it gradually became clear to me that

there must be two fundamentally different general attitudes which would

divide human beings into two  groups—provided the whole of humanity

consisted of highly differentiated individuals. Since this is obviously not the

case,  one  can  only  say  that  this  difference of  attitude becomes  plainly

observable only when we are confronted with a  comparatively well-

differentiated personality; in other words, it becomes of practical importance

only after a certain degree of differentiation has been reached. Pathological

cases of this kind are almost always people who deviate from the familial

type and, in consequence, no longer find sufficient security in their inherited

instinctual foundation. Weak instincts are one of the prime causes of the

development of an habitual one-sided attitude, though in the last resort it is

conditioned or reinforced by heredity.

[972] I have called these two fundamentally different  attitudes

extraversion and introversion. Extraversion is characterized by interest in the

external object,  responsiveness,  and a ready  acceptance of external

happenings, a desire to influence and be influenced by events, a need to join

in and get “with it,” the capacity to endure bustle and noise of every kind,

and actually find them enjoyable, constant attention to the surrounding

world, the cultivation of friends and acquaintances, none too carefully

selected, and finally by the great importance attached to the figure one

cuts, and hence by a strong tendency to make a  show of oneself.

Accordingly, the extravert’s philosophy of life and his ethics are as a rule

of a highly collective nature

with a strong streak of altruism, and his conscience is in large  measure

dependent on public opinion. Moral misgivings arise mainly when “otherpeople know.” His religious convictions  are determined, so to speak, by

majority vote.

[973] The actual subject, the extravert as a subjective entity, is, so far as

possible, shrouded in darkness. He hides it from himself

under veils of unconsciousness. The disinclination to submit  his own

motives to critical examination is very pronounced. He has no secrets he

has not long since shared with others. Should something unmentionable

nevertheless befall him, he prefers to forget it. Anything that might tarnish

the parade of  optimism and positivism is avoided. Whatever he thinks,

intends, and does is displayed with conviction and warmth.

[974] The psychic life of this type of person is enacted, as it were, outside

himself, in the environment. He lives in and  through others; all self-

communings give him the creeps.  Dangers lurk there which are better

drowned out by noise. If he should ever have a “complex,” he finds refuge in

the social whirl and allows himself to be assured several times a day that

everything is in order. Provided he is not too much of a busybody, too

pushing, and too superficial, he can be a distinctly useful member of the

community.

[975] In this short essay I have to content myself with an allusive sketch. It

is intended merely to give the reader some idea of what extraversion is like,

something he can bring into relationship with his own knowledge of human

nature. I have purposely started with a description of extraversion because

this attitude is familiar to everyone; the extravert not only lives in this

attitude, but parades it before his fellows on  principle. Moreover it

accords with certain popular ideals and moral requirements.

[976] Introversion, on the other hand, being directed not to the object but to

the subject, and not being oriented by the object, is not so easy to put into

perspective. The introvert is not forthcoming, he is as though in continual

retreat before the object. He holds aloof from external happenings, does not

join in, has a distinct dislike of society as soon as he finds himself among

too many people. In a large gathering he feels lonely and lost. The more

crowded it is, the greater becomes his resistance. He is not in the least “with

it,” and has no love of enthusiastic get-togethers. He is not a good mixer.

What he  does, he does in his own way, barricading himself against

influences from outside. He is apt to appear awkward, often  seeming

inhibited, and it frequently happens that, by a certain brusqueness of manner,

or by his glum unapproachability, or some kind of malapropism, he causesunwitting offence to people.

His better qualities he keeps to himself, and generally does everything he

can to dissemble them. He is easily mistrustful, self-willed, often suffers

from inferiority feelings and for this  reason is also envious. His

apprehensiveness of the object is not due to fear, but to the fact that it

seems to him negative, demanding, overpowering or even menacing. He

therefore  suspects all kinds of bad motives, has an everlasting fear of

making a fool of himself, is usually very touchy and surrounds himself

with a barbed wire entanglement so dense and impenetrable that finally he

himself would rather do anything than sit behind it. He confronts the world

with an elaborate defensive system compounded of scrupulosity, pedantry,

frugality, cautiousness, painful conscientiousness,  stiff-lipped rectitude,

politeness, and open-eyed distrust. His

picture of the world lacks rosy hues, as he is over-critical and finds a hair in

every soup. Under normal conditions he is  pessimistic and  worried,

because the world and human beings are not in the least good but crush

him, so he never feels accepted and taken to their bosom. Yet he himself

does not accept the world either, at any rate not outright, for everything has

first to be judged by his own critical standards. Finally only those things

are accepted which, for various subjective reasons, he can turn to his own

account.

[977] For him self-communings are a pleasure. His own world is a safe

harbour, a carefully  tended  and walled-in garden, closed to the public and

hidden from prying eyes. His own company is the best. He feels at home

in his world, where the only changes are made by himself. His best work is

done with his own resources, on his own initiative, and in his own way. If

ever he succeeds, after long and often wearisome struggles, in assimilating

something alien to himself, he is capable of turning it to excellent account.

Crowds, majority  views, public  opinion, popular enthusiasm  never

convince him of anything, but merely make him creep still deeper into his

shell.

[978] His relations with other people become warm only when safety is

guaranteed, and when he can lay aside his defensive distrust. All too often

he cannot, and consequently the number of friends and acquaintances is

very restricted. Thus the psychic life of this type is played out wholly within.

Should any difficulties and conflicts arise in this inner world, all doors and

windows are shut tight. The introvert shuts himself up with his complexesuntil he ends in complete isolation.

[979] In spite of these peculiarities the introvert is by no means a social

loss. His retreat into himself is not a final renunciation of the world, but

a search for quietude, where  alone it is possible for  him to make his

contribution to the life of the community. This type of person is the victim

of numerous misunderstandings—not unjustly, for he actually invites them.

Nor can he be acquitted of the charge of taking a  secret delight in

mystification, and that being misunderstood  gives him a certain

satisfaction, since it reaffirms his pessimistic outlook. That being so, it is

easy to see why he is accused of being cold, proud, obstinate, selfish,

conceited, cranky, and what not, and why he is constantly admonished that

devotion to the goals of society, clubbableness, imperturbable urbanity, and

selfless trust in the powers-that-be are true virtues and the marks of a

sound and vigorous life.

[980] The introvert is well enough aware that such virtues exist, and that

somewhere, perhaps—only not in his circle of  acquaintances—there are

divinely inspired people who enjoy  undiluted possession of these ideal

qualities. But his self-criticism and his awareness of his own motives have

long since disabused him of the illusion that he himself would be capable of

such virtues; and his mistrustful gaze, sharpened by anxiety, constantly

enables him to detect on his fellow men the ass’s ear sticking up from

under the lion’s mane. The world and men are for him a disturbance and a

danger, affording no  valid standard by  which he  could ultimately orient

himself. What alone is valid for him is his subjective  world, which he

sometimes believes, in moments of delusion, to be the objective one. We

could easily charge these people with the worst kind of subjectivism, indeed

with morbid individualism, if it were certain beyond a doubt that only one

objective world existed. But this truth, if such it be, is not axiomatic; it is

merely a half truth, the other half of which is the fact that the world also is

as it is seen by human beings, and in the last resort by the individual.

There is simply no world at all without the knowing subject. This, be it

never so small and inconspicuous, is always the other pier supporting the

bridge of the phenomenal world. The appeal to the subject therefore has the

same validity as the  appeal to the so-called objective world, for it is

grounded on psychic reality itself. But this is a reality with its own peculiar

laws which are not of a secondary nature.

[981] The two attitudes, extraversion and introversion, are opposing modesthat make themselves felt not least in the history of human thought. The

problems to which they give rise were very largely anticipated by Friedrich

Schiller, and they underlie his Letters on the Aesthetic Education of Man.

7 But since the concept of the unconscious was still unknown to him, he was

unable to reach a satisfactory solution. Moreover philosophers, who would

be the best equipped to go more  closely  into  this  question,  do not like 

having  to  submit their thinking function to a thorough psychological

criticism, and therefore hold aloof from such discussions. It  should,

however, be obvious that the intrinsic polarity of such an attitude exerts a

very great influence on the philosopher’s own point of view.

[982] For  the  extravert the  object is  interesting and attractive a priori, as is

the subject, or psychic reality, for the introvert. We could therefore use the

expression “numinal  accent” for this fact, by which I mean that for the

extravert the quality of positive significance and value attaches primarily to

the object, so that it plays the predominant, determining, and decisive role in

all psychic processes from the start, just as the subject does for the introvert.

[983] But the numinal accent does not decide only between  subject and

object; it also selects the conscious function of which the individual makes

the principal use. I distinguish four functions: thinking, feeling, sensation,

and intuition. The  essential function of sensation is to establish that

something exists, thinking tells us what it means, feeling what its value is,

and intuition surmises whence it comes and whither it goes. Sensation

and intuition I call irrational functions, because they are both concerned

simply with what happens and with actual or potential realities. Thinking

and feeling, being discriminative  functions, are rational. Sensation, the

fonction du réel, rules out any simultaneous intuitive activity, since the latter

is not concerned with the present but is rather  a  sixth sense for hidden

possibilities, and therefore should not allow itself to be unduly influenced by

existing reality. In the same way, thinking is opposed to feeling, because

thinking should not be influenced or deflected from its purpose by feeling

values, just as feeling is usually vitiated by too much reflection. The four

functions therefore form, when arranged diagrammatically, a cross with a

rational axis at right angles to an irrational axis.

[984] The four orienting functions naturally do not contain everything that is

in the conscious psyche. Will and memory, for instance, are not included.

The reason for this is that the differentiation of the four orienting functions

is, essentially,  an empirical consequence of typical differences in thefunctional attitude. There are people for whom the numinal accent falls on

sensation, on the perception of actualities, and  elevates it into the sole

determining and all-overriding principle. These are the fact-minded men, in

whom  intellectual judgment, feeling, and intuition are driven into the

background by the paramount importance of actual facts. When the accent

falls on thinking, judgment is reserved as to what significance should be

attached to the facts in question. And on this significance will depend the

way in which the individual deals with the facts. If feeling is numinal, then

his adaptation will depend entirely on the feeling value he attributes to

them. Finally, if the numinal accent falls on intuition, actual reality counts

only in so far as it seems to harbour possibilities which then become the

supreme motivating force, regardless of the way things actually are in the

present.

[985] The localization of the numinal accent thus gives rise to four function-

types, which I encountered first of all in my  relations  with  people and

formulated systematically only very much later. In practice these four types

are always combined with the attitude-type, that is, with extraversion or

introversion, so that the functions appear in an extraverted or introverted

variation. This produces a set of eight demonstrable function-types. It is

naturally impossible to present the specific psychology of these types within

the confines of an essay, and to go into its conscious and  unconscious

manifestations. I must therefore refer the  interested reader to the

aforementioned study.

[986] It is not the purpose of a psychological typology to classify human

beings into categories—this in itself would be pretty pointless. Its purpose is

rather to provide a critical psychology  which will make a methodical

investigation and presentation of the empirical material possible. First and

foremost, it is a critical tool for the research worker, who needs definite

points of view and guidelines if he is to reduce the chaotic profusion  of

individual experiences to any kind of order. In this respect  we could

compare typology to a trigonometric net or, better still, to a crystallographic

axial system. Secondly, a typology is a great help in understanding the wide

variations that occur among individuals, and it also furnishes a clue to the

fundamental differences in the psychological theories now current. Last

but not least, it is an essential means for  determining the “personal

equation” of the practising  psychologist, who, armed with an exact

knowledge of his  differentiated and inferior functions, can avoid manyserious blunders in dealing with his patients.

[987] The typological system I have proposed is an attempt, grounded on

practical experience, to provide an  explanatory basis and theoretical

framework for the boundless diversity that has hitherto prevailed in the

formation of psychological concepts. In a science as young as psychology,

limiting definitions will sooner or later become an unavoidable necessity.

Some day psychologists will have to agree upon certain basic principles

secure from arbitrary  interpretation if psychology is not to remain an

unscientific and fortuitous conglomeration of individual opinions.
 

                   PSYCHIATRIC STUDIES

 

                     EDITORIAL PREFACE

The  publication  of  the  first  complete  collected  edition,  in  English,  of  the

works of C. G. Jung is a joint endeavour by Routledge and Kegan Paul, Ltd.,

in England and, under the sponsorship of Bollingen Foundation, by Princeton

University Press in the United States. The edition contains revised versions of

works previously published, such as The Psychology of the Unconscious,

which is now entitled Symbols of Transformation; works originally written in

English, such as Psychology and Religion; works not previously translated,

such as Aion; and, in general, new translations of the major body of Professor

Jung’s  writings.  The  author  has  supervised  the  textual  revision,  which  in

some cases is extensive.

In presenting the Collected Works of C. G. Jung to the  public,  the Editors 

    believe that the plan of the edition * may require a short explanation.

The editorial problem of arrangement was difficult for a variety of reasons,

but perhaps most of all because of the author’s unusual literary productivity:

Jung has not only written several new books and essays since the Collected

Works were planned, but he has frequently published expanded versions of

texts to which a certain space had already been allotted. The Editors soon

found that the original framework was being subjected to severe stresses and

strains; and indeed, it eventually was almost twisted out of shape. They still

believe, however, that the programme adopted at the outset, based on the

principles to be outlined below, is the best they can devise.

An arrangement of material by strict chronology, though far the easier, would 

have produced a rather confusing network of subjects: essays on psychiatry 

mixed in with studies of religion, of  alchemy,  of  child psychology. Yet an 

arrangement according to subject-matter alone would tend to obscure a view 

of the progress of Jung’s researches. The growth of his work, however, has 

made a combination of these two schemes possible, for the unfolding of 

Jung’s psychological concepts corresponds, by and large, with the 

development of his interests.

C.  Jung  was  born  in  northeastern  Switzerland  in  1875,  a  Protestant

clergyman’s son. As a young man of scientific and philosophical bent, he

first contemplated archaeology as a career, but eventually chose medicine,

and qualified with distinction in 1900. Up to this time, Jung had expected to

make physiological chemistry his special field, in which a brilliant future

could  be  expected  for  him;  but,  to  the  surprise  of  his  teachers  andcontemporaries, he unexpectedly changed his aim. This came about through

his reading of Krafft-Ebing’s famous Text-Book of Insanity, which caught

his interest and stimulated in him a strong desire to understand the strange

phenomena he there found described. Jung’s inner prompting was supported

by propitious outer circumstances: Dr. Eugen Bleuler was then director of the

Burghölzli Mental Hospital, in Zurich, and it was under his guidance that

Jung embarked on his now well-known researches in psychiatry.

The present volume, first of the Collected Works, though not large, is 

sufficient to contain the studies in descriptive psychiatry. It opens  with 

Jung’s first published work, his dissertation for the medical degree: “On the 

Psychology and Pathology of So-called Occult Phenomena” (1902), a study 

that adumbrates very much of his later work. But clearly a man of Jung’s cast 

of mind could not be content with simple descriptive research, and soon he 

embarked upon the application of experimental psychology to psychiatry. 

The copious results of these researches make up Volume 2 and Volume 3. 

Jung’s work brought about the transformation of psychiatry, as the study of 

the psychoses, from a static system of classification into a dynamic 

interpretative science. His monograph “The Psychology of Dementia 

Praecox” (1907), in Volume 3, marks the peak of this stage of his activity.

It was these experimental researches that led Jung to a fruitful if stormy 

period of collaboration with Freud, which is represented by the 

psychoanalytic papers in Volume 4. The chief work in this volume, “The 

Theory  of  Psychoanalysis”  (1913),  gives  at  length  his  first  critical

estimation  of  psychoanalysis.  Volume  5,  Symbols  of  Transformation

(originally  1912),  and  Volume  7,  Two  Essays  on  Analytical  Psychology

(originally 1912 and 1916), restate his critical position but also make new

contributions to the foundation of analytical psychology as a system.

The constant growth of analytical psychology is reflected in Jung’s frequent 

revision of his publications. The first of the Two Essays on Analytical 

Psychology, for example, has passed through several different editions. 

Psychology of the Unconscious, as it was titled in its first (1916) edition in 

English, appears in the Collected Works, extensively revised by Jung, with 

the title Symbols of Transformation. The Editors decided to leave these 

works in the approximate chronological positions dictated  by  the dates of 

their first editions, though both are published in revised form. Revision and 

expansion also characterize the group of studies that form Volume 12, 

Psychology and Alchemy (originally 1935–36), as well as many single essays in other volumes of the present edition.

Psychological  Types  (Volume  6),  first  published  in  1921,  has  remained

practically  unchanged;  it  marks  the  terminus  of  Jung’s  move  away  from

psychoanalysis. No further long single work appeared till 1946. During the

intervening period, when Jung’s professional work and his teaching occupied

a large part of his time, he was abstracting, refining, and elaborating his basic

theses in a series of shorter essays, some of which are collected in Volume 8,

The Structure and Dynamics of the Psyche.

Volume  9,  part  I,  contains  essays,  mostly  of  the  same  period,  that  have

special reference to the collective unconscious and the archetypes. Part II of

this volume, however, contains a late (1951) major work, Aion: Researches

into the Phenomenology of the Self. From the chronological point of view,

Aion should come much later in this sequence, but it has been placed here

because it is concerned with the archetype of the self.

From Volume 10 onwards, the material deals with the application of Jung’s

fundamental concepts, which, with their historical antecedents, can be said by

now to have been adequately set out. The subject-matter of Volume 10 to

Volume 17—organized, in the main, around several themes, such as religion,

society, psychotherapy, and education—is indicated by the volume titles and

contents. It will be noted that, in his later years, Jung has returned to writing

longer works: Aion, the Mysterium Coniunctionis, and perhaps others yet to

come from his pen. These arise, no doubt, out of the reflective stage of his

life, when retirement from his analytical practice has at last given him time to

work out ideas that those who know him have long wanted to see in print.

In 1956, Professor Jung announced that he would make available to the 

Editors of the Collected Works two accessions of material which will have 

the effect of enhancing and rounding out the edition: first, a selection of his 

correspondence on  scientific  subjects (including  certain  of his  letters  to 

Freud); and second, the texts of a number of the seminars conducted by Jung. 

Accordingly, Volume 18, and thereafter such additional volumes as may be 

needed, will be devoted to this material.

The  Editors  have  set  aside  a  final  volume  for  minor  essays,  reviews,

newspaper articles, and the like. These may make a rather short volume. If

this should be so, an index of the complete works and a bibliography of

Jung’s writings in original and in translation will be combined with them;

otherwise, the index and bibliography will be published separately.

                                            *In the treatment of the text, the Editors have sought to present Jung’s most

recent  version  of  each  work,  but  reference  is  made  where  necessary  to

previous editions. In cases where Professor Jung has authorized or himself

made revisions in the English text, this is stated.

In a body of work covering more than half a century, it cannot be expected 

that the terminology would be standardized; indeed, some technical terms 

used by Jung in an earlier period were later replaced by others or put to 

different use. In view of their historical interest, such terms are translated 

faithfully according to the period to which they  belong, except where 

Professor Jung has himself altered them in the course of his revision. 

Occasionally, editorial comment is made on terms of particular interest. The 

volumes are provided with bibliographies and are fully indexed.

                                            *

Of the contents of Volume 1, nothing has previously been translated into

English except the monograph “On the Psychology and Pathology of So-

called Occult Phenomena.” The translation of the latter by M. D. Eder has

been consulted, but in the main the present translation is new. It may be noted

that, except for the 1916 English version of the “Occult Phenomena,” none of

these papers has ever been republished by Professor Jung.

An effort has been made to fill out the bibliographical details of the material,

which were sometimes abbreviated in the medical publications of the 1900’s.

Acknowledgment is made to George Allen and Unwin Ltd. for permission to

quote  passages  from  Freud’s  The  Interpretation  of  Dreams  and  from

Nietzsche’s Thus Spake Zarathustra.

     EDITORIAL NOTE TO THE SECOND


                                    EDITION

Since the above paragraphs were written, and following Jung’s death on June

6, 1961, different arrangements for the publication of the correspondence and

seminars have been made with the consent of his heirs. These writings will

not, as originally stated, comprise Volume 18 and subsequent volumes of the

Collected Works (for their contents as now planned, see below). Instead, a

large  selection  of  the  correspondence,  not  restricted  to  scientific  subjects

though  including  some  letters  to  Freud,  will  be  issued  under  the  same

publishing auspices but outside the Collected Works, under the editorship of

Dr. Gerhard Adler. A selection of the seminars, mainly those delivered in

English between 1925 and 1939, will also be published outside the Collected

Works in several volumes.

Two works usually described as seminars are, however, being published in 

the Collected Works, inasmuch as the transcripts were approved by Jung 

personally as giving a valid account of his statements: the work widely 

known as the Tavistock Lectures, delivered in London in 1935, privately 

circulated in multigraphed form, and published as a separate volume entitled 

Analytical Psychology: Its Theory and Practice (Routledge & Kegan Paul, 

London, and Pantheon Books, New York, 1968); and the seminar given in 

1938 to members of the Guild of Pastoral Psychology, London, and published 

in pamphlet form by the Guild in 1954 under the title The Symbolic Life. 

Both of these will be published in Volume  18, which has been given the 

general title The Symbolic Life.

Volume 18 will also include the minor essays, reviews, forewords, newspaper 

articles, and so on, for which a “final volume” had been set aside. 

Furthermore, the amount of new material that has come to light since the 

Collected Works were planned is very considerable, most of it having been 

discovered after Jung’s death and too late to have been placed in the volumes  

where  thematically  it  belonged.  The  Editors  have  therefore assigned the 

new and posthumous material also to Volume 18, which will be much larger 

than was first envisaged. The index of the complete works and a bibliography 

of Jung’s writings in the original and in translation will be published as two 

separate and final volumes.

Jung  ended  his  long  years  of  creative  activity  with  the  posthumously

published  Memories,  Dreams,  Reflections,  recorded  and  edited  by  AnielaJaffé and translated by Richard and Clara Winston (Collins with Routledge &

Kegan Paul, London, and Pantheon Books, New York, 1963). At his express

wish it was not included in the Collected Works.

                                            *

Finally,  the  Editors  and  those  closely  concerned  with  implementing  the

publication programme, including the translator, wish to express their deep

sense of loss at the death of their colleague and friend, Sir Herbert Read, who

died on June 12, 1968.

                                            *

For the second edition of Psychiatric Studies, bibliographical citations and

entries  have  been  revised  in  the  light  of  subsequent  publications  in  the

Collected Works and essential corrections have been made.

                                            *

In 1970, the Freud and Jung families reached an agreement that resulted in

the  publication  of  The  Freud/Jung  Letters  (the  complete  surviving

correspondence of 360 letters), under the editorship of William McGuire, in

1974.  And  a  selection  from  all  of  Jung’s  correspondence  throughout  his

career,  edited  by  Gerhard  Adler  in  collaboration  with  Aniela  Jaffé,  was

published in 1973 (1906–1950) and 1975 (1951–1961). Finally, a selection of

interviews  with  Jung  was  published  in  1977  under  the  title  C.  G.  Jung

Speaking: Interviews and Encounters.

     VOLUME 1 PSYCHIATRIC STUDIES


                                            I

ON THE PSYCHOLOGY AND PATHOLOGY OF

          SO-CALLED OCCULT PHENOMENA

            ON HYSTERICAL MISREADING

                            [1. INTRODUCTION]

[1] In that wide domain of psychopathic inferiority from which science has

marked off the clinical pictures of epilepsy, hysteria, and neurasthenia, we

find scattered observations on certain rare states of consciousness as to whose

meaning  the  authors  are  not  yet  agreed.  These  observations  crop  up

sporadically  in  the  literature  on  narcolepsy,  lethargy,  automatisme

ambulatoire,  periodic  amnesia,  double  consciousness,  somnambulism,

pathological dreaminess, pathological lying, etc.

[2]  The  above-mentioned  states  are  sometimes  attributed  to  epilepsy,

sometimes  to  hysteria,  sometimes  to  exhaustion  of  the  nervous  system–

neurasthenia–and  sometimes  they  may  even  be  accorded  the  dignity  of  a

disease  sui  generis.  The  patients  concerned  occasionally  go  through  the

whole gamut of diagnoses from epilepsy to hysteria and simulated insanity.

[3]  It  is,  in  fact,  exceedingly  difficult,  and  sometimes  impossible,  to

distinguish these states from the various types of neurosis, but on the other

hand certain features point beyond pathological inferiority to something more

than  a  merely  analogical  relationship  with  the  phenomena  of  normal

psychology, and even with the psychology of the supranormal, that of genius.

[4] However varied the individual phenomena may be in themselves, there is

certainly no case that cannot be related by means of some intermediate case

to  others  that  are  typical.  This  relationship  extends  deep  into  the  clinical

pictures of hysteria and epilepsy. Recently it has even been suggested that

there  is  no  definite  borderline  between  epilepsy  and  hysteria,  and  that  a

difference becomes apparent only in extreme cases. Steffens, for example,

says: “We are forced to the conclusion that in essence hysteria and epilepsy

are not fundamentally different, that the cause of the disease is the same, only

it manifests itself in different forms and in different degrees of intensity and

duration.”2

[5] The delimitation of hysteria and certain borderline forms of epilepsy fromcongenital  or  acquired  psychopathic  inferiority  likewise  presents  great

difficulties. The symptoms overlap at every point, so that violence is done to

the facts if they are regarded separately as belonging to this or that particular

group. To delimit psychopathic inferiority from the normal is an absolutely

impossible  task,  for  the  difference  is  always  only  “more”  or  “less.”

Classification in the field of inferiority itself meets with the same difficulties.

At best, one can only single out certain groups which crystallize round a

nucleus with specially marked typical features. If we disregard the two large

groups of intellectual and emotional inferiority, we are left with those which

are  coloured  pre-eminently  by  hysterical,  epileptic  (epileptoid),  or

neurasthenic symptoms, and which are not characterized by an inferiority

either of intellect or of emotion. It is chiefly in this field, insusceptible of any

sure classification, that the above-mentioned states are to be found. As is well

known,  they  can  appear  as  partial  manifestations  of  a  typical  epilepsy  or

hysteria, or can exist separately as psychopathic inferiorities, in which case

the  qualification  “epileptic”  or  “hysterical”  is  often  due  to  relatively

unimportant  subsidiary  symptoms.  Thus  somnambulism  is  usually  classed

among the hysterical illnesses because it is sometimes a partial manifestation

of severe hysteria, or because it may be accompanied by milder so-called

“hysterical” symptoms. Binet says: “Somnambulism is not one particular and

unchanging  nervous  condition;  there  are  many  somnambulisms.”3 As  a

partial manifestation of severe hysteria, somnambulism is not an unknown

phenomenon, but as a separate pathological entity, a disease sui generis, it

must be somewhat rare, to judge by the paucity of German literature on this

subject. So-called spontaneous somnambulism based on a slightly hysterical

psychopathic inferiority is not very common, and it is worth while to examine

such cases more closely, as they sometimes afford us a wealth of interesting

observations.

[6] CASE OF MISS E., aged 40, single, book-keeper in a large business. No 

hereditary taint, except that a brother suffered from “nerves”  after  a family 

misfortune and illness. Good education, of a cheerful disposition, not able to 

save money; “always had some big idea in my head.” She was very kind-

hearted and gentle, did a great deal for her parents, who were living in 

modest circumstances, and for strangers. Nevertheless she was not happy 

because she felt she was misunderstood. She had always enjoyed good health 

till a few years ago, when she said she was treated for dilatation of the 

stomach and tapeworm. During this illness her hair turned rapidly white. Later she had typhoid. An engagement was terminated by the death of her 

fiancé from paralysis. She was in a highly nervous state for a year and a half. 

In the summer of 1897 she went away for a change of air and hydrotherapy. 

She herself said that for about a year there were moments in her work when 

her thoughts seemed to stand still, though she did not fall asleep. She made 

no mistakes in her accounts, however. In the street she often went to the 

wrong place and then suddenly realized that she was not in the right street. 

She had no giddiness or fainting-fits. Formerly menstruation occurred 

regularly every four weeks with no bother; latterly, since she was nervous 

and overworked, every fourteen days. For a long time she suffered from 

constant headache. As accountant and book-keeper in a large business she 

had a very strenuous job, which she did well and conscientiously. In the 

present year, in addition to the strains of her work, she had all sorts of new 

worries. Her brother suddenly got divorced, and besides her own work she 

looked after his housekeeping, nursed him and his child through a serious 

illness, and so on. To recuperate, she went on September 13 to see a woman 

friend in southern Germany. Her great joy at seeing her friend again after 

such a long absence, and their celebration of a party, made the necessary rest 

impossible. On the 15th, quite contrary to her usual habit, she and her friend 

drank a bottle of claret. Afterwards they went for a walk in a cemetery, where 

she began to tear up flowers and scratch at the graves. She remembered 

absolutely nothing of this afterwards. On the 16th she stayed with her friend 

without anything of importance happening. On the 17th, her friend brought 

her to Zurich. An acquaintance came with her to the asylum; on the way she 

talked quite sensibly but was very tired. Outside the asylum they met three 

boys whom she described as “three dead people she had dug up.” She then 

wanted to go to the neighbouring cemetery, and only  with  difficulty would 

be persuaded to enter the asylum.

[7] The patient was small, delicately built, slightly anaemic. Left side of the

heart  slightly  enlarged;  no  murmurs,  but  a  few  double  beats;  accentuated

sounds in the mitral region. The liver dulness extended only to the edge of the

upper ribs. Patellar reflexes rather brisk, but otherwise no tendon reflexes. No

anaesthesia  or  analgesia,  no  paralysis.  Rough  examination  of  the  field  of

vision with the hands showed no restriction. Hair of a very pale, yellowish-

white colour. On the whole, the patient looked her age. She recounted her

history  and  the  events  of  the  last  few  days  quite  clearly,  but  had  no

recollection of what happened in the cemetery at C. or outside the asylum.During the night of the 17th/18th she spoke to the attendant and said she saw

the whole room full of dead people looking like skeletons. She was not at all

frightened, but was rather surprised that the attendant did not see them too.

Once she ran to the window, but was otherwise quiet. The next morning in

bed she still saw skeletons, but not in the afternoon. The following night she

woke  up  at  four  o’clock  and  heard  the  dead  children  in  the  adjoining

cemetery crying out that they had been buried alive. She wanted to go and dig

them up but allowed herself to be restrained. Next morning at seven o’clock

she was still delirious, but could now remember quite well the events in the

cemetery at C. and on her way to the asylum. She said that at C. she wanted

to dig up the dead children who were calling to her. She had only torn up the

flowers in order to clear the graves and be able to open them.

While she was in this state, Professor Bleuler explained to her that she would

remember everything afterwards, too, when she came to herself again. The

patient slept for a few hours in the morning; afterwards she was quite clear-

headed  and  felt  fairly  well.  She  did  indeed  remember  the  attacks,  but

maintained a remarkable indifference towards them. The following nights,

except  on  those  of  September  22  and  25,  she  again  had  short  attacks  of

delirium in which she had to deal with the dead, though the attacks differed in

detail.  Twice  she  saw  dead  people  in  her  bed;  she  did  not  appear  to  be

frightened of them, but got out of bed so as not to “embarrass” them. Several

times she tried to leave the room.

[8] After a few nights free from attacks, she had a mild one on September 30, 

when she called to the dead from the window. During the day her mind was 

quite clear. On October 3, while fully conscious, as she related afterwards, 

she saw a whole crowd of skeletons in the drawing-room. Although she 

doubted the reality of the skeletons she could not convince herself that it was 

an hallucination. The next night, between twelve and one o’clock—the earlier 

attacks usually happened about this time—she was plagued by the dead for 

about ten minutes. She sat up in bed, stared into a corner of the room, and 

said: “Now they’re coming, but they’re not all here yet. Come along, the 

room’s big enough, there’s room for all. When they’re all there I’ll come 

too.” Then she lay down, with the words: “Now they’re all there,” and fell 

asleep. In the morning she had not the slightest recollection of any of these 

attacks. Very short attacks occurred again on the nights of October 4, 6, 9, 13, 

and 15, all between twelve and one o’clock. The last  three coincided  with 

the  menstrual period.  The attendant tried to talk to her several times, showed her the lighted street- lamps and the trees, but she did not react to these 

overtures. Since then the attacks have stopped altogether. The patient 

complained about a number of troubles she had had during her stay here. She 

suffered especially from headaches, and these got worse the morning after the 

attacks. She said it was unbearable. Five grains of Sacch. lactis promptly 

alleviated this. Then she complained of a pain in both forearms, which she 

described as though it were tendovaginitis. She thought the bulging of the 

flexed biceps was a swelling and asked to have it massaged. Actually, there 

was nothing the matter, and when her complaints were ignored the trouble 

disappeared. She complained loud and long about the thickening of a toe-nail, 

even after the thickened part had been removed. Sleep was often disturbed. 

She would not give her consent to be hypnotized against the night attacks. 

Finally, on account of headache and disturbed sleep, she agreed to hypnotic 

treatment. She proved a good subject, and at the first sitting fell into a deep 

sleep with analgesia and amnesia.

[9] In November she was again asked whether she could remember the attack

of September 19, which it had been suggested she would recall. She had great

difficulty recollecting it, and in the end she could only recount the main facts;

she had forgotten the details.

 It remains to be said that the patient was not at all superstitious and in her  

healthy days had never been particularly interested in the supernatural. All 

through the treatment, which ended on November 14, she maintained a 

remarkable indifference both to the illness and its improvement. The 

following spring she returned as an outpatient for treatment of the headaches, 

which had slowly come back because of strenuous work during the 

intervening months. For the rest, her condition left nothing to be desired. It 

was established that she had no remembrance of the attacks of the previous 

autumn, not even those of September 19 and earlier. On the other hand, under 

hypnosis she could still give a good account of the events in the cemetery, 

outside the asylum, and during the night attacks.

The  peculiar  hallucinations  and  general  appearance  of  our  case  are

reminiscent of those states which Krafft-Ebing describes as “protracted states

of hysterical delirium.” He says:

It  is  in  the  milder  cases  of  hysteria  that  such  delirious  states  occur.…

Protracted  hysterical  delirium  depends  upon  temporary  exhaustion.…

Emotional disturbances seem to favour its outbreak. It is prone to relapse.

… Most frequently we find delusions of persecution, with often veryviolent reactive fear… then religious and erotic delusions. Hallucinations of

all the senses are not uncommon. The most frequent and most important are

delusions  of  sight,  smell,  and  touch.  The  visual  hallucinations  are  mostly

visions  of  animals,  funerals,  fantastic  processions  swarming  with  corpses,

devils, ghosts, and what not.… The auditory delusions are simply noises in

the ear (shrieks, crashes, bangs), or actual hallucinations, often with sexual

content.4

The corpse visions of our patient and their appearance during attacks remind

us  of  states  occasionally  observed  in  hysteroepilepsy.  Here  too  there  are

specific visions which, in contrast to protracted delirium, are associated with

individual attacks. I will give two examples:

A 30-year-old lady with grande hystérie had delirious twilight states in which

she was tormented by frightful hallucinations. She saw her children being

torn away from her, devoured by wild beasts, etc. She had no remembrance

of the individual attacks.5

A girl of 17, also a severe hysteric. In her attacks she always saw the corpse

of her dead mother approaching her, as if to draw her to itself. No memory of

the attacks.6

These  are  cases  of  severe  hysteria  where  consciousness  works  at  a  deep

dream level. The nature of the attacks and the stability of the hallucinations

alone show a certain affinity to our case, which in this respect has numerous

analogies with the corresponding states of hysteria, as for instance with cases

where  a  psychic  shock  (rape,  etc.)  occasioned  the  outbreak  of  hysterical

attacks,  or  where  the  traumatic  event  is  re-  experienced  in  stereotyped

hallucinatory form. Our case, however, gets its specific character from the

identity of consciousness during the different attacks. It is a “second state,”

with  a  memory  of  its  own,  but  separated  from  the  waking  state  by  total

amnesia. This distinguishes it from the above-mentioned twilight states and

relates it to those found in somnambulism.

Charcot7  divides somnambulism into two basic forms:

a. Delirium with marked inco-ordination of ideas and actions.

b. Delirium  with  co-ordinated  actions.  This  comes  nearer  to  the 

    waking state.

Our case belongs to the second group. If by somnambulism we understand a

state  of  systematic  partial  wakefulness,8 we  must  when  discussing  this

ailment  also  consider  those  isolated  attacks  of  amnesia  which  are

occasionally observed. Except for noctambulism, they are the simplest statesof systematic partial wakefulness. The most remarkable in the literature is

undoubtedly Naef’s case.8a It concerns a gentleman of 32 with a bad family

history and numerous signs of degeneracy, partly functional, partly organic.

As a result of overwork he had, at the early age of 17, a peculiar twilight state

with delusions, which lasted a few days and then cleared up with sudden

recovery of memory. Later he was subject to frequent attacks of giddiness

with palpitations and vomiting, but these attacks were never attended by loss

of consciousness. At the end of a feverish illness he suddenly left Australia

for Zurich, where he spent some weeks in carefree and merry living, only

coming to himself when he read of his sudden disappearance from Australia

in the newspapers. He had complete retrograde amnesia for the period of

several months that included his journey to Australia, his stay there, and the

journey back. A case of periodic amnesia is published by Azam:9 Albert X.,

12½ years old, with hysterical symptoms, had several attacks of amnesia in

the course of a few years, during which he forgot how to read, write, count,

and even how to speak his own language, for weeks at a stretch. In between

times he was normal.

A  case  of  automatisme  ambulatoire  on  a  decidedly  hysterical  basis,  but

differing from Naef’s case in that the attacks were recurrent, is published by

Proust:10 An educated man, aged 30, exhibited all the symptoms of grande

hystérie. He was very suggestible, and from time to time, under the stress of

emotional  excitement,  had  attacks  of  amnesia  lasting  from  two  days  to

several weeks. While in these states he wandered

about, visited relatives, smashed various things in their houses, contracted

debts, and was even arrested and convicted for picking pockets.

There is a similar case of vagrancy in Boeteau:11 A widow of 22, highly

hysterical, became terrified at the prospect of an operation for salpingitis, left

the  hospital  where  she  had  been  till  then,  and  fell  into  a  somnambulistic

condition, from which she awoke after three days with total amnesia. In those

three days she had walked about thirty miles looking for her child.

William James12 describes a case of an “ambulatory sort”: the Reverend 

Ansel Bourne, itinerant preacher, 30 years old, psychopath, had on several 

occasions attacks of unconsciousness lasting an hour. One day (January 17, 

1887) he suddenly disappeared from Greene, Rhode Island, after having 

lifted $551 from a bank. He was missing  for  two  months, during  which 

time he ran a little grocery store in Norristown, Pennsylvania, under the name 

of  A.  J.  Brown,  carefully  attending  to  all the purchases himself, although he had never done this sort of  work before. On March 14 he suddenly awoke 

and went back home. Complete amnesia for the interval.

Mesnet13 published this case: F., 27 years old, sergeant in the African 

regiment, sustained an injury of the parietal bone at Bazeilles. Suffered for a 

year from hemiplegia, which disappeared when the wound healed. During the 

illness he had somnambulistic attacks with marked restriction of 

consciousness; all the sense functions were paralysed except for the sense of 

taste and a little bit of the sense of sight. Movements were co- ordinated, but 

their performance in overcoming obstacles was severely limited. During 

attacks the patient had a senseless collecting mania. Through various 

manipulations his consciousness could be given an hallucinatory content; for 

instance, if a stick was placed in his hand, the patient would immediately feel 

himself transported to a battle  scene, would put himself on guard, see the 

enemy approaching, etc.

Guinon and Sophie Woltke made the following experiments with hysterics:14

A blue glass was held in front of a female patient during an hysterical attack,

and she regularly saw a picture of her mother in the blue sky. A red glass

showed her a bleeding wound, a yellow one an orange- seller or a lady in a

yellow dress.

Mesnet’s case recalls the cases of sudden restriction of memory.

MacNish15 tells of a case of this sort: An apparently healthy young woman

suddenly fell into an abnormally long sleep, apparently with no prodromal

symptoms. On waking she had forgotten the words for and all knowledge of

the simplest things. She had to learn how to read, write, and count all over

again, at which she made rapid progress. After a second prolonged sleep she

awoke as her normal self with no recollection of the intervening state. These

states alternated for more than four years, during which time consciousness

showed continuity within the two states, but was separated by amnesia from

the consciousness of the normal state.

These selected cases of various kinds of changes in consciousness each throw

some  light  on  our  case.  Naef’s  case  presents  two  hysteriform  lapses  of

memory, one of which is characterized by delusional ideas, and the other by

its long duration, restriction of consciousness, and the desire to wander. The

peculiar, unexpected impulses are particularly clear in Proust and Mesnet. In

our case the corresponding features would be the impulsive tearing up of

flowers  and  the  digging  up  of  graves.  The  patient’s  continuity  of

consciousness during attacks reminds us of the way consciousness behaved inthe MacNish case; hence it may be regarded as a temporary phenomenon of

alternating consciousness. The dreamlike hallucinatory content of restricted

consciousness in our case does not, however, appear to justify us in assigning

it  without  qualification  to  this  “double  consciousness”  group.  The

hallucinations in the second state show a certain creativeness which seems to

be due to its auto- suggestibility. In Mesnet’s case we observe the appearance

of hallucinatory processes through simple stimulations of touch. The patient’s

subconscious uses these simple perceptions for the automatic construction of

complicated  scenes  which  then  take  possession  of  his  restricted

consciousness.  We  have  to  take  a  somewhat  similar  view  of  the

hallucinations of our patient; at any rate the outward circumstances in which

they arose seem to strengthen this conjecture.

 The walk in the cemetery induced the vision of the skeletons, and the 

meeting with the three boys evoked the hallucination of children buried alive, 

whose voices the patient heard at night. She came to the cemetery in a 

somnambulistic condition, which on this occasion was particularly intense in 

consequence of her having taken alcohol. She then performed impulsive 

actions of which her subconscious, at least, received certain impressions. 

(The part played here by alcohol should not be underestimated. We know 

from experience that it not only acts adversely on  these conditions, but, like 

every other narcotic, increases suggestibility.) The  impressions  received in  

somnambulism  go on working in the subconscious to form independent 

growths, and finally reach perception as hallucinations. Consequently our 

case is closely allied to the somnambulistic dream-states that have recently 

been subjected to penetrating study in England and France.

The gaps of memory, apparently lacking content at first, acquire such through

incidental auto-suggestions, and this content builds itself up automatically to

a certain point. Then, probably under the influence of the improvement now

beginning,  its  further  development  comes  to  a  standstill  and  finally  it

disappears altogether as recovery sets in.

 Binet and Féré have made numerous experiments with the implanting of 

suggestions in states of partial sleep. They have shown, for instance, that 

when a pencil is put into the anaesthetic hand of an hysteric, she will 

immediately produce long letters in automatic writing whose content is 

completely foreign to her consciousness. Cutaneous stimuli in anaesthetic 

regions are sometimes perceived as visual images, or at least as vivid and 

unexpected visual ideas. These independent transmutations of simple stimuli must be regarded as the primary phenomenon in the formation of 

somnambulistic dream   pictures.   In   exceptional   cases,   analogous 

phenomena occur even within the sphere of waking consciousness. Goethe,16

for  instance,  says  that  when  he  sat  down,  lowered  his  head,  and  vividly

conjured up the image of a flower, he saw it undergoing changes of its own

accord, as if entering into new combinations of form. In the halfwaking state

these phenomena occur fairly often as hypnagogic hallucinations. Goethe’s

automatisms differ from truly somnambulistic ones, because in his case the

initial idea is conscious, and the development of the automatism keeps within

the bounds laid down by the initial idea, that is to say, within the purely

motor or visual area.

  If the initial idea sinks below the threshold, or if it was never conscious at 

all and its automatic development encroaches on areas in the immediate 

vicinity, then it is impossible to differentiate between waking automatisms 

and those of the somnambulistic state. This happens, for instance, if the 

perception of a flower associates itself with the idea of a hand plucking the 

flower, or with the idea of the smell of a flower. The only criterion of 

distinction is then simply “more” or “less”: in one case we speak of “normal 

waking hallucinations” and in the other of “somnambulistic dream visions.” 

The interpretation of our patient’s attacks as hysterical becomes more certain 

if we can prove that the hallucinations were probably psychogenic in origin. 

This is further supported by her complaints (headache and tendovaginitis), 

which proved amenable to treatment by suggestion. The only aspect that the 

diagnosis of “hysteria” does not take sufficiently into account is the 

aetiological factor, for we would after all expect a priori that, in the course of

an illness which responds so completely to a rest cure, features would now

and then be observed which could be interpreted as symptoms of exhaustion.

The question then arises whether the early lapses of memory and the later

somnambulistic  attacks  can  be  regarded  as  states  of  exhaustion  or  as

“neurasthenic crises.” We know that psychopathic inferiority can give rise to

various  kinds  of  epileptoid  attacks  whose  classification  under  epilepsy  or

hysteria is at least doubtful. To quote Westphal:

On the basis of numerous observations I maintain that the so-called epileptoid

attacks form one of the commonest and most frequent symptoms in the group

of diseases we reckon among the mental diseases and neuropathies, and that

the mere appearance of one or more epileptic or epileptoid attacks is not

decisive either for the character and form of the disease or for its course andprognosis.… As already mentioned, I have used the term “epileptoid” in the

widest sense for the attack itself.17

The epileptoid elements in our case are not far to seek; on the other hand, one

can object that the colouring of the whole picture is hysterical in the extreme.

As against this we must point out that not every case of somnambulism is

ipso facto hysterical. Occasionally states occur in typical epilepsy which to

experts seem directly parallel with somnambulistic states, or which can be

distinguished from hysteria only by the occurrence of genuine convulsions.18

As Diehl19 has shown, neurasthenic inferiority may also give rise to “crises”

which often confuse the diagnosis. A definite content of ideas can even repeat

itself in stereotyped form in each crisis. Mörchen, too, has recently published

the case of an epileptoid neurasthenic twilight state.20

I  am  indebted  to  Professor  Bleuler  for  the  following  case:  An  educated

gentleman of middle age, with no epileptic antecedents, had worn himself out

with  years  of  mental  overwork.  Without  any  other  prodromal  symptoms

(such as depression, etc.), he attempted suicide on a holiday: in a peculiar

twilight state he suddenly threw himself into the water from a crowded spot

on the river bank. He was immediately hauled out and had only a vague

memory of the incident.

  With these observations in mind, we must certainly allow neurasthenia a 

considerable share in the attacks of our patient. The headaches and the 

“tendovaginitis” point to a mild degree of hysteria, normally latent but 

becoming manifest under the stress of exhaustion. The genesis  of  this  

peculiar  illness  explains  the  above-described relationship to epilepsy, 

hysteria, and neurasthenia. To sum up: Miss E. suffers from a psychopathic 

inferiority with a tendency to hysteria. Under the influence of nervous 

exhaustion she has fits of epileptoid  stupor whose interpretation is uncertain 

at first sight. As a result of an unusually large dose of alcohol, the attacks 

develop into definite somnambulism with hallucinations, which attach 

themselves to fortuitous external perceptions in the same way as dreams. 

When the nervous exhaustion is cured, the hysteriform symptoms disappear.

In the realm of psychopathic inferiority with hysterical colouring, we meet

with numerous phenomena which show, as in this case, symptoms belonging

to  several  different  clinical  pictures,  but  which  cannot  with  certainty  be

assigned to any one of them. Some of these states are already recognized as

disorders in their own right: e.g., pathological lying, pathological dreaminess,

etc. But many of them still await thorough scientific investigation; at presentthey belong more or less to the domain of scientific gossip. Persons with

habitual hallucinations, and also those who are inspired, exhibit these states;

they draw the attention of the crowd to themselves, now as poets or artists,

now as saviours, prophets, or founders of new sects.

The genesis of the peculiar mentality of these people is for the most part lost

in obscurity, for it is only very rarely that one of these singular personalities

can be subjected to exact observation. In view of the— sometimes—great

historical significance of such persons, it were much to be wished that we had

enough scientific material to give us closer insight into the psychological

development of their peculiarities. Apart from the now practically useless

productions of the pneumatological school at the beginning of the nineteenth

century,  there  is  a  remarkable  dearth  of  competent  observations  in  the

German scientific literature of the subject; indeed, there seems to be a real

aversion to investigation in this field. For the facts so far gathered we are

indebted almost exclusively to the labours of French and English workers. It

therefore seems at least desirable that our literature should be enlarged in this

respect. These reflections have prompted me to publish some observations

which will perhaps help to broaden our knowledge of the relations between

hysterical twilight states and the problems of normal psychology.

[2.] A CASE OF SOMNAMBULISM IN A GIRL WITH POOR

              INHERITANCE (SPIRITUALISTIC MEDIUM)

The following case was under my observation during the years 1899 and

1900. As I was not in medical attendance upon Miss S. W., unfortunately no

physical examination for hysterical stigmata could be made. I kept a detailed

diary of the séances, which I wrote down after each sitting. The report that

follows is a condensed account from these notes. Out of regard for Miss S.

W. and her family, a few unimportant data have been altered and various

details omitted from her “romances,” which for the most part are composed

of very intimate material.

[Anamnesis]

Miss S. W., 15½ years old, Protestant. The paternal grandfather was very

intelligent, a clergyman who frequently had waking hallucinations (mostly

visions, often whole dramatic scenes with dialogues, etc.). A brother of her

grandfather was feeble-minded, an eccentric who also saw visions. One of his

sisters was also a peculiar, odd character. The paternal grandmother, after a

feverish illness in her twentieth year—typhoid fever?—had a trance lasting for three days, from which she did not begin to awake 

until the crown of her head was burnt with a red-hot iron. Later on, when 

emotionally excited, she had fainting-fits; these were nearly always followed 

by a brief somnambulism during which she uttered prophecies. The father too 

was an odd, original personality with bizarre ideas. Two of his brothers were 

the same. All three had waking hallucinations. (Second sight, premonitions, 

etc.) A third brother was also eccentric and odd, talented  but  one-sided.  The  

mother  has  a  congenital  psychopathic inferiority often bordering on 

psychosis. One sister is an hysteric and a visionary, another sister suffers 

from “nervous heart-attacks.”

  S. W. is of delicate build, skull somewhat rachitic though not noticeably 

hydrocephalic, face rather pale, eyes dark, with a peculiar penetrating look. 

She has had no serious illnesses. At school she passed for average, showed 

little interest, was inattentive. In general, her behaviour was rather reserved, 

but this would suddenly give place to the most exuberant joy and exaltation. 

Of mediocre intelligence, with no special gifts, neither musical nor fond of 

books, she prefers handwork or just sitting around day-dreaming. Even at 

school she was often absentminded, misread in a peculiar way when reading 

aloud—for instance, instead of the word “Ziege” (goat) she would say 

“Geiss,” and instead of “Treppe” (stair) she would say “Stege”; this happened 

so often that her brothers and sisters used to laugh at her.21  Otherwise  there

were no abnormalities to be noticed about S. W., and especially no serious

hysterical symptoms. Her family were all artisans and business people with

very limited interests. Books of a mystical nature were never allowed in the

family. Her education was deficient; apart from the fact that there were many

brothers and sisters, all given a very casual education, the children suffered a

great  deal  from  the  inconsequent,  vulgar,  and  often  brutal  treatment  they

received from their mother. The father, a very preoccupied business man,

could not devote much time to his children and died when S. W. was still

adolescent. In these distressing circumstances it is no wonder that she felt

shut in and unhappy. She was often afraid to go home and preferred to be 

anywhere rather than there. Hence she was left a great deal with her 

playmates and grew up without much polish. Her educational level was 

accordingly pretty low and her interests were correspondingly limited. Her 

knowledge of literature was likewise very limited. She knew the usual poems 

of Schiller and Goethe and a few other poets learnt by heart at school, some 

snatches from a song-book, and fragments of the Psalms. Newspaper and magazine stories probably represented the upper limit in prose. Up to the time 

of her  somnambulism  she  had  never  read  anything  of  a  more  cultured 

nature.

[Somnambulistic  States]

At home and from friends she heard about table-turning and began to take an

interest in it. She asked to be allowed to take part in such experiments, and

her  desire  was  soon  gratified.  In  July  1899,  she  did  some  table-turning

several times in the family circle with friends, but as a joke. It was then

discovered that she was an excellent medium. Communications of a serious

nature arrived and were received amid general astonishment. Their pastoral

tone was surprising. The spirit gave himself out to be the grandfather of the

medium. As I was acquainted with the family, I was able to take part in these

experiments. At the beginning of August 1899, I witnessed the first attacks of

somnambulism. Their course was usually as follows: S. W. grew very pale,

slowly sank to the ground or into a chair, closed her eyes, became cataleptic,

drew  several  deep  breaths,  and  began  to  speak.  At  this  stage  she  was

generally quite relaxed, the eyelid reflexes remained normal and so did tactile

sensibility. She was sensitive to unexpected touches and easily frightened,

especially in the initial stage.

 She did not react when called by name. In her somnambulistic dialogues she 

copied in a remarkably clever way her dead relatives and acquaintances, with 

all their foibles, so that she made a lasting impression even on persons not 

easily influenced. She could also hit off people whom she knew only from 

hearsay, doing it so well that none of the spectators could deny her at least 

considerable talent as an actress. Gradually gestures began to accompany the 

words, and these finally led up to “attitudes passionnelles” and whole 

dramatic scenes. She flung herself into postures of prayer and rapture, with 

staring eyes, and spoke with impassioned and glowing rhetoric. On these 

occasions she made exclusive use of literary German, which she spoke with 

perfect ease and assurance, in complete contrast to her usual uncertain and 

embarrassed manner in the waking state. Her movements were free and of a 

noble grace, mirroring most beautifully her changing emotions. At this stage 

her behaviour during the attacks was irregular and  extraordinarily  varied. 

Now she would lie for ten minutes to two hours on the sofa or the floor, 

motionless, with closed eyes; now she assumed a half-sitting posture and 

spoke with altered voice and diction; now she was in constant movement, 

going through every possible pantomimic gesture. The content of her speeches was equally variable and irregular. Sometimes she spoke in the first 

person, but never for long, and then only to prophesy her next attack; 

sometimes—and this was the most usual—she spoke of herself in the third 

person. She then acted some other person, either a dead acquaintance or 

somebody she had invented, whose part she carried out consistently 

according to the characteristics she herself conceived. The ecstasy was 

generally followed by a cataleptic stage with flexibilitas cerea, which 

gradually passed over into the waking state. An almost constant feature was 

the sudden pallor which gave her face a waxen anaemic hue that was 

positively frightening. This sometimes occurred right at the beginning of the 

attack, but often in the second half only. Her pulse was then low but regular 

and of normal frequency; the breathing gentle, shallow, often barely 

perceptible. As we have already remarked, S. W. frequently predicted her 

attacks beforehand; just before the attacks she had strange sensations, became 

excited, rather anxious, and occasionally expressed thoughts of death, saying 

that she would probably die in one of these attacks, that her soul only hung 

on to her body by a very thin thread, so that her body could scarcely go on 

living. On one occasion after the cataleptic stage, tachypnoea was observed, 

lasting for two minutes with a respiration of 100 per minute. At first the 

attacks occurred spontaneously, but later S. W. could induce them by sitting 

in a dark corner and covering her face with her hands. But often the 

experiment did not succeed, as she had what she called “good” and “bad” 

days.

 The question of amnesia after the attacks is unfortunately very unclear. This 

much is certain, that after each attack she was perfectly oriented about  the  

specific  experiences  she  had  undergone  in  the “rapture.” It is, however, 

uncertain how much she remembered of the conversations for which she 

served as a medium, and of changes in her surroundings during the attack. It 

often looked as if she did have a vague recollection, for often she would ask 

immediately on waking: “Who was there? Wasn’t X or Y there? What did he 

say?” She also showed that she was superficially aware of the content of the 

conversations. She often remarked that the spirits told her before waking 

what they had said. But frequently this was not the case at all. If at her 

request someone repeated the trance speeches to her, she was very often 

indignant about them and would be sad and depressed for hours on end, 

especially if any unpleasant indiscretions had occurred. She would rail 

against the spirits and assert that next time she would ask her guide to keep such spirits away from her. Her indignation was not faked, for in the waking 

state she could barely control herself and her affects, so that any change of 

mood was immediately reflected in her face. At times she seemed barely, if at 

all, aware of what went on around her during the attack. She seldom noticed 

when anyone left the room or came into it. Once she forbade me to enter the 

room when she was expecting special communications which she wished to 

keep secret from me. I went in, nevertheless, sat down with the three other 

sitters, and listened to everything. S. W. had her eyes open and spoke to the 

others without noticing me. She only noticed me when I began to speak, 

which gave rise to a veritable storm of indignation. She remembered better, 

but still only vaguely, the remarks of participants which referred to the trance 

speeches or directly to herself. I could never discover any definite rapport in 

this connection.

Besides these “big” attacks, which seemed to follow a certain law, S.

W.  also  exhibited  a  large  number  of  other  automatisms.  Premonitions,

forebodings, unaccountable moods, and rapidly changing fancies were all in

the day’s work. I never observed simple states of sleep. On the other hand, I

soon noticed that in the middle of a lively conversation she would become all

confused  and  go  on  talking  senselessly  in  a  peculiar  monotonous  way,

looking in front of her dreamily with half-closed eyes. These lapses usually

lasted only a few minutes. Then she would suddenly go on: “Yes, what did

you say?” At first she would not give any information about these lapses,

saying  evasively  that  she  felt  a  bit  giddy,  had  a  headache,  etc.  Later  she

simply said: “They were there again,” meaning her spirits. She succumbed to

these lapses very much against her will; often she struggled against them: “I

don’t want to, not now, let them come another time, they seem to think I’m

there only for them.” The lapses came over her in the street, in shops, in fact

anywhere. If they happened in the street, she would lean against a house and

wait till the attack was over. During these attacks, whose intensity varied

considerably, she had visions; very often, and especially during attacks when

she turned extremely pale, she “wandered,” or, as she put it, lost her body and

was wafted to distant places where the spirits led her. Distant journeys during

ecstasy tired her exceedingly; she was often completely exhausted for hours

afterward, and many times complained that the spirits had again drained the

strength from her, such exertions were too much, the spirits must get another

medium,  etc.  Once  she  went  hysterically  blind  for  half  an  hour  after  the

ecstasy. Her gait was unsteady, groping; she had to be led, did not see thelight that stood on the table, though the pupils reacted.

Visions also came in large numbers even without proper lapses (if we use this

word  only  for  higher-grade  disturbances  of  attention).  At  first  they  were

confined to the onset of sleep. A little while after she had gone to bed the

room would suddenly light up, and shining white figures detached themselves

from the foggy brightness. They were all wrapped in white veil-like robes,

the women had things resembling turbans on their heads and wore girdles.

Later (according to her own statement) “the spirits were already there” when

she went to bed. Finally she saw the figures in broad daylight, though only

blurred and fleetingly if there was no real lapse (then the figures became solid

enough to touch). But she always preferred the darkness. According to her

account,  the  visions  were  generally  of  a  pleasant  nature.  Gazing  at  the

beautiful figures gave her a feeling of delicious bliss. Terrifying visions of a

daemonic character were much rarer. These were entirely confined to night-

time or dark rooms.

Occasionally she saw black figures in the street at night or in her room; once 

in the dark hallway she saw a terrible copper-red face which suddenly glared 

at her from very near and terrified her. I could not find out anything 

satisfactory about the first occurrence of the visions. She stated that in her 

fifth or sixth year she once saw her “guide” at night— her grandfather (whom 

she had never known in life). I could not obtain any objective clues about this 

early vision from her relatives. Nothing more of the kind is said to have 

happened until the first séance. Except for the hypnagogic brightness and 

“seeing sparks” there were never any rudimentary hallucinations; from the 

beginning the hallucinations were of a systematic nature involving all the 

sense organs equally. So far as the intellectual reaction to these phenomena is 

concerned, what is remarkable is the amazing matter-of-factness with which 

she regarded them. Her whole development into a somnambulist, her 

innumerable weird experiences, seemed to her entirely natural. She saw her 

whole past only in this light. Every in any way striking event from her earlier 

years stood in a clear and necessary relationship to her present situation. She 

was happy in the consciousness of having found her true vocation. Naturally 

she was unshakably convinced of the reality of her visions. I often tried to 

give her some critical explanation, but she would have none of it, since in her 

normal state she could not grasp a rational explanation anyway, and in her 

semi-somnambulistic state she regarded it as senseless in view of the facts 

staring her in the face. She once said: “I do not know if what the spirits say and teach me is true, nor do I know if they really are the people they call 

themselves; but that my spirits exist is beyond question. I see them before 

me, I can touch them. I speak to them about everything I wish as naturally as 

I’m talking to you. They must be real.” She absolutely would not listen to the 

idea that the manifestations were a kind of illness. Doubts about her health or 

about the reality of her dream-world distressed her deeply; she felt so hurt by 

my remarks that she closed up in my presence and for a long time refused to 

experiment if I was there; hence I took care not to express my doubts and 

misgivings aloud. On the other hand she enjoyed the undivided respect and 

admiration of her immediate relatives and acquaintances, who asked her 

advice about all sorts of things. In time she obtained such an influence over 

her followers that three of her sisters began to hallucinate too. The 

hallucinations usually began as night-dreams of a very vivid and dramatic 

kind which gradually passed over into the waking state—partly hypnagogic, 

partly hypnopompic. A married sister in particular had extraordinarily vivid 

dreams that developed logically from night to night and finally appeared in 

her waking consciousness first as indistinct delusions and then as real 

hallucinations, but they never reached the plastic clearness of S. W.’s visions. 

Thus, she once saw in a dream a black daemonic figure at her bedside in 

vigorous argument with a beautiful white figure  who  was trying to restrain 

the black; nevertheless the black figure seized her by the throat and started to 

choke her; then she awoke. Bending over her she saw a black shadow with 

human outlines, and near it a cloudy white figure. The vision disappeared 

only when she lighted the candle. Similar visions were repeated dozens of 

times. The visions of the other two sisters were similar but less intense.

 The type of attack we have described, with its wealth of fantastic visions and 

ideas, had developed in less than a month, reaching a climax which was never 

to be surpassed. What came later was only an elaboration of all the thoughts 

and the cycles of visions that had been more or less foreshadowed right at the 

beginning. In addition to the “big attacks” and the “little lapses,” whose 

content however was materially the same, there was a third category that 

deserves mention. These were the semi-somnambulistic states. They occurred 

at the beginning or end of the big attacks, but also independently of them. 

They developed slowly in the course of the first month. It is not possible to 

give a more precise date for their appearance. What was especially noticeable 

in this state was the rigid expression of the face, the shining eyes, and a 

certain dignity and stateliness of movement. In this condition S. W. was herself, or rather her somnambulist ego. She was fully oriented to the external 

world but seemed to have one foot in her dream-world. She saw and heard 

her spirits,  saw  how  they  walked  round  the  room  among  those  present, 

standing now by one person and now by another. She had a clear memory of 

her visions, of her journeys, and the instructions she received. She spoke 

quietly, clearly, and firmly, and was always in a serious, almost solemn, 

mood. Her whole being glowed with deep religious feeling, free from any 

pietistic flavour, and her speech was in no way influenced by the Biblical 

jargon of her guide. Her solemn behaviour had something sorrowful and 

melancholy about it. She was painfully conscious of the great difference 

between her nocturnal ideal world and the crude reality of day. This state was

in sharp contrast to her waking existence; in it there was no trace of that

unstable  and  inharmonious  creature,  of  that  brittle  nervous  temperament

which was so characteristic of her usual behaviour. Speaking with her, you

had  the  impression  of  speaking  with  a  much  older  person,  who  through

numerous experiences had arrived at a state of calm composure. It was in this

state that she achieved her best results, whereas her romances corresponded

more  closely  to  her  waking  interests.  The  semi-somnambulism  usually

appeared spontaneously, as a rule during the table-turning experiments, and it

always began by S. W.’s knowing beforehand what the table was going to

say. She would then stop table- turning and after a short pause would pass

suddenly into an ecstasy. She proved to be very sensitive. She could guess

and answer simple questions devised by a member of the circle who was not

himself a medium. It was enough to lay a hand on the table, or on her hands,

to give her the necessary clues. Direct thought transference could never be

established.  Beside  the  obvious  broadening  of  her  whole  personality  the

continued existence of her ordinary character was all the more startling. She

talked with unconcealed pleasure about all her little childish experiences, the

flirtations and love secrets, the naughtiness and rudeness of her companions

and playmates. To anyone who did not know her secret she was just a girl of

15½, no different from thousands of other girls. So much the greater was

people’s astonishment when they came to know her other side. Her relatives

could not grasp the change at first; part of it they never understood at all, so

that there were often bitter arguments in the family, some of them siding with

S.  W.  and  others  against  her,  either  with  gushing  enthusiasm  or  with

contemptuous censure of her “superstition.” Thus S. W., during the time that

I knew her, led a curiously contradictory life, a real “double life” with twopersonalities existing side by side or in succession, each continually striving

for  mastery.  I  will  now  give  some  of  the  most  interesting  details  of  the

séances in chronological order.

[Records of Séances]

FIRST AND SECOND SITTINGS (August 1899). S. W. at once took control

of  the  “communications.”  The  “psychograph,”  for  which  an  overturned

tumbler was used, the two fingers of the right hand being placed upon it,

moved with lightning speed from letter to letter. (Slips of paper, marked with

letters and numbers, had been arranged in a circle round the glass.) It was

communicated that the medium’s grandfather was present and would speak to

us.  There  now  followed  numerous  communications  in  quick  succession,

mostly of an edifying religious character, partly in properly formed words

and partly with the letters transposed or in reverse order. These latter words

and sentences were often produced so rapidly that one could not follow the

meaning and only discovered it afterwards by reversing the letters. Once the

messages  were  interrupted  in  brusque  fashion  by  a  new  communication

announcing  the  presence  of  the  writer’s  grandfather.  Someone  remarked

jokingly:  “Evidently  the  two  spirits  don’t  get  on  very  well  together.”

Darkness  came  on  during  the  experiment.  Suddenly  S.  W.  became  very

agitated, jumped up nervously, fell on her knees, and cried: “There, there,

don’t you see that light, that star there?” She grew more and more excited,

and called for a lamp in terror. She was pale, wept, said she felt queer, did not

know what was the matter with her. When a lamp was brought she quieted

down. The experiments were suspended.

At the next sitting, which took place two days later, also in the evening,

similar  communications  were  obtained  from  S.  W.’s  grandfather.  When

darkness fell she suddenly lay back on the sofa, grew pale, closed her eyes to

a slit, and lay there motionless. The eyeballs were turned upwards, the eye-lid

reflex  was  present,  also  tactile  sensibility.  Respiration  gentle,  almost

imperceptible. Pulse low and feeble. This condition lasted about half an hour,

whereupon she suddenly got up with a sigh. The extreme pallor of the face,

which had lasted all through the attack, now gave way to her usual rosy

colour. She was somewhat confused and embarrassed, said she had seen “all

sorts”  of  things,  but  would  tell  nothing.  Only  after  insistent  questioning

would  she  admit  that  in  a  peculiar  waking  condition  she  had  seen  her

grandfather arm-in-arm with my grandfather. Then they suddenly drove past

sitting side by side in an open carriage.THIRD SITTING. In this, which took place a few days later, there was a

similar attack of more than half an hour’s duration. S. W. afterwards told of

many  white  transfigured  forms  who  each  gave  her  a  flower  of  special

symbolic  significance.  Most  of  them  were  dead  relatives.  Concerning  the

details of their talk she maintained an obstinate silence.

FOURTH SITTING. After S. W. had passed into the somnambulistic state

she began to make peculiar movements with her lips, emitting at the same

time  gulping  and  gurgling  noises.  Then  she  whispered  something

unintelligible  very  softly.  When  this  had  gone  on  for  some  minutes  she

suddenly began speaking in an altered, deep tone of voice. She spoke of

herself in the third person: “She is not here. she has gone away.” There now

followed  several  sentences  in  a  religious  vein.  From  their  content  and

language one could see that she was imitating her grandfather, who had been

a clergyman. The gist of the talk did not rise above the mental level of the

“communications.”  The  tone  of  voice  had  something  artificial  and  forced

about it, and only became natural when in due course it grew more like the

medium’s own. (In later sittings the voice only altered for a few moments

when a new spirit manifested itself.) Afterwards she had no remembrance of

the trance conversation. She gave hints about a sojourn in the other world and

spoke of the unimaginable blessedness she felt. It should be noted that during

the  attack  her  talk  was  absolutely  spontaneous  and  not  prompted  by  any

suggestions.

Immediately after this sitting S. W. became acquainted with Justinus Kerner’s

book Die Seherin von Prevorst.22 She thereupon began to magnetize herself

towards the end of the attacks, partly by means of regular passes, partly by

strange circles and figures of eight which she executed symmetrically with

both arms at once. She did this, she said, to dispel the severe headaches that

came  after  the  attacks.  In  other  August  sittings  (not  detailed  here)  the

grandfather  was  joined  by  numerous  kindred  spirits  who  did  not  produce

anything very remarkable. Each time a new spirit appeared, the movements

of the glass altered in a startling way: it ran along the row of letters, knocking

against some of them, but no sense could be made of it. The spelling was

very uncertain and arbitrary, and the first sentences were often incomplete or

broken up into meaningless jumbles of letters. In most cases fluent writing

suddenly began at this point. Sometimes automatic writing was attempted in

complete darkness. The movements began with violent jerkings of the whole

arm,  so  that  the  pencil  went  right  through  the  paper.  The  first  attemptconsisted of numerous strokes and zigzag lines about 8 cm. high. Further

attempts first produced illegible words written very large, then the writing

gradually grew smaller and more distinct. It was not much different from the

medium’s own. The control spirit was once again the grandfather.

 FIFTH SITTING. Somnambulistic attacks in September 1899. S. W. sat on 

the sofa, leant back, shut her eyes, breathing lightly and regularly. She 

gradually became cataleptic. The catalepsy disappeared after about two 

minutes, whereupon she lay there apparently sleeping quietly, muscles quite 

relaxed. Suddenly she began talking in a low voice: “No, you take the red, I’ll 

take the white. You can take the green, and you the blue. Are you ready? 

Let’s go.” (Pause of several minutes, during which her face assumed a 

corpse-like pallor. Her hands felt cold and were quite bloodless.) Suddenly 

she called out in a loud solemn voice:  “Albert, Albert, Albert,” then in a 

whisper: “Now you speak,” followed  by  a longer pause during which the 

pallor of her face reached its highest conceivable intensity. Again in a loud 

solemn voice: “Albert, Albert, don’t you believe your father? I tell you there 

are many mistakes in N’s teaching. Think about it.” Pause. The pallor 

decreased. “He’s very frightened, he couldn’t speak any more.” (These words 

in her usual conversational tone.) Pause. “He will certainly think about it.” 

She went on speaking in the same conversational tone but in a strange idiom 

that sounded like French and Italian mixed, recalling now one and now the 

other. She spoke fluently, rapidly, and with charm. It was possible to make 

out a few words, but not to memorize them, because the language was so 

strange. From time to time certain words recurred, like wena, wenes, wenai, 

wene, etc. The absolute naturalness of the performance was amazing. Now 

and then she paused as if someone were answering her. Suddenly she said, in 

German: “Oh dear, is it time already?” (In a sad voice.) “Must I go? 

Goodbye, goodbye!” At these words there passed over her face an 

indescribable expression of ecstatic happiness. She raised her arms, opened 

her eyes, till now closed, and looked  upwards  radiantly.  For  a  moment  she

remained in this position, then her arms sank down slackly, her face became

tired and exhausted. After a short cataleptic stage she woke up with a sigh.

“I’ve slept again, haven’t I?” She was told she had been talking in her sleep,

whereupon she became wildly annoyed, and her anger increased still more

when she learned that she was talking in a foreign language. “But I told the

spirits I didn’t want to, I can’t do it, it tires me too much.” (Began to cry.)

“Oh God, must everything, everything come back again like last time, am I tobe spared nothing?”

The next day at the same time there was another attack. After S. W. had

dropped off, Ulrich von Gerbenstein suddenly announced himself. He proved

to be an amusing gossip, speaking fluent High German with a North German

accent. Asked what S. W. was doing, he explained with much circumlocution

that she was far away, and that he was here meanwhile to look after her body,

its circulation, respiration, etc. He must take care that no black person got

hold of her and harmed her. On insistent questioning he said that S. W. had

gone with the others to Japan, to look up a distant relative and stop him from

a stupid marriage. He then announced in a whisper the exact moment when

the meeting took place. Forbidden to talk for a few minutes, he pointed to S.

W.’s sudden pallor, remarking that materialization at such great distances

cost a corresponding amount of strength. He then ordered cold compresses to

be applied to her head so as to alleviate the severe headache which would

come  afterwards.  With  the  gradual  return  of  colour  to  her  face,  the

conversation became more animated. There were all sorts of childish jokes

and trivialities, then U. v. G. suddenly said: “I see them coming, but they are

still very far off; I see her there like a little star.” S. W. pointed to the north.

We naturally asked in astonishment why they were not coming from the east,

whereupon U. v. G. laughingly replied: “They come the direct way over the

North Pole. I must go now, goodbye.” Immediately afterwards S. W. awoke

with a sigh, in a bad temper, complaining of violent headache. She said she

had seen U. v. G. standing by her body; what had he told us? She was furious

about the “silly chatter,” why couldn’t he lay off it for once?

SIXTH SITTING. Began in the usual way. Extreme pallor; lay stretched out,

scarcely breathing. Suddenly she spoke in a loud solemn voice: “Well then,

be frightened; I am. I warn you about N’s teaching. Look, in hope there is

everything needed for faith. You want to know who I am? God gives where

one least expects it. Don’t you know me?” Then unintelligible whispering.

After a few minutes she woke up.

SEVENTH SITTING. S. W. soon fell asleep, stretched out on the sofa.

Very pale. Said nothing, sighed deeply from time to time. Opened her eyes,

stood up, sat down on the sofa, bent forward, saying softly: “You have sinned

grievously,  have  fallen  far.”  Bent  still  further  forward  as  if  speaking  to

someone kneeling in front of her. Stood up, turned to the right, stretched out

her hand, and pointed to the spot over which she had been bending: “Will you

forgive her?” she asked loudly. “Do not forgive men, but their spirits. Notshe, but her human body has sinned.” Then she knelt down, remained for

about ten minutes in an attitude of prayer. Suddenly she got up, looked to

heaven  with  an  ecstatic  expression,  and  then  threw  herself  on  her  knees

again, her face in her hands, whispering incomprehensible words. Remained

motionless  in  this  attitude  for  several  minutes.  Then  she  got  up,  gazed

heavenward  again  with  radiant  countenance,  and  lay  down  on  the  sofa,

waking soon afterwards.

Development of the Somnambulistic Personalities

At the beginning of many séances, the glass was allowed to move by itself,

and this was always followed by the stereotyped invitation: “You must ask a

question.” Since several convinced spiritualists were attending the séances,

there was of course an immediate demand for all manner of spiritualistic

marvels, especially for the “protecting spirits.” At these requests the names of

well-known  dead  persons  were  sometimes  produced,  and  sometimes

unknown names such as Berthe de Valours, Elisabeth von Thierfelsenburg,

Ulrich von Gerbenstein, etc. The control spirit was almost without exception

the medium’s grandfather, who once declared that “he loved her more than

anyone in this world because he had protected her from childhood up and

knew  all  her  thoughts.”  This  personality  produced  a  flood  of  Biblical

maxims,  edifying  observations,  and  song-book  verses,  also  verses  he  had

presumably composed himself, like the following:

Be firm and true in thy believing, To faith in God cling ever nigh,

Thy  heavenly  comfort  never  leaving,  Which  having,  man  can  never  die.

Refuge in God is peace for ever When earthly cares oppress the mind; Who

from the heart can pray is never Bow’d down by fate howe’er unkind.

Numerous other effusions of this sort betrayed by their hackneyed, unctuous

content  their  origin  in  some  tract  or  other.  From  the  time  S.  W.  began

speaking in her ecstasies, lively dialogues developed between members of the

circle and the somnambulist personality. The gist of the answers received was

essentially  the  same  as  the  banal  and  generally  edifying  verbiage  of  the

psychographic  communications.  The  character  of  this  personality  was

distinguished by a dry and tedious solemnity, rigorous conventionality, and

sanctimonious piety (which does not accord, at all with the historical reality).

The grandfather was the medium’s guide and protector. During the ecstasies

he  offered  all  kinds  of  advice,  prophesied  later  attacks  and  what  would

happen when she woke, etc. He ordered cold compresses, gave instructions

concerning the way the medium should lie on the couch, arrangements forsittings, and so on. His relationship to the medium was exceedingly tender. In

vivid  contrast  to  this  heavy-footed  dream-personage,  there  appeared  a

personality  who  had  cropped  up  occasionally  in  the  psychographic

communications of the first sittings. He soon disclosed himself as the dead

brother  of  a  Mr.  R.,  who  was  then  taking  part  in  the  séances.  This  dead

brother,  Mr.  P.  R.,  peppered  his  living  brother  with  commonplaces  about

brotherly love, etc. He evaded specific questions in every possible way. At

the same time he developed a quite astonishing eloquence toward the ladies

of the circle, and in particular paid his attentions to a lady whom he had never

known in life. He stated that even when alive he had always raved about her,

had often met her in the street without knowing who she was, and was now

absolutely delighted to make her acquaintance in this unusual manner. His

stale compliments, pert remarks to the men, innocuous childish jokes, etc.,

took  up  a  large  part  of  the  séances.  Several  members  of  the  circle  took

exception to the frivolity and banality of this spirit, whereupon he vanished

for one or two sittings, but soon reappeared, at first well- behaved, often with

Christian phrases on his lips, but before long slipping back into his old form.

Besides these two sharply differentiated personalities, others appeared who

varied but little from the grandfather type; they were mostly dead relatives of

the medium. The general atmosphere of the first two months’ séances was

accordingly solemn and edifying, disturbed only from time to time by P. R.’s

trivial chatter. A few weeks after the beginning of the séances Mr. R. left our

circle, whereupon a remarkable change took place in P. R.’s behaviour. He

grew  monosyllabic,  came  less  often,  and  after  a  few  sittings  vanished

altogether. Later on he reappeared very occasionally, and mostly only when

the medium was alone with the lady in question. Then a new personality

thrust himself to the forefront; unlike P. R., who always spoke Swiss dialect,

this gentleman affected a strong North German accent. In all else he was an

exact copy of P. R. His eloquence was astonishing, since S. W. had only a

very scanty knowledge of High German, whereas this new personality, who

called  himself  Ulrich  von  Gerbenstein,  spoke  an  almost  faultless  German

abounding in amiable phrases and charming compliments.23

 Ulrich von Gerbenstein was a gossip, a wag, and an idler, a great admirer of 

the ladies, frivolous and extremely superficial. During  the winter of 

1899/1900 he came to dominate the situation more and more, and took over 

one by one all the above-mentioned functions of the grandfather, so that the 

serious character of the séances visibly deteriorated under his influence. All efforts to counteract it proved unavailing, and finally the séances had to be 

suspended on this account for longer and longer periods.

 One feature which all these somnambulist personalities have in common 

deserves mention. They have at their disposal the whole of the medium’s 

memory, even the unconscious portion of it, they are also au courant with the 

visions she has in the ecstatic state, but they have only the most superficial 

knowledge of her fantasies during the ecstasy. Of the somnambulistic dreams 

they only know what can occasionally be picked up from members of the 

circle. On doubtful points they can give no information, or only such as 

contradicts the medium’s own explanations. The stereotyped answer to all 

questions of this kind is  “Ask  Ivenes, Ivenes knows.”24 From the examples

we  have  given  of  the  different  ecstasies  it  is  clear  that  the  medium’s

consciousness  is  by  no  means  idle  during  the  trance,  but  develops  an

extraordinarily  rich  fantasy  activity.  In  reconstructing  her  somnambulistic

ego we are entirely dependent on her subsequent statements, for in the first

place the spontaneous utterances of the ego associated with the waking state

are few and mostly disjointed, and in the second place many of the ecstasies

pass off without pantomime and without speech, so that no conclusions about

inner processes can be drawn from external appearances. S. W. is almost

totally amnesic in regard to the automatic phenomena during ecstasy, in so

far as these fall within the sphere of personalities foreign to her ego. But she

usually has a clear memory of all the other phenomena directly connected

with  her  ego,  such  as  talking  in  a  loud  voice,  glossolalia,  etc.  In  every

instance, there is complete amnesia only in the first few moments after the

ecstasy. During the first half hour, when a kind of semi-somnambulism with

reveries, hallucinations, etc. is still present, the amnesia gradually disappears,

and fragmentary memories come up of what has happened, though in a quite

irregular and arbitrary fashion.

 The later séances usually began by our joining hands on the table, 

whereupon the table immediately started to move. Meanwhile S. W. 

gradually became somnambulistic, took her hands from the table, lay back on 

the sofa, and fell into an ecstatic sleep. She sometimes related her experiences 

to us afterwards, but was very reticent if strangers were present. Even after 

the first few ecstasies, she hinted that she played a distinguished role among 

the spirits. Like all the spirits, she had a special name, and hers was Ivenes; 

her grandfather surrounded her with quite particular care, and in the ecstasy 

with the flower-vision she learnt special secrets about which she still maintained the deepest silence. During the séances when her spirits spoke she 

made long journeys, mostly to relatives whom she visited, or she found 

herself in the Beyond, in “that space between the stars which people think is 

empty, but which really contains countless spirit worlds.” In the semi-

somnambulistic state that frequently followed her attacks she once gave a 

truly poetic description of a landscape in the Beyond, “a wonderful moonlit 

valley that was destined for generations as yet unborn.” She described her 

somnambulistic ego as a personality almost entirely freed from the body: a 

small but fully grown black-haired  woman,  of  a  markedly  Jewish  type,  

clothed  in  white garments, her head wrapped in a turban. As for herself, she 

understood and spoke the language of the spirits—for the spirits still speak 

with one another from human habit, although they don’t really need to 

because they can see one another’s thoughts. She did not always actually talk 

with them, she just looked at them and knew what they were thinking. She 

travelled in the company of four or five spirits, dead relatives, and visited her 

living relatives and acquaintances in order to investigate their life and way of 

thinking; she also visited all the places that lay on her ghostly beat. After 

becoming acquainted with Kerner’s book, she (like the Clairvoyante) felt it 

her destiny to instruct and improve the black spirits who are banished to 

certain regions or who dwell partly beneath the earth’s surface. This activity 

caused her a good deal of trouble and pain; both during and after the ecstasies 

she complained of suffocating feelings, violent headaches, etc. But every 

fortnight, on Wednesdays, she was allowed to spend the whole night in the 

gardens of the Beyond in the company of the blessed spirits. There she 

received instruction concerning the forces that govern the world and the 

endlessly complicated relationships between human beings, and also 

concerning the laws of reincarnation, the star-dwellers, etc. Unfortunately she 

expatiated only on the system of world-forces and reincarnation, and merely 

let fall an occasional remark concerning the other subjects. For instance, she 

once returned from a railway journey in an extremely agitated state. We 

thought at first that something unpleasant must have happened to her; but 

finally she pulled herself together and explained that “a star-dweller had sat 

opposite her in the train.” From the description she gave of this being I 

recognized an elderly merchant I happened to know, who had a rather 

unsympathetic face. Apropos of this event, she told us all the peculiarities of 

the star-dwellers: they have no godlike souls, as men have, they pursue no 

science, no philosophy, but in the technical arts they are far more advanced than we are. Thus, flying machines have long been in existence on Mars; the 

whole of Mars is covered with canals, the canals  are artificial lakes and are 

used for irrigation. The canals are all flat ditches, the water in them is very 

shallow. The excavating of the canals caused the

Martians no particular trouble, as the soil there is lighter than on earth. There

are  no  bridges  over  the  canals,  but  that  does  not  prevent  communication

because everybody travels by flying machine. There are no wars on the stars,

because no differences of opinion exist. The star- dwellers do not have a

human shape but the most laughable ones imaginable, such as no one could

possibly conceive. Human spirits who get permission to travel in the Beyond

are not allowed to set foot on the stars. Similarly, travelling star-dwellers may

not touch down on earth but must remain at a distance of some 75 feet above

its surface. Should they infringe this law, they remain in the power of the

earth and must take on human bodies, from which they are freed only after

their natural death. As human beings they are cold, hard-hearted, and cruel. S.

W.  can  recognize  them  by  their  peculiar  expression,  which  lacks  the

“spiritual,” and by their hairless, eyebrowless, sharply cut faces. Napoleon I

was a typical star-dweller.

On her journeys she did not see the places through which she hastened. She

had the feeling of floating, and the spirits told her when she was in the right

spot. Then, as a rule, she saw only the face and upper part of the person

before whom she wished to appear or whom she wanted to see. She could

seldom say in what kind of surroundings she saw this person. Occasionally

she  saw  me,  but  only  my  head  without  any  background.  She  was  much

occupied with the enchanting of spirits, and for this purpose wrote oracular

sayings in a foreign tongue on slips of paper which she concealed in all sorts

of queer places. Especially displeasing to her was the presence in my house

of an Italian murderer, whom she called Conventi. She tried several times to

cast a spell on him, and without my knowledge concealed several slips of

paper about the place, which were later found by accident. One of them had

the following message written on it (in red pencil):Figure 1

Unfortunately I never managed to get a translation, for in this matter

S. W. was quite unapproachable.

Occasionally the somnambulistic Ivenes spoke directly to the public.

She did so in dignified language that sounded slightly precocious, but Ivenes

was not boringly unctuous or irrepressibly silly like her two guides; she is a

serious, mature person, devout and right-minded, full of womanly tenderness

and  very  modest,  who  always  submits  to  the  opinion  of  others.  There  is

something soulful and elegiac about her, an air of melancholy resignation;

she  longs  to  get  out  of  this  world,  she  returns  unwillingly  to  reality,  she

bemoans her hard lot, her odious family circumstances. With all this she is

something  of  a  great  lady;  she  orders  her  spirits  about,  despises  von

Gerbenstein’s stupid “chatter,” comforts others, succours those in distress,

warns and protects them from dangers to body and soul. She is the channel

for the entire intellectual output of all the manifestations, though she herself

ascribes this to instruction by the spirits. It is Ivenes who directly controls S.

W.’s semi-somnambulistic state.

The Romances

 The  peculiar  ghostlike  look  in  S.  W.’s  eyes  during  her  semi- 

somnambulism prompted some members of the circle to compare her to the 

Clairvoyante of Prevorst. The suggestion was not without consequences. S. 

W. gave hints of earlier existences she had already lived through, and after a 

few weeks she suddenly disclosed a whole system of reincarnations, although 

she had never mentioned anything of the sort before. Ivenes, she said, was a 

spiritual being who had certain advantages over the spirits of other human 

beings. Every human spirit must embody itself in the course of the centuries. But Ivenes had to embody herself at least once every two hundred years; 

apart from her, only two human beings shared this fate, namely Swedenborg 

and Miss Florence Cook (Crookes’s24a famous medium). S. W. called these

two personages her brother and sister. She gave no information about their

previous existences. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, Ivenes had

been  Frau  Hauffe,  the  Clairvoyante  of  Prevorst,  and  at  the  end  of  the

eighteenth  century  a  clergyman’s  wife  in  central  Germany  (locality

unspecified), in which capacity she had been seduced by Goethe and had

borne him a son. In the fifteenth century she had been a Saxon countess, with

the poetic name of Thierfelsenburg. Ulrich von Gerbenstein was a relative

from that time. The lapse of three hundred years before her next incarnation,

and  the  slip-up  with  Goethe,  had  to  be  atoned  for  by  the  sorrows  of  the

Clairvoyante. In the thirteenth century, she had been a noblewoman with the

name of de Valours, in the south of France, and had been burnt as a witch.

From the thirteenth century back to the time of the Christian persecutions

under Nero there had been numerous reincarnations, of which S. W. gave no

account. During the Christian persecutions she had played a martyr’s part.

Then came another great darkness, back to the time of David, when Ivenes

had been an ordinary Jewess. After her death as such, she had received from

Astaf, an angel in one of the higher heavens, the mandate for her wonderful

career. In all her pre-existences she had been a medium and an intermediary

between this world and the Beyond. Her brothers and sisters were equally old

and had the same profession. In each of her pre-existences she had invariably

been married, and in this way founded a colossal family tree, with whose

endlessly  complicated  relationships  she  was  occupied  in  many  of  her

ecstasies. Thus, some time in the eighth century she had been the mother of

her earthly father and, what is more, of her grandfather and mine. Hence the

remarkable friendship between these two old gentlemen, otherwise strangers.

As Mme. de Valours she had been my mother. When she had been burnt as a

witch I had taken it very much to heart; I had retired to a monastery in Rouen,

wore a grey habit, became prior, wrote a work on botany, and died at over

eighty  years  of  age.  In  the  refectory  of  the  monastery  there  had  hung  a

portrait of Mme. de Valours, in which she was depicted in a half-sitting, half-

reclining position. (S. W. in the semi- somnambulistic state often assumed

this position on the sofa. It corresponds exactly to that of Mme. Récamier in

David’s  well-known  painting.)  A  gentleman  who  often  took  part  in  the

séances and bore a distant resemblance to me was also one of her sons fromthat time. Around this core of relationships there now grouped themselves, at

a greater or lesser distance, all the persons in any way related or known to

her. One came from the fifteenth century, another was a cousin from the

eighteenth century, and so on.

From the three great family stocks there sprang the greater part of the races of

Europe. She and her brothers and sisters were descended from Adam, who

arose by materialization; the other races then in existence, from among whom 

Cain took his wife, were descended from monkeys. From these interrelated 

groups S. W. produced a vast amount of family gossip, a spate of romantic 

stories, piquant adventures, etc. The special target of her romances was a lady 

acquaintance of mine, who for some undiscoverable reason was peculiarly 

antipathetic to her. She declared that this lady was the incarnation of a 

celebrated Parisian poisoner who had achieved great notoriety in the 

eighteenth century. This lady, she maintained, still continued her dangerous 

work, but in a much more ingenious and refined fashion than before. Through 

the inspiration of the wicked spirits who accompanied her, she had 

discovered a fluid which when merely exposed to the air attracted any 

tubercle bacilli flying about and formed a splendid culture medium for them. 

By means of this fluid, which she was in the habit of mixing with food, she 

had caused the death of her husband (who had indeed died from 

tuberculosis), also of one of her lovers and of her own brother, so as to get his 

inheritance. Her eldest son was an illegitimate child by her lover. During her 

widowhood she had secretly borne an illegitimate child to another lover, and 

had finally had illicit relations with her own brother, whom she later 

poisoned. In this way S. W. wove innumerable stories in which she believed 

implicitly. The characters in these romances also appeared in her visions, as 

for instance this lady in the above-mentioned vision with its pantomime of 

confession and forgiveness of sin. Anything at all interesting that happened in 

her surroundings was drawn into this system of romances and given a place 

in the family relationships with a more or less clear account of the pre- 

existences and influencing spirits. So it fared with all persons who made S. 

W.’s acquaintance: they were rated as a second or a first incarnation 

according to whether they had a well-marked or an indistinct character. In 

most cases they were also designated as relatives and always in the same 

quite definite way. Only afterwards, often several weeks later, a new and 

complicated romance would suddenly make  its  appearance  after  an ecstasy,

explaining the striking relationship by means of pre-existences or illegitimate liaisons. Persons sympathetic to S. W. were usually very close relatives. 

These family romances (with the exception of the one described above) were 

all composed very carefully, so that it was absolutely impossible to check up 

on them. They were delivered with the most amazing aplomb and often 

surprised us by the extremely clever  use  of details which S. W. must have 

heard or picked up from somewhere. Most of the romances had a pretty 

gruesome character: murder by poison and dagger, seduction and banishment, 

forgery of wills, and so forth played a prominent  role.

Mystic Science

S.  W.  was  subjected  to  numerous  suggestions  in  regard  to  scientific

questions. Generally, towards the end of the séances, various subjects of a

scientific or spiritualistic nature were discussed and debated. S. W. never

took  part  in  the  conversation,  but  sat  dreamily  in  a  corner  in  a  semi-

somnambulistic condition. She listened now to one thing and now to another,

catching it in a half dream, but she could never give a coherent account of

anything  if  one  asked  her  about  it,  and  she  only  half  understood  the

explanations. In the course of the winter, various hints began to emerge in the

séances: “The spirits brought her strange revelations about the world forces

and the Beyond, but she could not say anything just now.” Once she tried to

give a description, but only said “on one side was the light, on the other side

the power of attraction.” Finally, in March 1900, after nothing more had been

heard of these things for some time, she suddenly announced with a joyful

face that she had now received everything from the spirits. She drew forth a

long narrow strip of paper on which numerous names were written. Despite

my request she would not let it out of her hands, but told me to draw a

diagram [fig. 2].

I can remember clearly that in the winter of 1899/1900 we spoke several

times in S. W.’s presence of attractive and repulsive forces in connection with

Kant’s Natural History and Theory of the Heavens,25 also of the law of the

conservation of energy, of the different forms of energy, and of whether the

force of gravity is also a form of motion. From the content of these talks S.

W. had evidently derived the foundations of her mystic system. She gave the

following  explanations:  The  forces  are  arranged  in  seven  circles.  Outside

these there are three more, containing unknown forces midway between force

and matter. Matter is found in seven outer circles surrounding the ten inner

ones.26 In the centre stands the Primary Force; this is the original cause of

creation and is a spiritual force. The first circle which surrounds the PrimaryForce is Matter, which is not a true force and does not arise from the Primary

Force. But it combines with the Primary Force and from this combination

arise  other  spiritual  forces:  on  one  side  the  Good  or  Light  Powers

[Magnesor], on the other side the Dark Powers [Connesor]. The Magnesor

Power contains the most Primary Force, and the Connesor Power the least,

since there the dark power of matter is greatest. The further the Primary Force

advances outwards the weaker it becomes, but weaker too becomes the power

of matter, since its power is greatest where the collision with the Primary

Force is most violent, i.e., in the Connesor Power. In every circle there are

analogous  forces  of  equal  strength  working  in  opposite  directions.  The

system could also be written out in a single line or column, beginning with

Primary Force, Magnesor, Cafar, etc., and then—going from left to right on

the diagram—up through Tusa and Endos to Connesor; but in that way it

would be difficult to see the different degrees of intensity. Every force in an

outer circle is composed of the nearest adjacent forces of the inner circle.

























Figure 2

 THE MAGNESOR GROUP. From Magnesor descend in direct line the so- 

called Powers of Light, which are only slightly influenced by the dark side. Magnesor and Cafar together form the Life Force, which is not uniform but is 

differently composed in animals and plants. Man’s life- force stands between 

Magnesor and Cafar. Morally good persons and mediums who facilitate 

communication between good spirits and  the earth have most Magnesor. 

Somewhere about the middle are the life- forces of animals, and in Cafar 

those of plants. Nothing is known about Hefa, or rather S. W. can give no 

information. Persus is the basic force that manifests itself in the forces of 

motion. Its recognizable forms are Heat, Light, Electricity, Magnetism, and 

two unknown forces, one  of which is to be found only in comets. Of the 

forces in the sixth circle, S. could only name North and South Magnetism and

Positive  and  Negative  Electricity.  Deka  is  unknown.  Smar  is  of  special

significance, to be discussed below; it leads over to:

THE HYPOS GROUP. Hypos and Hyfonism are powers which dwell only in

certain human beings, in those who are able to exert a magnetic influence on

others. Athialowi is the sexual instinct. Chemical affinity is directly derived

from it. In the seventh circle comes Inertia. Surus and Kara are of unknown

significance. Pusa corresponds to Smar in the opposite sense.

THE CONNESOR GROUP. Connesor is the counterpole to Magnesor. It is

the dark and evil power equal in intensity to the good power of Light. What

the good power creates it turns into its opposite. Endos is a basic power in

minerals. From Tusa (significance unknown) is derived Gravitation, which in

its turn is described as the basic power manifesting itself in the forces of

resistance (gravity, capillarity, adhesion, and cohesion). Nakus is the secret

power in a rare stone which counteracts the effect of snake poison. The two

powers Smar and Pusa have a special significance. According to S. W., Smar

develops in the bodies of morally good people at the moment of death. This

power enables the soul to ascend to the powers of Light. Pusa works the

opposite way, for it is the power that leads the morally bad soul into the state

of Connesor on the dark side.

With the sixth circle the visible world begins; this appears to be so sharply

divided from the Beyond only because of the imperfection of our organs of

sense. In reality the transition is a very gradual one, and there are people who

live on a higher plane of cosmic knowledge because their perceptions and

sensations are finer than those of other human beings. Such “seers” are able

to see manifestations of force where ordinary people can see nothing. S. W.

sees Magnesor as a shining white or bluish vapour which develops when

good spirits are near. Connesor is a black fuming fluid which develops on theappearance of “black” spirits. On the night before the great visions began, the

shiny Magnesor vapour spread round her in thick layers, and the good spirits

solidified  out  of  it  into  visible  white  figures.  It  was  just  the  same  with

Connesor.  These  two  forces  have  their  different  mediums.  S.  W.  is  a

Magnesor medium, like the Clairvoyante of Prevorst and Swedenborg. The

materialization mediums of the spiritualists are mostly Connesor mediums,

since  materialization  takes  place  much  more  easily  through  Connesor  on

account of its close connection with the properties of matter. In the summer

of 1900, S. W. tried several times to produce a picture of the circles of matter,

but she never got beyond vague and incomprehensible hints, and afterwards

she spoke of it no more.

Termination of the Disorder

The  really  interesting  and  significant  séances  came  to  an  end  with  the

production of the power system. Even before this, the vitality of the ecstasies

had been falling off considerably. Ulrich von Gerbenstein came increasingly

to the forefront and filled the séances for hours on end with his childish

chatter. The visions which S. W. had in the meantime likewise seem to have

lost much of their richness and plasticity of form, for afterwards she was only

able to report ecstatic feelings in the presence of good spirits and disagreeable

ones  in  that  of  bad  spirits.  Nothing  new  was  produced.  In  the  trance

conversations, one could observe a trace of uncertainty, as if she were feeling

her way and seeking to make an impression on her audience; there was also

an increasing staleness of content. In her outward behaviour, too, there was a

marked shyness and uncertainty, so that the impression of wilful deception

became ever stronger. The writer therefore soon withdrew from the séances.

S. W. experimented later in other circles, and six months after the conclusion

of my observations was caught cheating in flagrante. She wanted to revive

the  wavering  belief  in  her  supernatural  powers  by  genuinely  spiritualistic

experiments  like  apport,  etc.,  and  for  this  purpose  concealed  in  her  dress

small objects which she threw into the air during the dark séances. After that

her role was played out. Since then, eighteen months have gone by, during

which I have lost sight of her. But I learn from an observer who knew her in

the early days that now and again she still has rather peculiar states of short

duration, when she is very pale and silent and has a fixed glazed look. I have

heard nothing of any more visions. She is also said not to take part any longer

in spiritualistic séances. S. W. is now an employee in a large business and is

by all accounts an industrious and dutiful person who does her work with zealand  skill  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  concerned.  According  to  the  report  of

trustworthy persons, her character has much improved: she has become on

the  whole  quieter,  steadier,  and  more  agreeable.  No  further  abnormalities

have come to light.

                      [3. DISCUSSION OF THE CASE]

 This case,  in spite  of  its incompleteness,  presents a mass  of psychological 

problems whose detailed discussion would far exceed the compass of this 

paper. We must therefore be content with a mere sketch of the more 

remarkable phenomena. For the sake of clearer exposition it seems best to 

discuss the different states under separate heads.

The Waking State

Here the patient shows various peculiarities. As we have seen, she was often

absent-minded at school, misread in a peculiar way, was moody, changeable,

and inconsequent in her behaviour, now quiet, shy,

reserved, now uncommonly lively, noisy, and talkative. She cannot be called

unintelligent,  yet  her  narrow-mindedness  is  sometimes  as  striking  as  her

isolated moments of intelligence. Her memory is good on the whole, but is

often very much impaired by marked distractibility. Thus, despite numerous

discussions and readings of Kerner’s Seherin von Prevorst, she still does not

know after many weeks whether the author is called Koerner or Kerner, or

the  name  of  the  Clairvoyante,  if  directly  asked.  Nevertheless  the  name

“Kerner”  appears  correctly  written  when  it  occasionally  turns  up  in  the

automatic communications. In general it may be said that there is something

extremely  immoderate,  unsteady,  almost  protean,  in  her  character.  If  we

discount the psychological fluctuations of character due to puberty, there still

remains  a  pathological  residue  which  expresses  itself  in  her  immoderate

reactions  and  unpredictable,  bizarre  conduct.  One  can  call  this  character

“déséquilibré” or “unstable.” It gets its specific cast from certain features that

must be regarded as hysterical: above all her distractibility and her dreamy

nature  must  be  viewed  in  this  light.  As  Janet27 maintains, the basis of 

hysterical anaesthesias is disturbance of attention. He was able to show in 

youthful hysterics “a striking indifference and lack of attention towards 

everything to do with the sphere of the perceptions.” A notable instance of 

this, and one which beautifully illustrates hysterical distractibility, is 

misreading. The psychology of this process may be thought of somewhat  as  

follows: While reading aloud, a person’s attention slackens and turns towards 

some other object. Meanwhile the reading continues mechanically, the sense impressions are received as before, but owing to the distraction the 

excitability of the perceptive centre is reduced, so that the strength of the 

sense impression is no longer sufficient to fix the attention in such a way as 

to conduct perception along the verbal-motor route—in other words, to 

repress all the inflowing associations which immediately ally themselves with 

any new sense impression. The further psychological mechanism permits of 

two possible explanations:

The sense impression is received unconsciously, i.e., below the threshold of

consciousness, owing to the rise of the stimulus threshold in the perceptive

centre, and consequently it is not taken up by the conscious attention and

conducted along the speech route, but only reaches verbal expression through

the mediation of the nearest associations, in this case the dialect expressions

for the object.

The sense impression is received consciously, but at the moment of entering

the  speech  route  it  reaches  a  spot  whose  excitability  is  reduced  by  the

distraction. At this point the dialect word is substituted by association for the

verbal-motor speech-image and is uttered in place of it. In either case, it is

certain that the acoustic distraction fails to correct the error. Which of the two

explanations is the right one cannot be determined in our case; probably both

approach the truth, for the distractibility appears to be general, affecting more

than one of the centres involved in the act of reading aloud.

In our case this symptom has a special value, because we have here a quite

elementary automatic phenomenon. It can be called hysterical because in this

particular  case  the  state  of  exhaustion  and  intoxication  with  its  parallel

symptoms can be ruled out. Only in exceptional circumstances does a healthy

person allow himself to be so gripped by an object that he fails to correct the

errors  due  to  inattention,  especially  those  of  the  kind  described.  The

frequency with which this happens in the patient points to a considerable

restriction of the field of consciousness, seeing that she can control only a

minimum of the elementary perceptions simultaneously flowing in upon her.

If we wish to define the psychological state of the “psychic shadow side” we

might describe it as a sleep- or dream-state according to whether passivity or

activity is its dominant feature. A pathological dream-state of rudimentary

scope and intensity is certainly present here; its genesis is spontaneous, and

dream- states that arise spontaneously and produce automatisms are usually

regarded as hysterical. It must be pointed out that instances of misreading

were a frequent occurrence in our patient and that for this reason the term“hysterical” is appropriate, because, so far as we know, it is only on the basis

of an hysterical constitution that partial sleep- or dream-states occur both

frequently and spontaneously.

  The automatic substitution of some adjacent association has been studied 

experimentally by Binet28 in  his  hysterical  subjects.  When  he  pricked  the

anaesthetic  hand  of  the  patient,  she  did  not  feel  the  prick  but  thought  of

“points”; when he moved her fingers, she thought of “sticks” or “columns.”

Again, when the hand, concealed from the patient’s sight by a screen, wrote

“Salpêtrière,” she saw before her the word “Salpêtrière” in white writing on a

black ground. This recalls the experiments of Guinon and Sophie Woltke

previously referred to.

 We thus find in our patient, at a time when there was nothing to suggest the 

later phenomena, rudimentary automatisms, fragments of dreaming, which 

harbour in themselves the possibility that some day more than one association 

will slip in between the distractibility of her perceptions and consciousness. 

The misreading also reveals a certain autonomy of the psychic elements; even 

with a relatively low degree of distractibility, not in any other way striking or 

suspicious, they develop a noticeable if slight productivity which 

approximates to that of the physiological dream. The misreading can 

therefore be regarded as a prodromal symptom of subsequent events, 

especially as its psychology is the prototype of the mechanism of 

somnambulistic dreams, which are in fact nothing but a multiplication and 

infinite variation of the elementary process we have described above. At the 

time of my observations I was never able to demonstrate any other 

rudimentary automatisms of this kind; it seems as if the originally low-grade 

states of distractibility gradually grew beneath the surface of consciousness 

into those remarkable somnambulistic attacks and therefore disappeared from 

the waking state. So far as the development of the patient’s character is 

concerned, except for a slight increase in maturity no striking change could 

be noted in the course of observations lasting nearly two years. On the other 

hand, it is worth mentioning that in the two years since the subsidence  

(complete cessation?) of the somnambulistic attacks a considerable change of 

character has taken place. We shall have occasion later on to speak of the 

significance of this observation.

Semi-Somnambulism

In our account of S. W.’s case, the following condition was indicated by the

term  “semi-somnambulism”:  For  some  time  before  and  after  the  actualsomnambulistic attack the patient found herself in a state whose most salient

feature can best be described as “preoccupation.” She lent only half an ear to

the  conversation  around  her,  answered  absent-  mindedly,  frequently  lost

herself in all manner of hallucinations; her face was solemn, her look ecstatic,

visionary, ardent. Closer observation revealed a far-reaching alteration of her

entire character. She was now grave, dignified; when she spoke, the theme

was always an extremely serious one. In this state she could talk so seriously,

so forcefully and convincingly, that one almost had to ask oneself: Is this

really a girl of 15½? One had the impression that a mature woman was being

acted with considerable dramatic talent. The reason for this seriousness, this

solemnity of behaviour, was given in the patient’s explanation that at these

times she stood on the frontier of this world and the next, and associated just

as  really  with  the  spirits  of  the  dead  as  with  the  living.  And  indeed  her

conversation was about equally divided between answers to objectively real

questions  and  hallucinatory  ones.  I  call  this  state  semi-  somnambulistic

because it coincides with Richet’s own definition:

Such a person’s consciousness appears to persist in its integrity, while all the

time  highly  complex  operations  are  taking  place  outside  consciousness,

without  the  voluntary  and  conscious  ego  seeming  to  be  aware  of  any

modification at all. He will have another person within him, acting, thinking,

and willing, without his consciousness, that is, his conscious reflecting ego,

having the least idea that such is the case.29

Binet30 says of the term “semi-somnambulism”:

This  term  indicates  the  relations  in  which  this  state  stands  to  genuine

somnambulism; and further, it gives us to understand that the somnambulistic

life which shows itself during the waking state is overcome and suppressed

by the normal consciousness as it reasserts itself.

Automatisms

Semi-somnambulism is characterized by the continuity of consciousness with

that of the waking state and by the appearance of various automatisms which

point to the activity of a subconscious independent of the conscious self.

Our case shows the following automatic phenomena:

Automatic movements of the table.

Automatic writing.

Hallucinations.

 (1) AUTOMATIC MOVEMENTS OF THE TABLE.  Before  the  patient 

came under my observation she had been influenced by the suggestion of “table-turning,” which she first came across as a parlour game. As soon as 

she entered the circle, communications arrived from members of her family, 

and she was at once recognized as a medium. I could only ascertain that as 

soon as her hands were placed on the table the typical movements began. The 

content of the communications has no further interest for us. But the 

automatic character of the act itself merits some discussion, for the objection 

might very well be made that there was some deliberate pushing or pulling on 

the part of the patient.

As  we  know  from  the  investigations  of  Chevreul,  Gley,  Lehmann,  and

others,31 unconscious motor phenomena are not only a frequent occurrence 

among hysterical persons and those pathologically inclined in other ways, but 

can also be induced fairly easily in normal persons who exhibit no   other   

spontaneous   automatisms.   I   have   made   many experiments on these 

lines and can fully confirm this observation. In the great majority of cases all 

that is required is enough patience to put up with an hour or so of quiet 

waiting. With most subjects motor automatisms will eventually be obtained 

in more or less high degree if not hindered by counter-suggestions. In a 

relatively small number of cases the phenomena arise spontaneously, i.e., 

directly under the influence of verbal suggestion or of some earlier auto-

suggestion. In our case the subject was powerfully affected by suggestion. In 

general, the disposition of the patient is subject to all those laws which also

hold good for normal hypnosis. Nevertheless, certain special circumstances

must be taken into account which are conditioned by the peculiar nature of

the case. It was not a question here of total hypnosis, but of a partial one,

limited entirely to the motor area of the arm, like the cerebral anaesthesia

produced by magnetic passes for a painful spot in the body. We touch the

spot in question, employing verbal suggestion or making use of some existing

auto-suggestion,  and  we  use  the  tactile  stimulus  which  we  know  acts

suggestively to bring about the desired partial hypnosis. In accordance with

this  procedure  refractory  subjects  can  be  brought  easily  enough  to  an

exhibition of automatism. The experimenter intentionally gives the table a

slight  push,  or  better,  a  series  of  light  rhythmical  taps.  After  a  while  he

notices that the oscillations become stronger, that they continue although he

has stopped his own intentional movements. The experiment has succeeded,

the  subject  has  unsuspectingly  taken  up  the  suggestion.  Through  this

procedure far better results are obtained than by verbal suggestion. With very

receptive persons and in all those cases where the movement seems to startspontaneously, the intended tremors,32 which are not of course perceptible to 

the subject, take over the role of agent provocateur. In this way persons who 

by themselves would never achieve automatic movements of the coarser type 

can sometimes assume unconscious control of the table movements, provided 

that the tremors are strong enough for the medium to understand their 

meaning. The medium then takes over the slight oscillations and gives them 

back considerably strengthened, but rarely at exactly the same moment, 

mostly a few seconds later, and in this way reveals the agent’s conscious or 

unconscious thought. This simple mechanism may give rise to instances of 

thought-reading which are quite bewildering at first sight. A  very simple 

experiment that works in many cases even with unpractised persons will 

serve to illustrate this. The experimenter thinks, say, of the number 4 and 

then waits, his hands quietly resting on the table, until he feels it making the 

first move to announce the number thought of. He lifts his hands off the table 

immediately, and the number will be correctly tilted out. It is advisable in this 

experiment to stand the table on a soft thick carpet. By paying close attention, 

the experimenter will occasionally notice a movement of the table that can be 

represented thus:














Figure 3

1: Intended tremors too slight to be perceived by the subject.

2: Very small but perceptible oscillations of the table which show that the

subject is responding to them.

3: The big movements (“tilts”) of the table, giving the number 4 that was

thought of.

ab denotes the moment when the operator’s hands are removed.

This  experiment  works  excellently  with  well-disposed  but  inexperiencedpersons. After a little practice the phenomenon usually

disappears,  since  with  practice  the  number  can  be  read  and  reproduced

directly from the intended movements.33

With a responsive medium these intended tremors work in just the same way

as  the  intentional  taps  in  the  experiment  cited  above:  they  are  received,

strengthened, and reproduced, though very gently, almost timidly. Even so,

they are perceptible and therefore act suggestively as slight tactile stimuli,

and  with  the  increase  of  partial  hypnosis  they  produce  the  big  automatic

movements.  This  experiment  illustrates  in  the  clearest  way  the  gradual

increase  of  auto-suggestion.  Along  the  path  of  this  autosuggestion  all  the

automatic  motor  phenomena  develop.  How  the  mental  content  gradually

intrudes  into  the  purely  motor  sphere  scarcely  needs  explaining  after  the

above  discussion.  No  special  suggestion  is  required  to  evoke  the  mental

phenomena, since, from the standpoint of the experimenter at least, it was a

question of verbal representation from the start. After the first random motor

expressions  are  over,  unpractised  subjects  soon  begin  reproducing  verbal

products of their own or the intentions of the experimenter. The intrusion of

the mental content can be objectively understood as follows:

Through the gradual increase of auto-suggestion the motor areas of the arm

are isolated from consciousness, that is to say, the perception of slight motor

impulses  is  veiled  from  the  mind.34 The  knowledge  received  via

consciousness of a potential mental content produces a collateral excitation in

the speech area as the nearest available means to mental formulation. The

intention  to  formulate  necessarily  affects  the  motor  component35 of  the

verbal representation most of all, thus explaining the unconscious overflow of

speech  impulses  into  the  motor  area,36 and  conversely  the  gradual

penetration of partial hypnosis into the speech area.

  In numerous experiments with beginners, I have noticed, usually at the start 

of the mental phenomena, a relatively large number of completely 

meaningless words, often only senseless jumbles of letters. Later all sorts of 

absurdities are produced, words or whole sentences with the letters 

transposed all higgledy-piggledy or arranged in reverse order, like mirror-

writing. The appearance of a letter or word brings a new suggestion; 

involuntarily some kind of association tacks on to it and is then realized. 

Curiously enough, these are not as a rule conscious associations but quite 

unexpected ones. This would seem to indicate that a considerable part of the 

speech area is already hypnotically isolated. The recognition of this automatism again forms a fruitful suggestion, since at this point a feeling of 

strangeness invariably arises, if it was not already present in the pure motor 

automatism. The question “Who is doing this?” “Who is speaking?” acts as a 

suggestion for synthesizing the unconscious personality, which as a rule is 

not long in coming. Some name or other presents itself, usually one charged 

with emotion, and the automatic splitting of the personality is accomplished. 

How haphazard and precarious this synthesis is at first can be seen from the 

following reports from the literature.

Myers gives the following interesting observation of a Mr. A., a member of

the Society for Psychical Research, who was experimenting on himself with

automatic writing:

3RD DAY

What is man? — Tefi hasl esble lies. Is that an anagram? — Yes.

How many words does it contain? — Five. What is the first word? — See.

What is the second word? — Eeeee.

SEE? Shall I interpret it myself? — Try to!

Mr. A. found this solution: “The life is less able.” He was astonished at this

intellectual pronouncement, which seemed to him to prove the existence of

an intelligence independent of his own. He therefore went on to ask:

Who are you? — Clelia.

Are you a woman? — Yes.

Have you lived on earth? — No. Will you come to life? — Yes. When? — In

six years.

Why are you conversing with me? — E if Clelia el.

Mr. A. interpreted this answer as: “I Clelia feel.”

4TH DAY

Am I the one who asks questions? — Yes. Is Clelia there?— No.

Who is here then? — Nobody. Does Clelia exist at all?— No.

Then with whom was I speaking yesterday? — With nobody.37

Janet conducted the following conversation with the subconscious of Lucie,

who, meanwhile, was engaged in conversation with another observer:

[Janet asks:] Do you hear me? [Lucie answers, in automatic writing:] No.

But one has to hear in order to answer. — Absolutely. Then how do you do

it? — I don’t know.

There must be someone who hears me. — Yes. Who is it? — Somebody

besides Lucie.

All right. Somebody else. Shall we give the other person a name?No.

Yes, it will be more convenient. — All right. Adrienne.

Well, Adrienne, do you hear me? — Yes.38

 One can see from these extracts how the unconscious personality builds 

itself up: it owes its existence simply to  suggestive  questions which strike an 

answering chord in the medium’s own disposition. This disposition can be 

explained by the disaggregation of psychic complexes, and the feeling of 

strangeness evoked by these automatisms assists the process as soon as 

conscious attention is directed to the automatic act. Binet remarks on this 

experiment of Janet’s: “Nevertheless it should be carefully noted that if the 

personality of ‘Adrienne’ could be created, it was because the suggestion 

encountered a psychological possibility;  in  other  words,  disaggregated

phenomena were existing there apart from the normal consciousness of the

subject.”39 The individualization of the subconscious is always a great step

forward and has enormous suggestive influence on further development of

the automatisms.40 The formation of unconscious personalities in our case

must also be regarded in this light.

 The objection that the table-turning was “simulated” may well be abandoned 

when one considers the phenomenon of thought-reading from intended 

tremors, of which the patient gave ample proof. Rapid, conscious thought-

reading requires at the very least an extraordinary amount of practice, and 

this the patient demonstrably lacked. Whole conversations can be carried on 

by means of these tremors, as happened in our case. In the same way the 

suggestibility of the subconscious can be demonstrated objectively if, for 

instance, the operator concentrates on the thought: “The medium’s hand shall 

no longer move the table  or  the glass,” and at once, contrary to all 

expectation, and to the liveliest astonishment of the subject, the table is 

immobilized. Naturally all kinds of other suggestions can be realized too, 

provided that their innervation does not exceed the area of partial hypnosis 

(which proves at the same time the partial nature of the hypnosis). Hence 

suggestions aimed at the legs or the other arm will not work.

The table-turning was not an automatism confined exclusively to the patient’s

semi-somnambulism.  On  the  contrary  it  occurred  in  its  most  pronounced

form  in  the  waking  state,  and  in  most  cases  then  passed  over  into  semi-

somnambulism, whose onset was generally announced by hallucinations, as

at the first séance.

 (2) AUTOMATIC WRITING. Another automatic phenomenon,  which from the first corresponds to a higher degree of partial hypnosis, is automatic 

writing. It is, at least in my experience, much rarer and much more difficult to 

produce than table-turning. Here again it is a question of a primary 

suggestion, directed to the conscious mind when sensibility is retained, and to 

the unconscious when it is extinct. The suggestion, however, is not a simple 

one, since it already contains an intellectual element: “to write” means “to 

write something.” This special property of the suggestion, going beyond the 

purely motor sphere, often confuses the subject and gives rise, to counter-

suggestions which prevent the appearance of automatisms. However, I have 

noticed in a few cases that the suggestion is realized despite its comparative 

boldness (it is after all directed to the waking consciousness of a so-called 

normal person!), but that it does so in a peculiar way, by putting only the 

purely motor part of the central nervous system under hypnosis, and that the 

deeper hypnosis is then obtained from the motor phenomenon by auto-

suggestion, as in the procedure for table-turning described above. The 

subject,41 holding a pencil in his hand, is purposely engaged in conversation

to distract his attention from writing. The hand thereupon starts to move,

making a number of strokes and zigzag lines at first, or else a simple line.






Figure 4

It sometimes happens that the pencil does not touch the paper at all but writes 

in the air. These movements must be regarded as purely motor phenomena 

corresponding to the expression of the motor element in the idea of “writing.” 

They are somewhat rare; usually single letters  are written right off, and what 

was said above of table-turning is true here of their combination into words 

and sentences. Now and then true mirror- writing  is  observed.  In  the  

majority  of  cases,  and  perhaps  in  all experiments with beginners who are 

not under some special suggestion, the automatic writing is that of the 

subject. Occasionally its character may  be  greatly  changed,42 but  this  is

secondary,  and  is  always  a  symptom  of  the  synthesis  of  a  subconscious

personality.  As  already  stated,  the  automatic  writing  of  our  patient  never

came to very much. The experiments were carried out in the dark, and in

most  cases  she  passed  over  into  semi-somnambulism  or  ecstasy.  So  the

automatic writing had the same result as the preliminary table-turning.(3) HALLUCINATIONS. The manner of transition to somnambulism in the

second séance is of psychological significance. As reported, the automatic

phenomena  were  in  full  swing  when  darkness  descended.  The  interesting

event  in  the  preceding  séance  was  the  brusque  interruption  of  a

communication  from  the  grandfather,  which  became  the  starting-point  for

various  discussions  among  members  of  the  circle.  These  two  factors,

darkness  and  a  remarkable  occurrence,  seem  to  have  caused  a  rapid

deepening  of  hypnosis,  which  enabled  the  hallucinations  to  develop.  The

psychological  mechanism  of  this  process  seems  to  be  as  follows:  The

influence of darkness on suggestibility, particularly in regard to the sense

organs,  is  well  known.43 Binet  states  that  it  has  a  special  influence  on

hysterical subjects, producing immediate drowsiness.44 As may be assumed 

from the foregoing explanations, the patient was in a state of partial hypnosis, 

and furthermore a subconscious personality having the closest ties with the 

speech area had already constituted itself. The automatic expression of this 

personality was interrupted in the most unexpected way by a new person 

whose existence no one suspected. Whence came this split? Obviously the 

patient had entertained the liveliest expectations about this first séance. Any 

reminiscences she had of me and my family had probably grouped 

themselves around  this feeling of expectation, and they suddenly came to 

light when the automatic expression was at its climax. The fact that it was my 

grandfather and no one else—not, for instance, my dead father, who, as the 

patient knew, was closer to me than my grandfather, whom I had never 

known—may suggest where the origin of this new person is to be sought. It 

was probably a dissociation from the already existing personality, and this 

split-off part seized upon the nearest available material for its expression, 

namely the associations concerning myself. Whether this offers a parallel to 

the results of Freud’s dream investigations45 must  remain  unanswered,  for

we  have  no  means  of  judging  how  far  the  emotion  in  question  may  be

considered “repressed.” From the brusque intervention of the new personality

we may conclude that the patient’s imaginings were extremely vivid, with a

correspondingly intense expectation which a certain maidenly modesty and

embarrassment sought perhaps to overcome. At any rate this event reminds

us vividly of the way dreams suddenly present to consciousness, in more or

less transparent symbolism, things one has never admitted to oneself clearly

and openly. We do not know when the splitting off of the new personality

occurred,  whether  it  had  been  slowly  preparing  in  the  unconscious,  orwhether  it  only  came  about  during  the  séance.  In  any  case  it  meant  a

considerable  increase  in  the  extent  of  the  unconscious  area  rendered

accessible by hypnosis. At the same time this event, in view of the impression

it made on the waking consciousness of the patient, must be regarded as

powerfully suggestive, for the perception of the unexpected intervention of a

new personality was bound to increase still further the feeling of strangeness

aroused by the automatism, and would naturally suggest the thought that an

independent  spirit  was  making  itself  known.  From  this  followed  the  very

understandable association that it might be possible to see this spirit.

 The situation that ensued at the second séance can be explained by the 

coincidence of this energizing suggestion with the heightened suggestibility 

occasioned by the darkness. The hypnosis, and with it the chain of split-off 

ideas, breaks through into the visual sphere; the expression of the 

unconscious, hitherto purely motor, is objectified (in accordance with the 

specific energy of the newly created system) in the form of visual images 

having the character of an hallucination—not as a mere accompaniment of 

the verbal automatism but as a direct substitute function. The explanation of 

the unexpected situation that arose in the first séance, at the time quite 

inexplicable, is no longer given in words, but as an allegorical vision. The 

proposition “they do not hate one another, but are friends” is expressed in a 

picture of the two grandfathers arm-in-arm. We frequently come across such 

things in somnambulism: the thinking of somnambulists proceeds in plastic 

images  which constantly break through into this or that sensory sphere and 

are objectified as hallucinations. The thought process sinks into the 

subconscious and only its final terms reach consciousness directly as 

hallucinations or as vivid and sensuously coloured ideas. In our case the same 

thing occurred as with the patient whose anaesthetic hand Binet pricked nine

times, making her think vividly of the number 9; or Flournoy’s Hélène Smith,

who, on being asked in her shop about a certain pattern, suddenly saw before

her the figure 18, eight to ten inches high, representing the number of days

the pattern had been on loan.46 The question arises as to why the automatism

broke through in the visual sphere and not in the acoustic. There are several

reasons for this choice of the visual:

(a)  The  patient  was  not  gifted  acoustically;  she  was  for  instance  very

unmusical.

There was no silence (to correspond with the darkness) which might have

favoured the occurrence of auditory hallucinations, for we were talking all the