air,  electricity,  magnetism,  etc.,  are  only  effective  temporarily,  and  quite

often are of no use at all. They are frequently introduced into treatment in a

not very commendable fashion, simply because reliance is placed upon their

suggestive effect. But it is in his soul that the patient is really sick; in those

most complicated and lofty functions which we scarcely dare to include in

the  province  of  medicine.  The  doctor  must  needs,  in  such  a  case,  be  a

psychologist, must needs understand the human soul. He cannot evade the

urgent demand upon him. So he naturally turns for help to psychology, since

his  psychiatry  text-books  have  nothing  to  offer  him.  But  modern

experimental  psychology  is  very  far  from  being  able  to  afford  him  any

connected insight into the most vital psychic processes, that is not its aim. As

far as possible it tries to isolate those simple elementary phenomena which

border on the physiological, and then study them in an isolated state. It quite

ignores  the  infinite  variation  and  movement  of  the  mental  life  of  the

individual, and accordingly, its knowledge and its facts are so many isolated

details, uninspired by any comprehensive idea capable of bringing them into

co-ordination. Hence it comes about that the inquirer after the secrets of the

human soul, learns rather less than nothing from experimental psychology.

He would be better advised to abandon exact science, take off his scholar's

gown, say farewell to his study, and then, strong in manly courage, set out to

wander  through  the  world;  alike  through  the  horrors  of  prisons,  lunatic

asylums and hospitals, through dreary outlying taverns, through brothels and

gambling-halls, into elegant drawing-rooms, the Stock Exchanges, socialist

meetings, churches, revival gatherings of strange religious sects, experiencing

in his own person love and hate and every kind of suffering. He would return

laden with richer knowledge than his yard-long text-books could ever have

given him, and thus equipped, he can indeed be a physician to his patients,

for he understands the soul of man. He may be pardoned if his respect for the

"corner-stones" of experimental psychology is no longer very considerable.

There is a great gulf fixed between what science calls "psychology," on the

one hand, and what the practice of everyday life expects from psychology on

the other.

This need became the starting-point of a new psychology whose inception we

owe first and foremost to the genius of Sigmund Freud, of Vienna, to his

researches  into  functional  nervous  disease.  The  new  type  of  psychology

might be described as "analytical psychology." Professor Bleuler has coined

the name "Deep Psychology," to indicate that the Freudian psychology takesas  its  province  the  deeper  regions,  the  "hinterland"  of  the  soul,  the

"unconscious." Freud names his method of investigation "psychoanalysis."

Before  we  approach  the  matter  more  closely,  we  must  first  consider  the

relationship of the new psychology to the earlier science. Here we encounter

a singular little farce which once again proves the truth of Anatole France's

apothegm: "Les savants ne sont pas curieux."

The first important piece of work in this new field awakened only the faintest

echo, in spite of the fact that it offered a new and fundamental conception of

the neuroses. Certain writers expressed their approbation, and then, on the

next page, proceeded to explain their cases of hysteria in the good old way. It

was much as if a man should subscribe fully to the idea of the earth's being

spherical,  and  yet  continue  to  represent  it  as  flat.  Freud's  next

publications were practically unnoticed, although they contributed findings of

immeasurable  importance  to  the  domain  of  psychiatry.  When  in  1900  he

produced the first real psychological elucidation of the dream (previously

there had reigned over this territory a suitable nocturnal darkness), he was

ridiculed; and when in the middle of the last decade he began to illumine the

psychology  of  sexuality  itself,  and  at  the  same  time  the  "Zürich  school"

decided  to  range  itself  on  his  side,  a  storm  of  abuse,  sometimes  of  the

coarsest kind, burst upon him, nor has it yet ceased to rage. At the last South-

West German Congress of alienists in Baden-Baden, the adherents of the new

psychology  had  the  pleasure  of  hearing  Hoche,  University  Professor  of

Psychiatry  at  Freiburg  in  Breisgau,  describe  the  movement  in  a  long  and

much-applauded address, as an outbreak of mental aberration among doctors.

The  old  proverb:  "Medicus  medicum  non  decimat"  was  here  quite  put  to

shame. How carefully the question had been studied was shewn by the naïve

remark of one of the most distinguished neurologists of Paris, which I myself

heard at the International Congress in 1907: "It is true I have not read Freud's

works (he did not happen to know any German!), but as for his theories, they

are nothing but a mauvaise plaisanterie." Freud, dignified, masterly, once said

to me, I first became clearly conscious of the value of my discoveries when

they were met everywhere with resistance and anger; since that time I have

judged the value of my work according to the degree of opposition provoked.

It is against my sexual theory that the greatest indignation is felt, so it would

seem  therein  lies  my  best  work.  Perhaps  after  all  the  real  benefactors  of

mankind are its false teachers, for opposition to the false doctrine pushes men

willy nilly into truth. Your truth-teller is a pernicious fellow, he drives meninto error."

The reader must now calmly accept the idea that in this psychology he is

dealing  with  something  quite  unique,  if  not  indeed  with  some  altogether

irrational, sectarian, or occult wisdom; for what else could possibly provoke

all the scientific authorities to turn away on the very threshold and utterly

refuse to cross it?

Accordingly, we must look more closely into this psychology. As long ago as

Charcot's time it was recognised that neurotic symptoms are "psychogenic,"

that is, that they have their origin in the psyche. It was also known, thanks

mainly to the work of the Nancy School, that every hysterical symptom can

be exactly reproduced by means of suggestion. But how a hysterical system

arises, and its relationship to psychic causes, were altogether unknown. In the

beginning  of  the  eighties  Dr.  Breuer,  an  old  Viennese  doctor,  made  a

discovery which was really the true starting-point of the new psychology. He

had a very intelligent young patient (a woman) suffering from hysteria, who

exhibited the following symptoms among others: A spastic paralysis of the

right arm, occasional disturbances of consciousness or twilight-states, and

loss of the power of speech in so far as she no longer retained any knowledge

of her mother-tongue, and could only express herself in English (so-called

systematic aphasia). They sought at that time, and still seek, in such a case to

establish some theory of anatomical disturbance, although there was just as

little disturbance in the arm-centre in the brain as in that of any normal man

who  boxes  another's  ears.  The  symptomatology  of  hysteria  is  full  of

anatomical impossibilities; such as the case of the lady who had lost her

hearing completely through some hysterical malady. None the less she often

used to sing, and once when she was singing her doctor sat down at the piano

unnoticed by her and softly accompanied her. Passing from one strophe to

another he suddenly altered the key, and she, quite unconscious of what she

was doing, sang on in the altered key. Thus she heard—yet did not hear. The

various forms of systematic blindness present similar phenomena. We have

the case of a man suffering from complete hysterical blindness. In the course

of the treatment he recovers his sight, but at first, and for some long time,

only partially: he could see everything with one exception—people's heads.

He saw all the people around him without heads. Thus he saw—yet did not

see. From a large number of like experiences it has long been concluded that

it is only the patient's consciousness which does not see, does not hear, but

the sense-function has nothing at all the matter with it. This state of affairs isdirectly contradictory to the essence of an organic disturbance, which always

materially involves the function.

After this digression let us return to Breuer's case. Since there was no organic

cause for the disturbance, the case was clearly to be regarded as hysterical,

that is, psychogenic. Dr. Breuer had noticed that if during her twilight-states

(whether spontaneous or artificially induced) he let the patient freely express

the reminiscences and phantasies that thronged in upon her, her condition

was afterwards much improved for some hours. He made systematic use of

this  observation  in  her  further  treatment.  The  patient  herself  invented  the

appropriate name for it of "talking cure" or, in jest, "chimney sweeping."

Her  illness  began  whilst  she  was  nursing  her  dying  father.  It  is  easy  to

understand that her phantasies busied themselves mainly with this disturbing

time.  In  the  twilight-states  memories  of  this  period  reappeared  with

photographic fidelity, distinct in every detail: no waking recollection is ever

so plastically and exactly reproduced. The term hypermnesia is applied to this

heightening  of  the  power  of  memory,  which  occurs  without  difficulty  in

certain states of contracted consciousness. Remarkable things now came to

light. Out of the many things told, one ran somewhat as follows.

On a certain night she was in a state of great anxiety about her father's high

temperature. She sat by his bed, waiting for the surgeon who was coming

from Vienna to perform an operation. Her mother had gone out of the room

for a little while, and Anna (the patient) sat by the bed, with her right arm

hanging over the back of her chair. She fell into a kind of waking-dream in

which she saw a black snake come out from the wall and approach the sick

man, prepared to bite. (It is very probable that some real snakes had been

seen in the fields behind the house, and that she had been frightened by them;

this would furnish the material for her hallucination.) She wanted to drive the

creature away, but felt paralysed; her right arm, hanging over the chair, had

"gone to sleep," was anæsthetic and paretic, and as she looked her fingers

turned into little snakes with death's heads (the nails). Probably she tried to

drive  the  snake  away  with  her  paralysed  right  hand,  and  thereby  the

anæsthesia  and  paralysis  became  associated  with  the  snake-hallucination.

Even after the snake had disappeared, her terror remained great. She tried to

pray,  but  found  she  had  no  words  in  any  language,  until  at  length  she

managed to remember some English nursery rhymes, and then she could go

on thinking and praying in that language.

This  was  the  actual  scene  in  which  the  paralysis  and  speech-disturbancearose; the describing it served to remove the speech-trouble, and in this same

fashion the case was finally completely cured.

I must restrict myself to this one instance. In Breuer and Freud's book there is

a wealth of similar examples. It is easy to understand that scenes such as

these make a very strong impression, and accordingly there is an inclination

to attribute a causal significance to them in the genesis of the symptoms. The

then current conception of hysteria, arising from the English "nervous shock"

theory, which Charcot strongly supported, came in conveniently to elucidate

Breuer's  discovery,  hence  arose  the trauma-theory  maintaining  that  the

hysterical  symptom  and  in  so  far  as  the  symptoms  comprise  the  disease,

hysteria  itself,  arises  from  some psychic injury (or trauma),  the  effect  of

which is retained in the unconscious indefinitely. Freud, working as Breuer's

colleague, amply confirmed this discovery. It was fully demonstrated that not

one out of the many hundred hysterical symptoms came down ready made

from heaven; they had already been conditioned by past psychic experiences.

To some extent, therefore, this new conception opened up a field of very

important empirical work. But Freud's tireless spirit of inquiry could not long

rest content at this superficial layer, since already there obtruded deeper and

more difficult problems. It is obvious enough that moments of great fear and

anxiety, such as Breuer's patient went through, would leave behind a lasting

effect,  but  how  is  it  that  these  happenings  are  themselves  already  deeply

stamped with the mark of morbidity? Must we suppose that the trying sick-

nursing in itself produce such a result? If so, such effects should occur much

more  frequently,  for  there  are,  unfortunately,  many  trying  cases  of  sick-

nursing, and the nurse's nervous constitution is by no means always of the

soundest. To this problem medicine gives its admirable answer; the "x" in the

calculation  is predisposition;  there  is  a  tendency  to  these  things.  But  for

Freud the problem was, what exactly constitutes this predisposition? This

question led logically to an investigation of all that had preceded the psychic

trauma. It is a matter of common observation that distressing scenes have

markedly  different  effects  upon  the  different  participants,  and  that  things

which to some are quite indifferent or even pleasant, such as frogs, mice,

snakes, cats, excite the greatest aversion in others. There are the cases of

women who can calmly be present at a very bad operation, but who tremble

all over with horror and nausea at the touch of a cat. By way of illustration let

me give the case of a young lady suffering from severe hysteria following a

sudden fright. She had been at a social gathering, and was on her way homeat midnight accompanied by several acquaintances, when a carriage came up

behind them at full speed. All the others moved out of the way, but she,

beside herself with fright, ran down the middle of the road just in front of the

horses. The coachman cracked his whip and cursed and swore in vain. She

ran down the whole length of the street till a bridge was reached. There her

strength failed her, and to escape the horses' feet in her despair she would

have jumped into the water had not passers-by prevented her. This same lady

happened to be in Petrograd during that sanguinary Revolution of the 22nd of

January, and saw a street cleared by the volleys of soldiers. All around her

people were dropping down dead or wounded, but she retained her calmness

and self-possession, and caught sight of a door which gave her escape into

another street. These terrible moments agitated her neither at the time nor

later on. She was quite well afterwards, indeed felt better than usual.

Essentially similar reactions can quite often be observed. Hence it follows

that  the  intensity  of  the  trauma  is  of  small  pathogenic  importance;  the

peculiar circumstances determine its pathogenic effect. Here, then, we have

the  key  which  enables  us  to  unlock  at  least  one  of  the  anterooms  to  an

understanding of predisposition. We must now ask what were the unusual

circumstances in this carriage scene? The terror and apprehension began as

soon as the lady heard the trampling horses. For a moment she thought this

portended some terrible fate, her death, or something equally frightful; the

next, she lost all sense of what she was doing.

This  powerful  impression  was  evidently  connected  in  some  way  with  the

horses.  The  predisposition  of  the  patient  to  react  in  such  an  exaggerated

fashion to a not very remarkable incident, might result from the fact that

horses had some special significance for her. It might be suspected that she

had experienced some dangerous accident with them; this actually turned out

to be the case. When a child of about seven years old she was out for a drive

with the coachman; the horses shied and galloped at full speed towards a

steep river-bank. The coachman jumped down, and shouted to her to do the

same, but in her extreme terror she could scarcely bring herself to obey. She

did, however, just manage to jump out in the nick of time, whilst the horses

and carriage were dashed to pieces below. No proof is needed that such an

experience must leave a lasting impression behind it. But it does not offer any

explanation for such an exaggerated reaction to an inadequate stimulus. So

far we only know that this later symptom had its prologue in childhood, but

its pathological aspect remains obscure. To penetrate into the heart of such amystery it was necessary to accumulate further material. And the greater our

experience the clearer does it become that in all cases with such traumatic

experiences  analysed  up  to  the  present,  there  co-exists  a  special  kind  of

disturbance  which  can  only  be  described  as  a  derangement  in  the  sphere

of love.  Not  all  of  us  give  due  credit  to  the  anomalous  nature  of  love,

reaching high as heaven, sinking low as hell, uniting in itself all extremes of

good and evil, of lofty and low.

As soon as Freud recognised this, a decisive change came about in his view.

In his earlier researches, whilst more or less dominated by Charcot's trauma-

theory,  he  had  sought  for  the  origin  of  the  neurosis  in  actual  traumatic

experiences; but now the centre of gravity shifted to a very different point.

This is best demonstrated by reference to our case; we can understand that

horses might easily play a significant part in the patient's life, but it is not

clear why there should be this later reaction, so exaggerated, so uncalled for.

It is not her fear of horses which forms the morbid factor in this curious story;

to get at the real truth we must remember our empirical conclusion, that, side

by  side  with  traumatic  experiences,  there  is  also  invariably  present  some

disturbance in the sphere of love. We must now go on to inquire whether

perhaps  there  is  anything  unsatisfactory  in  this  respect  in  the  case  under

review.

Our patient has a young man friend, to whom she is thinking of becoming

engaged, she loves him and expects to be happy with him. At first nothing

more is discoverable; but the investigator must not let himself be deterred by

a negative result in the beginning of this preliminary questioning. When the

direct way does not lead to the desired end, an indirect way may be taken. We

accordingly turn our attention back to that strange moment when she ran

away in front of the horses. We inquire who were her companions and what

kind of social gathering was it, and find it was a farewell-party to her best

friend, on her departure to a foreign health-resort on account of a nervous

breakdown. We are told this friend is happily married and is the mother of

one child. We may well doubt the assertion that she is happy. If she really

were so, it is hardly to be supposed she would be "nervous" and in need of a

cure. When I attacked the situation from a different vantage-ground, I learnt

that our patient—after this episode—had been taken by her friends to the

nearest safe place—her host's house. In her exhausted state he took charge of

her. When the patient came to this part of her story, she suddenly broke off,

was  embarrassed,  fidgeted  and  tried  to  turn  the  subject.  Evidently  somedisagreeable  reminiscences  had  suddenly  cropped  up.  After  obstinate

resistances  had  been  overcome,  she  admitted  something  very  strange  had

happened that night. Her host had made her a passionate declaration of love,

thus occasioning a situation that, in the absence of his wife, might well be

considered both painful and difficult. Ostensibly this declaration came upon

her like a "bolt from the blue." But a small dose of criticism applied to such

an assertion soon apprises us that these things never do drop suddenly from

the  sky;  they  always  have  their  previous  history.  It  was  a  task  of  the

following weeks to dig out piecemeal a long love-story. I will attempt to

sketch in the picture as it appeared finally.

As a child the patient was a thorough tomboy, loved boys' boisterous games,

laughed at her own sex, and would have nothing to do with feminine ways or

occupations. After puberty, just when the sex-issue should have meant much

to  her,  she  began  to  shun  all  society;  she  seemingly  hated  and  despised

everything which could remind her even remotely of the biological destiny of

mankind, and lived in a world of phantasy which had nothing in common

with rude reality. Thus, till her twenty-fourth year, she escaped all the little

adventures, hopes and expectations which ordinarily move a girl at this age.

But finally she got to know the two men who were destined to destroy the

thorny hedge which had grown up around her. Mr. A. was her best friend's

husband; Mr. B. was their bachelor-friend. She liked both; but pretty soon

found  B.  the  more  sympathetic,  and  an  intimacy  grew  up  between  them

which made an engagement seem likely. Through her friendship with him

and with Mrs. A., she often met Mr. A. His presence excited her inexplicably,

made her nervous. Just at this time she went to a big party. All her friends

were there. She became lost in thought, and in a reverie was playing with her

ring, when suddenly it slipped out of her hand and rolled under the table.

Both men tried to find it and Mr. B. managed to get it. With a meaning smile

he put the ring back on her finger, and said, "You know what that means!"

Overcome by some strange, irresistible feeling, she tore the ring from her

finger and flung it out of the open window. Naturally a painful moment for

all ensued, and she soon went away, much depressed. A little while after, so-

called chance brought her for her summer holidays to the health-resort where

A. and his wife were staying. It was then that Mrs. A. began to suffer from

nerve-trouble,  and  frequently  felt  too  unwell  to  leave  the  house.  So  our

patient could often go out for walks alone with A. One day they were out in a

small boat. She was boisterously merry and fell overboard. Mr. A. saved herwith difficulty as she could not swim, and he managed to lift her into the boat

in a half-unconscious state. Then he kissed her. This romantic event wove

fast the bonds between them. In self-defence she did her best to get herself

engaged to B. and to persuade herself that she loved him. Of course this

queer comedy could not escape the sharp eye of feminine jealousy. Mrs. A.,

her friend, guessed the secret, and was so much upset by it that her nervous

condition grew bad enough to necessitate her trying a cure at a foreign health-

resort.  At  the  farewell  gathering  the  demon  came  to  our  patient  and

whispered: "To-night he will be alone, something must happen to you so that

you can go to his house." And so indeed it came about; her strange behaviour

made her friends take her to his house, and thus she achieved her desire.

After this explanation the reader will probably be inclined to assume that

only diabolical subtlety could think out and set in motion such a chain of

circumstances. There is no doubt about the subtlety, but the moral evaluation

is less certain. I desire to lay special emphasis upon the fact that the patient

was in no sense conscious of the motives of this dramatic performance. The

incident apparently just came about of itself without any conscious motive

whatsoever.  But  the  whole  previous  history  makes  it  perfectly  clear  that

everything was most ingeniously directed towards the other aim; whilst the

conscious self was apparently working to bring about the engagement to Mr.

B., the unconscious compulsion to take the other road was still stronger.

So once more we must return to our original question, whence comes the

pathological, the peculiar and exaggerated reaction to the trauma? Relying on

a conclusion obtained from other analogous experiences, we ventured the

conjecture that in the present case we had to do with a disturbance in the

love-life, in addition to the trauma. This supposition was thoroughly borne

out; the trauma, which was apparently the cause of the illness, was merely

the occasion for some factor, till then unconscious, to manifest itself. This

was  the significant  erotic  conflict.  With  this  finding  the  trauma  loses  its

pathogenic  significance  and  is  replaced  by  a  much  deeper  and  more

comprehensive  conception,  which  regards  the  erotic  conflict  as  the

pathogenic agent. This conception may be described as the sexual theory of

the neurosis.

I am often asked why it is just the erotic conflict rather than any other which

is the cause of the neurosis. There is but one answer to this. No one asserts

that this ought necessarily to be the case, but as a simple matter of fact it is

always found to be so, notwithstanding all the cousins and aunts, godparents,and teachers, who rage against it. Despite all the indignant assertions to the

contrary, the problem and conflicts of love are of fundamental importance for

humanity, and with increasingly careful study, it comes out ever more clearly

that  the  love-life  is  of  immensely  greater  importance  than  the  individual

suspects.

As a consequence of the recognition that the true root of the neurosis is not

the trauma, but the hidden erotic conflict, the trauma loses its pathogenic

significance.                II.—THE SEXUAL THEORY.

Thus, it will be seen, the theory had to be shifted on to an entirely different

basis, for the investigation now had to face the erotic conflict itself. Our

example  shows  that  this  contains  extremely  abnormal  elements  and

cannot, primâ  facie,  be  compared  with  an  ordinary  love  conflict.  It  is

surprising, indeed hardly credible, that only the postulated affection should

be conscious, whilst the real passion remained unknown to the patient. But in

this  case  it  is  beyond  dispute  that  the  real  erotic  relation  remained

unillumined,  whilst  the  field  of  consciousness  was  dominated  by  the

assumption. If we try to formulate this fact, something like the following

proposition results: in a neurosis, two erotic tendencies exist which stand in

extreme opposition to one another, and one at least is unconscious. Against

this formula the objection can be raised that it has obviously been derived

from this one particular case, and is therefore lacking in general validity. The

criticism  will  be  the  more  readily  urged  because  no  one  unpossessed  of

special  reasons  is  willing  to  admit  that  the  erotic  conflict  is  of  universal

prevalence. On the contrary, it is assumed that this conflict belongs more

properly to the sphere of novels, since it is generally depicted as something in

the nature of such wild adventures as are described by Karin Michaelis in her

"Aberrations of Marriage," or by Forel in "The Sexual Question." But indeed

this is not the case; for we know the wildest and most moving dramas are not

played on the stage, but every day in the hearts of ordinary men and women

who pass by without exciting attention, and who betray to the world, save

through the symbol of a nervous breakdown, nothing of the conflicts that rage

within them. But what is so difficult for the layman to grasp is the fact that in

most cases patients have no suspicion whatever of the internecine war raging

in  their  unconscious.  But  remembering  that  there  are  many  people  who

understand nothing at all about themselves, we shall be less surprised at the

realisation that there are also people who are utterly unaware of their actual

conflicts.

If the reader is now inclined to admit the possible existence of pathogenic,

and perhaps even of unconscious conflicts, he will certainly protest that they

are  not  erotic  conflicts.  If  this  kind  reader  should  happen  himself  to  be

somewhat nervous, the mere suggestion will arouse his indignation, for we

are all inclined, as a result of our education in school and at home, to crossourselves three times where we meet such words as "erotic" and "sexual"—

and so we are conveniently able to think that nothing of that nature exists, or

at least very seldom, and at a great distance from ourselves. But it is just this

attitude which in the first instance brings about neurotic conflicts.

We  recognise  that  the  course  of  civilisation  consists  in  the  progressive

mastering of the animal element in man; it is a process of domestication

which cannot be carried through without rebellion on the part of the animal

nature  still  thirsting  for  its  liberty.  Humanity  forces  itself  to  endure  the

restrictions of the civilising process; but from time to time there comes a

frenzied bursting of all bonds. Antiquity had experience of it in that wave of

Dionysian orgies, surging hither from the East, which became an essentially

characteristic element of antique culture. Its spirit was partly instrumental in

causing the numerous sects and philosophic schools of the last century before

Christ, to develop the Stoic ideal into asceticism; and in producing from the

polytheistic chaos of those times, the ascetic twin-religions of Mithras and of

Christ.  A  second  clearly  marked  wave  of  the  Dionysian  impulse  towards

freedom swept over the Western world during the Renaissance. It is difficult

to judge of one's own time, but we gain some insight if we note how the Arts

are developing, what is the prevailing type of public taste, what men read and

write, what societies they found, what "questions" are the order of the day,

and against what the Philistines are fighting. We find in the long list of our

present social problems that the sexual question occupies by no means the

last place. It agitates men and women who would shake the foundations of

sexual  morality,  and  throw  off  the  burden  of  moral  shame  which  past

centuries  have  heaped  upon  Eros.  The  existence  of  these  aspirations  and

endeavours cannot be simply denied, or declared indefensible; they exist and

are therefore presumably not without justification. It is both more interesting

and more useful to study carefully the basic causes of these movements than

to chime in with the lamentations of the professional mourners over morals,

who prophesy with unction the moral downfall of humanity. The moralist

least of all trusts God, for he thinks that the beautiful tree of humanity can

only thrive by dint of being pruned, bound, and trained on a trellis, whereas

Father-Sun  and  Mother-Earth  have  combined  to  make  it  grow  joyfully  in

accordance with its own laws, which are full of the deepest meaning.

Serious people are aware that a very real sexual problem does exist at the

present time. The rapid development of the towns, coupled with methods of

work brought about by the extraordinary division of labour, the increasingindustrialisation of the country and the growing security of life, combine to

deprive  humanity  of  many  opportunities  of  expending  emotional  energy.

Think of the life of the peasant, whose work so rich and full of change,

affords him unconscious satisfaction by means of its symbolic content; a like

satisfaction the factory-hand and the clerk can never know. Think of a life

with nature; of those wonderful moments when, as lord and fructifier, man

drives the plough through the earth, and with kingly gesture scatters the seed

of the future harvest; see his justifiable awe before the destructive power of

the elements, his joy in the fruitfulness of his wife, who gives him daughters

and  sons,  who  mean  to  him  increased  working  power  and  enhanced

prosperity. Alas! from all this we town-dwellers, we modern machines, are

far, far removed.

Must we not admit that we are already deprived of the most natural and most

beautiful of all satisfactions, since we can no longer contemplate the arrival

of  our  own  seed,  the  "blessing"  of  children,  with  unmixed  pleasure?

Marriages  where  no  artifices  are  resorted  to  are  rare.  Is  this  not  an  all-

important departure from the joys which Mother Nature gave her first-born

sons? Can such a state of affairs bring satisfaction? Note how men slink to

their work, watch their faces at an early morning hour in the tram-cars. One

of them makes his little wheels, and another writes trivial things which do not

interest him. What wonder is it if such men belong to as many clubs as there

are days in the week, and that among women little societies flourish, where

they  pour  out  on  some  particular  hero  or  cause  those  unsatisfied  desires

which the man dulls at his restaurant or club, imbibing beer and playing at

being important? To these sources of dissatisfaction is added a more serious

factor. Nature has provided defenceless, weaponless man with a great amount

of energy to enable him not merely to bear passively the grave dangers of

existence, but also to conquer them. Mother Nature has equipped her son for

tremendous hardships and has placed a costly premium on the overcoming of

them,  as  Schopenhauer  quite  understood  when  he  said  that  "happiness  is

really but the termination of unhappiness." Civilized people are, as a rule,

shielded from the immediately pressing dangers, and they are therefore daily

tempted to excess, for in man the animal always becomes rampant when he is

not constrained by fierce necessity. Are we then indeed unrestrained? In what

orgiastic festivals do we dispose of the surplus of vital power? Our moral

views do not permit us that outlet.

But reckon up in how many directions we are met by unsatisfied longings;the  denial  of  procreation  and  begetting,  for  which  purpose  nature  has

endowed  us  with  great  energy;  the  unending  monotony  of  our  highly

developed  modern  methods  of  "division  of  labour,"  which  excludes  any

interest in the work itself; and above all our effortless security against war,

lawlessness, robbery, epidemics, infant and woman mortality—all this gives

a  sum  of  surplus  energy  which  must  needs  find  an  outlet.  But  how?  A

relatively few create quasi-natural dangers for themselves in reckless sport;

many more, seeking to find some equivalent for their more primitive energy,

take to alcoholic excess; others expend themselves in the rush of money-

making, or in the morbid performance of duties, in perpetual over-work. By

such means they try to escape a dangerous storing-up of energy which might

force mad outlets for itself. It is for such reasons that we have to-day a sexual

question. It is in this direction that men's energy would like to expend itself as

it  has  done  from  time  immemorial  in  periods  of  security  and  abundance.

Under  such  circumstances  it  is  not  only  rabbits  that  multiply;  men  and

women, too, become the sport of these accesses of nature: the sport, because

their  moral  views  have  confined  them  in  a  narrow  cage,  the  excessive

narrowness of which was not felt so long as harsh external necessity pressed

upon them with even greater constraint. But now the man of the cities finds

the space too circumscribed. He is surrounded by alluring temptation, and

like an invisible procureur there slinks through society the knowledge of

preventive methods which evade all consequences. Why then moral restraint?

Out of religious consideration for an angry God? Apart from the prevalence

of widespread unbelief, even the believing man might quietly ask himself

whether,  if  he  himself  were  God,  he  would  punish  the  youthful  erotic

uncontrol of John and Mary with twice twenty-four years of imprisonment

and seething in boiling oil. Such ideas are no longer compatible with our

decorous conception of God. The God of our time is necessarily much too

tolerant  to  make  a  great  fuss  over  it;  (knavishness  and  hypocrisy  are  a

thousand times worse). In this way the somewhat ascetic and hypocritical

sexual morality of our time has had the ground cut from under its feet. Or is it

the case that we are now protected from dissoluteness by superior wisdom,

recognition of the nothingness of human happenings? Unfortunately we are

very far from that; rather does the hypnotic power of tradition keep us in

bonds, and through cowardice and thoughtlessness and habit the herd goes

tramping on in this same path. But man possesses in the unconscious a fine

scent for the spirit of his time; he has an inkling of his own possibilities andhe feels in his innermost heart the instability of the foundations of present-

day morality, no longer supported by living religious conviction. It is thus the

greater number of the erotic conflicts of our time originate. Instinct thirsting

for liberty thrusts itself up against the yielding barriers of morality: men are

tempted, they desire and do not desire. And because they will not and cannot

think out to its logical conclusion what it is they really desire, their erotic

conflict  is  largely  unconscious;  whence  comes  neurosis.  Neurosis  then  is

most intimately bound up with the problem of our times and represents an

unsuccessful attempt of the individual to solve the general problem in his

own person. Neurosis is a tearing in two of the inner self. For most men the

reason of this cleavage is the fact that their conscious self desires to hold to

its  moral  ideal,  whilst  the  unconscious  strives  after  the  amoral  ideal,

steadfastly rejected by the conscious self. People of this kind would like to

appear  more  decent  than  they  really  are.  But  the  conflict  is  often  of  an

opposite kind. There are those who do not outwardly live a decent life at all

and do not place the slightest constraint upon their sexuality, but in reality

this is a sinful pose assumed for goodness knows what reasons, for down

below they have a decorous soul which has somehow gone astray in their

unconscious, just as has the real immoral nature in the case of apparently

moral people. Extremes of conduct always arouse suspicions of the opposite

tendencies in the unconscious.

It was necessary to make this general statement in order to elucidate the idea

of  the  "erotic  conflict"  in  analytical  psychology,  for  it  is  the  key  to  the

conception of neurosis. We can now proceed to consider the psychoanalytic

technique. Obviously the main problem is, how to arrive by the shortest and

best path at a knowledge of the patient's "unconscious." The method first

used  was  hypnotism,  the  patient  being  questioned,  on  the  production  of

spontaneous phantasies observed while in a state of hypnotic concentration.

This method is still occasionally used, but in comparison with the present

technique  is  primitive  and  frequently  unsatisfactory.  A  second  method,

evolved  by  the  Psychiatric  Clinic,  Zürich,  was  the  so-called  association

method,  which  is  chiefly  of  theoretic,  experimental  value.  Its  result  is  an

extensive, though superficial orientation, concerning the unconscious conflict

("complex"). The more penetrating method is that of dream-analysis whose

discovery belongs to Sigmund Freud.

Of the dream it can be said that "the stone which the builders rejected has

become the head of the corner." It is only in modern times that the dream(that fleeting and seemingly insignificant product of the soul), has met with

such complete contempt. Formerly it was esteemed, as a harbinger of fate, a

warning  or  a  consolation,  a  messenger  of  the  gods.  Now  we  use  it  as  a

messenger of the unconscious; it must disclose to us the secrets which our

unconscious self enviously hides from our consciousness, and it does so with

astonishing completeness.

On analytical investigation it becomes plain that the dream, as we remember

it, is only a façade which conceals the contents within the house. But if,

observing certain technical rules, we get the dreamer to talk about the details

of his dream, it soon appears that his free associations group themselves in

certain directions and round certain topics. These appear to be of personal

significance, and have a meaning which at first sight would not be suspected.

Careful  comparison  shows  that  they  are  in  close  and  subtle  symbolic

connection with the dream-façade. This particular complex of ideas in which

all the threads of the dream unite, is the conflict for which we are seeking; is

its  particular  form  at  the  moment,  conditioned  by  the  immediate

circumstances. What is painful and incompatible is in this way so covered up

or split that we can call it a wish-fulfilment; but we must immediately add

that  the  wishes  fulfilled  in  the  dream  do  not  seem  at  first  sight  to

be our wishes, but rather the very opposite. For instance, a daughter loves her

mother tenderly, but she dreams that her mother is dead; this causes her great

grief. Such dreams, where apparently there is no trace of any wish-fulfilment

are innumerable, and are a constant stumbling-block to our learned critics, for

—incredible dictu—they  still  cannot  grasp  the  simple  distinction  between

the manifest and the latent content of the dream. We must guard against such

an error; the conflict dealt with in the dream is an unconscious one, and

equally so also is the manner its solution. Our dreamer has, as a matter of

fact, the wish to get away from her mother—expressed in the language of the

unconscious,  she  wants  her  mother  to  die.  Now  we  know  that  a  certain

section of the unconscious contains all our lost memories, and also all those

infantile impulses that cannot find any application in adult life—a series, that

is,  of  ruthless  childish  desires.  We  may  say  that  for  the  most  part  the

unconscious bears an infantile stamp; like the child's simple wish: "Daddy,

when  Mummie  is  dead,  will  you  marry  me?"  In  a  dream  that  infantile

expression of a wish is the substitute for a recent wish to marry, which is

painful to the dreamer for reasons still undiscovered. This thought, or rather

the seriousness of its corresponding intention, is said to be "repressed into theunconscious" and must there necessarily express itself in an infantile way, for

the material which is at the disposal of the unconscious consists chiefly of

infantile  memories.  As  the  latest  researches  of  the  Zürich  school  have

shown,  these  are  not  only  infantile  memories  but  also  "racial"  memories,

extending far beyond the limits of individual existence.

Important desires which have not been sufficiently gratified, or have been

"repressed,"  during  the  day  find  their  symbolic  substitution  in  dreams.

Because  moral  tendencies  usually  predominate  in  waking  hours,  these

ungratified  desires  which  strive  to  realise  themselves  symbolically  in  the

dream are, as rule, erotic ones. It is, therefore, somewhat rash to tell dreams

before one who understands, for the symbolism is often extremely transparent

to him who knows the rules! The clearest in this respect are "anxiety-dreams"

which are so common, and which invariably symbolise a strong erotic desire.

Often  the  dream  apparently  deals  with  quite  irrelevant  details,  thereby

making a ridiculous impression; or else it is so unintelligible that we are

simply  amazed  at  it,  and  accordingly  have  to  overcome  considerable

resistance in ourselves before we can set to work seriously to unravel its

symbolic weaving by patient work. But when at last we penetrate into its real

meaning we find ourselves at a bound in the very heart of the dreamer's

secrets, and find to our astonishment that an apparently senseless dream is

quite  full  of  sense,  and  deals  with  extraordinarily  important  and  serious

problems of the soul. Having acquired this knowledge we cannot refrain from

giving rather more credit to the old superstitions concerning the meaning of

dreams for which our rationalising tendencies, until lately, had no use.

As Freud says: "Dream-analysis is the via regia to the unconscious." Dream-

analysis  leads  us  into  the  deepest  personal  secrets,  and  it  is  therefore  an

invaluable instrument in the hand of the psychotherapist and educator. The

objections of the opponents of this method are based, as might be expected,

upon argument, which (setting aside undercurrents of personal feeling) show

the bias of present-day Scholasticism. It so happens that it is just the analysis

of dreams which mercilessly uncovers the deceptive morals and hypocritical

affectations of man, and shows him the under side of his character; can we

wonder if many feel that their toes have been rather painfully trodden upon?

In connection with the dream-analysis I am always reminded of the striking

statue of Carnal Pleasure in Bâle Cathedral, which shows in front the sweet

smile of archaic sculpture, but behind is covered with toads and serpents.

Dream-analysis reverses the figure and for once shows the other side. Theethical  value  of  this  reality-correction  (Wirklichkeitscorrectur)  cannot  be

disputed. It is a painful but extremely useful operation, which makes great

demands on both physician and patient.

Psychoanalysis, in so far as we are considering it as a therapeutic technique,

consists mainly of the analysis of many dreams; the dreams in the course of

the treatment bringing up successively the contents of the unconscious in

order that they may be subjected to the disinfecting power of daylight, and in

this process many a valuable thing believed to have been lost is found again.

It is not surprising that for those persons who have adopted a certain pose

towards  themselves,  psychoanalysis  is  at  times  a  real  torture,  since  in

accordance with the old mystic saying, "Give all thou hast, then only shalt

thou receive," there is first the necessity to get rid of almost all the dearly

cherished  illusions,  to  permit  the  advent  of  something  deeper,  finer,  and

greater,  for  only  through  the  mystery  of  self-sacrifice  is  it  possible  to  be

"born-again." It is indeed ancient wisdom which again sees the daylight in

psychoanalytic treatment, and it is a curious thing that this kind of psychic re-

education proves to be necessary at the height of our modern culture; this

education which in more than one respect can be compared to the technique

of Socrates, even though psychoanalysis penetrates to much greater depths.

We always find in a patient some conflict, which at a particular point, is

connected with the great problems of society; so that when the analysis has

arrived  at  this  point  the  apparently  individual  conflict  is  revealed  as  a

universal conflict of the environment and the epoch. Neurosis is thus, strictly

speaking,  nothing  but  an  individual  attempt,  however  unsuccessful,  at  a

solution  of  the  general  problem;  it  must  be  so,  for  a  general  problem,  a

"question," is not an end in itself; it only exists in the hearts and heads of

individual men and women. The "question" which troubles the patient is—

whether  you  like  it  or  not—the  "sexual"  question,  or  more  precisely,  the

problem of present-day sexual morality. His increased demands upon life and

the  joy  of  life,  upon  glowing  reality,  can  stand  the  necessary  limitations

which reality sets, but not the arbitrary, ill-supported prohibitions of present-

day morals, which would curb too much the creative spirit rising up from the

depths of the darkness of the beasts that perish. For the neurotic has in him

the soul of a child that can but ill-endure arbitrary limitations of which it does

not see the meaning; it tries to adopt the moral standard, but thereby only

falls into deeper disunion and distress within itself. On the one hand it tries to

suppress itself, and on the other to free itself—this is the struggle that iscalled  Neurosis.  If  this  conflict  were  altogether  clear  to  consciousness  it

would of course never give rise to neurotic symptoms; these only arise when

we  cannot  see  the  other  side  of  our  character,  and  the  urgency  of  the

problems of that other side. In these circumstances symptoms arise which

partially express what is unrecognised in the soul. The symptom is, therefore,

an indirect expression of unrecognised desires, which, were they conscious,

would be in violent opposition to the sufferer's moral views. As we have

already said, this dark side of the soul does not come within the purview of

consciousness, and therefore the patient cannot deal with it, correct it, resign

himself to it, or renounce it, for he cannot be said to possess the unconscious

impulses. By being repressed from the hierarchy of the conscious soul, they

have  become autonomous  complexes  which  can  be  brought  again  under

control by analysis of the unconscious, though not without great resistance.

There are a great many patients whose great boast it is that the erotic conflict

does not exist for them; they are sure that the sexual question is nonsense,

that they have, so to say, no sexuality. These people do not see that other

things  of  unknown  origin  cumber  their  path,  such  as  hysterical  whims,

underhand tricks, from which they make themselves, or those nearest them,

suffer;  nervous  stomach-catarrh,  pain  here  and  there,  irritability  without

reason, and a whole host of nervous symptoms. All which things show what

is wrong with them, for relatively, only a few specially favoured by fate,

avoid the great conflict.

Analytical psychology has already been reproached with setting at liberty the

animal  instincts  of  men,  hitherto  happily  repressed,  and  causing  thereby

untold harm. This childish apprehension clearly proves how little trust is put

in  the  efficacy  of  present-day  moral  principles.  It  is  pretended  that  only

morals can restrain men from dissoluteness; a much more efficient regulator,

however, is necessity, which sets much more real and convincing bounds than

any moral principles. It is true that analysis liberates animal instincts, but not,

as some have said, just in order to let them loose, but rather to make them

available for higher application, in so far as this is possible to the particular

individual, and in so far as such "sublimated" application is required. Under

all circumstances it is an advantage to be in full possession of one's own

personality, for otherwise the repressed desires will get in the way in a most

serious  manner,  and  overthrow  us  just  in  that  place  where  we  are  most

vulnerable. It is surely better that a man learn to tolerate himself, and instead

of making war on himself convert his inner difficulties into real experiences,rather than uselessly repeat them again and again in phantasy. Then at least

he lives, and does not merely consume himself in fruitless struggles. But

when men are educated to recognise the baser side of their own natures, it

may be hoped they will learn to understand and love their fellow-men better

too. A decrease of hypocrisy and an increase of tolerance towards oneself,

can have only good results in tolerance towards one's neighbours, for men are

only too easily disposed to extend to others the unfairness and violence which

they do to their own natures.

Freud's theory of repression does, indeed, seem to postulate the existence

only  of  people  who,  being  too  moral,  are  continually  repressing  the

immorality of their natural instincts. According to this idea, the immoral man

who  allows  his  natural  instincts  an  unbridled  existence  should  be  proof

against neurosis. But daily experience proves this is obviously not the case;

he may be just as neurotic as other men. If we analyse him, we find that it is

simply his decency that has been repressed. Therefore, when an immoral man

is neurotic, he represents what Nietzsche appropriately described as "the pale

criminal," a man who does not stand upon the same level as his deed.

The  opinion  may  be  held,  that  in  such  a  case  the  repressed  remnants  of

decency  are  merely  infantile  traditional  legacies,  that  impose  unnecessary

fetters upon natural instincts, for which reason they should be eradicated. The

principle  "écraser  l'infâme"  would  be  the  natural  culmination  of  such  an

absolute  let-instinct-live  theory.  That  would  obviously  be  quite  phantastic

and  nonsensical.  It  should,  indeed,  never  be  forgotten—and  the  Freudian

School needs this reminder—that morality was not brought down upon tables

of stone from Sinai and forced upon the people, but that morality is a function

of  the  human  soul,  which  is  as  old  as  humanity  itself.  Morality  is  not

inculcated from without. Man has it primarily within himself—not the law

indeed, but the essence of morals.

After all, does a more moral view-point exist than the let-instinct-live theory?

Is there a more heroic morality than this? That is why Nietzsche, the heroic,

is especially partial to it. It is natural and inborn cowardice that makes people

say, "God preserve me from following my instincts," thinking that they thus

prove their high moral standard. They do not understand that following one's

bent is really much too costly for them, too strenuous, too dangerous, and

finally it cuts somewhat against that sense of decency which most people

associate  rather  with  taste  than  with  a  categorical  imperative.  The

unpardonable fault of the let-instinct-live theory is, that it is much too heroic,too idealogic for the multitude.

There is, therefore, probably no other way for the immoral man but to accept

the moral corrective of his unconscious, just as he who is moral must come to

terms  as  best  he  may,  with  his  demons  of  the  netherworld.  It  cannot  be

gainsaid that the Freudian School is so convinced of the fundamental, and

even  exclusive  importance  of  sexuality  in  neurosis,  that  it  has  been

courageous enough to face the consequences of its convictions by heroically

attacking the sexual morality of the present day. Many different opinions

prevail upon this subject. What is significant is, that the problem of sexual

morality is being widely discussed at the present time. This is doubtless both

useful and necessary, for hitherto we have not really had any sexual morality

at all, but merely a low barbaric view, quite insufficiently differentiated. In

the Middle Ages, usury was considered absolutely despicable, for at that time

the morality of finance was not casuistically differentiated; there was nothing

but a kind of lump-morality. So nowadays, there exists nothing but sexual

morality in the lump. A girl who has an illegitimate child is condemned,

without any inquiry as to whether she is a decent person or not. Any form of

love  that  has  no  legal  sanction  is  immoral,  no  matter  whether  it  occurs

between thoughtful people of value or irresponsible scamps. People are still

barbarically hypnotised by the thing itself, to such an extent that they forget

the individual.

Therefore the discussion of and attack upon sexual morality of the present

day  signifies  at  bottom,  a  moral  deed,  constraining  people  towards  a

differentiated and really ethical conception of the subject.

As already stated, Freud sees the great conflict between the ego and natural

instinct chiefly under its sexual aspect. This aspect does exist, but a big query

should be placed behind its actuality. The question is whether what appears in

a sexual form must always essentially be sexuality? It is conceivable that one

instinct may disguise itself under another. Freud himself has supplied several

notable instances of such a disguise, proving therewith, convincingly, that

many  of  the  deeds  and  aims  of  human  kind  are,  at  bottom,  nothing  but

somewhat figurative expressions substituted, on account of embarrassment,

in place of important elementary things. The substitution is not seen through

on account of reasons of mutual consideration. There is nothing to hinder

certain elementary things being also pushed conveniently into the foreground,

in place of more necessary but less pleasant ones, under the illusion that the

elementary things only are really in question.The theory of sexuality although one-sided is absolutely right up to a certain

point. It would, therefore, be just as false to repudiate it as to accept it as

universally valid.      III.—THE OTHER VIEWPOINT: THE


                        WILL TO POWER.

We have so far considered the problem of the psychology of unconscious

processes mainly from the point of view of Freud. We have thereby doubtless

gained an inkling of a real truth, which perhaps our pride, our consciousness

of civilisation, tries to deny, although something else in us affirms it. This

situation is extremely irritating to some people, arousing resistances, and at

the  same  time  they  are  terror-stricken  by  it,  a  fact  which  they  are  most

unwilling  to  acknowledge.  There  is  something  terrible  in  admitting  this

conflict, for it is an acknowledgment of being swayed by instinct. Has it ever

been understood what it means to confess to the sway of instinct? Nietzsche

desired to be so swayed and advocated it most seriously. He even sacrificed

himself  throughout  his  whole  life,  with  rare  passion,  to  the  idea  of  the

Superman,  that  is  to  the  idea  of  the  man  who,  obeying  his  instincts,

transcends even his very self. And what was the course of his life? It turned

out as Nietzsche himself prophesied in the passage in "Zarathustra" relating

to  the  fatal  fall  of  the  rope-dancer,  of  the  man  who  did  not  want  to  be

"surpassed." Zarathustra says to the dying rope-dancer: "Thy soul will be

dead even sooner than thy body." And later, the dwarf says to Zarathustra:

"Oh,  Zarathustra,  thou  stone  of  wisdom!  Thou  threwest  thyself  high,  but

every  thrown-stone  must  fall!  Condemned  of  thyself,  and  to  thine  own

stoning:  oh,  Zarathustra,  far  indeed  threwest  thou  the  stone—but

upon thyself will it recoil!"

When he cried his "ecce homo" over himself, it was again too late, and the

crucifixion of the soul began even before the body was dead. He who thus

taught yea-saying to the instincts of life, must have his own career looked at

critically, in order to discover the effects of this teaching upon the teacher.

But  if  we  consider  his  life  from  this  point  of  view,  we  must  say  that

Nietzsche lived beyond instinct, in the lofty atmosphere of heroic "sublimity."

This height could only be maintained by means of most careful diet, choice

climate and above all by many opiates. Finally, the tension of this living

shattered his brain. He spoke of yea-saying, but lived the nay. His horror of

people, especially of the animal man, who lives by instinct, was too great. He

could not swallow the toad of which he so often dreamt, and which he feared

he must yet gulp down. The Zarathustrian lion roared all the "higher" men,who craved for life, back into the cavernous depths of the unconscious. That

is why his life does not convince us of the truth of his teaching. The "higher

man" should be able to sleep without chloral, and be competent to live in

Naumburg or Basle despite "the fogs and shadows." He wants woman and

offspring; he needs to feel he has some value and position in the herd, he

longs for innumerable commonplaces, and not least for what is humdrum: it

is this instinct that Nietzsche did not recognise; it is, in other words, the

natural animal instinct for life.

But how did he live if it was not from natural impulse? Should Nietzsche

really be accused of a practical denial of his natural instincts? He would

hardly agree to that; indeed he might even prove, and that without difficulty,

that he really was following his instincts in the highest sense. But we may

well ask how is it possible that human instincts could have led him so far

from humanity, into absolute isolation, into an aloofness from the herd which

he supported with loathing and disgust? One would have thought that instinct

would have united, would have coupled and begot, that it would tend towards

pleasure and good cheer, towards gratification of all sensual desires. But we

have quite overlooked the fact that this is only one of the possible directions

of  instinct.  There  exists  not  only  the  instinct  for  the  preservation  of  the

species (the sexual instinct), but also the instinct for the preservation of the

self.

Nietzsche obviously speaks of this latter instinct, that is of the will to power.

Whatever other kinds of instinct may exist are for him only a consequence of

the will to power. Viewed from the standpoint of Freud's sexual-psychology

this is a gross error, a misconception of biology, a bad choice made by a

decadent neurotic human being. For it would be easy for any adherent of

sexual  psychology  to  prove  that  all  that  was  too  lofty,  too  heroic,  in

Nietzsche's  conception  of  the  world  and  of  life,  was  nothing  but  a

consequence of the repression and misconception of "instinct," that is of the

instinct that this psychology considers fundamental.

This brings us to the question of perception, or rather it were better to say of

the various lenses through which the world may be perceived. For it would

hardly be permissible to pronounce a judgment on a life like Nietzsche's. It

was lived with rare consistency, from the beginning to the fateful end, in

accordance  with  his  underlying  natural  fundamental  instinct  for  power.  It

would hardly do to pronounce it to be merely figurative, otherwise we should

make  the  same  unjust  condemnation  that  Nietzsche  pronounced  upon  hispolar opposite Richard Wagner, of whom he said, "Everything in him is false;

what is genuine is hidden or disguised. He is an actor, in every bad and good

meaning  of  the  word."  Why  this  judgment?  Wagner  is  a  precise

representative  of  that  other  fundamental  instinct,  which  Nietzsche

overlooked,  and  upon  which  Freud's  psychology  is  based.  If  we  inquire

whether the other main instinct—that of power—was unconsidered by Freud,

we shall find that he has included it under the name of the "ego instinct." But

these  ego  instincts  drag  out  an  obscure  existence,  according  to  his

psychology, alongside the broad, all-too-broad, development of the sexual

theme. In reality, however, human nature wages a cruel and hardly-to-be-

ended warfare between the ego-principle and that of formless instinct. The

ego is all barriers; instinct, on the other hand, is without any limits. Both

principles  are  equally  powerful.  In  a  certain  sense  men  may  account

themselves fortunate in being conscious of only one instinct: therefore he

who is wise avoids getting to know the other. But if, after all, he does get to

know the other instinct, he is indeed a lost man. For then he enters upon the

Faustian conflict. Goethe has shown us in the first part of "Faust" what the

acceptance of instinct involves, and in the second part, what the acceptance of

the ego and of his gruesome unconscious world would signify. Everything

that is insignificant, petty, and cowardly in us shrinks from it, and would

avoid  it—and  there  is  one  admirable  means  of  doing  so.  Namely,  by

discovering that the other thing in us is "another fellow," a live man who

actually thinks, feels, does and desires all the things that are despicable and

odious. In this way the bogey is seized, and the battle against him is begun to

our satisfaction. Hence arise, also, those chronic idiosyncrasies of which the

history  of  morals  has  preserved  a  few  examples  for  us.  The  instance  of

Nietzsche  contra  Wagner,  already  cited,  is  particularly  transparent.  But

ordinary human life is crammed full of such cases. It is by these ingenuous

devices that man saves himself from the Faustian catastrophe for which he

evidently lacks both courage and strength. But a sincere man knows that even

his bitterest opponent, or any number of them, does not by any means equal

his one worst adversary, that is his other self who "bides within his breast."

Nietzsche unconsciously had Wagner in himself, that is why he envied him

his Parsifal. But even worse, he was a Saul and also had Paul within. That is

why Nietzsche became a stigmatised outcast of the Spirit; he had like Saul to

experience Christification when "the other self" inspired him with his "ecce

homo."  Which  man  in  him  "broke  down  before  the  cross,"  Wagner  orNietzsche?

It was ordained by destiny that one of Freud's earliest pupils, Adler, should

formulate a view of neurosis as founded exclusively upon the principle of

power. It is interesting and even fascinating to observe how totally different

the same things appear when viewed in another light. In order to emphasise

the main contrast, I would like at once to draw attention to the fact that,

according to Freud, everything is a strictly causal consequence of previously-

occurring  facts;  Adler,  on  the  contrary,  sees  everything  as  a  finally

conditioned arrangement. To take a simple example: A young woman begins

to have attacks of terror. She wakes at night from some nightmare with a

piercing  cry;  calming  herself  with  difficulty,  she  clings  to  her  husband,

imploring him not to leave her, making him repeat again and again that he

loves her, etc. Gradually a nervous asthma develops, attacks of which also

come on during the day.

In such a case, the Freudian system begins at once to burrow in the inner

causality  of  the  illness:  What  did  the  initial  anxiety-dreams  contain.  She

recalls wild bulls, lions, tigers, bad men. What does the patient associate with

them? She told a story of something that had happened to her when she was

still  single.  It  ran  as  follows:  She  was  staying  at  a  summer-resort  in  the

mountains, a great deal of tennis was played, the usual acquaintances being

made. There was a young Italian who played particularly well, and who also

knew  how  to  handle  the  guitar  in  the  evenings.  A  harmless  flirtation

developed, leading once to a moon-light walk. On this occasion, the Italian

temperament "unexpectedly" broke through, running away with the young

man to the great terror of the unsuspecting girl. He "looked at her with such a

look,"  that  she  could  never  forget  it.  This  look  follows  her  even  in  her

dreams; the wild animals that persecuted her had it. As a matter of fact, does

this look originally come from the Italian? Another reminiscence enlightens

us. The patient had lost her father through an accident, when she was about

fourteen years old. The father was a man of the world, and travelled a great

deal. Not long before his death he took her to Paris, where, among other

things, they visited the Follies Bergères. Something happened there that at

the time made a deep impression upon her. As they were leaving the theatre,

a rouged female suddenly pressed close up to her father in an impertinent

way. She looked at her father in fear as to what he would do—and then she

saw that look, that animal glare in his eyes. An inexplicable something clung

to her day and night. From this moment her attitude to her father was quitechanged. At one instant she was irritable and full of venomous moods, at

another she loved him extravagantly; then causeless fits of crying suddenly

began, and, for a time, whenever her father was at home, she was tormented

by terrible choking at table, with apparent attacks of suffocation, which were

usually followed by voicelessness lasting from one to two days. When the

news of her father's sudden death arrived, she was overcome by uncontrolled

grief ending in hysterical laughter. But she soon calmed down, her condition

improving  quickly,  and  the  neurotic  symptoms  disappearing  almost

completely. It seemed as if a veil of forgetfulness had descended over the

past. Only the experience with the Italian roused something in her of which

she was afraid. She had broken off completely with the young man. A few

years later she married. The present neurosis only began after the birth of her

second child, that is at the moment when she discovered that her husband

took a certain tender interest in another woman.

This history raises a number of questions. For instance, what do we know

about the mother? It should be said of her that she was very nervous, and had

tried many kinds of sanatoria and systems of cure. She also had symptoms of

fear and nervous asthma. The relations between her and her husband had

been very strained as far back as the patient could remember. The mother did

not understand the father; the daughter always felt that she understood him

better.  She  was  moreover  her  father's  declared  favourite,  being  inwardly

correspondingly cool towards her mother.

These facts are indications for a survey of the meaning of the illness. Behind

the present symptoms phantasies are operative, connected in the first place

with  the  young  Italian,  but  further  clearly  referring  to  the  father,  whose

unhappy marriage furnished the little daughter with an early opportunity of

acquiring a position that really should have been filled by her mother. Behind

this conquest there lies, of course, a phantasy of being the woman who was

really  suited  to  her  father.  The  first  attack  of  neurosis  broke  out  at

the moment when this phantasy received a violent shock, presumably similar

to that the mother had once experienced (a fact that was, however, unknown

to the child). The symptoms are easily comprehensible as the expression of

disappointed and rejected love. The choking is based upon a sensation of

tightening in the throat that is a well-known accompanying phenomenon of

violent effects which we cannot quite "swallow." The metaphors of language

often  refer  to  similar  physiological  occurrences.  When  the  father  died,  it

seemed that her consciousness sorrowed deeply but her unconscious laughed,after the manner of Till Eulenspiegel, who was sad when he went downhill

but was jolly when climbing laboriously, happy in anticipation of what was

coming. When the father was at home the girl was low-spirited and ill, but

whenever he was away she felt much better. Herein she resembles numerous

husbands  and  wives  who  as  yet  are  mutually  hiding  from  each  other  the

secret that they are not under all circumstances indispensable to one another.

That the unconscious had some right to laugh was shown by the subsequent

period  of  good  health.  She  succeeded  in  letting  all  that  had  passed  retire

behind the trap-door. The experience with the Italian, however, threatened to

bring the netherworld up again. But she quickly pulled the handle and shut

the door. She remained quite well until the dragon of neurosis came creeping

in, just when she imagined herself to be already safely out of her troubles, in

the so-to-say perfected state of wife and mother. Sexual psychology finds the

cause of the neurosis in the fact that the patient is not at bottom free from the

father. This forces her to resuscitate her former experience at the moment

when she discovered in the Italian the very same disturbing something that

had formerly made such a deep impression upon her when perceived in her

father.  These  recollections  were  naturally  revived  by  the  analogous

experience with another man, and formed the starting-point of the neurosis. It

might therefore be said that the content and cause of the neurosis lay in the

conflict between the phantastic infantile-erotic relation to the father on the

one hand, and her love for the husband on the other.

But if we now consider the course of the same illness from the standpoint of

the other instinct, that is, of the will to power, a different complexion is put

upon  the  matter.  Her  parents'  unhappy  marriage  afforded  an  excellent

opportunity for the exhibition of childish instinct for power. The instinct for

power  desires  that,  under  all  circumstances,  the  ego  should  be  "on  top,"

whether  by  straight  or  crooked  means.  At  all  costs  the  integrity  of  the

personality must be preserved.

Every attempt, even what appears to be an attempt of the surroundings, to

bring about the slightest subjection of the individual, is retorted to by the

"masculine protest," as Adler expresses it. The mother's disappointment and

her  taking  refuge  in  a  neurosis  brought  about  an  opportunity  for  the

development of power and the attainment of a dominating position. Love and

excellence  of  conduct  are,  as  everybody  knows,  extremely  well-adapted

weapons for the purposes of the instinct for power. Virtue is not seldom made

the means of forcing recognition from others. Already as a child she knewhow to obtain a privileged position with her father by means of specially

pleasing and amiable behaviour, even occasionally to supplant her mother.

This was not out of love for her father, although love was a good means of

obtaining the coveted superiority. The hysterical laughter at the death of her

father is a striking proof of this fact. One is inclined to consider such an

explanation as a deplorable depreciation of love, if not actually a malicious

insinuation. But let us pause a moment, reflect, and look at the world as it

really  is.  Have  we  never  seen  those  innumerable  people  who  love,  and

believe in their love, only until its purpose is achieved, and who then turn

away as if they had never loved? And, after all, does not Nature herself do the

same? In fact, is a "purposeless" love possible? If so, it belongs to the highest

human  virtues,  which  confessedly  are  extremely  rare.  Perhaps  there  is  a

general disposition to reflect as little as possible about the nature and purpose

of love; discoveries might be made which would show the value of one's own

love  to  be  less  considerable  than  we  had  supposed.  However,  it  were

dangerous to life to subtract anything from the value of fundamental instincts,

perhaps specially so to-day, when we seem to have only a minimum of values

left.

So the patient had an attack of hysterical laughter at the death of her father;

she  had  finally  arrived  at  the  top.  It  was  hysterical  laughter,  therefore  a

psychogenic  symptom,  that  is,  something  proceeding  from  unconscious

motives and not from those of the conscious ego. That is a difference that

should not be underrated, for it enables us to recognise whence and how

human virtues arise. Their contraries led to hell, that is, in modern terms, to

the unconscious, where the counterparts of our conscious virtue have long

been gathering. That is why our very virtue makes us desire to know nothing

of  the  unconscious;  indeed,  it  is  even  the  summit  of  virtuous  wisdom  to

maintain that there is no unconscious at all. But unfortunately we are all in a

like predicament with Brother Medardus in E. T. A. Hoffman's "The Elixir of

the Devil": somewhere or other there exists a sinister, terrible brother, our

own incarnate counterpart bound to us by flesh and blood, who comprehends

everything, maliciously hoarding whatever we most desire should disappear

beneath the table.

The first outbreak of neurosis occurred in our patient at the moment when she

became aware of the fact that there was something in her father which she did

not control. And then it dawned upon her of what use her mother's neurosis

was. When one meets with an obstacle that cannot be overcome by sensibleand charming means, there yet exists an arrangement hitherto unknown to her

which her mother had been beforehand in discovering, and that is neurosis.

That is the reason why she now imitates her mother. But, the astonished

reader asks, what is supposed to be the use of neurosis? What does it effect?

Whoever  has  had  a  pronounced  case  of  neurosis  in  his  immediate

environment, knows all that can be "effected" by a neurosis. In fact, there is

altogether no better means of tyrannising over a whole household than by a

striking neurosis. Heart attacks, choking fits, convulsions of all kinds achieve

enormous effects, that can hardly be surpassed. Picture the fountains of pity

let loose, the sublime anxiety of the dear kind parents, the hurried running to

and fro of the servants, the incessant sounding of the call to the telephone, the

hasty arrival of the physicians, the delicacy of the diagnosis, the detailed

examinations, the lengthy courses of treatment, the considerable expense; and

there, in the midst of all the uproar, lies the innocent sufferer, to whom the

household is even overflowingly grateful, when he has recovered from the

"spasms."

The girl discovered this incomparable "arrangement" (to use Adler's term),

applying it on occasion when the father was there with success. It became

unnecessary when the father died, for now she was finally uppermost. The

Italian  was  soon  dismissed,  because  he  laid  too  much  stress  upon  her

femininity  by  an  inopportune  reminder  of  his  manliness.  When  the  way

opened to the possibility of a suitable marriage, she loved, adapting herself

without any complaint to the deplorable rôle of the queen bee. As long as she

held  the  position  of  admired  superiority,  everything  went  splendidly.  But

when her husband evinced a small outside interest, she was obliged again to

have  recourse  to  the  extremely  efficacious  "arrangement,"  that  is,  to  the

indirect application of power, because she had once again come upon that

thing—this time in her husband—that had already previously withdrawn her

father from her influence.

That is how the matter appears from the standpoint of the psychology of

power.  I  fear  that  the  reader  will  feel  as  did  the  Kadi,  before  whom  the

counsel of one party spoke first. When he had ended, the Kadi said: "Thou

hast spoken well. I perceive that thou art right." Then spoke the counsel for

the other party, and when he had ended, the Kadi scratched himself behind

his ear and said: "Thou hast spoken well. I perceive that thou also art right."

There is no doubt that the instinct for power plays a most extraordinary part.

It  is  true  that  the  complexes  of  neurotic  symptoms  are  also  exquisite"arrangements," that inexorably realise their aims with incredible obstinacy

and unequalled cunning. The neurosis is final; that is, it is directed towards an

aim. Adler merits considerable distinction for having demonstrated this.

Which of the two points of view is right? That is a question that might well

cause  much  brain-racking.  For  the  two  explanations  cannot  be  simply

combined,  being  absolutely  contradictory.  In  one  case,  it  is  love  and  its

course that is the principal and decisive fact; and in the other case, it is the

power of the ego. In the first case the ego is merely a kind of appendage to

the passion for love; and in the second love is upon occasion merely a means

to the end, that of gaining the upper hand. Whoever has the power of the ego

most at heart rebels against the former conception, whilst he who cares most

about love, will never be able to be reconciled to the latter.                  IV.—THE TWO TYPES OF


                            PSYCHOLOGY.

It is at this point that our most recent researches may suitably be introduced.

We  have  found,  in  the  first  place,  that  there  are  two  types  of  human

psychology. In the one type the fundamental function is feeling, and in the

other it is thought. The one feels his way into the object, the other thinks

about  it.  The  one  adapts  himself  to  his  surroundings  by  feeling,  thinking

coming later; whilst the other adapts himself by means of thought, preceded

by understanding. The one who feels his way transfers himself to some extent

to the object; whilst the other withdraws himself from the object to some

extent,  or  pauses  before  it  and  reflects  about  it.  The  first  we  called

the extroverted  type,  because  in  the  main  he  goes  outside  himself  to  the

object, the latter is called the introverted type, because in a major degree he

turns away from the object, withdrawing into himself and thinking about it.

These remarks only give the broadest outline of the two types. But even this

quite inadequate sketch enables us to recognise that the two theories are the

outcome  of  the  contrast  between  the  two  types.  The  sexual  theory  is

promulgated from the standpoint of feeling, the power theory from that of

thought; for the extrovert always places the accent upon the feelings that are

connected with the object, whereas the introvert always puts the accent upon

the ego, and is as much detached by thought from the object as possible.

The  irreconcilable  contradictions  of  the  two  theories  are  now  to  be

understood,  because  both  theories  are  the  product  of  a  one-sided

psychology. We find an instance of the contrast of types in Nietzsche and

Wagner. The dissension between the two is due to the contrast in their ideas

of psychological values. What is most prized by the one is "affectation" for

the other, and is deemed false to the very core. Each depreciates the other.

If we apply the sexual theory to an extrovert it tallies with the facts of the

case; but if we apply it to an introvert, we simply maltreat and do violence to

his psychology. The same applies to the contrary case. The relative rightness

of the two hostile theories is explained by the fact that each one draws its

material  from  cases  that  prove  the  correctness  of  the  theory.  There  is  a

remnant  of  persons  whom  neither  theory  fits—has  not  every  rule  its

exceptions?

Criticism of both theories is indispensable. Recognition of facts showed thenecessity of overcoming their contrast, and of evolving a theory that should

do justice not only to one or the other type, but equally to both.

Even the layman will to some extent have been struck by the fact that in spite

of their correctness both theories really have a very unpleasant character and

one not altogether pertinent under all circumstances to the strict views of

science. The sexual theory is unæsthetic and unsatisfying intellectually. The

power  theory,  on  the  other  hand,  is  decidedly  venomous.  Both  inevitably

reduce high-flown ideals, heroic attitudes, pathos, and deep convictions, in a

painful manner to a reality which is hackneyed and trite; that is, if these

theories  are  applied  to  such  things—but  they  should  certainly  not  be  so

applied. Both theories are really only therapeutic instruments out of the tool-

chest of the physician, whose sharp and merciless knife cuts out all that is

pernicious and diseased. It was just such a misapplication of theory Nietzsche

tried with his destructive criticism of ideals. He regarded ideals as rampant

diseases of the soul of humanity; as indeed they really are. However, in the

hands  of  a  good  physician  who  really  knows  the  human  soul,  who,  as

Nietzsche  says,  "has  a  finger  for  the  slightest  shade,"  who  applies  the

treatment  only  to  what  is  really  diseased  in  a  soul—in  such  hands  both

theories prove wholesome caustics. The application must be adapted to the

individual case. It is a dangerous therapy in the hands of those who do not

understand how to deal out the treatment. These applications of criticism do

good when there is something that should and must be destroyed, dissolved

or brought low, but can easily damage what is being built up, or growing in

response to life's requirements.

Both theories might, therefore, be allowed to pass without attack, in so far as

they, like medicinal poisons, are entrusted to the safe hands of the physician.

But fate has ordained that they should not remain solely in the care of those

who are qualified to use them. First of all they naturally became known to the

medical  public.  Every  practising  physician  has  an  indefinitely  high

percentage  of  neurotics  among  his  patients;  he  is  therefore  more  or  less

obliged to look out for new and suitable systems of treatment. He ultimately

lights  upon  the  difficult  method  of  psychoanalysis.  He  is  at  first  not

competent for this, for how should he have learnt about the secrets of the

human soul? Certainly not through his academic studies. The smattering of

psychiatry that he acquired for his examination barely suffices to enable him

to recognise the symptoms of the commonest mental disturbances, and is far

from giving him any sufficient insight into the human soul. He is, therefore,practically quite unprepared to apply the analytic method. An unusually far-

reaching knowledge of the soul is indeed necessary in order to be able to

apply this caustic treatment with advantage. One must be in a position to

differentiate elements that are diseased and should be discarded, from those

which are valuable and should be retained. This is plainly a matter of great

difficulty. Any one who wishes to get a vivid impression of the way in which

a psychologysing physician may unwarrantably violate a patient through an

ignoble pseudo-scientific prejudice, should read what Moebius has written

about  Nietzsche.  Or  he  may  study  various  psychiatric  writings  about  the

"case of Christ," and will surely not hesitate to lament the lot of the patient

whose fate it is to meet with such "understanding." Psychoanalysis—greatly

to the regret of the medical man who, however, had not accepted it—then

passed over into the hands of the teaching profession. This is right: for it is

really, when rightly understood and handled, an educational method, and one

of the social sciences. I would, however, never personally recommend that

Freud's  purely  sexual  analysis  should  be  exclusively  applied  as  an

educational method. It might do much harm because of its one-sidedness. In

order  to  make  psychoanalysis  available  for  educational  purposes,  all  the

metamorphoses that have been the work of the last few years were needed.

The method had to be expanded from a general psychological point of view.

But the two theories of which I have spoken are not general theories. They

are, as I have said, caustics to be applied, so to say, "locally," for they are

both destructive and reductive. They explain to the patient that his symptoms

come from here or there, and are "nothing but" this or that. It would be very

unjust to wish to maintain that this reductive theory is wrong in a given case,

but  when  exalted  into  a  general  explanation  of  the  nature  of  the  soul—

whether  sick  or  healthy—a  reductive  theory  becomes  impossible.  For  the

human  soul,  whether  it  be  sick  or  healthy,  cannot  be merely  reductively

explained. Sexuality it is true is always and everywhere present; the instinct

for power certainly does penetrate the heights and the depths of the soul; but

the soul itself is not solely either the one or the other, or even both together, it

is also that which it has made and will make out of them both. A person is

only half understood when one knows how everything in him came about.

Only a dead man can be explained in terms of the past, a living one must be

otherwise  explained.  Life  is  not  made  up  of  yesterdays  only,  nor  is  it

understood nor explained by reducing to-day to yesterday. Life has also a to-

morrow, and to-day is only understood if we are able to add the indications ofto-morrow to our knowledge of what was yesterday. This holds good for all

expressions of psychological life, even for symptoms of disease. Symptoms

of  neurosis  are  not  merely  consequences  of  causes  that  once  have  been,

whether they were "infantile sexuality" or "infantile instinct for power." They

are  endeavours  towards  a  new  synthesis  of  life.  It  must  immediately  be

added, however, they are endeavours that have miscarried. None the less they

are attempts; they represent the germinal striving which has both meaning

and value. They are embryos that failed to achieve life, owing to unpropitious

conditions of an internal and external nature.

The reader will now probably propound the question: What possible value

and meaning can a neurosis have? Is it not a most useless and repulsive pest

of  humanity?  Can  being  nervous  do  anybody  good?  Possibly,  in  a  way

similar to that of flies and other vermin, which were created by God in order

that man might exercise the useful virtue of patience. Stupid as this thought is

from the standpoint of natural science, it might be quite shrewd from that of

psychology;  that  is,  if  we  substitute  "nervous  symptoms"  in  the  place  of

"vermin."  Even  Nietzsche,  who  had  an  uncommon  disdain  for  anything

stupid and trite in thought, more than once acknowledged how much he owed

to  his  illness.  I  have  known  more  than  one  person  who  attributed  all  his

usefulness, and the justification for his existence even, to a neurosis, that

hindered  all  decisive  stupidities  of  his  life, compelling  him  to  lead  an

existence which developed what was valuable in him; material that would

have been crushed had not the neurosis with its iron grip forced the man to

keep to the place where he really belonged. There are people the meaning of

whose  life—whose  real  significance—lies  in  the  unconscious;  in

consciousness lies only all that is vain and delusive. With others the reverse

is the case, and for them the neurosis has another significance. An extended

reduction is appropriate to the one, but emphatically unsuitable to the other.

The reader will now, indeed, be inclined to agree to the possibility of certain

cases of neurosis having such a significance but will nevertheless be ready to

deny an expediency that is so far-reaching and full of meaning to ordinary

cases of this illness. What value, for instance, might there be in the afore-

mentioned case of asthma and hysterical attacks of fear? I confess that the

value here is not so obvious, especially if the case be looked at from the

standpoint  of  a  reductive  theory,  that  is,  from  that  of  a chronique

scandaleuse of the psychological development of an individual.

We perceive that both the theories hitherto discussed have this one point incommon, viz. they relentlessly disclose everything that is valueless in people.

They are theories, or rather hypotheses, which explain wherein the cause of

the sickness lies. They are accordingly concerned not with the values of a

person, but with his lack of value that makes itself evident in a disturbing

way.  From  this  point  of  view,  it  is  possible  to  be  reconciled  to  both

standpoints.

A "value" is a possibility by means of which energy may attain development.

But in so far as a negative value is also a possibility through which energy

may attain development—as may, for instance, be clearly seen in the very

considerable manifestations of energy shown in neurosis—it also stands for a

value, albeit it brings about manifestations of energy which are useless and

harmful. In itself energy is neither useful nor harmful, neither full of value

nor lacking in it; it is indifferent, everything depending upon the form into

which it enters. The form gives the quality to the energy. On the other side,

mere  form  without  energy  is  also  indifferent.  Therefore  in  order  to  bring

about a positive value, on the one hand energy is necessary, and upon the

other a valuable form. In a neurosis psychic energy is undoubtedly present,

but in an inferior and not realisable form. Both the analytic methods that have

been discussed above are of service only as solvents of this inferior form.

They prove themselves good here as caustics.

By these methods we gain energy that is certainly free, but which, being as

yet  unapplied,  is  indifferent.  Hitherto  the  supposition  prevailed,  that  this

newly acquired energy was at the patient's conscious disposal, that he might

apply it in any way he liked. In so far as it was thought that the energy was

nothing but the sexual impulse, people spoke of a sublimated application of

the same, under the presumption that the patient could, without further ado,

transfer what was thought of as sexual energy into a "sublimation"; that is,

into a non-sexual form of use. It might, for instance, be transferred to the

cultivation of an art, or to some other good or useful activity. According to

this concept, the patient had the possibility of deciding, either arbitrarily or

from inclination, how his energy should be sublimated.

This conception may be accorded a justification for its existence, in so far as

it is at all possible for a human being to assign a definite direction to his life,

in  which  its  course  should  run.  But  we  know  that  there  is  no  human

forethought nor philosophy which can enable us to give our lives a prescribed

direction, except for quite a short distance. Destiny lies before us, perplexing

us,  and  teeming  with  possibilities,  and  yet  only  one  of  these  manypossibilities  is  our  own  particular  right  way.  Who  should  presume  to

designate  the  one  possibility  beforehand,  even  though  he  have  the  most

complete knowledge of his own character that a man can have? Much can

certainly be attained by means of will-power. But having regard to the fate of

certain personalities with particularly strong wills, it is entirely misleading for

us to want at all costs to change our own fate by power of will. Our will is a

function that is directed by our powers of reflection; it depends, therefore,

upon how our powers of reflection are constituted. In order to deserve its

name reflection must be rational, that is, according to reason. But has it ever

been proved, or can it ever be proved, that life and destiny harmonise with

our human reason, that is, that they are exclusively rational? On the contrary,

we have ground for supposing that they are also irrational, that is to say, that

in the last resort they too are based in regions beyond the human reason. The

irrationality of the great process is shown by its so-called accidentalness,

which perforce we ought to deny, since, obviously, we cannot think of a

process  not  being  causally  and  necessarily  conditioned.  But  actually,

accidentality exists everywhere, and does so indeed so obtrusively that we

might as well pocket our causal philosophy! The rich store of life both is, and

is  not,  determined  by  law;  it  is  at  the  same  time  rational  and  irrational.

Therefore, the reason and the will founded upon it are only valid for a short

distance. The further we extend this rationally chosen direction, the surer we

may be that we are thereby excluding the irrational possibilities of life, which

have,  however,  just  as  good  a  right  to  be  lived.  Aye,  we  even  injure

ourselves, since we cut off the wealth of accidental eventualities by a too

rigid and conscious direction. It was certainly very expedient for man to be

able to give his life a direction; it would, therefore, be quite right to maintain

that  the  attainment  of  reasonableness  was  the  greatest  achievement  of

mankind. But that is not to say that under all circumstances, this must or will

always continue to be the case. The present fearful catastrophic world-war

has  tremendously  upset  the  most  optimistic  upholder  of  rationalism  and

culture.

In 1913 Ostwald wrote as follows: "The whole world agrees that the present

state of armed peace is untenable, and is gradually becoming an impossible

condition.  It  demands  tremendous  sacrifices  from  individual  nations  far

surpassing the outlay for cultural purposes, without any positive values being

gained thereby. Therefore, if mankind could discover ways and means of

putting  an  end  to  these  preparations  for  a  war that  will  never  come, thisconscripting of a considerable part of the nation at the best and most capable

age for training for war purposes, if it could overcome all the innumerable

other injuries caused by the present customs, such an enormous saving of

energy would be effected, that an undreamt-of development of the evolution

of culture might be expected. For like a hand-to-hand fight, war is the oldest,

and  also  the  most  unsuitable  of  all  possible  means  of  solving  a  conflict

between wills, being indeed accompanied by the most deplorable waste of

energy. The complete setting aside of potential as well as of actual warfare is,

therefore, absolutely one of the most important tasks of culture in our time, a

real necessity from the point of view of energy."

But the irrationality of destiny ordained otherwise than the rationality of the

well-meaning  thinker;  since  it  not  only  determined  to  use  the  piled-up

weapons  and  soldiers,  but  much  more  than  that,  it  brought  about  a

tremendous  insane  devastation  and  unparalleled  slaughter.  From  this

catastrophe humanity may possibly draw the conclusion, that only one side of

fate can be mastered by rational intention.

What  can  be  said  of  mankind  in  general  applies  also  to  individuals,  for

mankind as a whole consists of nothing but individuals. And whatever the

psychology of mankind is, that is also the psychology of the individual. We

are experiencing in the world-war a fearful balancing-up with the rational

intentionality of organised culture. What is called "will" in the individual, is

termed "imperialism" among nations, for the will is a demonstration of power

over fate, that is, exclusion of what is accidental. The organisation of culture

is a rational and "expedient" sublimation of free and indifferent energies,

brought about by design and intention. The same is the case in the individual.

And just as the hope of a universal international organisation of culture has

experienced a cruel right-about through this war, so also must the individual,

in the course of his life, often find that so-called "disposable" energies do not

suffer themselves to be disposed of.

I was once consulted by a business man of about forty-five, whose case is a

good illustration of the foregoing. He was a typical American self-made man,

who had worked himself up from the bottom. He had been successful, and

had founded a very extensive business. He had also gradually organised the

business in such a way that he could now retire from its management. He had

indeed resigned two years before I saw him. Until then he had only lived for

his  business,  concentrating  all  his  energy  upon  it,  with  that  incredible

intensity and one-sidedness that is so peculiar to the successful Americanman of business. He had bought himself a splendid country seat, where he

thought  he  would  "live,"  which  he  imagined  to  mean  keeping  horses,

automobiles, playing golf and tennis, attending and giving parties, etc. But he

had reckoned without his host. The energy that had become "disposable" did

not enter into these tempting prospects, but betook itself capriciously to quite

other ways. A couple of weeks after the commencement of his longed-for life

of bliss, he began to brood over peculiar vague physical sensations. A few

more  weeks  sufficed  to  plunge  him  into  an  unprecedented  state  of

hypochondria. His nerves broke down completely. He, who was physically an

uncommonly strong and exceptionally energetic man, became like a whining

child. And that put an end to all his paradise. He fell from one apprehension

to another, worrying himself almost to death. He then consulted a celebrated

specialist, who immediately perceived quite rightly that there was nothing

wrong with the man but lack of employment. The patient saw the sense of

this,  and  betook  himself  to  his  former  position.  But  to  his  great

disappointment  no  interest  for  his  business  presented  itself.  Neither  the

application of patience nor determination availed to help. His energy would

not by any means be forced back into the business. His condition naturally

became worse than before. Energy that hitherto had been actively creative

was  now  turned  back  into  himself,  with  fearfully  destructive  force.  His

creative genius rose up, so to speak, in revolt against him, and instead of, as

before, producing great organisations in the world, his demon now created

equally clever systems of hypochondriac fallacies, by which the man was

absolutely crushed. When I saw him, he was already a hopeless moral ruin. I

tried to make clear to him that such a gigantic amount of energy might indeed

be withdrawn from business, but the problem remained as to where it should

go. The finest horses, the fastest automobiles, and the most amusing parties

are in themselves no inducement for energy, although it is certainly quite

rational to think that a man who has devoted his whole life to serious work,

has a natural right to enjoy himself. This would necessarily be the case if

things happened "humanly" in destiny; first would come work, then well-

earned  leisure.  But  things  happen  irrationally  and  inconveniently  enough,

energy requires a congenial channel, otherwise it is dammed up and becomes

destructive.  My  arguments  met  with  no  response,  as  was  indeed  to  be

expected.  Such  an  advanced  case  can  only  be  taken  care  of  till  death;  it

cannot be cured.

This case clearly illustrates the fact that it does not lie in our power to transfera  "disposable"  energy  to  whatever  rationally  chosen  object  we  may  like.

Exactly the same may be said of those apparently available energies that are

made available by the fact that the psychoanalytical caustic has destroyed

their  unsuitable  forms.  These  energies  can  be  arbitrarily  applied,  as  has

already  been  said,  at  the  very  most  only  for  a  short  time.  They  resist

following the rationally presented possibilities for any length of time. Psychic

energy  is  indeed  a  fastidious  thing,  that  insists  upon  having  its  own

conditions  fulfilled.  There  may  be  ever  so  much  energy  existing,  but  we

cannot make it useful, so long as we do not succeed in finding a congenial

channel for it.

The whole of my research work for the last years has been concentrated upon

this question. The first stage of this work was to discover the extent to which

the two theories discussed above were tenable. The second stage consisted in

the recognition of the fact, that these two theories correspond to two opposite

psychological  types,  which  I  have  designated  the  introversion  and  the

extroversion  types.  William  James  was  struck  by  the  existence  of  these

two types among thinkers. He differentiated them as the "tough-minded," and

the "tender-minded." Similarly, Ostwald discovered an analogous difference

in the classical and romantic types among great scholars. I am not therefore

alone in my ideas about the types, as is testified by mentioning only these two

well-known names out of many others. Historical researches have proved to

me that not a few of the great controversies in the history of thought were

based upon the contrast between the types. The most significant case of this

kind is the contrast between nominalism and realism, which, beginning with

the difference between the Platonic and the Megarian schools, descended to

scholastic philosophy, where Abelard won the immortal distinction of at least

having  ventured  an  attempt  to  unite  the  two  contradictory  standpoints  in

conceptualism. This conflict has continued down to the present day, where it

finds expression in the antagonism of spiritualism and materialism.

Just as in the general history of thought, so too every individual has a share in

this contrast of types. Close investigation proves that people of opposite types

have  an  unconscious  predilection  for  marrying  each  other,  that  they  may

mutually  complement  one  another.  Each  type  has  one  function  that  is

specially well developed, the introvert using his thought as the function of

adaptation, thinking beforehand about how he shall act; whilst the extrovert,

on the contrary, feels his way into the object by acting. To some extent he

acts  beforehand.  Hence  by  daily  application  the  one  has  developed  histhought, and the other his feeling. In extreme cases the one limits himself to

thinking and observing, and the other to feeling and acting. It is true that the

introvert feels also, very deeply indeed, almost too deeply; that is why an

English  investigator  has  gone  so  far  as  to  describe  his  as  "the  emotional

type."  True,  the  emotion  is  there,  but  it  all  remains  inside,  and  the

more  passionate  and  deeper  his  feeling  is,  the  quieter  is  his  outward

demeanour. As the proverb puts it, "Still waters run deep." Similarly, the

extrovert thinks  also,  but  that  likewise  mostly  inside,  whilst  his  feelings

visibly go outside, that is why he is held to be full of feeling whilst the

introvert is considered cold and dry. But as the feeling of the thinker goes

inwards, it is not developed as a function adapted to external situations, but

remains in a relatively undeveloped state. Similarly the thinking of one who

feels remains also relatively undeveloped.

But if comparatively well-adapted individuals are under consideration, then

the introvert will normally be found to have his feeling directed outwards,

and the result may be extraordinarily deceptive. He shows feelings; he is

amiable,  sympathetic,  even  emotional.  But  a  critical  examination  of  the

expressions of his feelings reveals that they are markedly conventional. They

are  not  individualised.  He  shows  to  every  one,  without  any  essential

difference,  the  same  friendliness  and  the  same  sympathy;  whilst  the

extrovert's  expressions  of  feeling  are  throughout  delicately  graded  and

individualised. With the introvert the expression of feelings is really a gesture

that  is  artificially  adopted  and  conventional.  Similarly,  the  extrovert  may

apparently  think,  and  that  even  very  clearly  and  scientifically.  But  upon

closer  investigation,  his  thoughts  are  found  to  be  really  foreign  property,

merely conventional forms which have been artificially acquired. They lack

anything individual and original, and are just as lukewarm and colourless as

the conventional feelings of the introvert. Under these conventional disguises,

quite other things are slumbering in both, which occasionally when awakened

by some overpowering effect, suddenly break out to the astonishment and

horror of the environment.

Most civilised people incline more to one type than the other. Taken together

they would supplement each other exceedingly well. That is why they are so

apt to marry one another, and so long as they are fully occupied with adapting

themselves to the necessities of life they suit one another splendidly. But if

the  man  has  earned  a  competence,  or  if  a  big  legacy  drop  from  the  sky,

terminating  the  external  urgencies  of  life,  then  they  have  time  to  occupythemselves with each other. Until now they stood back to back, defending

themselves  against  want.  But  now  they  turn  to  each  other  expecting  to

understand one another; and they make the discovery that they have never

understood one another. They speak different languages. Thus the conflict

between  the  two  types  of  psychology  begins.  This  conflict  is  venomous,

violent and full of mutual depreciation, even if it be conducted very quietly in

the  utmost  intimacy. This  is  so  because  the  value  of  the  one  is  the

worthlessness  of  the  other.  The  one,  starting  from  the  standpoint  of  his

valuable thinking, takes for granted that the feelings of the other correspond

to his own inferior feelings, this because he knows absolutely nothing of any

other  feelings.  But  the  other,  starting  from  the  standpoint  of  his  valuable

feelings,  assumes  that  his  partner  has  the  same  inferior  thought  that  he

himself has. Evidently there is plenty of work here for Goethe's Homunculus,

who had to find out "why husband and wife get on so badly." Now as many

cases of neurosis have a basis in such differences, I, as a physician, found

myself obliged to relieve the Homunculus of some of his ungrateful task. I

am glad to be able to say that many a sufferer has been helped in grave

difficulties by the enlightenment I could give.

The third  stage  of  the  path  of  increasing  understanding  consisted  in

formulating a theory of the psychology of types which would be of practical

use for the development of man. Viewed from the newly-gained standpoint,

there resulted, first of all, a totally new theory of psychogenic disturbances.

The foundation of the facts remains the same: the first hypothesis of every

neurosis is the existence of an unconscious conflict. According to Freud's

theory, this is an erotic conflict, or to speak more exactly, a battle of the

moral  consciousness  against  the  unconscious  infantile  sexual  world  of

phantasy and its transference to external objects. According to Adler's theory,

it is a battle of the superiority of the ego against all oppressive influences,

whether from inside or outside.

But the new idea asserts that the neurotic conflict always takes place between

the adapted function and the co-function that is undifferentiated, and that lies

to a great extent in the unconscious; therefore in the case of the introvert,

between  thought  and  unconscious  feeling,  but  in  that  of  the  extrovert,

between feeling and unconscious thought. Another theory of the etiological

moment results from this. If a man who naturally adapts himself by thinking

is  faced  by  a  demand  that  cannot  be  met  by  thinking  alone,  but  which

requires  differentiated  feeling,  the  traumatic  or  pathogenic  conflict  breaksout. On the contrary, the critical moment comes to the man who adapts by

feeling when he is faced by a problem requiring differentiated thought. The

afore-mentioned case of the business man is a clear example of this. The man

was  an  introvert,  who  all  through  his  life  had  left  every  consideration  of

sentiment in the background, that is, in the unconscious. But when, for the

first time in his life, he found himself in a situation in which nothing could be

done except by means of differentiated feeling, he failed utterly. At the same

time,  a  very  instructive  phenomenon  occurred;  his  unconscious  feelings

manifested themselves as physical sensations of a vague nature. This fact

harmonises with a generally accepted experience in our psychology, to wit,

that  undeveloped  feelings  partake  of  the  character  of  vague  physical

sensations, since undifferentiated feelings are as yet identical with subjective

physical sensations. Differentiated feelings are of a more "abstract" objective

nature. This phenomenon may well be the unconscious basis of the earliest

statement of psychological types that is known to me; namely, the three types

of the Valentinian School. They held the undifferentiated type to be the so-

called hylic (material) man. He was ranked below the differentiated types,

that is, the psychic (soulful) man, who corresponds to the extroversion type;

and the pneumatic (spiritual) man, who corresponds to the introversion type.

For  these  gnostics  the  "pneumatikos"  stood  of  course  the  highest.

Christianity,  with  its  "psychic"  (spiritual)  nature  (principle  of  love),  has

indeed  contested  this  privilege  of  the  gnosis.  But  even  this  page  may  be

turned in the course of time: since, if the signs of the age are not deceptive,

we are now in the great final settlement of the Christian epoch. We know

that, evolution not being uniformly continuous, when one form of creation

has been outlived, the evolutionary tendency harks back to resume that form

which, after having made a beginning, was left behind in an undeveloped

state.

After this brief digression to generalities, let us return to our case. If a similar

disturbance were to take place in an extrovert, he would have what are called

hysterical symptoms, that is, symptoms that are also of an apparently physical

nature, which, as our theory indicates, would this time represent the patient's

unconscious  undifferentiated  thought.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  find  also  a

widespread region of phantasy as the basis of hysterical symptoms, of which

many have been described in detail in the literature of the subject. They are

phantasies of a pronounced sexual, that is physical complexion. But in reality

they  are  undifferentiated  thoughts,  which  in  common  with  theundifferentiated feelings are to some extent physical, and therefore appear as

what may be called physical symptoms.

By taking up again here the thread that was dropped before, we can now

clearly see why it is precisely in the neurosis that those values which are most

lacking to the individual lie hidden. We might also now return to the case of

the young woman, and apply to it the newly-won insight. She is an extrovert

with  an  hysterical  neurosis.  Let  us  suppose  that  this  patient  had  been

"analysed," that is, that the treatment having made it clear to her what kind of

unconscious thoughts lay behind her symptoms, she had regained possession

of the psychic energy which by becoming unconscious had constituted the

strength of the symptoms. The following practical question now arises: what

can be done with the so-called available energy? It would be rational, and in

accordance with the psychological type of the invalid, to extrovert this energy

again, that is to transfer it to an object, as for instance to philanthropic or

some other useful activities. This way is possible only in exceptional cases—

there are energetic natures who do not shrink from care and trouble in a

useful  cause,  there  are  people  who  care  immensely  about  just  such

occupations—otherwise it is not feasible. For it must not be forgotten, that in

the case under consideration, the libido (that is the technical expression for

the psychic energy) has found its object already unconsciously in the young

Italian, or an appropriate real human substitute. Under these circumstances

such a desirable sublimation, however natural, is out of the question. For the

object of the energy usually affords a better channel than an ethical activity,

however attractive. Unfortunately there are many people who always speak

of a person, not as he is, but as he would be if their desires for him were

realised.  But  the  physician  is  necessarily  concerned  with  the  actual

personality, which will obdurately remain the same, until its real character

has been recognised on all sides. An analysis must necessarily be based upon

the recognition of naked reality, not upon any arbitrarily selected phantasies

about a person, however desirable.

The  fact  is  that  the  so-called  available  energy  unfortunately  cannot  be

arbitrarily directed as desired. It follows its own channel, one which it had

already found, even before we had quite released it from its bondage to the

unadapted form. For we now make the discovery that the phantasies which

were formerly occupied with the young Italian, have been transferred to the

physician himself. The physician has therefore himself become the object of

the unconscious libido. If this is not the case, or if the patient will on noaccount acknowledge the fact of transference, or again, if the physician either

does not understand the phenomenon at all, or does so wrongly, then violent

resistances  make  their  appearance,  which  aim  at  completely  breaking  off

relations with the doctor. At this point patients leave and look for another

doctor or for people who "understand" them; or if they hopelessly relinquish

this search they go to pieces.

But if the transference to the physician takes place and is accepted, a natural

channel has thereby been found, which not only replaces the former, but also

makes a discharge of the energic process possible, and provides a course that

is relatively free from conflict. Therefore if the libido is allowed its natural

course, it will of its own accord find its way into the transference. Where this

is not the case, it is always a question either of arbitrary rebellion against the

laws of Nature, or of some deficiency in the physician's work.

Into  the  transference  every  conceivable  infantile  phantasy  is  first  of  all

projected; these must then be subjected to the caustic, that is, analytically

dissolved.  This  was  formerly  called  the dissolution  of  the  transference.

Thereby the energy is freed from this unsuitable form also, and once again

we are confronted by the problem of disposable energy. We shall find that an

object affording the most favourable channel has been chosen by Nature even

before our search began.            V.—THE PERSONAL AND THE


          IMPERSONAL UNCONSCIOUS

The fourth stage of our newly won insight is now reached. The analytical

dissolution  of  the  infantile  transference  phantasies  was  continued  until  it

became  sufficiently  clear,  even  to  the  patient,  that  he  was  making  his

physician into father, mother, uncle, guardian, teacher, friend or any other

kind of surrogate for parental authority conceivable. But, as experience is

constantly proving, further phantasies make their appearance, representing

the physician as saviour or as some other divine being. Obviously this is in

flagrant contradiction to the sane reasoning of consciousness. Moreover, it

appears that these divine attributes considerably overstep the bounds of the

Christian conception in which we grew up. They even assume the guise of

heathen allurements, and, for instance, not infrequently assume the form of

animals.

The transference is in itself nothing but a projection of unconscious contents

on  to  the  analyst.  At  first  it  is  the  so-called  superficial  contents  that  are

projected. During this stage the physician is interesting as a possible lover

(somewhat after the manner of the young Italian in our case). Later on, he is a

representation  of  the  father,  and  is  the  symbol  either  of  kindness  or  of

severity, according to what the patient formerly imputed to his real father.

Occasionally  the  doctor  even  appears  to  the  patient  as  a  kind  of  mother,

which, though sounding somewhat strange, really lies well within the bounds

of possibility. All these projections of phantasy have an underlying basis of

personal reminiscences.

But  presently  other  forms  of  phantasy  appear,  bearing  an  extravagantly

effusive and impossible character. The physician now appears to be endowed

with uncanny qualities; he may be either a wizard or a demoniacal criminal,

or  his  counterpart  of  virtue,  a  saviour.  Later  on  he  appears  as  an

incomprehensible mixture of both sides. It should be clearly understood that

the physician does not appear to the patient's consciousness in these forms,

but that phantasies come up to the surface representing the doctor in this

guise. If, as is not seldom the case, the patient cannot forthwith perceive that

his view of the physician is a projection of his own unconscious, then he will

probably  behave  rather  foolishly.  Difficulties  often  arise  at  this  stage  of

analysis, making severe demands upon the good will and patience of bothphysician and patient. In a few exceptional cases, a patient cannot refrain

from  disseminating  the  stupidest  tales  about  the  physician.  Such  people

cannot get it into their head that, as a matter of fact, their phantasies originate

in themselves, and have nothing or very little to do with the physician's actual

character. The pertinacity of this error arises from the circumstance that there

is no foundation of personal memory for this particular kind of projection. It

is occasionally possible to prove that similar phantasies, for which neither

parent  gave  reasonable  occasion,  had  at  some  time  in  childhood  been

attached to the father or mother.

In one of his shorter books, Freud has shown how Leonardo da Vinci was

influenced in his later life by the fact that he had two mothers. The fact of the

two mothers (or the double descent) had indeed a reality in Leonardo's case,

but  it  plays  a  part  with  other  artists  as  well.  Benvenuto  Cellini  had  this

phantasy  of  a  double  descent.  It  is  unquestionably  a  mythological  theme;

many heroes of legend have two mothers. The phantasy is not founded upon

the  actual  fact  of  the  hero's  having  two  mothers,  but  is  a  widespread

"primordial image" belonging to the secrets of the universal history of the

human mind. It does not belong to the sphere of personal reminiscences.

In every individual, in addition to the personal memories, there are also, in

Jacob  Burckhardt's  excellent  phrase,  the  great  "primordial  images,"  the

inherited  potentialities  of  human  imagination.  They  have  always  been

potentially latent in the structure of the brain. The fact of this inheritance also

explains the otherwise incredible phenomenon, that the matter and themes of

certain legends are met with all the world over in identical forms. Further, it

explains how it is that persons who are mentally deranged are able to produce

precisely the same images and associations that are known to us from the

study of old manuscripts. I gave some examples of this in my book on "The

Psychology of the Unconscious." I do not hereby assert the transmission of

representations, but only of the possibility of such representations, which is a

very different thing.

It is therefore in this further stage of the transference that those phantasies are

produced that have no basis in personal reminiscence. Here it is a matter of

the  manifestation  of  the  deeper  layers  of  the  unconscious,  where  the

primordial universally-human images are lying dormant.

This discovery leads to the fourth stage of the new conception: that is, to the

recognition of a differentiation in the unconscious itself. We are now obliged

to differentiate a personal unconscious and an impersonal or super-personalunconscious. We also term the latter the absolute or collective unconscious,

because it is quite detached from what is personal, and because it is also

absolutely  universal,  wherefore  its  contents  may  be  found  in  every  head,

which of course is not the case with the personal contents.

The  primordial  images  are  quite  the  most  ancient,  universal,  and  deep

thoughts of mankind. They are feeling just as much as thought, and might

therefore be termed original thought-feelings.

We have therewith now found the object selected by the libido when it was

freed from the personal-infantile form of transference. Namely, that it sinks

down into the depths of the unconscious, reviving what has been dormant

there  from  immemorial  ages.  It  has  discovered  the  buried  treasure  out  of

which mankind from time to time has drawn, raising thence its gods and

demons, and all those finest and most tremendous thoughts without which

man would cease to be man.

Let  us  take  as  an  example  one  of  the  greatest  thoughts  to  which  the

nineteenth century gave birth—the idea of the conservation of energy. Robert

Mayer is the originator of this idea. He was a physician, not a physicist nor a

natural philosopher, to either of whom the creation of such an idea would

have been more germane. It is of great importance to realise that in the real

sense  of  the  word,  Robert  Mayer's  idea  was  not created.  Neither  was  it

brought  about  through  the  fusion  of  the  then-existent  conceptions  and

scientific hypotheses. It grew in the originator, and was conditioned by him.

Robert  Mayer  wrote  (1841)  to  Griesinger  as  follows:  "I  by  no  means

concocted the theory at the writing-desk." He goes on to report about certain

physiological investigations that he made in 1840-41 as doctor on board ship,

and continues: "If one wishes to be enlightened about physiological matters,

some knowledge of physical processes is indispensable, unless one prefers to

work from the metaphysical side, which is immensely distasteful to me. I

therefore  kept  to  physics,  clinging  to  the  subject  with  such  ardour  that,

although it may well seem ridiculous to say so, I cared little about what part

of the world we were in. I preferred to remain aboard where I could work

uninterruptedly, and where many an hour gave me such a feeling of being

inspired in a way I can never remember having experienced either before or

since.

"A few flashes of thought that thrilled through me"—this was in the harbour

of Surabaja—"were immediately diligently pursued, leading again in their

turn  to  new  subjects.  Those  times  are  passed,  but  subsequent  quietexamination of what then emerged, has taught me that it was a truth which

can not only be subjectively felt, but also proved objectively; whether this

could be done by one who has so little knowledge of physics as I have, is a

matter which obviously, I must leave undecided."

Heim, in his book on Energetics, expresses the opinion: "that Robert Mayer's

new thought did not gradually detach itself by dint of revolving it in his mind,

from the conceptions of power transmitted from the past, but belongs to those

ideas that are intuitively conceived, which, originating in other spheres of a

mental  kind,  surprise  thought,  as  it  were,  compelling  it  to  transform  its

inherited notions conformably with those ideas."

The question now arises, whence did this new idea that forced itself upon

consciousness with such elemental power spring? And whence did it derive

such strength that it was able to effect consciousness so forcibly that it could

be completely withdrawn from all the manifold impressions of a first voyage

in the tropics? These questions are not easy to answer. If we apply our theory

to this case the explanation would run as follows: The idea of energy and of

its conservation must be a primordial image that lay dormant in the absolute

unconscious. This conclusion obviously compels us to prove that a similar

primordial  image  did  really  exist  in  the  history  of  the  human  mind,  and

continued to be effective through thousands of years. As a matter of fact,

evidence of this can be produced without difficulty. Primitive religions, in the

most dissimilar regions of the earth, are founded upon this image. These are

the so-called dynamistic religions, whose sole and distinctive thought is the

existence of some universal magical power upon which everything depends.

The  well-known  English  scholars,  Taylor  and  Frazer,  both  wrongly

interpreted  this  idea  as  animism.  Primitive  peoples  do  not  mean  souls  or

spirits  by  their  conception  of  power,  but  in  reality  something  that  the

American investigator Lovejoy most aptly terms "primitive energetics."

In  an  investigation  appertaining  to  this  subject,  I  showed  that  this  notion

comprises the idea of soul, spirit, God, health, physical strength, fertility,

magic power, influence, might, prestige, curative remedies, as well as certain

states of mind which are characterised by the setting loose of affects. Among

certain Polynesians "Melungu" (that is this primitive concept of energy) is

spirit,  soul,  demoniacal  being,  magic,  prestige.  If  anything  astonishing

happens, the people cry "Melungu." This notion of power is also the first

rendering of the concept of God among primitive peoples. The image has

undergone many variations in the course of history. In the Old Testament thismagic power is seen in the burning bush, and shines in the face of Moses. It

is manifest in the Gospels as the outpouring of the Holy Spirit, as cloven

tongues of fire from heaven. In Heraclitus it appears as universal energy, as

"eternally living fire"; for the Persians it is the fiery brightness, haôma, divine

mercy; for the Stoics it is heimarmene, the power of destiny. In mediæval

legend it is seen as the aura, or the halo of the saint. It blazes forth in great

flames from the hut where the saint is lying in ecstasy. The saints reflect the

sum of this power, the storehouse of light, in their faces. According to ancient

concepts this power is the soul itself; the idea of its immortality contains that

of  its conservation.  The  Buddhistic  and  primitive  conception  of  the

metempsychosis (transmigration of souls) contains the idea of its unlimited

capacity for transformation under constant conservation.

This thought has obviously therefore been imprinted on the human brain for

untold ages. That is why it lies ready in the unconscious of every one. Only

certain  conditions  are  needed  in  order  to  let  it  appear  again.  These

conditions  were  obviously  fulfilled  in  the  example  of  Robert  Mayer.  The

greatest and best thoughts form themselves upon these primordial images,

which are the ancient common property of humanity.

After  this  instance  of  the  nascence  of  new  ideas  out  of  the  treasury  of

primordial images, we will resume the further delineation of the process of

transference. It was seen that the libido of the patient seizes upon its new

object in those apparently preposterous and peculiar phantasies, namely the

contents  of  the  absolute  unconscious.  As  I  already  observed,  the

unacknowledged  projection  of  primordial  images  upon  the  physician

constitutes a danger for further treatment which should not be undervalued.

The images contain not only every beautiful and great thought and feeling of

humanity, but also every deed of shame and devilry of which human beings

have  ever  been  capable.  Now,  if  the  patient  cannot  differentiate  the

physician's  personality  from  these  projections,  there  is  an  end  to  mutual

understanding,  and  human  relations  become  impossible.  If  however  the

patient avoids this Charybdis, he falls into the Scylla of introjecting these

images, that is, he does not ascribe their qualities to the physician but to

himself. This peril is just as great. If he projects, he vacillates between an

extravagant and morbid deification, and a spiteful contempt of his physician.

In the case of introjection, he falls into a ludicrous self-deification or moral

self-laceration. The mistake that he makes in both cases consists in attributing

the  contents  of  the  absolute  unconscious  to  himself  personally.  Thus  hemakes himself into both God and devil. This is the psychological reason why

human beings have always needed demons, and could not live without gods.

There is the exception, of course, of a few specially clever specimens of

the homo occidentalis  of  yesterday  and  the  day  before—supermen  whose

God  is  dead,  wherefore  they  themselves  become  gods.  There  is  also  the

example of Nietzsche, who confessedly required chloral in order to be able to

exist. These supermen even become rationalistic petty gods, with thick skulls

and  cold  hearts.  The  concept  of  God  is  simply  a  necessary

psychological  function  of  an  irrational  nature  that  has  altogether  no

connection with the question of God's existence. This latter question is one of

the most fatuous that can be put. It is indeed sufficiently evident that man

cannot conceive a God, much less realise that he actually exists, so little is he

able to imagine a process that is not causally conditioned. Theoretically, of

course, no accidentality can exist, that is certain, once and for all. On the

other hand, in practical life, we are continually stumbling upon accidental

happenings. It is similar with the existence of God; it is once and for all an

absurd problem. But the consensus gentium has spoken of gods for æons past,

and will be speaking of them in æons to come. Beautiful and perfect as man

may think his reason, he may nevertheless assure himself that it is only one of

the possible mental functions, coinciding merely with the corresponding side

of the phenomena of the universe. All around is the irrational, that which is

not congruous with reason. And this irrationalism is likewise a psychological

function,  namely  the  absolute  unconscious;  whilst  the  function  of

consciousness  is  essentially  rational.  Consciousness  must  have  rational

relations,  first  of  all  in  order  to  discover  some  order  in  the  chaos  of

disordered individual phenomena in the universe; and secondly, in order to

labour at whatever lies within the area of human possibility. We are laudably

and usefully endeavouring to exterminate so far as is practicable the chaos of

what  is  irrational,  both  in  and  around  us.  Apparently  we  are  making

considerable progress with this process. A mental patient once said to me,

"Last night, doctor, I disinfected the whole heavens with sublimate, and yet

did  not  discover  any  God."  Something  of  the  kind  has  happened  to  us.

Heraclitus,  the  ancient,  that  really  very  wise  man,  discovered  the  most

wonderful  of  all  psychological  laws,  namely,  the regulating  function  of

antithesis. He termed this "enantiodromia" (clashing together), by which he

meant that at some time everything meets with its opposite. (Here I beg to

remind the reader of the case of the American business man, which shows theenantiodromia  most  distinctly.)  The  rational  attitude  of  civilisation

necessarily terminates in its antithesis, namely in the irrational devastation of

civilisation. Man may not identify himself with reason, for he is not wholly a

rational being, and never can or ever will become one. That is a fact of which

every pedant of civilisation should take note. What is irrational cannot and

may not be stamped out. The gods cannot and may not die. Woe betide those

men who have disinfected heaven with rationalism; God-Almightiness has

entered into them, because they would not admit God as an absolute function.

They are identified with their unconscious, and are therefore its sport. (For

where  God  is  nearest,  there  the  danger  is  greatest.)  Is  the  present  war

supposed to be a war of economics? That is a neutral American "business-

like" standpoint, that does not take the blood, tears, unprecedented deeds of

infamy and great distress into account, and which completely ignores the fact

that this war is really an epidemic of madness. The several parties project

their unconscious upon each other, hence the mad confusion of ideas in every

head. This is the enantiodromia that occurs in the individual life of man, as

well as in that of peoples. The legend of the Tower of Babel turns out to be a

tenable truth.

Only he escapes from the cruel law of enantiodromia who knows how to

separate himself from the unconscious—not by repressing it, for then it seizes

him from behind—but by presenting it visibly to himself as something that is

totally different from him.

This  gives  the  solution  of  the  Scylla  and  Charybdis  problem  which  I

described  above.  The  patient  must  learn  to  differentiate  in  his  thoughts

between what is the ego and what is the non-ego. The latter is the collective

psyche or absolute unconscious. By this means he will acquire the material

with which henceforward, for a long time, he will have to come to terms.

Thereby  the  energy,  that  before  was  invested  in  unsuitable  pathological

forms, will have found its appropriate sphere. In order to differentiate the

psychological  ego  from  the  psychological  non-ego,  man  must  necessarily

stand upon  firm  feet  in  his  ego-function;  that  is, he  must  fulfil his  duty

towards life completely, so that he may in every respect be a vitally living

member of human society. Anything that he neglects in this respect descends

into the unconscious and reinforces its position, so that he is in danger of

being  swallowed  up  by  it,  if  his  ego-function  is  not  established.  Severe

penalties are attached to that. As indicated by old Synesius, the "spiritualised

soul (pneumatike psyché) becomes god and demon, a state in which it suffersthe divine penalties," that is, it suffers being torn asunder by the Zagreus, an

experience which Nietzsche also underwent at the beginning of his insanity,

where, in "Ecce Homo," the God whom he was despairingly resisting in front

assailed him from behind. Enantiodromia is the being torn asunder into the

pairs  of  opposites,  which  opposites  are  only  proper  to  "the  god,"  and

therefore also to the deified man, who owes likeness to God to his having

prevailed over his gods.

VI.—The Synthetic or Constructive Method

We now reach the fifth stage of progressive understanding. The coming to

terms with the unconscious is a technical performance to which the name

of transcendental  function  has  been  given  because  a  new  function  is

produced, which being based upon both real and imaginary, or rational and

irrational data, makes a bridge between the rational and irrational functions of

the  psyche.  The  basis  of  the  transcendental  function  is  a new  method  of

treating psychological materials such as dreams and phantasies. The theories

previously  discussed  were  based  upon  an  exclusively  causal-reductive

procedure,  which  reduces  the  dream  or  phantasy  to  its  component

reminiscences,  and  the  instinctive  processes  that  underlie  them.  I  have

already stated the justification as well as the limitations of this proceeding. It

reaches the end of its usefulness at the moment when the dream symbols no

longer permit of a reduction to personal reminiscences or aspirations; that is

when the images of the absolute unconscious begin to be produced. It would

be quite inappropriate to reduce these collective ideas to what is personal, and

not  only  inappropriate  but  even  actually  pernicious,  a  fact  that  has  been

impressed upon me by disagreeable experiences. The values of the images or

symbols of the absolute unconscious are only disclosed if they are subjected

to  a  synthetic  (not  analytical)  treatment.  Just  as  analysis  (the  causally

reductive  procedure)  disintegrates  the  symbol  into  its  components,  so  the

synthetic  procedure  synthesises  the  symbol  into  a  universal  and

comprehensible expression. The synthetic procedure is by no means easy; I

will therefore give an example, by means of which I can explain the whole

process.

A  patient  had  the  following  dream.  She  was  just  at  the  critical  juncture

between the analysis of the personal unconscious and the commencement of

the production of the absolute unconscious. "I am on the point of crossing a

broad and rapid stream. There is no bridge, but I find a ford where I can

cross. As I am just on the point of doing so, a big crab that lay hidden in thewater seizes my foot and does not let it go." She awoke in fear. Associations

with the dream were as follows:—

1. Stream.—It forms a boundary that is difficult to cross. I must surmount an

obstacle; I suppose it refers to the fact that I am getting on very slowly; I

suppose I ought to reach the other side.

2. Ford.—An opportunity for getting safely across, a possible way; otherwise

the stream would be too difficult. The possibility of surmounting the obstacle

lies in the analytical treatment.

3. Crab.—The crab lay quite hidden in the water; I did not see it at first.

Cancer is a fearful incurable illness. (A series of recollections of Mrs. X.,

who died of cancer, followed.) I am afraid of this illness. A crab is an animal

that walks backwards; obviously it wants to pull me down into the stream. It

clutched me in a gruesome way, and I was awfully afraid. What prevents my

getting across? Oh yes, I had another great scene with my friend.

It must be explained that there is something special about this friendship. We

have here an ardent attachment, bordering on the homosexual. It has been

going on for years. The friend is in many respects like the patient, and is also

nervous. They have pronounced artistic interests in common. But the patient

is the stronger personality of the two. They are both nervous, and their mutual

relation being too engrossing, cuts them off too much from other possibilities

of life. In spite of an "ideal friendship" they have at times tremendous scenes,

owing to their mutual irritability. Evidently the unconscious wishes to put

some distance between them, but they refuse to pay attention to it. A "scene"

usually begins by one of them finding that she does not yet understand the

other  well  enough,  and  that  they  ought  to  talk  more  openly  together;

whereupon  both  make  enthusiastic  endeavours  to  talk  things  out.

Misunderstandings supervene almost directly, provoking fresh scenes, each

worse than the last. The quarrel was in its way and faute de mieux a pleasure

to  both  of  them,  which  they  were  unwilling  to  relinquish.  My  patient,

especially, was unable for a very long time to renounce the sweet pain of not

being understood by her best friend, although, as she said, every scene "tired

her to death." She had long since realised that this friendship had become

superfluous, and that it was only from mistaken ambition that she clung to the

belief that she could yet make something ideal out of it. The patient had

formerly had an extravagant, fantastic relation to her mother, and after her

mother's death had transferred her feelings to her friend.

VII.—Analytical (Causal-reductive) Interpretation.This interpretation may be summed up in a sentence: "I understand that I

ought to get to the other side of the stream (that is, give up the relation with

the friend), but I would much rather that my friend did not let me out of her

claws (embrace)." That is, expressed as an infantile wish: Mother would like

to  attract  me  to  herself  again  by  the  well-known  mode  of  enthusiastic

embraces. The incompatibility of the wish lies in the strong under-current

of homosexuality,  the  existence  of  which  had  been  abundantly  proved  by

obvious facts. The crab seizes her foot. The patient having big, "manly" feet,

she  plays  a  masculine  part  towards  her  friend,  having  also  corresponding

sexual fantasies. The foot is known to have phallic significance. (Detailed

evidence  of  this  is  to  be  found  in Aigremont's  writings.)  The  complete

interpretation  would  run  as  follows:  The  reason  why  she  will  not  let  her

friend go is because her unconscious homosexual wishes are set upon her. As

these wishes are morally and æsthetically incompatible with the tendency of

the conscious personality, they are repressed, and therefore unconscious. The

fear is an expression of this repressed wish.

This interpretation is exceedingly depreciative of the patient's high-pitched

conscious ideal of friendship. It is true at this point in analysis she would no

longer have taken this interpretation amiss. Some time before certain facts

had sufficiently convinced her of her homosexual tendency, so that she was

able to acknowledge the existence of this inclination frankly, although it was

of course painful for her to do so. Therefore if, at this stage of the treatment, I

had  informed  her  that  this  was  the  interpretation,  I  should  not  have

encountered resistances from her. She had already overcome the painfulness

of this unwelcome tendency by understanding it. But she would have said to

me: "Why do we analyse this dream at all? It is only repeating what I have

now known for a long while." It is true this interpretation does not reveal

anything new to the patient, and it is therefore uninteresting and ineffective.

This kind of interpretation would at the beginning of the treatment have been

impossible in this case, because the patient's prudishness would under no

circumstances have acknowledged it. The "venom" of understanding had to

be  instilled  very  carefully,  and  in  the  smallest  of  doses,  until  the  patient

gradually  became  more  enlightened.  But  when  the  analytical  or  causal-

reductive  interpretation,  instead  of  furnishing  something  new,  persistently

brings the same material in different variations, then the moment has come

when  another  mode  of  interpretation  is  called  for.  The  causal-reductive

procedure has certain drawbacks. First, it does not take strictly into accountthe  patient's  associations—e.g.  in  this  case  the  association  of  the  illness

("cancer")  with  "crab"  (Krebs  =  cancer).  Second,  the  particular  choice  of

symbol remains obscure. For instance, why does the friend-mother appear as

a crab? A prettier and more plastic representation would have been a nymph.

("Half dragged she him, half sank he down," etc.) An octopus, a dragon, a

serpent, or a fish could have performed the same services. Third, the causal-

reductive  procedure  completely  ignores  that  a  dream  is  a  subjective

phenomenon,  and  that  consequently  even  an  exhaustive  interpretation  can

never  connect  the  crab  with  the  mother  or  the  friend,  but  only  with  the

dreamer's idea of them. The whole dream is the dreamer; she is the stream,

the crossing, and the crab. That is to say these details are expressions of

psychological conditions and tendencies in the subject's unconscious.

I have therefore introduced the following terminology. I call interpretations in

which  the  dream  symbols  are  treated  as  representations  of  the  real

objects interpretation upon the objective plane. The opposite interpretation is

that which connects every fragment of the dream (e.g. all the persons who do

anything) with the dreamer himself. This is interpretation upon the subjective

plane. Objective interpretation is analytical, because it dissects the dream

contents  into  complexes  of  reminiscence,  and  finds  their  relation  to  real

conditions.  Subjective  interpretation  is synthetic,  because  it  detaches  the

fundamental underlying complexes of reminiscence from their actual causes,

regarding them as tendencies or parts of the subject, and reintegrating them

with the subject. (In experiencing something I do not merely experience the

object, but in the first place myself, although this is only the case if I render

myself account of the experience.)

The synthetic or constructive procedure of interpretation is therefore based

upon the version on the subjective plane.                    VIII.—THE SYNTHETIC


  (CONSTRUCTIVE) INTERPRETATION.

The patient is unconscious of the fact that it is in herself that the obstacle lies

which  should  be  overcome,  the  boundary  that  is  difficult  to  cross  which

impedes further progress. But it is possible to cross the boundary. It is true

that just here a peculiar and unexpected peril threatens, namely, something

"animal"  (non-human  or  super-human)  which  moves  backwards  and  goes

into the depths of the stream, wanting to draw down the dreamer as a whole

personality.  This  danger  is,  moreover,  like  the  deadly  disease  of  cancer,

which  begins  secretly  somewhere,  and  is  incurable  (overpowering).  The

patient imagines that her friend hinders her, pulling her down. So long as this

is her belief she must perforce influence her friend, "draw her up," teach,

improve, educate her, and make futile and impractically idealistic efforts in

order  to  avoid  being  dragged  down  herself.  Of  course,  the  friend  makes

similar endeavours, being in a like case with the patient. So both of them

keep jumping upon each other like fighting cocks, each trying to fly over the

other's head. The higher the point to which the one screws herself, the higher

must the other also try to get. Why? Because each thinks the fault lies in the

other, in the object. Interpretation of the dream on the subjective plane brings

deliverance  from  this  absurdity,  for  it  shows  the  patient  that  she  has

something in herself that is hindering her from crossing the boundary; that is,

from getting out of the one position or attitude into another. To interpret

change of place as change of attitude is supported by the mode of expression

in certain primitive languages, where, e.g., the phrase "I am on the point of

going," is "I am at the place of going." In order to understand the language of

dreams,  we  need  plenty  of  parallels  from  the  psychology  of  primitive

peoples, as well as from historical symbolism. This is so because dreams

originate  in  the  unconscious,  which  contains  the  residual  potentialities  of

function of all preceding epochs of the history of the evolution of man.

Obviously, in our interpretation everything now depends upon understanding

what is meant by the crab. We know that it symbolizes something that comes

to  light  in  the  friend  (she  connects  the  crab  with  the  friend),  and  also

something that came to light in the mother. Whether both mother and friend

really  have  this  quality  in  them  is  irrelevant  as  regards  the  patient.  The

situation will only be changed when the patient herself has changed. Nothingcan be changed in the mother because she is dead. The friend cannot be urged

to alter; if she wants to alter herself, that is her own affair. The fact that the

quality in question is associated with the mother indicates that it is something

infantile. What is there in common in the patient's relation both to her mother

and her friend? What is common to both is a violently extravagant demand

for love, the patient feeling herself overwhelmed by its passion. This claim is

an overpowering infantile craving which is characteristically blind. What is in

question here is a part of her libido that has not been educated, differentiated,

nor humanized, retaining still the compulsive character of an instinct, because

it  has  not  yet  been  tamed  by  domestication.  An animal  is  a  perfectly

appropriate symbol for this rôle of libido. But why is the animal a crab in this

particular instance? The patient associates cancer with it, of which disease

Mrs. X. died at the age the patient has just reached. It may, therefore, well be

that this is an allusion to an identification with Mrs. X. We must therefore

make  inquiries  about  this  Mrs.  X.  The  patient  relates  the  following  facts

about her: Mrs. X. was widowed early; she was very cheerful and enjoyed

life. She had a number of adventures with men, especially with one particular

man, a gifted artist, who the patient herself knew personally and who always

impressed her as very fascinating and weird.

An  identification  can  only  result  from  an  unrecognized  unconscious

resemblance. Now what is the resemblance between our patient and Mrs. X.?

I was able here to remind the patient of a series of former fantasies and

dreams, which had shown plainly that she also had a frivolous vein in her,

although anxiously repressing it, because she vaguely feared it might seduce

her to an immoral life. We have now gained a further essential contribution

for a right understanding of the "animal" rôle, which evidently represents an

untamed, instinctive greed, which in this case is directed to men. At the same

time we understand a further reason why she cannot let go of her friend. She

must cling to her in order not to fall a prey to this other tendency, which

seems so much more dangerous. By these means she remains at an infantile

homosexual stage, which serves her as a defence. (Experience proves this

erection of defences to be one of the most effective motives for the retention

of unadapted, infantile relations.) But in this missing libido in the animal rôle

lies her well-being, the germ of her future healthy personality, which does not

shrink from the hazards of human life.

But  the  patient  had  drawn  another  conclusion  from  the  fate  of  Mrs.  X.,

having conceived her severe illness and early death as a punishment of fatefor her gay life which the patient, although certainly not confessing to this

feeling, always envied her. When Mrs. X. died, the patient pulled a long face,

beneath which a "human, all too human," malicious satisfaction was hidden.

As a punishment for this tendency the patient, taking Mrs. X.'s example as a

warning,  deterred  herself  from  living  and  from  further  development,  and

burdened herself with the misery of this unsatisfying friendship. Of course

this concatenation had not been consciously clear to her, otherwise she would

never have acted as she had done. The truth of this conclusion can be proved

by the material.

The  history  of  this  identification  by  no  means  ends  here.  The  patient

subsequently  emphasized  the  fact  that  Mrs.  X.  had  a  not  inconsiderable

artistic capacity which developed only after her husband's death and which

led to her friendship with the artist. This fact seems to be one of the essential

incentives to the identification, if we call to mind that the patient had already

told  us  what  a  striking  impression  she  had  received  from  the  artist.  A

fascination of this kind is never exclusively exercised by one person only

upon the other. It is a phenomenon of reciprocal relation between two persons

in so far as the fascinated person must provide a suitable predisposition. But

she must be unconscious of this predisposition, otherwise there will be no

fascination.  Fascination  is  a  phenomenon  of  compulsion  which  lacks

conscious ground; that is, it is not a process of the will, but a phenomenon

coming to the surface from the unconscious, and forcing itself compulsorily

upon  consciousness.  All  compulsions  arise  from  unconscious  motives.  It

must therefore be assumed that the patient possesses a similar unconscious

predisposition to that of the artist. She becomes identified with this artist, and

is also identified with him as man. Here we are at once reminded of the

analysis of the dream, where we met an allusion to the "masculine" foot. As a

matter  of  fact,  the  patient  plays  a  thoroughly  masculine  part  towards  her

friend, being the active one who continually takes the lead, commanding her

friend and occasionally even forcing her somewhat violently to some course

that only the patient desires. Her friend is distinctly feminine both in her

external appearance and otherwise, whilst the patient is also externally of a

somewhat masculine type. Her voice is stronger and deeper than that of her

friend. She now describes Mrs. X. as a very feminine woman, her gentleness

and amiability being comparable to that of her friend, so she thinks. This

gives us a new clue. The patient is obviously playing towards her friend the

artist's  part  towards  Mrs.  X.  Thus  she  unconsciously  completes  heridentification with Mrs. X. and her lover. In this way she is giving expression

to her frivolous vein which she had repressed so carefully. She is not living it

consciously, however, but is herself played upon by her own unconscious

tendency.

We now know a great deal about the crab: it represents the inner psychology

of this untamed part of the libido. The unconscious identifications always

keep drawing her on. They have this power because being unconscious they

cannot be subjected to insight and correction. The crab is the symbol of the

unconscious  contents.  These  contents  are  always  seducing  the  patient  to

retain her relation to the friend. (The "crab goes backwards.") But the relation

to  the  friend  is  synonymous  with  illness,  she  became  nervous  through  it

(hence the association of illness).

Strictly speaking, this really belongs to the analysis on the objective plane.

But we must not forget that we only arrive at understanding by applying

the subjective interpretation, which thereby proves itself to be an important

heuristic principle. For practical purposes we might rest quite satisfied with

the  result  we  have  already  reached.  But  we  seek  here  to  satisfy  all  the

requirements  of  the  theory.  Not  all  the  associations  have  yet  been  used;

neither  is  the  significance  of  the  choice  of  symbols  yet  demonstrated

sufficiently.

We will now recur to the patient's remark that the crab lay hidden under the

water in the stream, and that she had not seen it at first. She had not at first

perceived the unconscious relations that have just been elucidated; they lay

hidden in the water. But the stream is the obstacle preventing her from going

across. It is precisely the unconscious relations binding her to her friend that

have  been  hindering  her.  The  unconscious  was  the  obstacle.  In  this  case,

therefore,  the  water  signifies  the  unconscious,  or,  it  were  better  to  say,

the being  unconscious  the  being  hidden,  for  the  crab  is  also  something

unconscious,  namely,  the  portion  of  the  libido  that  was  hidden  in  the

unconscious.          IX.—THE DOMINANTS OF THE


    SUPER-PERSONAL UNCONSCIOUS.

The task now lies before us of raising the unconscious data and their relations

that  have  been  hitherto  understood  upon  the  objective  plane,  to

the subjective plane. To this end we must once more separate them from their

objects, conceiving them as images, related in a subjective way to function-

complexes in the patient's own unconscious. Raised to the subjective plane,

Mrs. X. is the person who showed the patient the way to do something that

the patient herself feared while unconsciously desiring it. Mrs. X. therefore

represents that which the patient would like to become, and yet does not quite

want  to.  In  a  certain  sense  Mrs.  X.  is  a  picture  of  the  patient's  future

character.  The  fascinating  artist  cannot  be  raised  to  the  subjective  plane,

because the unconscious artistic gift lying dormant in the patient has already

been covered over by Mrs. X. It would be quite right to say that the artist is

the  image  of  the  masculine  element  in  the  patient,  which  not  being

consciously realised, is still lying in the unconscious. In a certain sense this is

indeed true, the patient actually deluding herself as regards this matter. That

is, she seems to herself to be particularly tender, sensitive and feminine, with

nothing in the least masculine about her. She was indignantly amazed when I

drew  her  attention  to  her  masculine  traits.  But  the  reason  why  she  is

fascinated by something mysterious in the artist cannot be attributed to what

is masculine in her. That seems to be completely unknown to her. And yet it

must be hiding somewhere, for she has produced this feeling out of herself.

Whenever a part of libido similar to this cannot be found, experience teaches

us that it has always been projected. But into whom? Is it still attached to the

artist? He has long ago disappeared from her horizon, and can hardly have

taken the projection with him, because it was firmly fixed in the patient's

unconscious. A similar projection is always actually present, that is, there

must somewhere be some one upon whom this amount of libido is actually

projected, otherwise she would have felt it consciously.

Thus we once more reach the objective plane, for we cannot discover this

missing projection in any other way. The patient does not know any man

except myself who means anything at all to her, and as her doctor I mean a

good deal to her. Therefore she has probably projected this part upon me. It is

true I had never noticed anything of the kind. But the exquisitely deceptiverôles are never presented to the analyst on the surface, coming to light always

only outside the hour of treatment. I therefore carefully inquire: "Tell me

what do I seem like to you when you are not with me? Am I just the same

then?" Reply: "When I am with you, you are very pleasant and kind; but

when I am alone, or have not seen you for rather a long time, then the picture

I have in my mind of you changes in an extraordinary way. Sometimes you

seem  quite  idealized,  and  then  again  different."  She  hesitates;  I  help  by

saying:  "Yes,  what  am  I  like  then?"  Reply:  "Sometimes  quite  dangerous,

sinister like an evil magician or demon. I do not know how I get hold of such

ideas. You are not really a bit like that."

So this part was attached to me as part of a transference; that is why it was

lacking in her inventory. Therewith we recognize a further important thing. I

was confused with (identified with) the artist, and in her unconscious fantasy

she is Mrs. X. I was easily able to prove this fact by means of material that

had previously been brought to light (sexual fantasies). But I myself then am

the obstacle, the crab, that is hindering her from getting across. The state of

affairs would be critical if at this particular point we were to limit ourselves

to  the  objective  plane  of  interpretation.  What  would  be  the  use  of  my

explaining: "But I am not this artist at all, I am not in the least weird as he is,

nor  am  I  like  an  evil  magician."  That  would  leave  the  patient  quite

unconvinced because she would know as well I do that the projection would

continue to exist all the same, and that it is really I who am hindering her

further  progress.  It  is  at  this  point  that  many  a  treatment  has  come  to  a

standstill. For there is no other way for the patient here of escaping from the

embrace of the unconscious, but for the physician to raise himself to the

subjective plane, where he is to be regarded as an image. But an image of

what? This is where the greatest difficulty lies. The doctor will say: "An

image of something in the patient's unconscious." But the patient may object:

"What, am I to suppose myself to be a man, a mysteriously fascinating one to

boot, a wicked wizard and a demon? No, I cannot accept that; it is nonsense.

I'd sooner believe that you are all that." She is really, so to speak, quite right.

It is too preposterous to want to transfer such things to herself. She cannot

permit herself to be made into a demon, any more than can the physician. Her

eyes  flash,  a  wicked  expression  appears  upon  her  face,  a  glimmer  of  an

unknown hate never seen before, something snake-like seeming to creep into

her. I am suddenly faced by the possibility of a fatal misunderstanding with

her.  What  is  it?  Is  it  disappointed  love?  Is  she  offended?  Does  she  feeldepreciated? There seems to lurk something of the beast of prey, something

really demoniac in her glance. Is she then after all a demon? Or am I myself

the beast of prey, the demon, and is this a terrified victim sitting before me,

who is trying to defend herself with the brute force of despair against my

wicked spells? But either idea must be nonsense, phantastical delusion. What

have I come in contact with? What new string is vibrating? But it is only for a

passing  moment.  The  expression  upon  the  patient's  face  becoming  quiet

again, she says, as if relieved: "It is extraordinary. I feel as if you had touched

the point which I could never get over in relation to my friend. It is a horrible

feeling,  something  non-human,  wicked,  and  cruel.  I  cannot  describe  how

queer this feeling is. At such moments it makes me hate and despise my

friend, although I struggle against it with all my might and main."

An explanatory light is thrown upon what has happened by this observation. I

have now taken the friend's place. The friendship has been overcome, the ice

of repression is broken. The patient has without knowing it entered upon a

new phase of her existence. I know that now upon me will fall everything

painful and bad in the relation to the friend. So also will whatever was good

in it, although in violent conflict with the mysterious unknown quantity X,

about which the patient could never get clear. A new phase, therefore, of the

transference  supervenes,  which,  however,  does  not  as  yet  make  clearly

apparent what the X that is projected upon me consists of.

It is quite certain, that the most troublesome misunderstandings threaten if the

patient should stick at this stage of the transference. In that case she will

necessarily treat me as she treated her friend; that is the X will continually be

somewhere  in  the  air  giving  rise  to  misunderstandings.  The  end  would

probably be that she would see the evil demon in me, because she is quite

unable to accept the fact that she is herself the demon. All insoluble conflicts

are brought about in this way. And an insoluble conflict signifies a standstill

in life.

Another possibility is, that the patient should disregard the obscure point by

applying her old preventative against this new difficulty. That is, she would

repress it again, instead of keeping it conscious, which is the necessary and

obvious demand of the whole method. Nothing is gained by such repression;

on  the  contrary,  the  X  threatens  more  from  the  unconscious  where  it  is

considerably more unpleasant.

Whenever such an unacceptable image emerges, one must decide whether at

bottom it is destined to represent a human quality or not. "Magician" and"demon" may represent qualities that are described in this particular fashion,

in order that they may speedily be recognized as not human but mythological

qualities. Magician and demon being mythological figures aptly express the

unknown  "non-human"  feelings  which  had  surprised  the  patient.  These

attributes  are  not  applicable  to  a  human  personality;  being  as  a  rule

judgments  of  character intuitively  and  not  critically  approved,  which  are

projected upon our fellow-beings, inevitably doing serious injury to human

relations.

Such  attributes  always  indicate  that  contents  of  the  super-personal  or

absolute  unconscious  are  being  projected.  Neither  demons  nor  wicked

magicians are reminiscences of personal experiences, although every one has,

of course, at some time or other heard or read of them. Although one has

heard of a rattle-snake, it would hardly be appropriate to describe a lizard or a

blind-worm  as  a  rattle-snake,  simply  because  one  was  startled  by  their

rustling. Similarly, one would hardly term a fellow-being a demon, unless

some  kind  of  demoniacal  influence  were  closely  associated  with  him.  If,

however, the demoniacal influence were really part of his personal character,

it  would  show  itself  everywhere,  and  then  this  human  being  would  be  a

demon, a kind of werwolf. But such an ascription is mythology; in other

words, it is from the collective and not from the individual psyche. Inasmuch

as  through  our  unconscious  we  have  a  share  in  the  historical  collective

psyche, we naturally dwell unconsciously in a world of werwolves, demons,

magicians, etc., these being things which have always affected man most

profoundly. We have just as much a part in gods and devils, saviours and

criminals. But it would be absurd to want to ascribe to one's personal self the

possibilities  that  are  potentially  existing  in  the  human  unconscious.  It  is,

therefore, essential to make as clear a distinction as possible between the

personal  and  the  impersonal  assets  of  our  psyche.  This  is  by  no  means

intended to nullify the occasional great effects due to the existence of the

contents  of  the  absolute  unconscious;  but  these  contents  of  the  collective

psyche  should  be  differentiated  from  those  belonging  to  the  individual

psyche.  For  simple-minded  people,  of  course,  these  things  were  never

separated, the projection of gods, demons, etc., not having been understood

as a psychological function were simply accounted concretistical realities.

Their projectional character was never perceived. It was only with the advent

of the epoch of scepticism that it was realized that the gods did not really

exist  except  as  projections.  With  that  the  matter  was  set  at  rest.  But  thepsychological function corresponding to it was by no means set at rest, for it

lapsed into the unconscious and began to poison men with a surplus of libido

that had hitherto been invested in the cult of idols or gods. Obviously, the

depreciation and repression of such a powerful function as that of religion has

serious consequences for the psychology of the individual. The reflux of this

libido strengthens the unconscious prodigiously, so that it begins to exercise a

powerful compulsory influence upon consciousness and its archaic collective

contents. One period of scepticism came to a close with the horrors of the

French  Revolution.  At  the  present  time  we  are  again  experiencing  an

ebullition of the unconscious destructive powers of the collective psyche. The

result is an unparalleled general slaughter. That is just what the unconscious

was  tending  towards.  This  tendency  had  previously  been  inordinately

strengthened  by  the  rationalism  of  modern  life,  which  by  depreciating

everything  irrational,  caused  the  function  of  irrationalism  to  sink  into  the

unconscious. But the function once in the unconscious will from thence work

unceasing havoc, like an incurable disease whose centre cannot be eradicated.

For then the individual and the nation alike are compelled to live irrationally,

and  even  to  apply  their  highest  idealism  and  their  best  wit  to  make  this

madness of irrationalism as complete as possible. We see examples of this on

a small scale in our patient. She turned from a possibility of life that seemed

to her irrational (Mrs. X.) in order to live it in a pathological form, to her own

loss, and with an unsuitable object.

There is, indeed, no possible alternative but to acknowledge irrationalism as a

psychological function that is necessary and always existent. Its results are

not  to  be  taken  as  concrete  realities  (that  would  involve  repression),  but

as psychological realities. They are realities because they are effective things,

that is, they are actualities.

The  collective  unconscious  is  the  sediment  of  all  the  experience  of  the

universe of all time, and is also an image of the universe that has been in

process of formation for untold ages. In the course of time certain features

have  become  prominent  in  this  image,  the  so-called dominants.  These

dominants  are  the  ruling  powers,  the  gods;  that  is,  the  representations

resulting from dominating laws and principles, from average regularities in

the issue of the images that the brain has received as a consequence of secular

processes.

In so far as the images formed in the brain are relatively faithful portrayals of

psychic  happenings  they  will  correspond  to  their  dominants;  that  is,  theirgeneral  characteristic  features,  made  prominent  by  the  accumulation  of

similar experiences, will correspond to certain physical fundamental facts that

are  also  universal.  Hence  it  is  possible  to  transfer  unconscious  images  to

physical events direct as intuitive ideas; e.g. ether the primeval breath or

soul-substance  appears  in  man's  conceptions  the  whole  world  over;  so,

too, energy, the magic force, which is equally widespread.

On account of their connection with physical things the dominants usually

make their appearance as projections, appearing, indeed—if the projections

are unconscious—in the persons of the immediate environment, as a rule in

the  form  of  abnormal  under-  or  over-valuations,  which  excite

misunderstandings, conflict, infatuations, and various kinds of folly. People

say: "He makes a god of So-and-so," or "So-and-so is X.'s bête noire." They

also give rise to the formation of modern myths, that is, fantastic rumours,

suspicions and prejudices.

The  dominants  of  the  collective  unconscious  are  therefore  extremely

important things of significant effect, to which great attention should be paid.

They must not be repressed, but must be given most careful consideration.

They usually appear as projections, and since projections are only attached

where there is some external stimulus, it is very difficult to appraise them

aright, on account of the relation of the unconscious images with the object.

If some one projects the dominant of "devil" into a fellow-being, this occurs

because this other person has something in him that makes the attachment of

the devil dominant possible. But that is by no means to say that this person is

therefore, so to speak, a devil; on the contrary, he may be a particularly good

fellow, but being antipathetic to the one who projects, a "devilish effect" is

brought about between the two. This does not mean that the one who projects

is  a  devil,  although  he  must  recognize  that  he  too,  just  as  much,  has

something  devilish  in  him,  and  has  been  gulled  by  it,  inasmuch  as  he

projected it; but that does not make him a devil; indeed, he may be just as

decent  a  man  as  the  other.  In  such  a  case  the  appearance  of  the  devil

dominant means: the two persons are incompatible (for the moment and for

the near future), wherefore the unconscious splits them asunder and holds

them apart from each other.

One of the dominants that is almost always met in the analysis of projections

of  collective  unconscious  contents  is  the  "magical  demon;"  it  is  of

preponderating sinister effect. "The Golem," by Meyrink, is a good example

of this; also the Thibetan wizard in Meyrink's "Fledermäusen," who lets theworld-war  loose  by  magic.  Obviously  Meyrink  formed  this  image

independently and freely out of his unconscious, by giving word and picture

to a feeling similar to the one that my patient had projected upon me. The

dominant of magic also appears in "Zarathustra," whilst in "Faust" it is, so to

say, the hero himself.

The picture of this demon is the lowest and most elementary concept of God.

It is the dominant of the primitive tribal magic-man, or a singularly gifted

personality endowed with magic power. This figure very frequently makes an

appearance in my patient's unconscious as a dark-skinned being of Mongolian

type.

An  important  step  forward  has  been  taken  by  the  recognition  of  the

dominants of the absolute unconscious. The magical or demoniac effect of

the  fellow-being  is  made  to  disappear  by  the  feeling  being  realised  as  a

definite  projection  of  the  absolute  unconscious.  On  the  other  hand,  a

completely  new  and  unsuspected  task  now  lies  before  us:  namely,  the

question in what way the ego should come to terms with this psychological

non-ego. Should one rest satisfied with having verified the effective existence

of unconscious dominants, leaving the matter to take care of itself?

To leave it at this point would be the means of creating a permanent state of

dissociation in the subject, a conflict between the individual psyche and the

collective  psyche.  Upon  the  one  side  we  should  have  the  differentiated

modern ego, whilst upon the other a kind of uncivilized negro representative

of a thoroughly primitive state. That would mean that we should have what

really  does  exist,  a  crust  of  civilization  over  a  dark-skinned  brute;  the

cleavage would be distinct and demonstrable before our very eyes. But such a

dissociation  requires  immediate  synthesis  and  cultivation  of  what  is

undeveloped. There must be a union of these two aspects.

Before entering upon this new question let us first return to the dream from

which we started. The discussion has given us a broader understanding of the

dream, and especially of an essential part of it, namely, the fear. This fear is a

demoniac fear of the dominants of the collective unconscious. We saw that

the patient identifies herself with Mrs. X., expressing thereby that she also

has  some  relation  to  the  mysterious  artist.  It  was  apparent  also  that  she

identified the physician (myself) with the artist; and further that when taken

upon  the  subjective  plane,  the  image  of  the  wizard  dominants  of  the

collective unconscious represented me.

All  this  is  covered  in  the  dream  by  the  symbol  of  the  crab  which  walksbackwards. The crab stands for the living content of the unconscious that can

by  no  means  be  exhausted  or  rendered  inoperative  by  analysis  on  the

objective plane. But what we were able to do was to detach the mythological

or collective psychological contents from the objects of consciousness, and to

consolidate them as psychological realities outside the individual psyche.

So long as the absolute unconscious and the individual psyche are coupled

together without differentiation, no progress can be made, or, as the dream

expresses  it,  no  boundary  be  crossed.  If  the  dreamer  does  nevertheless

prepare to cross the boundary, the unconscious that was hitherto unnoticed

becomes animated, seizing her and dragging her down. The dream and its

material characterize the absolute unconscious, on the one side as a lower

animal living hidden in the depths of the water; and on the other side, as a

dangerous disease that can only be cured by a timely operation. To what

extent  this  characterization  is  appropriate  has  already  been  seen.  As  was

pointed out, the animal symbol specially refers to what is extra human, that is

super-personal; for the contents of the absolute unconscious are not merely

the residue of archaic human functions, but also the residue of functions of

the animal ancestry of mankind, whose duration of life was indeed vastly

greater than the relatively brief epoch of specifically human existence. If such

residues are active, they are apt, as nothing else is, not merely to arrest the

progress  of  development,  but  also  to  divert  the  libido  into  regressive

channels, until the quantity which the absolute unconscious has activated has

been  absorbed.  The  energy  becomes  profitable  again  after  it  has  been

consciously  contrasted  with  the  absolute  unconscious,  a  process  which

enables it to be converted into a valuable source from which to draw. This

transference of energy was established by religions in a concretistic manner

through cultural communication with the gods (the dominants of the absolute

unconscious). But these modes and customs are too much at variance with

our intellect and our moral sense for us to be able to declare this solution of

the  problem  as  still  binding,  or  even  possible.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we

apprehend  the  images  of  the  unconscious  as  collective  unconscious

dominants,  therefore  as  collective-psychological  phenomena  or  functions,

this hypothesis is in no way opposed to our intellect and conscience. This

solution  is  rationally  acceptable.  We  have  thus  gained  the  possibility  of

coming to terms with the activated residues of our ancestral history. This

mode of settlement makes it possible to traverse the boundary line hitherto

limiting us, and is therefore appropriately termed the transcendental function,which is synonymous with progressive development to a new attitude. In the

dream this development is indicated by the other side of the stream.

The similarity to hero-myths is striking. The typical combat of the hero with

the monster (the unconscious content) frequently takes place on the banks of

some water; sometimes at a ford. This circumstance is prominent in legends

of Red Indians, as, for example, in Longfellow's "Hiawatha." In the decisive

battle  the  hero  is  swallowed  by  a  monster  (cf.  story  of  Jonah),  as

Frobenius has shown by means of extensive material. But inside the monster

the hero begins to come to terms with the beast in his own way: whilst the

creature swims with him towards the sunrise, he cuts off a valuable piece of

the viscera, e.g. the heart, by which the monster lived, that is, the valuable

energy by which the unconscious was activated. Through this deed he kills

the monster, who then drifts to land, where the hero, born anew through the

transcendental  function  (the  "night-journey  under  the  sea"  of  Frobenius),

steps forth, often in company with all those beings whom the monster had

previously swallowed. This enables the normal state to be restored, as the

unconscious  having  been  robbed  of  its  energy  no  longer  occupies  a

preponderating  position.  In  this  way  the  myth—which  is  the  dream  of  a

people—graphically  describes  the  problem  with  which  our  patient  is

concerned.

The problem of how to come to terms with the absolute unconscious is a

question apart. I must content myself here with a general survey of the new

theory  of  the  unconscious  up  to  the  transcendental  function,  leaving  the

presentation of the transcendental function itself to a later work.        X.—THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE


      TYPES OF INTROVERSION AND


EXTROVERSION IN THE ANALYTICAL


                                  PROCESS.

The description of the analysis of the unconscious would be incomplete if a

word  were  not  said  about  the  question  whether  this  method  is  equally

applicable to the two types. As a matter of fact, both the development and the

conception of the unconscious are different for each type. Although making

every effort to find out a formulation that shall be as universally valid as

possible, we must emphatically impress upon our minds the fact that the two

modes  of  conception  of  the  types  are  essentially  different;  a  universal

formulation that is just, only becomes possible when both standpoints are

given equal consideration. I do not conceal from myself the fact that this

subject is of less interest to the layman than to the specialist. Nevertheless,

certain aspects of the question are of such a general character that the layman

should not find the perusal of this last section entirely without interest.

Let us first consider the concept of the unconscious. I have here introduced

the unconscious under the conception of a psychological function, namely,

the function of the sum of all those psychic contents which do not reach the

threshold  of  consciousness.  I  have  divided  the  unconscious  materials

into personal—that is to reminiscences attributable to personal experiences,

combinations and tendencies—and into impersonal collective contents, that

is, those whose contents cannot be attributed to personal experiences.

The contents of the psyche are fundamentally images indicating function on

the  one  hand,  and  upon  the  other  objects  and  the  world  generally.  The

conscious contains the recent object-images; the personal unconscious, the

object-images of the individual past, so far as they have either been forgotten

or  repressed;  whilst  the  absolute  or  collective  unconscious  contains  the

inherited world-images generally, under the form of primordial images or

mythical themes. All psychic images have two sides: the one, being directed

towards the object, is as faithful a likeness of the object as possible, framed

without any intention or obligation to be anything else. The other side is

directed towards the soul, that is towards the psychic function and the lawspeculiar to it.

Let us take as an example, a primordial image out of a hero-myth. There is in

the West a demon ancestress with a large mouth. The hero creeps into it, and

at the same moment a certain little bird sings; the ancient dame shuts her

mouth with a bang, and the hero disappears.

The side of the image directed towards the physical object means, the sun

goes down in the evening into the mouth of the ocean. At this hour a certain

little bird sings (which is an objective fact), and the sun disappears into the

depths of the sea.

The side of the image directed towards the soul, that is the idea, signifies:

The  energy  contained  in  consciousness  disappears  (like  the  sun  in  the

evening) into the monster of the unconscious.

If we consider the collective-unconscious from the side of the soul or idea, it

is something entirely distinct, and it must be differentiated, abstracted from

the object, if its contents are to attain the perfection of an idea. If, on the other

hand, we consider the collective-unconscious from the side of the physical

object, that is as an image of the object, it is weaker and less clear than the

object itself, and can only be brought to perfection if it is objectified, that is

projected on to the object itself.

As previously explained, there are two types of human psychology that can

be clearly distinguished, viz. introversion and extroversion. The introvert is

characterised  by  the  thought  standpoint;  the  extrovert  by  the  feeling

standpoint. As I showed, they are quite different in their relation to the object:

the  introvert  abstracting  from  the  object  and  thinking  about  it,  whilst  the

extrovert goes to the object and feels himself into it. The accent of value lies

upon the ego for the introvert, but upon the object for the extrovert. The

former's chief concern is the preservation of the ego; that of the latter the

preservation  of  the  object.  The  two  types  will  adopt  a  different  attitude

towards the unconscious, namely, the introvert will and must seize the idea-

side of the unconscious image; the extrovert, on the other hand, seizing the

side of the physical reflection. The introvert will purify as far as possible the

idea-side from the "alloy" of the concretistic admixture of the physical image,

in order to arrive at the abstract idea; whilst, on the other hand, the extrovert

will  purify  the  physical  image  as  far  as  possible  from  the  "phantastic"

admixture of the enveloping ideas. The former, by raising himself to a world

of  idea,  will  endeavour  to  overcome  the  disturbing  influence  of  the

unconscious; whilst the latter will approach the object as near as possible andproject the unconscious image into the physical object, thus freeing himself

from the grip of the unconscious.

What  for  the  extrovert  is  a  phantastic  and  disturbing  admixture  in  the

unconscious picture, is for the introvert precisely that which has the most

value, for it is the germ of the pure idea, and vice versâ; what for the introvert

are merely concretistical "imperfections," survivals of a physical origin, are

for the extrovert a most valuable hint, the bridge by which the unconscious

can be united with the object.

This description makes it manifest that the two types go contrary ways in the

course of the development of their unconscious, arriving therefore at opposite

extremes:  the  one  at  the  idea,  the  other  at  the  object  of  his  feeling.  The

psychological characteristics of the types are eventually pushed to extremes,

where according to the enantiodromic law the moment has arrived when in

each case the "other" function enters into its fully acknowledged right, that is,

feeling in the case of the introvert, and thought in that of the extrovert. The

introvert attains the lacking function of autonomous feeling by means of a

differentiation and enhancement of his thought; whilst the extrovert, on the

other hand, attains his thinking by the way of an increasingly differentiated

love. These functions that hitherto were secondary are found at first in the

unconscious, gradually reaching consciousness in the course of development.

At  first  they  are  unconscious  functions  in  a  state  that  is  more  or  less

incompatible  with  consciousness  and  have  the  typical  qualities  of

unconscious  contents.  These  qualities  are  such  as  are  not  tolerated  in

consciousness. The lunatic Schreber says most aptly that the language of God

(the unconscious) is a somewhat archaic but vigorous German, of which he

gives a few striking examples. As the contrary function that emerges from the

unconscious into consciousness differs to such an extent from what appears

to  be  acceptable  to  consciousness,  the  necessity  arises  of  a  technique  for

coming to terms with the contrary function. It is impossible to accept the

contrary function as it stands, as it always drags extraneous qualities and

accompanying circumstances with it from the absolute unconscious. Through

the above-described development the extrovert has acquired an adaptation to

the object that is absolutely real and free from all phantasies; he will therefore

be able to turn his attention towards the "alloy" which for the introvert was

the valuable germ of idea. From this he will then develop similar ideas to

those which the introvert has already developed. Vice versâ, the introvert will

now be able to turn his attention to those materials which before he wasobliged to reject, as being side-tracks on the road to physical reality; that is,

he will carry out the same clearing and winnowing in his feeling-relations,

that the extrovert has already completed.

The  development  of  the  contrary  function  that  was  hitherto  unconscious,

leads to individuation beyond the type, and thereby to a new relation to the

world and mind. The process which begins with the complementation of the

types is the transcendental function, which leads to the new adaptation by

means of the clearing and winnowing of unconscious feelings and thoughts

that have been brought up by the contrary function that had been neglected.

Following  the  old  maxim:  "naturam  si  sequemur  ducem  nunquam

aberrabimus," we have obeyed the natural impulse of the thinker to carry the

principle of thought through to its utmost perfection attainable, as also that of

the feeler, of carrying the principle of feeling through to the end. By these

means the salutary extreme was produced, to wit, the hunger, the desire for

the compensatory function. For, by means of thought, the one is landed in a

lifeless ice-cold world of crystalline ideas; whereas, by means of feeling, the

other  reaches  a  limitless  ocean  of  never  ending  flood  of  sentiment.  The

former will, therefore, yearn for living warmth of feeling, and the latter for

the restrictive precision and solidity of thought.

An enrichment of the individual is attained by this compensatory process,

giving him greater decision and the possibility of a harmony that is complete

in  itself.  The  assimilation  of  the  contrary  function  discloses  new  inner

springs, which guarantee to the individual considerably greater independence

from external conditions. This acquisition is an indisputable advantage that

none would like to surrender in face of the fact so unavoidably connected

with  it,  that  a  new  adaptation  and  orientation  of  this  kind  places  the

individual in a certain contrast to the great bulk of people who yet have the

old attitude. This contrast is no drawback; it is rather a welcome and effective

spur  to  life  and  work,  for  thereby  is  created  the  channel  required  by  our

psychic energy for its development.        XI.—GENERAL REMARKS ON THE


                                  THERAPY.

I have still to draw the reader's attention to an important fact. Throughout the

course of this paper, I have seemed to associate the idea of disturbance or

even of peril with the unconscious. But it would give a false impression if we

were  only  to  emphasize  the  dangerous  side  of  the  unconscious. The

unconscious is a source of danger when the individual is not at one with it. If

we succeed in establishing the function or attitude that I call transcendental,

the disharmony ceases, and we are permitted to enjoy the favourable side of

the unconscious. In such case the unconscious vouchsafes us that furtherance

and  assistance  which  bountiful  Nature  is  always  ready  to  give  to  man  in

overflowing abundance. The unconscious possesses possibilities of wisdom

that are completely closed to consciousness, for the unconscious has at its

disposal not only all the psychic contents that are under the threshold because

they had been forgotten or overlooked, but also the wisdom of the experience

of untold ages, deposited in the course of time and lying potential in the

human brain. The unconscious is continually active, creating combinations of

its  materials;  these  serve  to  indicate  the  future  path  of  the  individual.  It

creates prospective combinations just as our consciousness does, only they

are considerably superior to the conscious combinations both in refinement

and  extent.  The  unconscious  may  therefore  be  an  unparalleled  guide  for

human beings.

The reader must on no account suppose that the complicated psychological

changes described must all be passed through in every individual case. In

practice the treatment is adjusted according to the therapeutic result attained.

The particular result arrived at may be reached at any stage of the treatment,

quite apart from the seriousness or duration of the malady. The treatment of a

serious case may last a long time, without the higher phases of the evolution

ever being reached, or needing to be reached. There are comparatively few

people who, after attaining the desired therapeutical result, pursue the further

stages of evolution for the sake of their own development. It is, therefore, not

the  seriousness  of  the  case  which  obliges  one  to  pass  through  the  whole

development.  In  any  case,  only  those  people  attain  a  higher  degree  of

differentiation who are by nature destined and called to it, that is, who have

both a capacity and tendency towards the higher differentiation. This is amatter  in  which  people  are  extremely  different,  just  as  among  species  of

animals there are some that are stationary and conservative, and others that

are  evolutionary.  Nature  is  aristocratic,  but  not  in  the  sense  of  having

reserved the possibility of differentiation exclusively for those species that

stand  high.  Similarly,  the  possibility  of  the  psychological  development  of

human beings is not reserved for specially gifted individuals. In other words:

neither  special  intelligence  nor  any  other  talent  is  necessary  in  order  to

achieve  a  far-reaching  psychological  development,  inasmuch  as  in  this

development moral qualities step in to supplement where intellect does not

suffice.  But  it  must  not  be  supposed  under  any  circumstances  that  the

treatment consists in grafting general formulas and complicated doctrines on

to people; this is not so. Each one can acquire that which he needs, after his

own fashion and in his own language. What I have here presented is only the

intellectual formulation of the subject, founded upon preliminary scientific

study of an empirical as well as a theoretical nature; but this formulation does

not become a subject of discussion in the ordinary practical analytical work.

The brief notes of cases that I have inserted give an approximate idea of the

practical side of analysis.

The reader should realize that our new understanding of psychology has a

side that is entirely practical, and another that is entirely theoretical. It is not

merely a practical method of treatment or education, but it is also a scientific

theory, that is closely related to other co-ordinated sciences.                              CONCLUSION.

In conclusion, I must beg the reader to pardon me for having ventured to say

so many new and abstruse things in such a brief compass. I lay myself open

to adverse criticism, because I conceive it to be the duty of every one who

isolates himself by taking his own path, to tell others what he has found or

discovered, whether it be a refreshing spring for the thirsty, or a sandy desert

of  sterile  error.  The  one  helps,  the  other  warns.  Not  the  opinion  of  any

individual contemporary will decide the truth and error of what has been

discovered, but rather future generations and destiny. There are things that

are not yet true to-day, perhaps we are not yet permitted to recognize them as

true, although they may be true to-morrow. Therefore every pioneer must

take  his  own  path,  alone  but  hopeful,  with  the  open  eyes  of  one  who  is

conscious of its solitude and of the perils of its dim precipices. Our age is

seeking a new spring of life. I found one and drank of it and the water tasted

good. That is all that I can or want to say. My intention and my duty to

society is fulfilled when I have described, as well as I can, the way that led

me to the spring; the reproaches of those who do not follow this way have

never troubled me, nor ever will. New ideas always encounter resistance from

the old. That always was and always will be the case; it appertains to the self-

regulation of mental progress.                                CHAPTER XV

              THE CONCEPTION OF THE UNCONSCIOUS        I.—THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE

          PERSONAL AND THE IMPERSONAL

                              UNCONSCIOUS

Since  the  breach  with  the  Viennese  school  upon  the  question  of  the

fundamental explanatory principle of analysis—that is, the question if it be

sexuality  or  energy—our  concepts  have  undergone  considerable

development. After the prejudice concerning the explanatory basis had been

removed by the acceptance of a purely abstract view of it, the nature of which

was not anticipated, interest was directed to the concept of the unconscious.

According to Freud's theory the contents of the unconscious are limited to

infantile  wish-tendencies,  which  are  repressed  on  account  of  the

incompatibility of their character. Repression is a process which begins in

early  childhood  under  the  moral  influence  of  environment;  it  continues

throughout life. These repressions are done away with by means of analysis,

and  the  repressed  wishes  are  made  conscious.  That  should  theoretically

empty the unconscious, and, so to say, do away with it; but in reality the

production of infantile sexual wish-fantasies continues into old age.

According to this theory, the unconscious contains only those parts of the

personality which might just as well be conscious, and have really only been

repressed by the processes of civilisation. According to Freud the essential

content of the unconscious would therefore be personal. But although, from

such a view-point the infantile tendencies of the unconscious are the more

prominent, it would be a mistake to estimate or define the unconscious from

this alone, for it has another side.

Not only must the repressed materials be included in the periphery of the

unconscious,  but  also  all  the  psychic  material  that  does  not  reach  the

threshold of consciousness. It is impossible to explain all these materials by

the principle of repression, for in that case by the removal of the repression a

phenomenal memory would be acquired, one that never forgets anything. As

a matter of fact repression exists, but it is a special phenomenon. If a so-

called  bad  memory  were  only  the  consequence  of  repression,  then  those

persons who have an excellent memory should have no repression, that is, be

incapable of being neurotic. But experience teaches us that this is not the

case. There are, undoubtedly, cases with abnormally bad memories, where it

is clear that the main cause must be attributed to repression. But such cases

are comparatively rare.We therefore emphatically say that the unconscious contains all that part of

the  psyche  that  is  found  under  the  threshold,  including  subliminal  sense-

perceptions, in addition to the repressed material. We also know—not only

on account of accumulated experience, but also for theoretical reasons—that

the unconscious must contain all the material that has not yet reached the

level of consciousness. These are the germs of future conscious contents. We

have also every reason to suppose that the unconscious is far from being

quiescent, in the sense that it is inactive, but that it is probably constantly

busied  with  the  formation  and  re-formation  of  so-called  unconscious

phantasies. Only in pathological cases should this activity be thought of as

comparatively  autonomous,  for  normally  it  is  co-ordinated  with

consciousness.

It may be assumed that all these contents are of a personal nature in so far as

they are acquisitions of the individual life. As this life is limited, the number

of  acquisitions  of  the  unconscious  must  also  be  limited,  wherefore  an

exhaustion of the contents of the unconscious through analysis might be held

to  be  possible.  In  other  words,  by  the  analysis  of  the  unconscious  the

inventory of unconscious contents might be completed, possibly in the sense

that the unconscious cannot produce anything besides what is already known

and accepted in the conscious. Also, as has already been said, we should have

to accept the fact that the unconscious activity had thereby been paralysed,

and  that  by  the  removal  of  the  repression  we  could  stop  the  conscious

contents from descending into the unconscious. Experience teaches us that is

only possible to a very limited extent. We urge our patients to retain their

hold upon repressed contents that have been brought to consciousness, and to

insert them in their scheme of life. But, as we may daily convince ourselves,

this procedure seems to make no impression upon the unconscious, inasmuch

as it goes on producing apparently the same phantasies, namely, the so-called

infantile-sexual ones, which according to the earlier theory were based upon

personal repressions. If in such cases analysis be systematically continued, an

inventory  of  incompatible  wish-phantasies  is  gradually  revealed,  whose

combinations  amaze  us.  In  addition  to  all  the  sexual  perversions  every

conceivable kind of crime is discovered, as well as every conceivable heroic

action  and  great  thought,  whose  existence  in  the  analysed  person  no  one

would have suspected.

In  order  to  give  an  example  of  this,  I  would  like  to  refer  to  Maeder's

Schizophrenic  patient  who  called  the  world  his  picture-book.  He  was  alocksmith's  apprentice  who  fell  ill  very  early  in  life;  he  had  never  been

blessed with intellectual gifts. As regards his idea that the world was his

picture-book and that he was turning its pages over when he looked about in

the  world,  it  is  just  Schopenhauer's  world,  conceived  as  will  and

representation, expressed in primitive picture-language. This idea has just as

universal a character as Schopenhauer's. The difference consists in the fact

that the patient's notion has stood still at an embryonic stage in a process of

growth, whereas with Schopenhauer the same idea has been changed from a

mere image into an abstraction expressed in terms that are universally valid.

It would be false to assume that the patient's idea had a personal character

and value. That would be to attribute to him the dignity of a philosopher. But

he alone is a philosopher who raises an image that has naturally sprung up

into an abstract idea, thereby translating it into terms of universal validity.

Schopenhauer's philosophical conception is his personal value, whereas the

notion of the patient has merely an impersonal value of natural growth, in

which  personal  proprietary  rights  can  only  be  acquired  by  making  an

abstraction of the images, and translating them into terms that are universally

valid. But it would be wrong if an exaggerated sense of the value of this

achievement led us to ascribe to the philosopher the merit of having made or

conceived the original image itself. The primordial image has also sprung up

naturally in the philosopher, and is nothing but a part of the universal human

heritage in which, theoretically at least, every one has a share. The golden

apples come from the same tree whether they are gathered by a locksmith's

apprentice or a Schopenhauer.

The  recognition  of  such  primordial  images  obliges  me  to  differentiate

between the contents of the unconscious; a differentiation of another kind

than  that  between  the  pre-conscious  and  unconscious,  or  between  the

subconscious and unconscious. The justification for those distinctions cannot

be discussed here; they have a value of their own and probably merit to be

carried  further  as  affording  a  point  of  view.  The  differentiation  which  I

propose follows obviously from what has previously been said, namely, that

in  the  so-called  unconscious  we  must  differentiate  a  layer  which  may  be

termed the personal unconscious. The materials contained in this layer are of

a personal kind, inasmuch as on the one hand they may be characterised as

acquisitions of the individual existence, and on the other as psychological

factors  which  might  just  as  well  be  conscious.  It  is,  for  instance,

comprehensible  that  incompatible  psychological  elements  succumb  torepression on the one hand and are therefore unconscious, but on the other

hand  there  exists  the  possibility  of  bringing  the  repressed  contents  into

consciousness and keeping them there, once they are known and recognised.

We  recognise  these  materials  as  personal  contents,  because  we  can

prove  their  effects,  their  partial  appearance,  or  their  origin  to  lie  in  our

personal past. They are integral constituents of the personality, and belong to

a complete inventory of the same. They are constituents whose omission in

consciousness implies an inferiority in one respect or another, not indeed an

inferiority bearing the psychological character of an organic deformity or a

natural defect, but rather the character of a neglect which arouses a moral

reaction. The feeling of moral inferiority always indicates that in the portion

omitted is something that according to the feelings should not be missing; or

in other words, could be conscious if we took sufficient trouble about it. The

sense of moral inferiority is not the result of a collision with the universal, in

a certain sense arbitrary, moral law, but rather the result of a conflict with the

personal  ego,  which  by  reason  of  the  psychic  economy  demands  an

adjustment of the deficiency. Wherever a feeling of inferiority appears, it

reveals  not  only  the  presence  of  a  demand  for  the  assimilation  of  an

unconscious constituent, but also the possibility of such an assimilation. It is,

after all, a person's moral qualities that make him assimilate his unconscious

self and retain it in consciousness, whether he be forced to it by a recognition

of its necessity, or by a painful neurosis. He who continues to tread this path

of the realisation of his unconscious self, necessarily transposes the content

of the personal unconscious into consciousness, whereby the periphery of the

personality is considerably enlarged.        II—THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE


                  ASSIMILATION OF THE


                            UNCONSCIOUS.

This  process  of  assimilating  the  unconscious  leads  to  remarkable  results.

Some people build up from it an unmistakable, even unpleasantly increased

self-consciousness  or  self-confidence;  they  "know  everything,"  and  are

completely  aware  of  everything  so  far  as  their  unconscious  is  concerned.

They think themselves accurately informed about everything that comes up

from the unconscious. Others are increasingly oppressed by the contents of

the unconscious, they lose their self-reliance or their self-consciousness more

and more, and come near to a state of depressed resignation in regard to all

the extraordinary things the unconscious produces. The former undertake in

the exuberance of their self-confidence, a responsibility for their unconscious

that  goes  much  too  far,  beyond  every  reasonable  possibility;  the  latter

ultimately decline to accept any responsibility in the depressing recognition

of the powerlessness of the ego confronted by relentless Destiny, working

through the unconscious.

If we give the two types close analytical consideration, we shall discover that

behind the optimistic self-confidence of the former there is hidden a just as

deep,  or  rather  a  far  deeper,  helplessness;  a  helplessness  to  which  the

conscious optimism acts as an unsuccessful effort at compensation. Behind

the pessimistic resignation of the latter there is hidden a defiant desire for

power, far exceeding in self-confidence the conscious optimism of the former

type.

This condition of the personality may well be expressed by the idea of "God-

Almightiness" (Gottähnlichkeit), to which Adler has particularly drawn our

attention.

When the devil wrote the serpent's words in the student's album, Eritis sicut

Deus scientes bonum et malum, he added:

"Follow the ancient text and the snake thou wast ordered to trample!

With all thy likeness to God, thou'lt yet be a sorry example."

The idea of "likeness to God," or "God-Almightiness," is not a scientific one,

although it characterises the psychological state of affairs most exactly. Still

we must examine whence this attitude comes, and ask why it merits the nameof  "God-Almightiness."  As  the  expression  denotes,  the  patient's  abnormal

condition is constituted by the fact that he ascribes to himself qualities or

values which obviously do not belong to him, for "God-Almightiness" means

being like the spirit which is set above the human spirit.

If for psychological purposes we abstract from the hypostasis of the God-

idea, we find that this expression does not only include every dynamic fact

discussed in my book on "The Psychology of the Unconscious," but also a

certain mental function having a collective character, which is of another

order from that of the individual character of the mind. In the same way as

the individual is not only an isolated and separate, but also a social being, so

also  the  human  mind  is  not  only  something  isolated  and  absolutely

individual, but also a collective function. And just as certain social functions

or  impulses  are,  so  to  speak,  opposed  to  the  ego-centric  interests  of  the

individual, so also the human mind has certain functions or tendencies which,

on  account  of  their  collective  nature,  are  to  some  extent  opposed  to  the

personal mental functions. This is due to the fact that every human being is

born with a highly differentiated brain, which gives him the possibility of

attaining a rich mental function that he has neither acquired ontogenetically

nor developed. In proportion as human brains are similarly differentiated, the

corresponding  mental  functions  are  collective  and  universal.  This

circumstance explains the fact that the unconscious of far-separated peoples

and  races  possesses  a  remarkable  number  of  points  of  agreement.  One

example  among  many  others  which  has  been  demonstrated  is  the

extraordinary unanimity shown by the autochthonous forms and themes of

myths.

The universal similarity of brains results in a universal possibility of a similar

mental  function.  This  function  is  the  collective  psyche,  which  is  divided

into collective  mind  and collective  soul.  In  so  far  as  there  exist

differentiations corresponding to race, descent, or even family, so, beyond the

level of the "universal" collective psyche, we find a collective psyche limited

by  race,  descent,  and  family.  To  quote P.  Janet,  the  collective  psyche

contains the "parties inférieures" of the mental function, that is, the part of the

mental function which, being fixed and automatic in its action, inherited and

present everywhere, is therefore super-personal or impersonal. The conscious

and the personal unconscious contain as personal differentiations the "parties

supérieures" of the mental function, therefore the part that has been acquired

and developed ontogenetically.An  individual  therefore  who  joins  the a  priori  and  unconsciously-given

collective psyche on to his ontogenetically acquired assets, enlarges thereby

the  periphery  of  his  personality  in  an  unjustifiable  way,  with  the

corresponding consequences. Inasmuch as the collective psyche is the "partie

inférieure" of the mental function, and therefore is the fundamental structure

underlying  every  personality,  it  weighs  heavily  upon  and  depreciates  the

personality; a fact that is expressed in the afore-mentioned stifling of self-

confidence, and in the unconscious increase of the ego-emphasis up to the

point of a morbid will to power. Inasmuch as the collective psyche ranks

even above the personality, because it is the mother foundation upon which

all personal differentiations are based, and because it is the common mental

function of the sum total of the individual, therefore its incorporation in the

personality may evoke inflation of self-confidence, an inflation which is then

compensated by an extraordinary sense of inferiority in the unconscious.

A dissolution of the pairs of opposites in the personality sets in if, through the

assimilation  of  the  unconscious,  the  collective  psyche  be  included  in  the

inventory of the personal mental functions. Alongside the pairs of opposites

already  alluded  to  that  are  so  particularly  evident  in  the  neurotic,  viz.

megalomania and sense of inferiority, there are also many other pairs, of

which I will only mention the specifically moral pair, that is, good and evil

(scientes bonum et malum). They accompany the increase or depreciation of

self-confidence. The specific virtues and vices of humanity are contained in

the collective psyche, just as everything else is. One man ascribes all the

collective virtue to himself as his own personal merit; another accounts as

personal guilt what is but collective vice. Both are just as illusionary as the

sense  of  greatness  and  of  inferiority,  for  imaginary  virtues  as  well  as

imaginary  vices  are  only  the  pairs  of  moral  opposites  contained  in  the

collective psyche, which have become perceptible or have artificially been

made  conscious.  How  far  the  collective  psyche  contains  these  pairs  of

opposites is shown by primitive peoples, whose great virtue is praised by one

observer; whereas another observer of the same race reports only the worst

impressions.  Both  views  are  true  of  primitive  man,  whose  personal

differentiation is only beginning; his mental function is essentially collective.

He is more or less identified with the collective psyche, and therefore without

any  personal  responsibility  or  inner  conflict;  his  virtues  and  vices  are

collective. Conflict only begins when a conscious personal development of

the  mind  has  already  started,  whereby  the  reason  becomes  aware  of  theirreconcilable nature of the pairs of opposites. The struggle to repress is the

consequence of this realisation. Man wants to be good, therefore the bad must

be repressed; this puts an end to the paradise of the collective psyche.

The repression of the collective psyche, in so far as it was conscious, was a

necessity  for  the  development  of  the  personality,  because  collective

psychology and personal psychology are in a certain sense irreconcilable. In

the  history  of  thought,  whenever  a  fresh  psychological  attitude  acquires

collective  value  the  formation  of  schisms  begins.  Nowhere  is  this  more

clearly  seen  than  in  the  history  of  religion.  A  collective  point  of  view,

although it may be necessary, is always dangerous for the individual. It is

dangerous because it is apt to choke and smother personal differentiation. It

has derived this capacity from the collective psyche, which is itself a result of

psychological differentiation of the strong gregarious instincts of humanity.

Collective thought and feeling, and collective accomplishment, are relatively

easy in comparison with individual function and performance; a fact that is

only  too  prone  to  lead  to  a  fining  down  to  the  collective  level,  and  is

peculiarly  disastrous  to  personal  development.  The  concomitant  loss  of

personality  is  replaced—as  is  always  the  case  in  psychology—by  an

unconscious all-compelling binding to and identification with the collective

psyche. It cannot be denied, and should be warningly emphasized that in the

analysis  of  the  unconscious,  the  collective  psychology  is  merged  into  the

personal  psychology,  with  the  afore-mentioned  unpleasant  consequences.

These  consequences  are  either  bad  for  the  individual's  vital  feeling

(Lebensgefühl), or they injure his fellow-beings if he have any power over

his  environment.  Being  identified  with  the  collective  psyche  he  will

inevitably  try  to  force  the  claims  of  his  unconscious  upon  others,  for

identification  with  the  collective  psyche  is  accompanied  by  a  feeling  of

universal  validity  ("God-Almightiness"),  which  disregards  the  different

psychology of his fellows.

The worst abuses of this kind may be removed by a clear understanding and

appreciation of the fact that there are totally different psychological types,

and that a psychology of one type cannot be forced into the mould of another.

It  is  indeed  almost  impossible  for  one  type  to  understand  the  other

completely,  and  a  perfect  comprehension  of  another's  individuality  is

impossible. Due regard for another's individuality is not only advisable but is

absolutely essential in analysis, if the development of the other's personality

is not to be stifled. It should not be forgotten that the one type thinks that heis leaving another person free when he grants him freedom of action, and the

other type when he grants him freedom of thought. In analysis both must be

conceded,  in  so  far  as  reasons  of  self-preservation  permit  the  analyst  to

accord them. An excessive desire to understand or explain things is just as

useless and injurious as a lack of comprehension.

The collective natural propensities and primary forms of idea and feeling

which  analysis  of  the  unconscious  has  shown  to  be  effective  are  an

acquisition  for  the  conscious  personality  which  cannot  be  admitted

unreservedly without prejudicial results.

In practical treatment it is therefore of the utmost importance to keep the aim

of individual development constantly before us. If for instance the collective

psyche be conceived as a personal possession or as a personal burden, an

unbearable weight or strain is put upon the personality. Hence we must make

a clear distinction between the personal and the collective psyche. In practice

this distinction is not easy because the personal grows out of the collective

psyche, and is most closely joined with it. It is therefore difficult to say which

materials are to be termed collective and which personal. There is no doubt,

for instance, that the archaic symbols so often found in phantasies and dreams

are  collective  factors.  All  primary  propensities  and  forms  of  thought  and

feeling  are  collective;  so  is  everything  about  which  men  are  universally

agreed,  or  which  is  universally  understood,  said  or  done.  Upon  close

consideration it is astonishing to note how much of our so-called individual

psychology is really collective; so much that the individual element quite

disappears.  Individuation,  however,  is  an  indispensable  psychological

requirement. The crushing predominance of what is collective should make

us realise what peculiar care and attention must be given to the delicate plant

"individuality," if it is to develop.

Human beings have a capacity which is of the utmost use for purposes of

collectivism and most prejudicial to individuation, and that is the capacity

to imitate.  Collective  psychology  cannot  dispense  with  imitation,  without

which  the  organization  of  the  State  and  Society  would  be  impossible.

Imitation includes the idea of suggestibility, suggestive effect, and mental

infection.

But we see daily how the mechanism of imitation is used, or rather abused,

for the purposes of personal differentiation; some prominent personality, or

peculiar trait or activity is simply imitated, which at least brings about an

external differentiation from the environment. As a rule this delusive attemptto attain individual differentiation by means of imitation comes to a standstill

as mere affectation, the individual remaining on the same plane as before,

only a few degrees more sterile than formerly, and under an unconscious

compulsory bondage to his environment.

In order to find out what is really individual in us, we should have to give the

matter deep thought, and we should certainly become aware how exceedingly

difficult such a discovery is.            III.—THE INDIVIDUAL AS AN


      EXCERPT OF THE COLLECTIVE


                                  PSYCHE.

We  now  come  to  a  problem  the  overlooking  of  which  would  cause  the

greatest confusion.

As I said before, the immediate result of the analysis of the unconscious is

that additional personal portions of the unconscious are incorporated into the

conscious. I called those parts of the unconscious which are repressed but

capable  of  being  made  conscious, the  personal  unconscious.  I  showed

moreover that through the annexation of the deeper layers of the unconscious,

which I called the impersonal unconscious, an extension of the personality is

brought  about  which  leads  to  the  state  of  God-Almightiness

("Gottähnlichkeit"). This state is reached by a continuation of the analytical

work, by means of which we have already re-introduced what is repressed to

consciousness. By continuing analysis further we incorporate some distinctly

impersonal  universal  basic  qualities  of  humanity  with  the  personal

consciousness,  which  brings  about  the  aforesaid  enlargement,  and  this  to

some extent may be described as an unpleasant consequence of analysis.

From this standpoint, the conscious personality seems to be a more or less

arbitrary excerpt of the collective psyche. It appears to consist of a number of

universal  basic  human  qualities  of  which  it  is à  priori  unconscious,  and

further of a series of impulses and forms which might just as well have been

conscious, but were more or less arbitrarily repressed, in order to attain that

excerpt  of  the  collective  psyche,  which  we  call  personality.  The

term persona is really an excellent one, for persona was originally the mask

which  an  actor  wore,  that  served  to  indicate  the  character  in  which  he

appeared.  For  if  we  really  venture  to  undertake  to  decide  what  psychic

material  must  be  accounted  personal  and  what  impersonal,  we  shall  soon

reach  a  state  of  great  perplexity;  for,  in  truth,  we  must  make  the  same

assertion regarding the contents of the personality as we have already made

with respect to the impersonal unconscious, that is to say that it is collective,

whereas we can only concede individuality to the bounds of the persona, that

is to the particular choice of personal elements, and that only to a very limited

extent. It is only by virtue of the fact that the persona is a more or lessaccidental or arbitrary excerpt of the collective psyche that we can lapse into

the error of deeming it to be in toto individual, whereas as its name denotes, it

is only a mask of the collective psyche; a mask which simulates individuality,

making others and oneself believe that one is individual, whilst one is only

acting a part through which the collective psyche speaks.

If  we  analyse  the  persona  we  remove  the  mask  and  discover  that  what

appeared to be individual is at bottom collective. We thus trace "the Little

God of the World" back to his origin, that is, to a personification of the

collective psyche. Finally, to our astonishment, we realise that the persona

was only the mask of the collective psyche. Whether we follow Freud and

reduce  the  primary  impulse  to  sexuality,  or  Adler  and  reduce  it  to  the

elementary  desire  for  power,  or  reduce  it  to  the  general  principle  of  the

collective psyche which contains the principles of both Freud and Adler, we

arrive at the same result; namely, the dissolution of the personal into the

collective. Therefore in every analysis that is continued sufficiently far, the

moment arrives when the aforesaid God-Almightiness must be realised. This

condition is often ushered in by peculiar symptoms; for instance, by dreams

of flying through space like a comet, of being either the earth, the sun, or a

star,  or  of  being  either  extraordinarily  big  or  small,  of  having  died,  etc.

Physical sensations also occur, such as sensations of being too large for one's

skin, or too fat; or hypnagogic feelings of endless sinking or rising occur, of

enlargement  of  the  body  or  of  dizziness.  This  state  is  characterised

psychologically  by  an  extraordinary  loss  of  orientation  about  one's

personality, about what one really is, or else the individual has a positive but

mistaken idea of that which he has just become. Intolerance, dogmatism, self-

conceit, self-depreciation, contempt and belittling of "not analysed" fellow-

beings, and also of their opinions and activities, all very frequently occur. An

increased  disposition  to  physical  disorders  may  also  occasionally  be

observed, but this occurs only if pleasure be taken therein, thus prolonging

this stage unduly.

The wealth of the possibilities of the collective psyche is both confusing and

dazzling. The dissolution of the persona results in the release of phantasy,

which apparently is nothing else but the functioning of the collective psyche.

This release brings materials into consciousness of whose existence we had

no  suspicion  before.  A  rich  mine  of  mythological  thought  and  feeling  is

revealed. It is very hard to hold one's own against such an overwhelming

impression. That is why this phase must be reckoned one of the real dangersof analysis, a fact that should not be concealed.

As  may  easily  be  understood,  this  condition  is  hardly  bearable,  and  one

would like to put an end to it as soon as possible, for the analogy with a

mental derangement is too close. The essence of the most frequent form of

derangement—dementia  præcox  or  schizophrenia—consists,  as  is  well

known, in the fact that the unconscious to a large extent ejects and replaces

the conscious. The unconscious is given the value of reality, being substituted

for the reality function. The unconscious thoughts become audible as voices,

or visible as visions, or perceptible as physical hallucinations, or they become

fixed ideas of a kind that supersede reality. In a similar, although not in the

same  way,  by  the  resolution  of  the  persona  of  the  collective  psyche,  the

unconscious is drawn into the conscious. The difference between this state of

mind and that of mental derangement consists in the fact that the unconscious

is brought up by the help of the conscious analysis; at least that is the case in

the  beginning  of  analysis,  when  there  are  still  strong  cultural  resistances

against the unconscious to be overcome. Later on, after the removal of the

barriers erected by time and custom, the unconscious usually proceeds, so to

say, in a peremptory manner, sometimes even discharging itself in torrents

into the consciousness. In this phase the analogy with mental derangement is

very close. But it would only be a real mental disorder should the content of

the  unconscious take  the  place  of  the  conscious  reality,  that  is,  in  other

words,  if  the  contents  of  the  unconscious  were  believed  absolutely  and

without reserve.        IV.—THE ENDEAVOURS TO FREE


      THE INDIVIDUALITY FROM THE


                    COLLECTIVE PSYCHE.

1. The Regressive Restoration of the Persona.

The unbearableness of thus being identified with the collective psyche forces

us to find a radical solution. There are two ways open. The first possibility is

the regressive one of trying to restore the persona to its former condition, by

endeavouring to restrain the unconscious by the application of a reductive

theory;  for  instance,  by  declaring  it  to  be  nothing  but  long-repressed  and

overdue infantile sexuality, for which it would really be best to substitute the

normal  sexual  function.  This  solution  is  based  upon  the  unmistakable

sexualistic  symbolism  of  the  language  of  the  unconscious,  and  upon  the

concretistic interpretation of the same. Or an attempt may be made to apply

the power theory, by conceiving the God-Almightiness as a "virile protest,"

and  as  an  infantile  striving  for  power  and  self-preservation:  a  theory  for

which support is found in the unmistakable pretensions to power that the

unconscious material contains. A further possibility would be to declare the

unconscious to be the archaic collective psychology of primitive man, an

explanation  that  would  not  only  cover  the  sexualistic  symbolism  and  the

"God-Almighty" aiming for power of the unconscious content, but would

also apparently do justice to the religious, philosophical, and mythological

aspects  and  tendencies  of  the  unconscious  content.  In  every  case  the

conclusion arrived at is the same, viz. that the unconscious is nothing but this

or that, which has already been adequately recognised and acknowledged as

infantile, useless, meaningless, impossible, and out of date. There is nothing

to be done but to shrug one's shoulders and resign one's self to the inevitable.

To the patient there seems to be no alternative, if one wishes to continue to

live  sensibly,  but  to  restore  in  so  far  as  is  possible  that  extract  of  the

collective psyche termed persona, to lay the fact of analysis silently aside,

and do one's utmost to forget that one possesses an unconscious. We shall

find support in Faust's words:—

"The sphere of earth is known enough to me;

The view beyond is barred immutably:

A fool, who there his blinking eyes directeth,And o'er his clouds of peers a place expecteth!

Firm let him stand, and look around him well!

This world means something to the capable.

Why needs he through Eternity to wend?

He here acquires what he can apprehend.

Thus let him wander down his earthly day;

When spirits haunt go quietly his way;

In marching onward, bliss and torment find,

Though every moment, with unsated mind!"

This would be a happy solution if one really could succeed in throwing off

the unconscious to such an extent as to withdraw the libido from it, and so

render it inoperative. But experience proves that energy cannot be withdrawn

from the unconscious; it continues operative, for the unconscious contains

and is indeed itself the source of libido, from which issue the primary psychic

elements,  thought-feelings,  or  feeling-thoughts—undifferentiated  germs  of

idea and sentiment. It would therefore be a delusion to believe that by means

of  some,  so  to  say,  magical  theory  or  method,  the  libido  could  be

conclusively wrested from the unconscious, or that it could be to a certain

extent disconnected. One may yield to this illusion for a time, but some day

he will be obliged to declare with Faust:—

"Now fills the air so many a haunting shape,

That no one knows how best he may escape.

What though one day with rational brightness beams,

The night entangles us in webs of dreams.

From our young fields of life we come, elate:

There croaks a bird; what croaks he? Evil fate!

By superstition constantly ensnared,

It grows to us and warns and is declared.

Intimidated thus we stand alone.—

The portal jars, yet entrance is there none.

Is any one here?

Care:  Yes! must be my reply.

Faust: And, thou, who art thou, then?

Care:  Well—here am I.

Faust: Avaunt!

Care:  I am where I should be:

Though no ear should choose to hear me,Yet the shrinking heart must fear me;

Though transformed to mortal eyes,

Grimmest power I exercise."

The  unconscious  cannot  be  "analysed"  to  a  finish,  and  thus  brought  to  a

standstill.  No  one  can  wrest  active  force  from  it  for  any  length  of  time.

Therefore to act according to the method just described is only to deceive

one's self, and is nothing but a new edition of an ordinary repression.

2. The Identification with the Collective Psyche.

The second way would be that of identification with the collective psyche.

That  would  mean  the  symptom  of  "God-Almightiness"  developed  into  a

system; in other words, one would be the fortunate possessor of the absolute

truth,  that  had  yet  to  be  discovered;  of  the  conclusive  knowledge,  which

would be the people's salvation. This attitude is not necessarily megalomania

("Grössenwahn") in a direct form, but the well-known milder form of having

a  prophetic  mission.  Weak  minds  which,  as  is  so  often  the  case,  have

correspondingly  an  undue  share  of  vanity  and  misplaced  naïveté  at  their

disposal,  run  a  considerable  risk  of  succumbing  to  this  temptation.  The

obtaining access to the collective psyche signifies a renewal of life for the

individual,  whether  this  renewal  of  life  be  felt  as  something  pleasant  or

unpleasant. It would seem desirable to retain a hold upon this renewal: for

one  person,  because  it  increases  his  feeling  for  life  ("Lebensgefühl");  for

another, because it promises a great accretion to his knowledge. Therefore

both of them, not wishing to deprive themselves of the rich values that lie

buried in the collective psyche, will endeavour by every means possible to

retain their newly gained union with the primal cause of life. Identification

appears to be the nearest way to it, for the merging of the persona in the

collective psyche is a veritable lure to unite one's self with this "ocean of

divinity," and, oblivious of the past, to become absorbed in it. This piece of

mysticism  belongs  to  every  finer  individual,  just  as  the  "yearning  for  the

mother"—the looking back to the source whence one originated—is innate in

every one.

As  I  have  demonstrated  explicitly  before,  there  is  a  special  value  and  a

special necessity hidden in the regressive longing—which, as is well-known,

Freud conceives as "infantile fixation" or as "incest-wish." This necessity and

longing is particularly emphasized in myths, where it is always the strongest

and  best  of  people,  in  other  words,  the  hero,  who  follows  the  regressive

longing and deliberately runs into danger of letting himself be devoured bythe monster of the maternal first cause. But he is a hero only because, instead

of letting himself be finally devoured by the monster, he conquers it, and that

not  only  once  but  several  times.  It  is  only  through  the  conquest  of  the

collective psyche that its true value can be attained, whether it be under the

symbol of capture of treasure, of an invincible weapon, of a magical means of

defence, or whatever else the myth devises as the most desirable possession.

Hence whoever identifies himself with the collective psyche, also reaches the

treasure which the dragon guards, but against his will and to his own great

injury, by thus allowing himself (mythologically speaking) to be devoured by

the monster and merged with it.

Identification with the collective psyche is therefore a failure; this way ends

just as disastrously as did the first, which led to the severance of the persona

from the collective psyche.      V.—LEADING PRINCIPLES FOR THE


        TREATMENT OF COLLECTIVE


                                IDENTITY.

In  order  to  solve  the  problem  how  practical  treatment  can  overcome  the

assimilation of the collective psyche, we must first of all make quite clear to

ourselves what was the error of the two ways already described. We saw that

neither the one way nor the other led to any appropriate result. The first way

simply leads the patient back to the point of departure, having lost the vital

values contained in the collective psyche. The second way leads him straight

into the collective psyche, having lost that detached human existence which

alone renders possible a bearable and satisfying life. There are on both sides

values that should not be lost to the individual.

The  mistake  is,  therefore,  neither  in  the  collective  psyche  nor  in  the

individual psyche, but in allowing the one to exclude the other. The monistic

tendency  assists  this  propensity,  for  it  always  suspects  and  looks

for one principle everywhere. As a general psychological tendency, monism

is a peculiarity of differentiated feeling and thought, corresponding to the

keen desire to make the one or the other function the supreme psychological

principle. The introversion type only knows the thought principle, and the

extroversion  type  only  that  of  feeling.  This  psychological  monism—or  it

would be better to say monotheism—has the advantage of simplicity, and the

disadvantage of one-sidedness. On the one hand, it signifies the exclusion of

the  variety  and  true  riches  of  life;  whilst  on  the  other,  it  means  the

practicability of realizing the ideals of the present day and of the near past.

But it does not in itself signify any actual possibility of human progress.

In the same way rationalism tends towards exclusiveness. Its essence is to

exclude  instantly  whatever  is  opposed  to  its  standpoint,  whether  it  be

intellectually logical or emotionally so. In regard to reason it is both monistic

and autocratic. Special thanks are due to Bergson for having broken a lance

for the right of the irrational to exist. Psychology will probably be obliged to

acknowledge and to submit to a plurality of principles, in spite of the fact that

this does not suit the scientific mind. Only so can psychology be saved from

ship-wreck.

But with regard to individual psychology science must waive its claims. Forto speak of a scientific individual psychology is in itself a contradictio in

adjecto.  It  is  necessarily  always  only  the  collective  part  of  an  individual

psychology that can be the subject of scientific study, for the individual is—

according to definition—something unique and incomparable. A "scientific"

individual psychology is a denial of individual psychology. It may justly be

suspected that individual psychology is indeed a projection of the psychology

of him who defines it. Every individual psychology must have its own text-

book, for the universal text-book only contains collective psychology.

These  remarks  are  intended  to  prepare  for  what  has  to  be  said  about  the

treatment of the aforesaid problem. The fundamental error of both the afore-

mentioned ways is simply that the subject is collectively identified with the

one or the other part of his psychology. His psychology is individual as well

as collective, but not in such a manner as to merge the individual with what is

collective, or the collective with what is individual. The persona must be

strictly separated from the concept of the individual, in so far as the persona

can be absolutely merged with the collective. But what is individual is just

that which can never be absorbed in the collective, and is, too, never identical

with  the  collective.  Therefore,  an  identification  with  the  collective  or  an

arbitrary  cutting-off  from  the  collective  is  equivalent  to  illness;  it  is

pathological.

As  has  already  been  indicated,  what  is  individual  appears  at  first  as  the

particular selection of those elements of the collective psyche that contribute

to the composition of the persona. As I said before, the components are not

individual but collective. It is only their combination, or the selection as a

model  of  particular  groups  that  had  already  been  combined,  which  is

individual. That would be the individual nucleus which is concealed by the

personal mask. By the particular differentiation of the persona, the resistance

is  shown  of  the  individuality  to  the  collective  psyche.  By  analysing  the

persona, we transfer a greater value to the individuality, increasing thereby its

conflict with collectivity. This conflict obviously is a psychological conflict

in the individual. The dissolution of the compromise between the two halves

of a pair of opposites increases the effectiveness of the contrast. This conflict

does not exist within the sphere of purely unconscious natural life, although

the  purely  physiological  life  of  the  individual  also  has  to  comply  with

collective demands.

The natural unconscious attitude is harmonious; the body, with its capacities

and needs, providing immediately indications and limitations, that preventintemperance and lack of proportion. A differentiated psychological function,

however,  always  inclines  towards  disproportion,  on  account  of  the  one-

sidedness which is cultivated by the conscious rationality of intention. What

is  called  mental  individuality,  is,  also,  an  expression  of  the  individual

corporeity,  being,  so  to  speak,  identical  with  it.  This  sentence  might

obviously  also  be  reversed,  a  fact  that  does  not  materially  alter  the  real

psychological data concerning the intimate relation of the individuality to the

body.  At  the  same  time,  the  body  is  also  that  which  makes  the  subject

resemble all others to a great extent, although it is the individual body that is

differentiated from all others.

Similarly the mental or moral individuality differs from all others, although in

every respect it is so constituted as to place one person on an equality with all

others. Every living creature that is able freely to develop itself individually

without any coercion at all, will, through the perfecting of its individuality,

soonest  realize  the  ideal  type  of  its  species,  and  therefore,  figuratively

speaking, will have collective validity.

The  persona  is  always  identical  with  a typical  attitude,  in

which one  pyschological  function  dominates, e.g.  feeling,  or  thought,  or

intuition.  This  one-sidedness  always  causes  the  relative  repression  of  the

other functions. In consequence of this circumstance, the persona is hindering

to  the  development  of  the  individual.  The  dissolution  of  the  persona  is,

therefore,  an  indispensable  condition  of  individuation.  It  is,  therefore,  to

some  extent  impossible  to  achieve  individuation  by  means  of  conscious

intention;  for  conscious  intention  leads  to  a  conscious  attitude,  which

excludes  everything  that  "does  not  suit."  But  the  assimilation  of  the

unconscious  contents  leads,  on  the  contrary,  to  a  condition  in  which

conscious intention is excluded, being replaced by a process of development

that  appears  to  us  irrational.  This  process  alone  signifies  individuation,

its product being individuality as defined above, viz. as something individual

that is at the same time universal. So long as the persona exists individuality

is repressed, betraying itself at most by the particular selection of personal

requisites,  of  what  might  be  called  the  actor's  costumes.  Only  when  the

unconscious is assimilated does the individuality become more prominent,

and with it also that uniting psychological phenomenon between the ego and

non-ego, expressed by the word attitude, is now no longer a typical attitude

but an individual one.

What is paradoxical in these formulations arises from the same cause fromwhich the conflict about the "universalia" formerly arose. The phrase "animal

nullumque  animal  genus  est"  makes  the  fundamental  paradox  clearly

comprehensible. What exists "really" is individual: that which is universal is

existing psychologically, but being caused by the real-existing similarities of

individual things. The individual is, therefore, the individual thing that has, to

a greater or less extent, those attributes upon which the collective conception

of "collectivity" rests; and the more individual he is, the more he develops

those attributes that are the basis of a collective concept of human nature.

If a grotesque figure, suggested by the initial situation of our problem be

permitted, it is Buridan's ass between the two bundles of hay. His questioning

is obviously wrong: the question is not whether the hay-bundle on the right or

the left be the better one, or whether he should begin to eat on the right or the

left hand, but what he himself would like to do, what he is eager for—that is

the point. He is thinking of the hay and not of himself, and therefore he does

not know what he really wants.

The question is: what at this moment is the natural direction of the growth of

this individual?

This question cannot be settled by any philosophy, religion or good advice,

but  solely  by  an  unprejudiced  review  of  the  psychological  germs  of  life

which  have  resulted  from  the  natural  co-operation  of  the  conscious  and

unconscious on the one hand, and of the individual and the collective on the

other.  One  person  looks  for  them  in  the  conscious,  and  another  in  the

unconscious. But the conscious is only one side, and the unconscious is only

the other. For it should never be forgotten that dreams are compensatory or

complementary  to  consciousness.  Were  this  not  the  case,  we  should  be

obliged to regard dreams as a source of knowledge superior to the conscious.

This view would undoubtedly carry us back to the mentality of the augur, and

we should have to accept all the consequences of such a superstitious attitude,

unless, indeed, we look upon dreams as valueless, as does the vulgar mind.

We find the unifying function that we are seeking, in the phantasies in which

everything  that  has  any  effectual  determination  is  present.  But  phantasies

have a bad reputation among psychologists. The psychoanalytical theories

hitherto obtaining have treated them accordingly. For both Freud and Adler

the  phantasy  is  nothing  but  a  so-called  "symbolic"  disguise  of  what  both

investigators  suppose  to  be  the  primary  propensities  and  aims.  But  in

opposition to these views it should be emphasised—not for theoretical but for

essentially practical reasons—that the phantasy may indeed be thus causallyexplained  and  depreciated,  but  that  it  nevertheless  is  the  creative  soil  for

everything that has ever brought development to humanity. The phantasy as a

psychological function has a peculiar non-reducible value of its own, whose

roots are in both the conscious and the unconscious contents, and in what is

collective as well as in what is individual.

But whence comes the bad reputation of the phantasy? It owes that reputation

chiefly  to  the  circumstance  that  it  ought  not  to  be  taken  literally.  It  is

worthless  if  understood  concretistically.  If  we  understand  semiotically,  as

Freud  does,  it  is  interesting  from  the  scientific  standpoint.  But  if  it  be

understood hermeneutically, as an actual symbol, it provides us with the cue

that we need in order to develop our life in harmony with ourselves.

For the significance of a symbol is not that it is a disguised indication of

something that is generally known, but that it is an endeavour to elucidate by

analogy  what  is  as  yet  completely  unknown  and  only  in  process  of

formation. The phantasy represents to us that which is just developing under

the  form  of  a  more  or  less  apposite  analogy.  By  analytical  reduction  to

something universally known, we destroy the actual value of the symbol; but

it  is  appropriate  to  its  value  and  meaning  to  give  it  an  hermeneutical

interpretation.

The essence of hermeneutics—an art that was formerly much practised—

consists in adding more analogies to that already given by the symbol: in the

first place, subjective analogies given by the patient as they occur to him; and

in the second place, objective analogies provided by the analyst out of his

general knowledge. The initial symbol is much enlarged and enriched by this

procedure, the result being a highly complex and many-sided picture, which

may  now  be  reduced  to tertia  comparationis.  Thence  result  certain

psychological  lines  of  development  of  an  individual  as  well  as  collective

nature. No science upon earth could prove the accuracy of these lines; on the

contrary, rationalism could very easily prove that they are wrong. But these

lines vindicate their validity by their value for life. The chief thing in practical

treatment  is  that  people  should  get  a  hold  of  their  own  life,  not  that  the

principle of their life should be provable or "right."

Of  course,  true  to  the  spirit  of  scientific  superstition suggestion  will  be

mooted. But it should long ago have been realised that a suggestion is only

accepted by one it suits. Beyond that there is no suggestion, otherwise the

treatment of neurosis would be extremely simple, for we should only need to

suggest health. This pseudo-scientific talk about suggestion is based upon theunconscious superstition that suggestion actually possesses some real magic

power. No one succumbs to suggestion unless from the very bottom of his

heart he be willing to co-operate.

By means of the hermeneutical treatment of the phantasies we arrive at the

synthesis of the individual with the collective psyche, put theoretically, that

is, but practically, one indispensable condition is yet lacking. For it belongs

to the regressive disposition of the neurotic—a disposition in which he has

been confirmed in the course of his illness—to take neither himself nor the

world seriously, but always to rely on this or that method or circumstance to

effect a cure, quite apart from his own serious co-operation. "But you can't

wash the dog without getting his skin wet." No cure can be effected without

unlimited  willingness  and  absolute  seriousness  on  the  part  of  the  patient.

There are no magical cures for neurosis. Just as soon as we begin to elaborate

the symbolic outlines of the path, the patient must begin to walk thereon. If

he delude himself and shirk it, no cure can result. He must really work and

live according to what he has seen and recognised as the direction for the

time  being  of  his  individual  life-line,  and  must  continue  thereon  until  a

distinct reaction of his unconscious shows him that he is beginning in good

faith to go a wrong way.

He who does not possess this moral function of faithfulness to himself will

never get rid of his neurosis; but he who has this faithfulness can find the way

out.

Neither physician nor patient must yield to the delusion that "being analysed"

is in itself sufficient to remove a neurosis. That would be deception and self-

delusion.  Ultimately  it  is  infallibly  the  moral  factor  that  decides  between

health and illness.

By the construction of the individual's life-line the ever-varying trends and

tendencies of his libido are made conscious. These life-lines are not identical

with the "directing fictions" discovered by Adler, which are none other than

arbitrary attempts to cut the persona off from the collective psyche, and to

give it independence. It might rather be said that the "directing fiction" is an

unsuccessful  attempt  to  construct  a  life-line.  The  unsuitability  of  the

"directing fiction" is also proved by the fact that the lines are tenaciously

retained for much too long a time. The hermeneutically constructed life-line

is  short,  for  life  follows  no  straight  lines  that  indicate  the  future  long

beforehand,  for,  as  Nietzsche  says,  "All  truth  is  crooked."  Life-lines  are

therefore neither principles nor ideals of universal validity, but points of viewand  adaptations  of  ephemeral  validity.  An  abatement  of  vital  intensity,  a

perceptible loss of libido, or an excessive passion or ecstasy—all show that

one  such  line  is  left,  and  that  a  new  line  begins,  or  rather  should  begin.

Sometimes  it  is  enough  to  leave  the  revealing  of  the  new  line  to  the

unconscious;  but  this  course  should  indeed  not  be  recommended  to  the

neurotic under all circumstances, though there are cases where what is needed

is to learn to trust to so-called chance. However, it is not advisable to let one's

self drift for any length of time; a watchful eye should at least be kept upon

the  reactions  of  the  unconscious,  that  is  to  say,  upon  the  dreams:  these

indicate  like  a  barometer  the  one-sidedness  of  our  attitude.  Therefore,  I

consider it necessary, in contrast to some other analysts, for the patient after

analysis  to  remain  in  contact  with  the  unconscious,  if  he  would  avoid  a

relapse. That is why I am convinced that the real end of analysis is reached

when the patient has acquired adequate knowledge of the method to remain

in contact with the unconscious, and sufficient psychological knowledge to

be able to understand approximately his ever-changing life-line; otherwise he

is  not  in  a  position  to  follow  the  direction  of  the  libido  currents  in  the

unconscious, and thereby to gain conscious support in the development of his

individuality. Every serious case of neurosis needs this weapon in order to

maintain the cure.

In this sense analysis is not a method that is a medical monopoly, but rather

an art or technique or science of psychological life, which he who has been

cured must continue to foster, for the sake of his own welfare and that of his

environment.  If  he  understands  this  aright  he  will  not  pose  as  a

psychoanalytical prophet nor as a public reformer, but truly understanding the

common weal, he will first himself reap the benefit of the self-knowledge

acquired in his treatment, and then he will let the example of his life work

what  good  it  can,  rather  than  indulge  in  aggressive  talk  and  missionary

propaganda.                                  SUMMARY.

A. Psychological Material must be divided

into Conscious and Unconscious Contents.

1. The conscious contents are partly personal, in so far as their universal

validity is not recognised; and partly impersonal, that is, collective, in so far

as their universal validity is recognised.

2. The unconscious contents are partly personal, in so far as they concern

solely repressed materials of a personal nature, that have once been relatively

conscious and whose universal validity is therefore not recognised when they

are made conscious; partly impersonal, in so far as the materials concerned

are  recognised  as impersonal  and  of  purely  universal  validity,  of  whose

earlier even relative consciousness we have no means of proof.

B. The Composition of the Persona.

1. The conscious personal contents constitute the conscious personality, the

conscious ego.

2. The unconscious personal contents constitute the self, the unconscious or

subconscious ego.

3. The conscious and unconscious contents of a personal nature constitute the

persona.

C. The Composition of the Collective Psyche.

1. The conscious and unconscious contents of an impersonal or collective

nature compose the psychological non-ego, the image of the object. These

materials can appear analytically as projections of feeling or of opinion, but

they are a priori collectively identical with the object-imago, that is they

appear  as  qualities  of  the  object,  and  are  only a posteriori  recognised  as

subjective psychological qualities.

2. The persona is that grouping of conscious and unconscious contents which

is  opposed  as  ego  to  the  non-ego.  The  general  comparison  of  personal

contents  of  different  individuals  establishes  their  far-reaching  similarity,

extending  even  to  identity,  by  which  the individual  nature  of  personal

contents, and therewith of the persona, is for the most part suspended. To this

extent the persona must be considered an excerpt of the collective psyche,

and also a component of the collective psyche.

3. The collective psyche is therefore composed of the object-imago and the

persona.D. What is Individual.

1. What is individual appears partly as the principle that decides the selection

and limitation of the contents that are accepted as personal.

2. What is individual is the principle by which an increasing differentiation

from the collective psyche is made possible and enforced.

3. What is individual manifests itself partly as an impediment to collective

accomplishment, and as a resistance against collective thinking and feeling.

4.  What  is  individual  is  the  uniqueness  of  the  combination  of  universal

(collective) psychological elements.

E. We  must  divide  the  Conscious  and  Unconscious  Contents  into

Individualistic and Collectivistic.

1. A content is individualistic whose developing tendency is directed towards

the differentiation from the collective.

2. A content is collectivistic whose developing tendency aims at universal

validity.

3. There are insufficient criteria by which to designate a given content as

simply  individual  or  collective,  for  uniqueness  is  very  difficult  to  prove,

although it is a perpetually and universally recurrent phenomenon.

4. The life-line of an individual is the resultant of the individualistic and

collectivistic tendency of the psychological process at any given moment.
 
 