time.

The  heightened  conviction  of  the  near  presence  of  spirits,  owing  to  the

feeling of strangeness evoked by the automatism, could easily lead to the idea

that it might be possible to see a spirit, thus causing a slight excitation of the

visual sphere.

The  entoptic  phenomena  in  the  darkness  favoured  the  appearance  of

hallucinations.

[100] The reasons given in (c) and (d) are of decisive importance for the

appearance of hallucinations. The entoptic phenomena in this case play the

same  role  in  producing  automatisms  by  auto-suggestion  as  do  the  slight

tactile stimuli during hypnosis of the motor centres. As reported, the patient

saw sparks before passing into the first hallucinatory twilight state at the first

séance. Obviously attention was already at high pitch and directed to visual

perceptions, so that the light sensations of the retina, usually very weak, were

seen with great intensity. The part played by entoptic perceptions of light in

the production of hallucinations deserves closer scrutiny. Schüle says: “The

swarm of lights and colours that excite and activate the nocturnal field of

vision in the darkness supplies the material for the fantastic figures seen in

the  air  before  going  to  sleep.”47 As we know, we never see absolute 

darkness, always a few patches of the dark field are dully illuminated; flecks 

of light bob up here and there and combine into all sorts of shapes, and it only 

needs a moderately active imagination to  form out  of them, as  one does  out 

of clouds,  certain figures known to oneself personally. As one falls asleep, 

one’s fading power of judgment leaves the imagination free to construct more 

and more vivid forms. “Instead of the spots of light, the haziness and 

changing colours of the dark visual field, outlines  of  definite  objects begin 

to appear.”48 Hypnagogic hallucinations arise in this way. Naturally the chief

share falls to the imagination, which is why highly imaginative people are

particularly subject to them.49 The  “hypnopompic” hallucinations described 

by Myers are essentially the same as the hypnagogic ones.

[101] It is very probable that hypnagogic images are identical with the dream-

images of normal sleep, or that they form their visual foundation. Maury50

has  proved  by  self-observation  that  the  images  which  floated  round  him

hypnagogically were also the objects of the dreams that followed. Ladd51

showed the same thing even more convincingly. With practice he succeeded

in waking himself up two to five minutes after falling asleep. Each time he

noticed that the bright figures dancing before the retina formed as it were theoutlines of the images just dreamed of. He even supposes that practically all

visual dreams derive their formal elements from the light sensations of the

retina.  In  our  case  the  situation  favoured  the  development  of  a  fantastic

interpretation.  Also,  we  must  not  underrate  the  influence  of  the  tense

expectation which caused the dull light sensations of the retina to appear with

increased intensity.52 The development of retinal phenomena then followed

in accordance with the predominant ideas. Hallucinations have been observed

to arise in this way with other visionaries: Joan of Arc saw first a cloud of

light,53 then out of it, a little later, stepped St. Michael, St. Catharine, and St.

Margaret. Swedenborg saw nothing for a whole hour but luminous spheres

and brilliant flames.54 All the time he felt a tremendous change going on in

his brain, which seemed to him like a “release of light.” An hour afterwards

he suddenly saw real figures whom he took to be angels and spirits. The sun

vision of Benvenuto Cellini in Sant’ Angelo probably belongs to the same

category.55 A  student  who  often  saw  apparitions  said:  “When  these

apparitions come, I see at first only single masses of light and hear at the

same time a dull roaring in my ears. But after a bit these outlines turn into

distinct figures.”56 The hallucinations arise in quite the classical way with

Flournoy’s Hélène Smith. I cite the relevant passages from his report:

[102] March 18. Attempt to experiment in the darkness.… Mlle. Smith sees a

balloon, now luminous, now becoming dark.

[103] March 25.… Mlle. Smith begins to distinguish vague gleams with long

white streamers moving from the floor to the ceiling, and then a magnificent

star, which in the darkness appears to her alone throughout the whole séance.

[104] April 1. Mlle. Smith is very much agitated; she has fits of shivering, is

very cold. She is very restless, and sees suddenly, hovering above the table, a

grinning,  very  ugly  face,  with  long  red  hair.  Afterwards  she  sees  a

magnificent bouquet of roses of different hues.… Suddenly she sees a small

snake come out from underneath the bouquet; it rises up gently, smells the

flowers, looks at them …57

[105] Concerning the origin of her Mars visions, Hélène Smith said: “The red 

light   continues   about   me,   and   I   find   myself   surrounded   by 

extraordinary flowers.…”58

[106] At all times the complex hallucinations of visionaries have occupied a

special  place  in  scientific  criticism.  Thus,  quite  early,  Macario59

distinguished them as “intuitive” hallucinations from ordinary hallucinations,

saying that they occur in persons of lively mind, deep understanding, andhigh nervous excitability. Hecker expresses himself in a similar manner but

even more enthusiastically. He supposes their conditioning factor to be the

“congenitally  high  development  of  the  psychic  organ,  which  through  its

spontaneous activity calls the life of the imagination into free and nimble

play.”60 These hallucinations are “harbingers and also signs of an immense

spiritual power.” A vision is actually “a higher excitation which adapts itself

harmoniously  to  the  most  perfect  health  of  mind  and  body.”  Complex

hallucinations do not belong to the waking state but occur as a rule in a state

of partial waking: the visionary is sunk in his vision to the point of complete

absorption. Flournoy, too, was always able to establish “a certain degree of

obnubilation” during the visions of Hélène Smith.61 In our case the vision is

complicated by a sleeping state whose peculiarities we shall discuss below.

The Change in Character

[107]  The  most  striking  feature  of  the  “second  state”  is  the  change  in

character. There are several cases in the literature which show this symptom

of spontaneous change in the character of a person. The first to be made

known in a scientific journal was that of Mary Reynolds, published by Weir

Mitchell.62 This was the case of a young woman living in Pennsylvania in

1811. After a deep sleep of about twenty hours, she had totally forgotten her

entire past and everything she had ever learnt; even the words she spoke had

lost their meaning. She no longer knew her relatives. Slowly she re-learnt to

read and write, but her writing now was from right to left. More striking still

was the change in her character. “Instead of being melancholy she was now

cheerful to extremity. Instead of being reserved she was buoyant and social.

Formerly  taciturn  and  retiring,  she  was  now  merry  and  jocose.  Her

disposition was totally and absolutely changed.”63

[108] In this state she gave up entirely her former secluded life and liked to

set out on adventurous expeditions unarmed, through woods and mountains,

on foot and on horseback. On one of these expeditions she encountered a

large black bear, which she took for a pig. The bear stood up on his hind legs

and gnashed his teeth at her. As she could not induce her horse to go any

further, she went up to the bear with an ordinary stick and hit him until he

took to flight. Five weeks later, after a deep sleep, she returned to her earlier

state with amnesia for the interval. These states alternated for about sixteen

years.  But  the  last  twenty-five  years  of  her  life  Mary  Reynolds  passed

exclusively in the second state.

[109]  Schroeder  van  der  Kolk64 reports  the  following  case:  The  patientbecame ill at the age of sixteen with a periodic amnesia after a previous long

illness of three years. Sometimes in the morning after waking she fell into a

peculiar choreic state, during which she made rhythmical beating movements

with her arms. Throughout the day she would behave in a childish, silly way,

as  if  she  had  lost  all  her  educated  faculties.  When  normal  she  was  very

intelligent, well-read, spoke excellent French. In the second state she began to

speak French faultily. On the second day she was always normal again. The

two states were completely separated by amnesia.65

[110]    Höfelt66 reports on a case of spontaneous somnambulism in a girl

who in her normal state was submissive and modest, but in somnambulism

was impertinent, rude, and violent. Azam’s Felida67 was in her normal state 

depressed, inhibited, timid, and in the second state lively, confident, 

enterprising to recklessness. The second state gradually became the dominant 

one and finally supplanted the first to such an extent that the patient called 

her normal states, which now lasted only a short time, her “crises.” The 

amnesic attacks had begun at the age of 14½. In time the second state   

became   more   moderate,   and   there   was   a   certain approximation in the 

character of the two states. A very fine example of change in character is the 

case worked out by Camuset, Ribot, Legrand du Saule, Richer, and Voisin 

and put together by Bourru and Burot.68 It  is  that  of  Louis  V.,  a  case  of

severe male hysteria, with an amnesic alternating character. In the first state

he was rude, cheeky, querulous, greedy, thievish, inconsiderate. In the second

state  he  showed  an  agreeable,  sympathetic  character  and  was  industrious,

docile, and obedient. The amnesic change in character has been put to literary

use by Paul Lindau69 in his play Der Andere. A case that parallels Lindau’s

criminalistic public prosecutor is reported on by Rieger.70 The subconscious

personalities of Janet’s Lucie and Léonie,71 or of Morton Prince’s patient,72

can also be regarded as parallels of our case, though these were artificial

therapeutic  products  whose  importance  lies  rather  in  the  domain  of

dissociated consciousness and memory.

[111] In all these cases the second state is separated from the first by an

amnesic split, and the change in character is accompanied by a break in the

continuity  of  consciousness.  In  our  case  there  is  no  amnesic  disturbance

whatever; the transition from the first to the second state is quite gradual,

continuity of consciousness is preserved, so that the patient carries over into

the waking state everything she has experienced of the otherwise unknown

regions of the unconscious during hallucinations in the second state.[112] Periodic changes in personality without an amnesic split are found in

cyclic  insanity,  but  they  also  occur  as  a  rare  phenomenon  in  hysteria,  as

Renaudin’s case shows.73 A young man, whose behaviour had always been

exemplary, suddenly began to display the worst tendencies. No symptoms of

insanity were observed, but on the other hand the whole surface of his body

was found to be anaesthetic. This state was periodic, and, in the same way,

the patient’s character was subject to fluctuations. As soon as the anaesthesia

disappeared he became manageable and friendly. The moment it returned he

was dominated by the worst impulses, including even the lust for murder.

[113]  If  we  remember  that  our  patient’s  age  at  the  beginning  of  the

disturbances was 15½, i.e., that the age of puberty had just been reached, we

must suppose that there was some connection between these disturbances and

the physiological changes of character at puberty.

At this period of life there appears in the consciousness of the individual a

new  group  of  sensations  together  with  the  ideas  and  feelings  arising

therefrom.  This  continual  pressure  of  unaccustomed  mental  states,  which

constantly make themselves felt because their cause is constantly at work,

and which are co-ordinated with one another because they spring from one

and the same source, must in the end bring about far-reaching changes in the

constitution of the ego.74

We  all  know  the  fitful  moods,  the  confused,  new,  powerful  feelings,  the

tendency to romantic ideas, to exalted religiosity and mysticism, side by side

with  relapses  into  childishness,  which  give  the  adolescent  his  peculiar

character.  At  this  period  he  is  making  his  first  clumsy  attempts  at

independence  in  every  direction;  for  the  first  time  he  uses  for  his  own

purposes all that family and school have inculcated into him in childhood; he

conceives ideals, constructs lofty plans for the future, lives in dreams whose

main content is ambition and self-complacency. All this is physiological. The

puberty of a psychopath is a serious crisis. Not only do the psychophysical

changes  run  an  exceedingly  stormy  course,  but  features  of  an  inherited

degenerate  character,  which  do  not  appear  in  the  child  at  all  or  only

sporadically,  now  become  fixed.  In  explaining  our  case  we  are  bound  to

consider a specifically pubertal disturbance. The reasons for this will appear

from a more detailed study of her second personality. For the sake of brevity

we shall call this second personality Ivenes, as the patient herself christened

her higher ego.

[114]    Ivenes is the direct continuation of her everyday ego. She comprises its whole conscious content. In the semi-somnambulist state her relation to 

the external world is analogous to that of the waking state—that is to say, she 

is influenced by recurrent hallucinations, but no more than persons who are 

subject to non-confusional psychotic hallucinations. The continuity of Ivenes 

obviously extends to the hysterical attacks as well, when she enacts dramatic 

scenes, has visionary experiences, etc. During the actual attack she is usually 

isolated from the external world, does not notice what is going on around her, 

does not know that she is talking loudly, etc. But she has no amnesia for the 

dream-content of the attack. Nor is there always amnesia for her motor 

expressions and for the changes in her surroundings. That this is dependent 

on the degree of somnambulistic stupor and on the partial paralysis of 

individual sense organs is proved by the occasion when the patient did not 

notice me, despite the fact that her eyes were open and that she probably saw 

the others, but only perceived my presence when I spoke to her. This is a case 

of so-called systematic anaesthesia (negative hallucination), which is 

frequently observed among hysterics.

[115]  Flournoy,75 for  instance,  reports  of  Hélène  Smith  that  during  the

séances she suddenly ceased to see those taking part, although she still heard

their  voices  and  felt  their  touch;  or  that  she  suddenly  stopped  hearing,

although she saw the speakers moving their lips, etc.

[116] Just as Ivenes is a continuation of the waking ego, so she carries over

her whole conscious content into the waking state. This remarkable behaviour

argues strongly against any analogy with cases of double consciousness. The

characteristics  reported  of  Ivenes  contrast  favourably  with  those  of  the

patient;  she  is  the  calmer,  more  composed  personality,  and  her  pleasing

modesty and reserve, her more uniform intelligence, her confident way of

talking, may be regarded as an improvement on the patient’s whole being;

thus far there is some resemblance to Janet’s Léonie. But it is no more than a

resemblance. They are divided by a deep psychological difference, quite apart

from the question of amnesia. Léonie II is the healthier, the more normal; she

has regained her natural capacities, she represents the temporary amelioration

of a chronic condition of hysteria. Ivenes gives more the impression of an

artificial product; she is more contrived, and despite all her excellent points

she strikes one as playing a part superlatively well. Her world-weariness, her

longing for the Beyond, are not mere piety but the attributes of saintliness.

Ivenes is no longer quite human, she is a mystic being who only half belongs

to the world of reality. Her mournful features, her suffering resignation, hermysterious  fate  all  lead  us  to  the  historical  prototype  of  Ivenes:  Justinus

Kerner’s Clairvoyante of Prevorst. I assume that the content of Kerner’s book

is generally known, so I omit references to the features they have in common.

Ivenes, however, is not just a copy of the Clairvoyante; the latter is simply a

sketch for an original. The patient pours her own soul into the role of the

Clairvoyante, seeking to create out of it an ideal of virtue and perfection; she

anticipates her own future and embodies in Ivenes what she wishes to be in

twenty years’ time—the assured, influential, wise, gracious, pious lady. In the

construction of the second personality lies the deep-seated difference between

Léonie II and Ivenes. Both are psychogenic, but whereas Léonie I obtains in

Léonie II what properly belongs to her, the patient builds up a personality

beyond herself. One cannot say that she deludes herself into the higher ideal

state, rather she dreams herself into it.76

[117]  The realization of this dream is very reminiscent of the psychology of 

the pathological swindler. Delbrück77 and  Forel78 have  pointed  out  the

importance of auto-suggestion in the development of pathological cheating

and pathological daydreaming. Pick79 regards intense auto- suggestion as the

first  symptom  of  hysterical  dreamers  which  makes  the  realization  of

“daydreams” possible. One of Pick’s patients dreamt herself into a morally

dangerous situation and finally carried out an attempt at rape on herself by

lying naked on the floor and tying herself to the table and chairs. The patients

may  create  some  dramatic  personage  with  whom  they  enter  into

correspondence  by  letter,  as  in  Bohn’s  case,80 where  the  patient  dreamt

herself into an engagement with a completely imaginary lawyer in Nice, from

whom  she  received  letters  which  she  had  written  herself  in  disguised

handwriting.  This  pathological  dreaming,  with  its  auto-suggestive

falsifications  of  memory  sometimes  amounting  to  actual  delusions  and

hallucinations, is also found in the lives of many saints.81 It is only a step

from  dreamy  ideas  with  a  strong  sensuous  colouring  to  complex

hallucinations proper.82 For instance, in Pick’s first case, one can see how 

the  patient, who imagined  she was the Empress Elizabeth, gradually lost 

herself in her reveries to such an extent that her condition must be regarded 

as a true twilight state. Later it passed over into an hysterical delirium in 

which her dream fantasies became typical hallucinations. The pathological 

liar who lets himself be swept away by his fantasies behaves exactly like a 

child who loses himself in the game he is playing,83 or  like  an  actor  who

surrenders  completely  to  his  part.  There  is  no  fundamental  distinctionbetween this and the somnambulistic dissociation of the personality, but only

a  difference  of  degree  based  on  the  intensity  of  the  primary  auto-

suggestibility  or  disaggregation  of  the  psychic  elements.  The  more

consciousness becomes dissociated the greater becomes the plasticity of the

dream situations, and the less, too, the amount of conscious lying and of

consciousness in general. This state of being carried away by one’s interest in

the object is what Freud calls hysterical identification. For instance, Erler’s

patient,84 a severe hysteric, had hypnagogic visions of little riders made of

paper, who so took possession of her imagination that she had the feeling of

being herself one of them. Much the same sort of thing normally happens to

us  in  dreams,  when  we  cannot  help  thinking  “hysterically.”85 Complete

surrender to the interesting idea explains the wonderful naturalness of these

pseudological or somnambulistic performances, which is quite beyond the

reach of conscious acting. The less the waking consciousness intervenes with

its reflection and calculation, the more certain and convincing becomes the

objectivation of the dream.86

[118] Our case has still another analogy with pseudologia phantastica: the

development of fantasies during the attacks. Many cases are known in the

literature of fits of pathological lying, accompanied by various hysteriform

complaints.87 Our patient develops her fantasy systems exclusively during 

the attack. In her normal state she is quite incapable of thinking out new ideas 

or explanations; she must either put herself into the  somnambulistic  state  or  

await  its  spontaneous  appearance.  This exhausts the affinities with 

pseudologia phantastica and pathological dreaming.

[119]  Our  patient  differs  essentially  from  pathological  dreamers  in  that  it

could never be proved that her reveries had previously been the object of her

daily interests; her dreams came up explosively, suddenly bursting forth with

amazing completeness from the darkness of the unconscious. The same thing

happened with Flournoy’s Hélène Smith. At several points, however, it is

possible in our case to demonstrate the link with perceptions in the normal

state [see next par.], so it seems probable that the roots of those dreams were

originally feeling-toned ideas which only occupied her waking consciousness

for a short time.88 We must suppose that hysterical forgetfulness89 plays a

not inconsiderable role in the origin of such dreams: many ideas which, in

themselves,  would  be  worth  preserving  in  consciousness,  sink  below  the

threshold,  associated  trains  of  thought  get  lost  and,  thanks  to  psychic

dissociation, go on working in the unconscious. We meet the same processagain  in  the  genesis  of  our  own  dreams.90 The  apparently  sudden  and

unexpected reveries of the patient can be explained in this way. The total

submersion of the conscious personality in the dream role is also the indirect

cause of the development of simultaneous automatisms:

A second condition may also occasion the division of consciousness. It is not

an alteration of sensibility, but it is rather a peculiar attitude of the mind—the

concentration  of  attention  on  a  single  thing.  The  result  of  this  state  of

concentration is that the mind is absorbed to the exclusion of other things,

and to such a degree insensible that the way is opened for automatic actions;

and these actions, becoming more complicated, as in the preceding case, may

assume a psychic character and constitute intelligences of a parasitic kind,

existing  side  by  side  with  the  normal  personality,  which  is  not  aware  of

them.91

[120]  Our  patient’s  “romances”  throw  a  most  significant  light  on  the

subjective  roots  of  her  dreams.  They  swarm  with  open  and  secret  love-

affairs, with illegitimate births and other sexual innuendoes. The hub of all

these ambiguous stories is a lady whom she dislikes, and who gradually turns

into her polar opposite, for whereas Ivenes is the pinnacle of virtue this lady

is  a  sink  of  iniquity.  But  the  patient’s  reincarnation  theory,  in  which  she

appears as the ancestral mother of countless thousands, springs, in all of its

naïve  nakedness,  straight  from  an  exuberant  fantasy  which  is  so  very

characteristic of the puberty period. It is the woman’s premonition of sexual

feeling, the dream of fertility, that has created these monstrous ideas in the

patient. We shall not be wrong if we seek the main cause of this curious

clinical picture in her budding sexuality. From this point of view the whole

essence of Ivenes and her enormous family is nothing but a dream of sexual

wish-fulfilment, which differs from the dream of a night only in that it is

spread over months and years.

[Nature of the Somnambulistic Attacks]

[121] So far there is one point in S. W.’s history that has not been discussed, 

and that is the nature of her attacks. In the second séance she was suddenly 

seized with a sort of fainting-fit, from which she awoke with a recollection of 

various hallucinations. According to her own statement, she had not lost 

consciousness for a moment. Judging from the outward symptoms and course 

of these attacks, one is inclined to think of narcolepsy or lethargy, of the kind 

described, for instance, by Loewenfeld. This is the more plausible since we 

know that one member of her family—the grandmother—had once had an attack of lethargy. So it is conceivable that our patient inherited the lethargic 

disposition (Loewenfeld). One often observes hysterical fits of convulsions at 

spiritualistic séances. Our patient never showed any symptoms of 

convulsions,  but instead she had those peculiar sleeping states. 

Aetiologically, two elements must be considered for the first attack:

The influence of hypnosis.

Psychic excitation.

[122]  (1) INFLUENCE OF PARTIAL HYPNOSIS. Janet observed that 

subconscious automatisms have a hypnotic influence and can bring about 

complete somnambulism.92 He made the following experiment: While the

patient,  who  was  fully  awake,  was  engaged  in  conversation  by  a  second

observer,  Janet  stationed  himself  behind  her  and  by  means  of  whispered

suggestions  made  her  unconsciously  move  her  hand,  write,  and  answer

questions by signs. Suddenly the patient broke off the conversation, turned

round,  and  with  supraliminal  consciousness  continued  the  previously

subconscious talk with Janet. She had fallen into hypnotic somnambulism.93

In this example we see a process similar to our case. But, for certain reasons

to be discussed later, the sleeping state cannot be regarded as hypnotic. We

therefore come to the question of:

[123] (2) PSYCHIC EXCITATION. It is reported that the first time Bettina

Brentano met Goethe, she suddenly fell asleep on his knee.94 Ecstatic sleep

in the midst of extreme torture, the so-called “witch’s sleep,” is a well-known

phenomenon in the annals of witchcraft.95

[124] With susceptible subjects, comparatively small stimuli are enough to

induce somnambulistic states. For example, a sensitive lady had to have a

splinter cut out of her finger. Without any kind of bodily change she suddenly

saw herself sitting beside a brook in a beautiful meadow, plucking flowers.

This  condition  lasted  all  through  the  minor  operation  and  then  vanished

without having any special after-effects.96

[125] Loewenfeld observed the unintentional induction of hysterical lethargy

by hypnosis.97 Our case has certain resemblances to hysterical lethargy as

described by Loewenfeld:98 superficial respiration, lowering of the pulse,

corpse-like pallor of the face, also peculiar feelings of dying and thoughts of

death.99  Retention of one or more senses is no argument against lethargy:

for  instance  in  certain  cases  of  apparent  death  the  sense  of  hearing

remains.100 In  Bonamaison’s  case,101 not only was the sense of touch 

retained, but the senses of hearing and smell were sharpened. Hallucinations and loud speaking of hallucinatory persons are also met with  in  lethargy.102   

As  a  rule  there  is  total  amnesia  for  the  lethargic interval. Loewenfeld’s 

case D. had a vague memory afterwards,103 and in Bonamaison’s case there

was  no  amnesia.  Lethargic  patients  do  not  prove  accessible  to  the  usual

stimuli for rousing them, but Loewenfeld succeeded, with his patient St., in

changing  the  lethargy  into  hypnosis  by  means  of  mesmeric  passes,  thus

establishing contact with the rest of her consciousness during the attack.104

Our patient proved at first absolutely inaccessible during lethargy; later she

started to speak spontaneously, was indistractible when her somnambulistic

ego was speaking, but distractible when the speaker was one of her automatic

personalities. In the latter case, it seems probable that the hypnotic effect of

the  automatisms  succeeded  in  achieving  a  partial  transformation  of  the

lethargy  into  hypnosis.  When  we  consider  Loewenfeld’s  view  that  the

lethargic  disposition  must  not  be  “identified  outright  with  the  peculiar

behaviour of the nervous apparatus in hysteria,” then the assumption that this

disposition was due to family heredity becomes fairly probable. The clinical

picture is much complicated by these attacks.

[126] So far we have seen that the patient’s ego-consciousness was identical 

in all states. We have discussed two secondary complexes of consciousness 

and followed them into the somnambulistic attack, where, owing to loss of 

motor expression, they appeared to the patient in the second séance as a 

vision of the two grandfathers. These complexes completely disappeared 

from view during the attacks that followed, but on the other hand they 

developed an all the more intense activity during the twilight state, in the 

form of visions. It seems that numerous secondary sequences of ideas must 

have split off quite early from the primary unconscious personality, for soon 

after the first two séances “spirits” appeared by the dozen. The names were 

inexhaustible in their variety, but the differences between the various 

personalities were exhausted very quickly, and it became apparent that they 

could all be classified under two types, the serio-religious and the gay-

hilarious. It was really only a question of two different subconscious 

personalities appearing under various names, which had however no essential 

significance.  The  older  type,  the  grandfather,  who  had  started  the 

automatisms off in the first place, was also the first to make use of the 

twilight state. I cannot remember any suggestion that might have given rise to 

the automatic speaking. According to our previous explanations, the attack 

can in these circumstances be thought of as a partial self- hypnosis. The ego-consciousness which remains over and, as a result of its isolation from the 

external world, occupies itself entirely with its hallucinations, is all that is left 

of the waking consciousness. Thus the automatism has a wide field for its 

activity. The autonomy of the individual centres, which we found to be 

present in the patient from the beginning, makes the act of automatic 

speaking more understandable. Dreamers, too, occasionally talk in their 

sleep, and people in the waking state sometimes  accompany  intense thought  

with  unconscious whispering.105 The  peculiar  movements  of  the  speech

muscles  are  worth  noting.  They  have  also  been  observed  in  other

somnambulists.106 These clumsy attempts can be directly paralleled by the

unintelligent and clumsy movements of the table or glass; in all probability

they correspond to the preliminary expression of the motor components of an

idea, or they correspond to an excitation limited to the motor centres and not

yet subordinated to a higher system. I do not know whether anything of the

sort occurs with people who talk in their dreams, but it has been observed in

hypnotized persons.107

[127] Since the convenient medium of speech was used as the means of 

communication, it made the study of the subconscious personalities 

considerably easier. Their intellectual range was relatively narrow. Their 

knowledge comprised all that the patient knew in her waking state, plus a few 

incidental details such as the birthdays of unknown persons who were dead, 

etc. The source of this information is rather obscure, since the patient did not 

know how she could have procured knowledge of these facts  in the ordinary 

way. They were cryptomnesias, but are too insignificant to deserve more 

detailed mention. The two subconscious personalities had a very meagre 

intelligence; they produced almost nothing but banalities. The interesting 

thing is their relation to the ego- consciousness of the patient in the 

somnambulistic state. They were well informed about everything that took 

place during the ecstasies and occasionally gave an exact report, like a 

running commentary.108 But they had only a very superficial knowledge of

the  patient’s  fantasies;  they  did  not  understand  them  and  were  unable  to

answer a single question on this subject correctly; their stereotyped reply was

“Ask  Ivenes.”  This  observation  reveals  a  dualism  in  the  nature  of  the

subconscious  personalities  which  is  rather  difficult  to  explain;  for  the

grandfather, who manifests himself through automatic speech, also appears to

Ivenes, and according to her own statement “knew all her thoughts.” How is

it that when the grandfather speaks through the mouth of the patient he knowsnothing about the very things he teaches Ivenes in the ecstasies?

[128]  Let  us  go  back  to  what  we  said  at  the  first  appearance  of  the

hallucinations [par. 98]. There we described the vision of the grandfathers as

an irruption of hypnosis into the visual sphere. That irruption did not lead to a

“normal”  hypnosis  but  to  “hystero-hypnosis”;  in  other  words,  the  simple

hypnosis was complicated by an hysterical attack.

[129] It is not a rare occurrence for normal hypnosis to be disturbed, or rather 

to be replaced, by the unexpected appearance of hysterical somnambulism; 

the hypnotist in many cases then loses rapport with the patient. In our case 

the automatism arising in the motor area plays the part of the hypnotist, and 

the suggestions emanating from it (objectively described as autosuggestions) 

hypnotize the neighbouring areas  which have grown susceptible. But the 

moment the hypnosis affects the  visual sphere the hysterical attack 

intervenes, and this, as we have  remarked, effects a very profound  change  

over  large  portions  of  the  psychic  area. We must picture the automatism 

as standing in the same relation to the attack as the hypnotist to a pathological 

hypnosis: it loses its influence on the subsequent development of the 

situation. The hallucinatory appearance of the hypnotic personality, or of the 

suggested idea, may be regarded as its last effect on  the  personality  of  the  

somnambulist. Thereafter the hypnotist becomes a mere figure with whom 

the somnambulistic personality engages autonomously; he can only just make 

out what is going on, but can no longer condition the content of the attack. 

The autonomous ego-complex—in this case Ivenes—now has the upper 

hand, and she groups her own mental products around the personality of her 

hypnotist, the grandfather, now diminished to a mere image. In this way we 

are able to understand the dualism in the nature of the grandfather. 

Grandfather I, who speaks directly to those present, is a totally different 

person and a mere spectator of his double, Grandfather II, who appears as 

Ivenes’ teacher. Grandfather I maintains energetically that both are one and 

the same person, that Grandfather I has all the knowledge which Grandfather 

II possesses and is only prevented from making it public because of language 

difficulties. (The patient herself was naturally not conscious of this split, but 

took both to be the same person.) On closer inspection, however, Grandfather 

I is not altogether wrong, and he can appeal to an observation which 

apparently confirms the identity of I and II, i.e., the fact that they are never 

both present together, When I is speaking automatically, II is not present, and 

Ivenes remarks on his absence. Similarly, during her ecstasies, when she is with II, she cannot say where I is, or she only learns on returning from her 

journeys that he has been guarding her body in the meantime. Conversely, the 

grandfather never speaks when he is going on a journey with Ivenes or when 

he gives her special  illumination.  This  behaviour is  certainly  remarkable,  

for if Grandfather I is the hypnotist and completely separate from the 

personality of Ivenes, there seems no reason why he should not speak 

objectively at  the  same  time  that his double  appears  in  the  ecstasy. 

Although this might have been supposed possible, as a matter of fact it was 

never observed. How is this dilemma to be resolved? Sure enough there is an 

identity of I and II, but it does not lie in the realm of the personality under 

discussion; it lies rather in the basis common to both, namely in the 

personality of the patient, which is in the deepest sense one and indivisible.

[130] Here we come upon the characteristic feature of all hysterical splits of

consciousness. They are disturbances that only touch the surface, and none of

them goes so deep as to attack the firmly knit basis of the ego- complex.

Somewhere, often in an extremely well-concealed place, we find the bridge

which  spans  the  apparently  impassable  abyss.  For  instance,  one  of  four

playing  cards  is  made  invisible  to  a  hypnotized  person  by  suggestion;

consequently he calls only the other three. A pencil is then put into his hand

and he is told to write down all the cards before him; he correctly adds the

fourth one.109 Again, a patient of Janet’s110 always saw, in the aura of his 

hysteroepileptic attacks, the vision of a conflagration. Whenever he saw an 

open fire he had an attack; indeed, the sight of a lighted match held before 

him was sufficient to induce one. The patient’s visual field was limited to 30° 

on the left side; the right eye was closed. The left eye was then focused on the 

centre of a perimeter while a lighted match  was  held at 80°.  An  

hysteroepileptic attack took  place immediately. Despite extensive amnesia in 

many cases of double consciousness, the patients do not behave in a way that 

corresponds to the degree of their ignorance, but as though some obscure 

instinct still guided their actions in accordance with their former knowledge. 

Neither this relatively mild amnesic split nor even the severe amnesia of the 

epileptic twilight state, formerly regarded as an irreparabile damnum, is 

sufficient to sever the innermost threads that bind the ego-complex of the 

twilight state to that of the normal state. In one case it was possible to 

articulate the content of the twilight state with the waking ego-complex.111

[131] If we apply these discoveries to our case, we arrive at the explanatory

hypothesis that, under the influence of appropriate suggestions, the layers ofthe unconscious which are beyond reach of the split try to represent the unity

of the automatic personality, but that this endeavour comes to grief on the

profounder  and  more  elementary  disturbance  caused  by  the  hysterical

attack.112 This prevents  a more complete synthesis by appending 

associations which are, as it were, the truest and most original property of the 

“supraconscious” personality. The dream of Ivenes, as it emerges into 

consciousness, is put into the mouths of the figures who happen to be in the 

field of vision, and henceforth it remains associated with these persons.

[Origin of the Unconscious Personalities]

[132] As we have seen, the various personalities are grouped round two 

types, the grandfather and Ulrich von Gerbenstein. The grandfather produces 

nothing but sanctimonious twaddle and edifying moral precepts. Ulrich von 

Gerbenstein is simply a silly schoolgirl, with nothing masculine about  him 

except  his name.  We must  here add,  from the anamnesis, that the patient 

was confirmed at the age of fifteen by a very pietistic clergyman, and that 

even at home she had to listen to moral sermons. The grandfather represents 

this side of her past, Gerbenstein the other half; hence the curious contrast. So 

here we have, personified, the chief characters of the past: here the 

compulsorily educated bigot, there the boisterousness of a lively girl of 

fifteen who often goes too far.113 The patient herself is a peculiar mixture of

both; sometimes timid, shy, excessively reserved, at other times boisterous to

the point of indecency. She is often painfully conscious of these contrasts.

This gives us the key to the origin of the two subconscious personalities. The

patient  is  obviously  seeking  a  middle  way  between  two  extremes;  she

endeavours to repress them and strives for a more ideal state. These strivings

lead to the adolescent dream of the ideal Ivenes, beside whom the unrefined

aspects of her character fade into the background. They are not lost; but as

repressed thoughts, analogous to the idea of Ivenes, they begin to lead an

independent existence as autonomous personalities.

[133]  This  behaviour  calls  to  mind  Freud’s  dream  investigations,  which

disclose  the  independent  growth  of  repressed  thoughts.114 We  can  now

understand why the hallucinatory persons are divorced from those who write

and speak automatically. They teach Ivenes the secrets of the Beyond, they

tell  her  all  those  fantastic  stories  about  the  extraordinariness  of  her

personality, they create situations in which she can appear dramatically with

the  attributes  of  their  power,  wisdom,  and  virtue.  They  are  nothing  but

dramatized split-offs from her dream-ego. The others, the automata, are theones to be overcome; they must have no part in Ivenes. The only thing they

have  in  common  with  her  spirit  companions  is  the  name.  It  is  not  to  be

expected in a case like this, where no clear-cut divisions exist, that two such

pregnant groups of characters, with all their idiosyncrasies, should disappear

entirely from a somnambulistic ego- complex so closely connected with the

waking  consciousness.  And  in  fact,  we  meet  them  again,  partly  in  those

ecstatic penitential scenes and partly in the romances that are crammed with

more or less banal, mischievous gossip. On the whole, however, a very much

milder form predominates.

Course of the Disorder

[134]  It  only  remains  now  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  course  of  this

singular ailment. The whole process reached its climax within four to eight

weeks,  and  the  descriptions  of  Ivenes  and  the  other  subconscious

personalities  refer  in  general  to  this  period.  Thereafter  a  gradual  decline

became  noticeable;  the  ecstasies  grew  more  and  more  vacuous  as

Gerbenstein’s influence increased. The phenomena lost their plasticity and

became  ever  shallower;  characters  which  at  first  were  well  differentiated

became by degrees inextricably mixed. The psychological yield grew more

and more meagre, until finally the whole story assumed the appearance of a

first-class fraud. Ivenes herself was severely hit by this decline; she became

painfully  uncertain,  spoke  cautiously,  as  if  feeling  her  way,  so  that  the

character of the patient came through in more and more undisguised form.

The somnambulistic attacks, too, decreased in frequency and intensity. One

could observe with one’s own eyes all the gradations from somnambulism to

conscious lying.

[135] Thus the curtain fell. The patient has since gone abroad. The fact that

her character has become pleasanter and more stable may have a significance

that  is  not  to  be  underestimated,  if  we  remember  those  cases  where  the

second state gradually came to replace the first. We may be dealing here with

a similar phenomenon.

[136]  It  is  well  known  that  somnambulistic  symptoms  are  particularly

common in puberty.115   The attacks of somnambulism in Dyce’s case116

began immediately before the onset of puberty and lasted just till its end. The

somnambulism  of  Hélène  Smith  is  likewise  closely  connected  with

puberty.117 Schroeder  van  der  Kolk’s  patient  was  16  at  the  time  of  her

illness; Felida X., 14½. We know also that the future character is formed and

fixed at this period. We saw in the cases of Felida X. and Mary Reynoldshow the character of the second state gradually replaced that of the first. It is,

therefore,  conceivable  that  the  phenomena  of  double  consciousness  are

simply  new  character  formations,  or  attempts  of  the  future  personality  to

break through, and that in consequence of special difficulties (unfavourable

circumstances, psychopathic disposition of the nervous system, etc.) they get

bound  up  with  peculiar  disturbances  of  consciousness.  In  view  of  the

difficulties that oppose the future character, the somnambulisms sometimes

have an eminently teleological significance, in that they give the individual,

who would otherwise inevitably succumb, the means of victory. Here I am

thinking especially of Joan of Arc, whose extraordinary courage reminds one

of the feats performed by Mary Reynolds in her second state. This is also,

perhaps,  the  place  to  point  out  the  like  significance  of  “teleological

hallucinations,”  of  which  occasional  cases  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the

public, although they have not yet been subjected to scientific study.

Heightened Unconscious Performance

[137] We have now discussed all the essential phenomena presented by our 

case which were significant for its inner structure. Certain accompanying 

phenomena have still to be briefly considered; these are the phenomena of 

heightened unconscious performance. In this field, we meet with a not 

altogether unjustifiable scepticism on the part of the scientific pundits. Even 

Dessoir’s conception of the second ego aroused considerable opposition and 

was rejected in many quarters as too enthusiastic. As we know, occultism has 

claimed a special right to this field and has drawn premature conclusions 

from dubious observations. We are still very far indeed from being able to 

say anything conclusive, for up to the present our material  is  nothing  like  

adequate.  If,  therefore,  we touch on  this question of heightened 

unconscious performance, we do so only to do justice to all sides of our case.

[138]  By heightened unconscious performance we mean that peculiar 

automatic process whose results are not available for the conscious psychic 

activity of the individual. Under this category comes, first of all, thought-

reading by means of table movements. I do not know whether there are 

people who can guess an entire long train of thought by means of inductive 

inferences from the “intended tremors.” At any rate it  is certain that, granting 

this to be possible, such persons must be making use of a routine acquired by 

endless practice. But in our case routine can be ruled out at once, and there is 

no choice but to assume for the present a receptivity of the unconscious far 

exceeding that of the conscious mind. This  assumption is supported by numerous observations on somnambulists. Here I will mention only Binet’s 

experiments, where little letters or other small objects, or complicated little 

figures in relief, were laid on the anaesthesic skin of the back of the hand or 

the neck, and the unconscious perceptions were registered by means of signs. 

On the basis of these experiments he comes to the following conclusion: 

“According to the calculations that I have been able to make, the unconscious 

sensibility of an hysterical patient is at certain moments fifty times more 

acute than that of a normal person.”118 Another  example  of  heightened

performance that applies to our case and to numerous other somnambulists is

the process known as cryptomnesia.119 By this is meant the coming into

consciousness of a memory-image which is not recognized as such in the first

instance, but only secondarily, if at all, by means of subsequent recollection

or  abstract  reasoning.  It  is  characteristic  of  cryptomnesia  that  the  image

which comes up does not bear the distinctive marks of the memory-image—

that  is  to  say,  it  is  not  connected  with  the  supraliminal  ego-complex  in

question.

[139] There are three different ways in which the cryptomnesic image may be

brought into consciousness:

The image enters consciousness without the mediation of the senses, 

intrapsychically. It is a sudden idea or hunch, whose causal nexus is hidden 

from the person concerned. To this extent cryptomnesia is an everyday 

occurrence and is intimately bound up with normal psychic processes. But 

how often it misleads the scientist, author, or composer into believing that his 

ideas are original, and then along comes the critic and points out the source! 

Generally the individual formulation of the idea protects the author from the 

charge of plagiarism and proves his good faith, though there are cases where 

the reproduction occurs unconsciously, almost word for word. Should the 

passage contain a remarkable idea, then the suspicion of more or less 

conscious plagiarism is justified. After all, an important idea is linked by  

numerous associations to the ego-complex; it has been thought about at 

different times and in different situations and therefore has innumerable 

connecting threads leading in all directions. Consequently it can never 

disappear so entirely from consciousness that its continuity is lost to the 

sphere of conscious memory. We have, however, a criterion by which we can 

always recognize intrapsychic cryptomnesia objectively: the cryptomnesic 

idea is linked to the ego-complex by the minimum of associations. The 

reason for this lies in the relation of the individual to the object concerned, in the want of proportion between interest and object.

Two possibilities are conceivable: (a) The object is worthy of interest, but the

interest is slight owing to distractibility or lack of understanding. (b) The

object is not worthy of interest, consequently the interest is slight. In both

cases there is an extremely labile connection with consciousness, the result

being that the object is quickly forgotten. This flimsy bridge soon breaks

down and the idea sinks into the unconscious, where it is no longer accessible

to  the  conscious  mind.  Should  it  now  re-enter  consciousness  by  way  of

cryptomnesia, the feeling of strangeness, of its being an original creation, will

cling to it, because the path by which it entered the subconscious can no

longer  be  discovered.  Strangeness  and  original  creation  are,  moreover,

closely  allied  to  one  another,  if  we  remember  the  numerous  witnesses  in

belles-lettres to the “possessed” nature of genius.120 Apart from a number of

striking instances of this kind, where it is doubtful whether it is cryptomnesia

or an original creation, there are others where a passage of no essential value

has been reproduced cryptomnesically, and in almost the same words, as in

the following example:

[140] Nietzsche, Thus Spake Zarathustra121

Kerner, Blätter aus Prevorst122

Now  about  the  time  that  Zarathustra  sojourned  on  the  Happy  Isles,  it

happened that a ship anchored at the isle on which the smoking mountain

stands, and the crew went ashore to shoot rabbits. About the noontide hour,

however, when the captain and his men were together again, they suddenly

saw a man coming towards them through the air, and a voice said distinctly:

“It is time! It is highest time!” But when the figure drew close to them, flying

past quickly like a shadow in the direction of the volcano, they recognized

with  the  greatest  dismaythat  it  was  Zarathustra.…  “Behold,”  said  the  old

helmsman, “Zarathustra goes down to hell!”

The four captains and a merchant, Mr. Bell, went ashore on the island of

Mount Stromboli to shoot rabbits. At three o’clock they mustered the crew to

go aboard, when, to their inexpressible astonishment, they saw two men

flying rapidly towards them through the air. One was dressed in black, the

other in grey. They came past them very closely, in the greatest haste, and to

their utmost dismay descended amid the burning flames into the crater of the

terrible volcano, Mount Stromboli. They recognized the pair as acquaintances

from London.

[141] Nietzsche’s sister, Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche, told me, in reply to myenquiry, that Nietzsche had taken a lively interest in Kerner when staying

with his grandfather, Pastor Oehler, in Pobler, between the ages of 12 and 15,

but certainly not later. It could scarcely have been Nietzsche’s intention to

commit a plagiarism from a ship’s log; had this been the case he would surely

have  omitted  that  extremely  prosaic  and  totally  irrelevant  passage  about

shooting rabbits. Obviously, when painting the picture of

Zarathustra’s descent into hell, that forgotten impression from his youth must

have slipped half or wholly unconsciously into his mind.

[142] This example shows all the peculiarities of cryptomnesia: a quite 

unimportant detail which only deserves to be forgotten as quickly as possible 

is suddenly reproduced with almost literal  fidelity,  while  the main point of 

the story is, one cannot say modified, but re-created in an individual manner. 

Around the individual core—the idea of the journey to hell–there are 

deposited, as picturesque details, those old, forgotten impressions of a similar 

situation. The story itself is so absurd that the young Nietzsche, a voracious 

reader, probably skimmed through it without evincing any very profound 

interest in the matter. Here, then, is the required minimum of associative 

connections, for we can hardly conceive of a greater jump than from that 

stupid old tale to Nietzsche’s consciousness in the year 1883. If we realize 

Nietzsche’s state of mind123 at the time when he wrote Zarathustra, and the

poetic ecstasy that at more than one point verges on the pathological, this

abnormal reminiscence will appear more understandable.

[143] The other of the two possibilities mentioned above, namely, registering

some object, not in itself uninteresting, in a state of distractibility or partial

interest due to lack of understanding, and its cryptomnesic reproduction, is

found mainly in somnambulists, and also— as curiosities of literature—in

people at the point of death.124 Out of the rich choice  of  these phenomena  

we  are chiefly  concerned  here with speaking in foreign tongues, the 

symptom of glossolalia. This phenomenon is mentioned in practically all 

cases of ecstasy; it is found in the New Testament, in the Acta Sanctorum,125

in the witch trials, and in recent times in the story of the Clairvoyante of

Prevorst, in Judge Edmond’s daughter Laura, in Flournoy’s Hélène Smith,

who was thoroughly investigated on this question too, and also in Bresler’s

case,126 which was probably identical with that of Blumhardt’s  Gottliebin 

Dittus.127 As  Flournoy  has  shown,  glossolalia,  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  really

independent  language,  is  a  cryptomnesic  phenomenon  par  excellence.  I

would refer the reader to Flournoy’s exceedingly interesting study of thissubject.128

[144]  In  our  case  glossolalia  was  observed  only  once,  and  then  the  only

intelligible  words  were  the  interspersed  variations  of  the  word  vena.  The

origin of this word is clear: a few days previously the patient had dipped into

an anatomical atlas and immersed herself in a study of the veins of the face,

which were given in Latin, and she used the word vena in her dreams, just as

a normal person might do. The remaining words and sentences in foreign

language  reveal  at  a  glance  their  derivation  from  the  patient’s  slight

knowledge of French. Unfortunately I did not get exact translations of the

various sentences, because the patient refused to give them to me; but we can

take it that it was the same sort of thing as Hélène Smith’s Martian language.

Flournoy  shows  that  this  Martian  language  was  nothing  but  a  childish

translation from the French; only the words were altered, the syntax remained

the same. A more probable explanation is that our patient simply strung a lot

of meaningless foreign-sounding words together, and, instead of forming any

true  words,129 borrowed  certain  characteristic  sounds  from  French  and

Italian and combined them into a sort of language, just as Hélène Smith filled

in the gaps between the real Sanskrit words with pseudo-linguistic products

of her own. The curious names of the mystical system can mostly be traced

back to known roots. Even the circles remind one of the planetary orbits

found in every school atlas; the inner parallel with the relation of the planets

to the sun is also pretty clear, so we shall not go far wrong if we see the

names  as  reminiscences  of  popular  astronomy.  In  this  way  the  names

“Persus,” “Fenus,” “Nenus,” “Sirum,” “Surus,” “Fixus,” and “Pix” can be

explained as childish distortions of “Perseus,” “Venus,” “Sirius,” and “fixed

star,”  analogous  to  the  vena  variations.  “Magnesor”  is  reminiscent  of

“magnetism,”  whose  mystical  significance  the  patient  knew  from  the

Clairvoyante of Prevorst story. “Connesor” being contrary to “Magnesor,”

the first syllable “Con-” suggests French “contre.” “Hypos” and “Hyfonism”

remind one of “hypnosis” and “hypnotism,” about which the weirdest ideas

still circulate amongst laymen. The frequent endings in “-us” and “-os” are

the signs by which most people distinguish between Latin and Greek. The

other  names  derive  from  similar  accidents  to  which  we  lack  the  clues.

Naturally the modest glossolalia of our case cannot claim to be a classic

example  of  cryptomnesia,  for  it  consists  only  in  the  unconscious  use  of

different impressions, some optical, some acoustic, and all very obvious.

[145] (2) The cryptomnesic image enters consciousness through mediation ofthe senses, as an hallucination. Hélène Smith is the classic example of this.

See the case cited above, concerning the number 18 [par. 98].

[146] (3) The image enters consciousness by motor automatism. Hélène 

Smith had lost a very valuable brooch which she was anxiously looking for 

everywhere. Ten days later her guide Leopold told her by table movements 

where it was. From the information received, she found it one night  in an 

open field, covered by sand.130 Strictly speaking, in cryptomnesia there is no

heightened performance in the true sense of the term, since the conscious

memory experiences no intensification of function but only an enrichment of

content. Through the automatism certain areas which were previously closed

to  consciousness  are  made  accessible  to  it  in  an  indirect  way,  but  the

unconscious itself is not performing any function that exceeds the capacities

of the conscious mind either qualitatively or quantitatively. Cryptomnesia is

therefore only an apparent instance of heightened performance, in contrast to

hypermnesia, where there is an actual increase of function.131

[147] We spoke earlier of the unconscious having a receptivity superior to

that of the conscious mind, chiefly in regard to simple thought- transference

experiments with numbers. As already mentioned, not only our somnambulist

but a fairly large number of normal people are able to guess, from tremor

movements,  quite  long  trains  of  thought,  provided  they  are  not  too

complicated. These experiments are, so to speak, the prototype of those rarer

and incomparably more astonishing cases of intuitive knowledge displayed at

times  by  somnambulists.182 Zschokke  has  shown  from  his  own  self-

analysis133  that  such  phenomena  occur  in  connection  not  only  with

somnambulism but with non-somnambulists as well.

[148] This knowledge seems to be formed in several different ways. The first

thing  to  be  considered,  as  we  have  said,  is  the  delicacy  of  unconscious

perceptions; secondly, we must emphasize the importance of what proves to

be the enormous suggestibility of somnambulists. The somnambulist not only

incorporates every suggestive idea into himself, he actually lives himself into

the  suggestion,  into  the  person  of  the  doctor  or  observer,  with  the  utter

abandon  characteristic  of  suggestible  hysterics.  Frau  Hauffe’s  relation  to

Kerner is an excellent example of this. So it not surprising that there is in

these cases a high degree of concord of associations, a fact which Richet, for

instance, might have taken more account of in his experiments on thought-

transference.  Finally,  there  are  cases  of  somnambulistic  heightened

performance  which  cannot  be  explained  solely  by  the  hyperaestheticunconscious activity of the senses, or by the concord of associations, but

which postulate a highly developed intellectual activity of the unconscious.

To  decipher  the  intended  tremor  movements  requires  an  extraordinary

delicacy  of  feeling,  both  sensitive  and  sensory,  in  order  to  combine  the

individual perceptions into a self- contained unit of thought—if indeed it is

permissible at all to make an analogy between the cognitive processes in the

unconscious and those of the conscious. The possibility must always be borne

in mind that, in the unconscious, feelings and concepts are not so clearly

separated,  and  may  even  be  one.  The  intellectual  exaltation  which  many

somnambulists display during ecstasy, though rather uncommon, is a well-

observed fact,134 and I am inclined to regard the mystical system devised by

our patient as just such an example of heightened unconscious performance

that transcends her normal intelligence. We have already seen where part of

that  system  probably  comes  from.  Another  source  may  be  Frau  Hauffe’s

“life-circles,” depicted in Kerner’s book. At any rate its outward form seems

to be determined by these factors. As we have already noted, the idea of

dualism  derives  from  those  fragments  of  conversation  overheard  by  the

patient in the dreamy state following her ecstasies.

                              [4. CONCLUSION]

[149] This exhausts my knowledge of the sources used by the patient.

Where the root idea came from she was unable to say. Naturally I waded

through  the  occult  literature  so  far  as  it  pertained  to  this  subject,  and

discovered  a  wealth  of  parallels  with  our  gnostic  system,  dating  from

different centuries, but scattered about in all kinds of works, most of them

quite  inaccessible  to  the  patient.  Moreover,  at  her  tender  age,  and  in  her

surroundings, the possibility of any such study must be ruled out of account.

A brief survey of the system in the light of the patient’s own explanations

will show how much intelligence was expended on its construction. How

high the intellectual achievement is to be rated must remain a matter of taste.

At all events, considering the youth and mentality of the patient, it must be

regarded as something quite out of the ordinary.

[150]  In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  express  my  warmest  thanks  to  my

revered teacher, Professor Bleuler, for his friendly encouragement and the

loan of books, and to my friend Dr. Ludwig von Muralt for his kindness in

handing  over  to  me  the  first  case  mentioned  in  this  book  (case  of  Miss

E.).135                                                              1
ON HYSTERICAL MISREADING

[151] In his review of my paper “On the Psychology and Pathology of So-

called  Occult  Phenomena,”2 Mr.  Hahn  misrepresented  my  views  on

“hysterical  misreading.”  Since  I  regard  this  phenomenon  as  being  of

fundamental importance, perhaps I may be allowed to state my views once

again.

[152] My patient misread with remarkable frequency at school, and always in 

a quite definite way: each time she substituted the Swiss dialect word for the 

word in question, so instead of saying “Treppe” (stair) she said “Stege,” and 

instead  of “Ziege” (goat) she said  “Geiss,” and  so on.3  These  expressions

are absolutely synonymous. Hence, if the word “Stege” is produced, it proves

that  the  meaning  of  the  word  “Treppe”  was  understood.  There  are  two

possible ways of explaining this phenomenon:

[153] (1) The word “Treppe” is understood correctly and consciously. In this 

case there is absolutely no reason for a healthy person to reproduce the word 

incorrectly, i.e., as a dialect word. But with  my  patient  the dialect word 

somehow crept in.

[154] (2) The word “Treppe” is not understood correctly. In this case any 

normal person will reproduce nonsense that either sounds like or looks like 

the word, but he will never reproduce an expression that sounds and looks 

different but is synonymous. I have made numerous reading-tests with  

patients suffering from paralysis, mania, alcoholism, senile dementia, etc., 

who are distractible and unable to concentrate, and on the basis of hundreds 

of these experiences I can confidently assert that this kind of misreading does 

not occur in individuals who are not hysterical. Every misreading that occurs 

in a state of distractibility is based on a phonetic or a textual likeness; with 

normal persons it is usually caused by momentary  constellations.  I  have  

found  this  rule  amply  confirmed  by association tests conducted under 

conditions of distraction.

[155] If, therefore, my patient reproduces dialect words instead of the literary

ones without noticing this frequently repeated mistake, she has in the first

place a defective acoustic control of what she is saying; and, in the second

place,  the  synonym  shows  that  the  meaning  of  the  optic  impression  was

understood correctly. But it is reproduced incorrectly. Where does the cause

of the mistake lie? In my paper I left this question open, contenting myself

with the general remark that it was an “automatic” phenomenon which I was

not able to localize at the time.[156] The most probable explanation is as follows: We know from everyday

experience  that  the  ordinary  kind  of  misreading  disturbs  the  sense  by

substituting for the right word a word akin to it in sound or form. Slips of the

tongue in uttering a correctly understood word follow the same rule, and

when, as often happens, a Swiss finds himself uttering a dialect word, he very

rarely does so when reading out loud, and the words that are confused with

one another are mostly those with a strong phonetic affinity. This cannot be

said of the example I have deliberately chosen: “Ziege—Geiss.” In order to

explain  their  confusion,  we  have  to  assume  an  additional  factor.  This

additional factor is the patient’s hysterical disposition.

[157]  Our  dreamy,  somewhat  drowsy  patient  reads  mechanically;  her

comprehension  of  the  meaning  is  therefore  practically  nil.  While  her

conscious  mind  is  occupied  with  something  quite  different,  the  psychic

processes set in motion by her reading remain feeble and indistinct. In normal

and  sick  persons  who  are  distractible  but  not  hysterical,  these  feebly

accentuated  psychic  processes  give  rise  to  misconstructions  based  on  a

phonetic or formal likeness, so that reproduction is falsified at the cost of

sense. It is the other way round with my patient: the formal connection breaks

down completely but the sense connection is preserved. This can only be

explained on the hypothesis of a split consciousness; that is to say, besides

the ego-complex, which follows its own thoughts, there is another conscious

complex  which  reads  and  understands  correctly,  and  allows  itself  various

modifications of expression, as indeed is frequently the case with complexes

that function automatically. Hysterical misreading differs from all other types

in that, despite the misreading, the sense is preserved during reproduction.

[158]  If  Mr.  Hahn  fails  to  understand  this  well-known  automatization  of

psychic functions in the psychopathology of hysteria, I can only recommend

him to a study of the literature and to a little practical observation on his own

account. Literature and reality abound in analogous phenomena.

[159] The reason why I attach particular importance to hysterical misreading

is that it demonstrates in a nutshell the splitting off of psychic functions from

the ego-complex, which is such a characteristic of hysteria, and consequently

the strong tendency of the psychic elements towards autonomy.

[160]  In  my  paper,  I  cited  by  way  of  analogy  the  observations  made  by

Binet,4 who, having anaesthetized the subject’s hand by hypnosis (split it off

from the ego-complex), pricked it with a needle under the cover of a screen,

whereupon the subject suddenly thought of a row of dots (corresponding tothe number of pricks). Or Binet would move the subject’s fingers, and she at

once thought of “sticks” or “columns”; or the anaesthetic hand was induced

to write the name “Salpêtrière,” and the subject suddenly saw “Salpêtrière”

before her, in white writing on a black ground.

[161] Mr. Hahn is of the opinion that these observations have to do with

“something essentially different” from misreading. What is this something?

Mr. Hahn does not say.

[162] Binet’s experiments make it clear that the conscious complex which is

split off from the ego-complex, and upon which the anaesthesia of the arm

depends, perceives things correctly but reproduces them in modified form.

[163] The ego-complex of my patient is displaced from the act of reading by

other ideas, but the act continues automatically and forms a little conscious

complex on its own, which likewise understands correctly but reproduces in

modified form.

[164]  The  type  of  process  is  therefore  the  same,  for  which  reason  my

reference to Binet’s experiments is fully justified. It is a type that repeats

itself over the whole field of hysteria; for instance, the systematic “irrelevant

answers” of hysterical subjects, which have only recently been publicized,

would also come into this category.

[165] For the rest, I would like to point out that the main emphasis of my 

paper falls on the fullest possible registration and analysis of the manifold 

psychological phenomena which are all intimately connected with the 

development of character at this time of life. The analysis of the clinical 

picture is not, as Mr. Hahn thinks, based on French writers, but on Freud’s 

investigations of hysteria. Mr. Hahn would like to see the analysis “carried 

further and pursued more rigorously.” I would be very much obliged to Mr. 

Hahn if, together with his criticism, he  would specify new ways of 

investigating this very difficult field.                                          II

                              CRYPTOMNESIA

[166] Modern scientific psychology distinguishes between direct and indirect

memory. You have a direct memory when, for instance, you see a certain

house and it then “comes into your mind” that a friend of yours lived there

some years ago. You see the well-known house, and by the law of association

the coexistent memory-image of your friend enters your consciousness. An

indirect memory is different: I walk, deep in thought, past the house where

my friend X used to live. I pay no attention either to the house or to the street,

but am thinking of some urgent business matter I have to attend to. Suddenly

an unexpected image thrusts itself obtrusively between my thoughts: I see a

scene in which X once discussed similar matters with me many years ago. I

am  surprised  that  this  particular  memory  should  come  up,  for  the

conversation was of no importance. Suddenly I realize that I am in the street

where my friend once lived. In this case the association of the memory-image

with the house is indirect: I did not perceive the house consciously, for my

thoughts distracted me from my surroundings too much. But the perception

of the house nevertheless slipped into the dark background of consciousness2

and  activated  the  association  with  X.  As  this  association  was  too  feebly

accentuated to cross the threshold of consciousness, a common association

had to intervene as an auxiliary. This mediating association is the memory-

image of the conversation that touched on matters similar to those now being

revolved in my consciousness. In this way, the memory-image of X enters the

sphere of consciousness.

[167] The direct  and  the indirect  memory-image  have one  quality  in 

common: the quality of being known. I recognize the association as an image 

I remember, and therefore know that it is not a new formation. The images  

we  combine  anew  lack  this  quality  of  being  known.  I  say “combine,” 

because originality lies only in the combination of psychic elements and not 

in the material, as everything in nature eloquently testifies. If a new 

combination has the quality of being known it is something abnormal: a 

deception of memory. The million acts of recollection daily taking place in 

our brain consist for the most part of direct memories, but a considerable 

number of them will fall on the side of indirect memory. These last are 

especially interesting. As our example of indirect memory shows, an 

unconscious perception that enters the brain passively can spontaneously activate a related association and in this way reach consciousness. The 

unconscious perception therefore does what our consciousness ordinarily 

does when we look at the house and ask ourselves “Who lived there?” in 

order to evoke a clear memory. We thus call back the image of X into our 

minds. The unconscious perception behaves in exactly the same way; it seeks 

out the memory-image related to it, and in our example (by a psychological 

law which I do not propose to go into here) it combines with something that 

is being gently activated from the other side, namely the image of X talking 

of similar business matters. We see from this that association can take place 

without the least assistance from consciousness.

[168] From the way it entered my consciousness as an indirect memory, the

image  of  X  would  commonly  be  described  as  a  “chance  idea,”  and  the

German  word  Einfall  clearly  expresses  the  apparently  fortuitous  and

groundless nature of the phenomenon. This kind of indirect memory is very

common among people who think intuitively rather than in logical sequence–

so common that we often forget how strictly determined all psychic processes

are.  To  take  a  simple  example:  I  am  working  away  at  some  casual  task,

whistling a tune, some popular song whose words I don’t even remember at

the moment. Somebody asks me what tune it is. I cast round in my memory:

it is the student song “Not a cent, not a cent, and my clothes are only lent!” I

have no idea how I came to pick on this particular song, which has nothing

whatever to do with the associations now engaging my conscious mind. I go

back  along  the  train  of  thought  I  followed  while  working.  All  at  once  I

remember that a few minutes ago I had been thinking, with a certain amount

of feeling-tone, of a grand settlement of accounts in the New Year. Hence the

song! I need hardly add that one can carry out some very pretty psychological

diagnoses on one’s fellows in this way. For instance, when a friend of mine

was imprudent enough to whistle three little melodies within a space of ten

minutes, I could tell him to his face how sorry I was to hear that his love

affair had ended unhappily. The melodies were “Im Aargau sind zwei Liebei”

(“In Aargau are two lovers,”—a Swiss folksong), “Verlassen, verlassen bin i”

(“Forlorn, forlorn am I”), and “Steh ich in finstrer Mitternacht” (“I stand in

midnight’s gloom”). It even happened that on one occasion I whistled a tune

whose text I did not know. On making inquiries I discovered a text that was

undoubtedly associated with a strongly feeling-toned2a train of thought I had

pursued five minutes before.

[169]  These  examples,  which  one  can  observe  every  day  in  oneself  andothers, clearly show that a (feeling-toned) train of thought can disappear from

the conscious mind without therefore ceasing to exist. On the contrary, it still

has  sufficient  energy  to  send  up,  in  the  midst  of  the  conscious  world  of

associations that have completely changed in the meantime, an idea that bears

no relation to its momentary surroundings.

[170] Still more drastic examples are provided by hysteria, which is nothing

other than a caricature of normal psychological mechanisms. Recently I had

to treat a hysterical young lady who became ill chiefly because she had been

brutally beaten by her father. Once, when we were out for a walk, this lady

dropped her cloak in the dust. I picked it up, and tried to get the dust off by

beating it with my stick. The next moment the lady hurled herself upon me

with violent defensive gestures and tore the cloak out of my hands. She said

she couldn’t stand the sight, it was quite unendurable to her. I at once guessed

the connection and urged her to tell me the motives for her behaviour. She

was nonplussed, and could only say that it was extremely unpleasant for her

to see her cloak cleaned like that. These symptomatic actions, as Sigmund

Freud  calls  them,  are  very  common  among  hysterics.  The  explanation  is

simple.  A  feeling-toned  memory  complex,  though  not  present  in

consciousness at the moment, motivates certain actions from its invisible seat

in the unconscious just as if it were present in the conscious mind.

[171]  We  can  confidently  say  that  our  consciousness  fairly  swarms  with

strange intruders of this kind, which would be hard put to it to establish their

identity. Every day thousands of associations enter the luminous circle of

consciousness,  and  we  would  question  them  in  vain  for  a  more  specific

account of their origins. We must always bear in mind that conscious psychic

phenomena are only a very small part of our total psyche. By far the greater

part of the psychic elements in us is unconscious.

[172] Our consciousness therefore finds itself in a rather precarious position 

with regard to automatic movements of the unconscious that are independent 

of our will. The unconscious can perceive, and can associate autonomously; 

and the trouble is that only those associations which have once passed 

through our conscious minds have the quality of being known, and many of 

them can fall into oblivion so completely that they lose any such quality. Our 

unconscious must therefore harbour an immense number of psychic 

complexes which would astonish us by their strangeness. The inhibitions 

imposed by our waking consciousness do something to protect us from 

invasions of this kind. But in dreams, when the inhibitions of the conscious mind are lifted, the unconscious can play the maddest games. Anyone who 

has read Freud’s dream analyses or, better still, has done some himself, will 

know how the unconscious can bedevil the most innocent and decent-minded 

people with sexual symbols whose lewdness is positively horrifying. It is to 

this unconscious that all those who do creative work must turn. All new ideas 

and combinations of ideas are premeditated by the unconscious. And when 

our own consciousness approaches the unconscious with a wish, it was the 

unconscious that gave it this wish. The unconscious brings the wish and its  

fulfilment.

[173] On this treacherous ground wander all who seek new combinations of

ideas. Woe to them if they do not continually exercise the most rigorous self-

criticism!

[174] Since, in the airy world of thought, one usually finds what one seeks,

and gets what one wishes, the man who seeks new ideas will also be the most 

easily enchanted with the deceptive gifts of the psyche. Not only is the 

history of religion or the psychology of the masses rich in examples, but so is 

the intellectual life of anyone who has ever hoped to achieve anything. What 

poet or composer has not been so beguiled by certain of his ideas as to 

believe in their novelty? We believe what we wish to believe. Even  the  

greatest and  most  original genius  is  not free from human wishes and their 

all-too-human consequences.

[175] Quite apart from this general proposition, what kind of people seek

these  new  combinations?  They  are  the  men  of  thought,  who  have  finely-

differentiated  brains  coupled  with  the  sensitivity  of  a  woman  and  the

emotionality of a child. They are the slenderest, most delicate branches on the

great  tree  of  humanity:  they  bear  the  flower  and  the  fruit.  Many  become

brittle too soon, many break off. Differentiation creates in its progress the fit

as  well  as  the  unfit;  wits  are  mingled  with  nitwits—there  are  fools  with

genius  and  geniuses  with  follies,  as  Lombroso  has  remarked.  One  of  the

commonest and most usual marks of degeneracy is hysteria, the lack of self-

control  and  self-criticism.  Without  succumbing  to  the  pseudo-psychiatric

witch-hunting of an author like Nordau,3 who sees fools everywhere, we can

assert  with  confidence  that  unless  the  hysterical  mentality  is  present  to  a

greater or lesser degree genius is not possible. As Schopenhauer rightly says,

the characteristic of the genius is great sensibility, something of the mimosa-

like quality of the hysteric. Geniuses also have other qualities in common

with hysterical persons.[176] It may be that the majority of hysterical persons are ill because they

possess a mass of memories, highly charged with affect and therefore deeply

rooted in the unconscious, which cannot be controlled and which tyrannize

the  conscious  mind  and  will  of  the  patient.  With  women  it  is  sometimes

disappointed hopes of love, sometimes an unhappy marriage; with men, a bad

position in life or unrewarded merits. They try to repress the affect from their

daily  lives,  and  so  it  torments  them  with  horrid  dream-symbols  at  night,

plagues them with fits of precordial anxiety by day, saps their energy, drives

them into all kinds of crazy sects, and causes headaches that defy all the

medicine-men and all the magic remedies of electricity, sun-baths, and food

cures. The genius, too, has to bear the brunt of an outsize psychic complex; if

he  can  cope  with  it,  he  does  so  with  joy,  if  he  can’t,  he  must  painfully

perform the “symptomatic actions” which his gift lays upon him: he writes,

paints, or composes what he suffers.

[177] This applies more or less to all productive individuals. Tapping the

depths of the psyche, the instinctively functioning complex sends up from its

unknown  and  inexhaustible  treasury  countless  thoughts  to  its  slave

“consciousness,” some old and some new, and consciousness must deal with

them as best it can. It must ask each thought: Do I know you, or are you new?

But when the daemon drives, consciousness has no time to finish its sorting

work,  the  flood  pours  into  the  pen—and  the  next  day  is  perhaps  already

printed.

[178]  I  said  earlier  that  only  the  combinations  are  new,  not  the  material,

which  hardly  alters  at  all,  or  only  very  slowly  and  almost  imperceptibly.

Have we not seen all Böcklin’s hues already in the old masters? And were

not the fingers, arms, legs, noses and throats of Michelangelo’s statues all

somehow prefigured in antiquity? The smallest parts of a master work are

certainly always old, even the next largest, the combined units, are mostly

taken over from somewhere else; and in the last resort a master will not scorn

to incorporate whole chunks of the past in a new work. Our psyche is not so

fabulously rich that it can build from scratch each time. Neither does nature.

One  can  see  from  our  prisons,  hospitals,  and  lunatic  asylums  at  what

enormous cost nature takes a little step forward; she builds laboriously on

what has gone before.

[179] This process in the world at large is repeated in the smaller world of

language: few novel combinations, nearly all of it old fragments taken over

from somewhere. We speak the words and sentences learnt from parents,teachers, books; anyone who talks fastidiously, whether because he has a gift

for language or because he takes pleasure in it, talks “like a book”—the book

he has just been reading; he repeats rather larger fragments than do other

people. The ordinary decent person either does not talk that way or openly

admits where he got it from. But if somebody reproduces a sentence eight

lines long verbatim from somebody else, we cannot, it is true, peremptorily

shut  the  mouths  of  those  who  cry  “Plagiarism!”—for  as  a  matter  of  fact

plagiarisms do occur—but neither need we immediately drop the person to

whom  this  misfortune  happens.  For,  when  nature  instituted  the  faculty  of

remembrance, she did not tie herself exclusively to the possibility of direct

and indirect memories; she also gave, to clever and foolish alike, the power

of cryptomnesia.

[180]  The  word  “cryptomnesia”  is  a  technical  term  taken  from  French

scientific literature. The Swiss psychologist Flournoy has made particularly

valuable  contributions,  based  on  case  material,  to  our  knowledge  of  this

phenomenon.4 Cryptomnesia means something like “hidden memory.” What

this means in practice is best shown by a concrete example.5 When, some

years ago, I read about Zarathustra’s journey to hell, I was particularly struck

by the passage where Nietzsche describes how Zarathustra descends into hell

through  the  mouth  of  a  volcano.  It  seemed  to  me  that  I  had  read  this

description somewhere before. I thought at first that it must be a falsification

of memory on my part (abnormal quality of being known), but finally the

most startling aspect of this quality settled on the passage where the crew of

the  ship  went  ashore  “to  shoot  rabbits.”  This  passage  preoccupied  my

thoughts for several days, till at last I remembered having read a similar story

some  years  earlier  in  Justinus  Kerner.  I  leafed  through  his  Blätter  aus

Prevorst, that antiquated collection of simple-minded Swabian ghost stories,

and found the following tale, which I put side by side with the corresponding

passage from Nietzsche:

[181] 6
      Nietzsche, Thus Spake Zarathustra

Kerner, Blätter aus Prevorst7

Now  about  the  time  that  Zarathustra  sojourned  on  the  Happy  Isles,  it

happened that a ship anchored at the isle on which the smoking mountain

stands, and the crew went ashore to shoot rabbits. About the noontide hour,

however, when the captain and his men were together again, they suddenly

saw a man coming towards them through the air, and a voice said distinctly:

“It is time! It is highest time!” But when the figure drew close to them, flyingpast quickly like a shadow in the direction of the volcano, they recognized

with the greatest dismay that it was Zarathustra.… “Behold,” said the old

helmsman, “Zarathustra goes down to hell!”

The four captains and a merchant, Mr. Bell, went ashore on the island of

Mount Stromboli to shoot rabbits. At three o’clock they mustered the crew to

go  aboard,  when,  to  their  inexpressible  astonishment,  they  saw  two  men

flying rapidly towards them through the air. One was dressed in black, the

other in grey. They came past them very closely, in the utmost haste, and to

their greatest dismay descended amid the burning flames into the crater of the

terrible volcano, Mount Stromboli. They recognized the pair as acquaintances

from London.

[Nietzsche introduces this story with the words: “They say … that through

the volcano itself the narrow path leads down to the gate of the underworld.”]

[Kerner goes on to say that when the travellers returned to London, they

learnt that two acquaintances had died in the meantime, the very ones whom

they saw on Stromboli. From this story it was concluded that Stromboli was

the entrance to hell.]

[182] One can see at once that the similarity between the two stories cannot

be mere chance. The main argument in its disfavour is the number of verbal

correspondences and the reproduction of unimportant details like “to shoot

rabbits.” A plagiarism, therefore! Everyone will find this supposition absurd.

Why?  Because  the  passage  is  too  unimportant  in  relation  to  Nietzsche’s

artistic  intention.  And  not  only  unimportant,  but  largely  superfluous  and

unnecessary.  The  rabbits,  for  instance,  characterize  nothing  in  particular,

whether we imagine the “Happy Isles” as the Lipari Islands or the Canary

Islands. Nor is the description made any more felicitous by the rabbits—on

the  contrary.  The  thing  is  not  easy  to  explain  psychologically.  The  first

question is, when did Nietzsche read the Blätter aus Prevorst? As I learnt

from a letter which Frau Förster- Nietzsche wrote me, Nietzsche took a lively

interest in Justinus Kerner when staying with his grandfather, Pastor Oehler,

in Pobler, between the ages of 12 and 15, but probably not later. As Nietzsche

had to be very economical in his reading because of his weak eyes, it is

difficult  to  understand  what  could  have  lured  him  back  to  this  childish

wonder-book in his later years, and the explanation of the plagiarism then

becomes even more difficult. I think we may take it that Nietzsche read this

story in his early youth and never again afterwards. How then did he come to

reproduce this passage?[183] I believe, though I cannot prove it, that it was not this old wives’ tale

that gave Nietzsche the idea of Zarathustra’s journey to hell. Rather, while he

was working out the general idea, Kerner’s story would have slipped into his

mind because it was associated with the general idea “journey to hell” by the

law  of  similarity.  The  remarkable  thing  is  the  verbal  fidelity  of  the

reproduction. The striking agreement between the two texts strongly suggests

that the reproduction did not come from the sphere of conscious memory,

otherwise  Nietzsche  would  have  to  be  credited  with  a  memory  that  was

absolutely amazing. The normal powers of memory offer no explanation; it is

almost  inconceivable  that  Nietzsche  could  have  reawakened  that  old

sequence of words by a voluntary act of evocation. The reappearance of old,

long-forgotten impressions is, however, explicable in terms of the physiology

of the brain. The brain never forgets any impression, no matter how slight;

every impression leaves behind it some trace in the memory, no matter how

fine. Consciousness, on the other hand, operates with an unending loss of

previous impressions, much as the Bank of England always destroys after a

certain lapse of time the notes that are daily returned to it. Under special

conditions the re-emergence of old memory traces with photographic fidelity

is  by  no  means  impossible.  Literature  records  not  a  few  cases  of  dying

people, or people in other abnormal mental states, who recited whole chains

of  earlier  impressions  which  perhaps  never  belonged  to  the  sphere  of

conscious memory at all. Eckermann8 mentions an old man “of low station”

who, on his deathbed, suddenly began talking Greek. It turned out that a

number of Greek verses had been drummed into him as a child, so that he

should serve as a shining example to a lazy pupil of noble birth. I know

another case where an old maidservant recited from the Bible passages in

Greek and Hebrew on her deathbed. Investigations showed that as a young

girl she had worked for a priest who had the habit of walking up and down

after meals, reading the Bible aloud in the original tongues. The Viennese

psychiatrist, Krafft-Ebing, who died recently, reports the case of a sixteen-

year-old  hysterical  girl  who,  in  an  ecstatic  state,  could  repeat  without

difficulty a poem, two pages long, which she had read shortly before.

[184] As these examples show, the physiology of the brain makes such 

reproductions possible. But, for them to take place, an abnormal mental state  

is always needed, which can justifiably be conjectured in Nietzsche’s case at 

the time when he wrote Zarathustra. One has only to think of the incredible 

speed with which this work was produced.There is an ecstasy so great that the tremendous strain of it is at times eased

by a storm of tears, when your steps now involuntarily rush ahead, now lag

behind; a feeling of being completely beside yourself, with the most distinct

consciousness of innumerable delicate thrills tingling through you to your

very toes; a depth of happiness, in which pain and gloom do not act as its

antitheses, but as its condition, as a challenge, as necessary shades of colour

in such an excess of light.9

So he himself describes his mood. These shattering extremes of feeling, far

transcending his personal consciousness, were the forces that called up in him

the  remotest  and  most  hidden  associations.  Here,  as  I  said  before,

consciousness only plays the role of slave to the daemon of the unconscious,

which  tyrannizes  over  it  and  inundates  it  with  alien  ideas.  No  one  has

described  the  state  of  consciousness  when  under  the  influence  of  an

automatic complex better than Nietzsche himself:

Has any one at the end of the nineteenth century any distinct notion of what

poets of a stronger age understood by the word “inspiration”? If not, I will

describe it. If one had the smallest vestige of superstition left in one, it would

hardly  be  possible  to  set  aside  the  idea  that  one  is  the  mere  incarnation,

mouthpiece, or medium of an almighty power. The idea of revelation, in the

sense that something which profoundly convulses and shatters one becomes

suddenly  visible  and  audible  with  indescribable  certainty  and  accuracy,

describes the simple fact. One hears—one does not seek; one takes-one does

not ask who gives; a thought suddenly flashes up like lightning, it comes with

necessity, without faltering—I never had any choice in the matter.10

There could scarcely be a better description of the impotence of 

consciousness in face of the tremendous automatism driving up from the 

unconscious. Only this elemental force can wrench from oblivion the oldest 

and most delicate traces in a man’s memory, while yet he retains his full 

senses. When the brain dies, and consciousness disintegrates, while the 

cerebral cortex  still goes  on drowsily working for  a bit, automatically and 

without co-ordination, fragmentary memories may be reproduced together 

with a mass of morbid rubbish. The same thing happens in insanity. I recently 

observed a case of compulsive talking in a feeble-minded girl. She rattled 

away for hours on end about all the warders she had ever met in her life, 

including their families, their children, the arrangement of the rooms, 

describing everything down to the craziest detail—a marvellous performance 

that could not possibly have been a voluntary evocation. The work of genius is very different; it fetches up these distant fragments in order to build them 

into a new and meaningful structure.

[185] These psychic processes, where an automatic creative force causes lost

memories to reappear in sizeable fragments and with photographic fidelity,

are what science calls cryptomnesia.

[186]  The case of Jacobsohn, which I know only from the remarks of Harden 

and Schnitzler,11 would seem to have much in common with cryptomnesia;

at any rate I could not say why it should not be so. From this one might,

perhaps, draw conclusions about the strength of Jacobsohn’s talent and his

passion for art, but hardly, as Schnitzler ventures to do, about his state of

mind, let alone infer a focal lesion of the speech centres. Symptoms of a

lesion in Broca’s convolution and the neighbouring areas of the brain bear

little  resemblance  to  cryptomnesia.  I  am  on  the  contrary  inclined  to  give

Jacobsohn  a  good  prognosis,  for  the  time  being,  as  regards  his  artistic

production. Should any human ill befall him, it would be the purest accident

if the cortex of his speech convolutions were also affected.                                          III

                ON MANIC MOOD DISORDER

[187]  Under  the  term  “manic  mood  disorder”  I  would  like  to  publish  a

number of cases whose peculiarity consists in chronic hypomanic behaviour.

A constitutional mood disorder characterized by melancholy and irritability

has been known for some time, but only recently has attention been drawn to

cases which, while still coming into the category of psychopathic inferiority,

are  remarkable  for  their  excessively  “sanguine  temperament.”  So  far  as  I

know from the relevant literature, Siefert2 was the first to publish a case of

this  kind.  It  offered  clear  indications  of  a  manic  state,  which,  as  the

anamnesis showed, was chronic and could be followed back into youth. The

patient was 36 years old on his admission, and had suffered a severe head

trauma at the age of nine. He was intelligent and a skilled worker. Later,

however, he led a vagabond’s life, was a deserter, thief, jail-breaker, and

hardened alcoholic. He was arrogant in his behaviour, tremendously active,

full of noble intentions and plans for world betterment, showing flight of

ideas and surprisingly little need for sleep.

[188] In earlier writers we find only the barest hints, which might possibly

refer to similar cases, as for instance in Pinel,3 whose manie sans délire with

unimpaired brain activity and maniac behaviour is nevertheless too wide a

frame for the narrowly circumscribed clinical picture we have in mind. The

mania chronica mentioned in Mendel4 is a “secondary psychopathic state”

with imbecility; a picture that hardly fits here. Even in Koch, Schüle, Krafft-

Ebing, and others we find no mention of these states. In 1896, van Deventer5

published a second case under the term “sanguine inferiority,” which comes

midway between the “sanguine- tempered normal person on the one hand and

the maniac on the other.” The patient had an hereditary taint, was excitable

and wayward from youth up, of good intelligence, skilled in various crafts,

always cheerful and carefree, but with a wild and turbulent character, morally

defective in every sense, showing flight of ideas, dangerous recklessness, and

immense activity, occasionally also deep depressions.

[189]  In  his  Grundriss  der  Psychiatrie,6 Wernicke  gives  an  excellent

description  of  these  cases  under  the  term  “chronic  mania.”  He  can  say

“nothing certain” about their causation, but thinks it safe to say that a pure

mania  never  terminates  in  such  a  chronic  state.  The  case  he  cites  was

preceded  by  a  psychosis  of  several  years’  standing,  about  which  noinformation was available. He describes this state as follows:

Chronic mania has all the essential marks of acute mania, only these are 

modified in accordance with the conditions of a chronic, stable state. Hence, 

the flight of ideas keeps within the bounds of moderation, and can still be 

influenced to some extent by reflection and self-control.  The elated mood is 

less marked, but occasionally it breaks through. On the other hand, the 

irascible mood is maintained owing to unavoidable conflicts with society. 

The heightened feeling of self-confidence, though not amounting to real 

megalomania, is very marked and gives these persons a certainty of address 

which, combined with their undeniable mental productivity, helps them to get 

on in the world. At the same time, they create for themselves all sorts of 

difficulties and conflicts by disregarding all the norms and checks which are 

imposed on them by custom and law. They have no consideration for others, 

yet demand every consideration for themselves. No signs of any formal 

disturbance of thinking need be present in this state.

[190] Although this general description fits in very well with the picture of a

chronic hypomanic state, it still seems to me rather too broad, since it could

also cover a large number of instabilities listed by Magnan—many querulous

and morally feebleminded persons (moral insanity). As experience shows, in

many psychopathic illnesses there are persons who think unclearly and are

prone  to  flights  of  ideas,  who  are  ruthlessly  egocentric,  irascible,  and

mentally productive, but who can hardly be said to be suffering from chronic

mania. In order to arrive at an accurate diagnosis, we require the symptoms of

mania in more definite form. Occasional elation, exaggerated self-confidence, 

mental productivity, conflicts with law and order are not in themselves 

sufficient to warrant a diagnosis of “chronic mania.” For this we need the 

cardinal symptoms: emotional lability with predominantly elated mood, flight 

of ideas, distractibility, over-activity, restlessness, and–dependent on these 

symptoms-exaggerated self-importance, megalomaniac  ideas, alcoholism, 

and other moral defects.

[191] So far as the term “manic mood disorder” is concerned, I would prefer

van Deventer’s “sanguine inferiority,” because in my view it gives a more

accurate description of what the term connotes. We have long been familiar

with  the  idea  of  a  constitutional  melancholic  mood,  connoting  a  picture

whose  position  midway  between  “healthy”  and  “diseased”  exactly

corresponds to that of the constitutional manic mood. As to the term “chronic

mania” in the sense used by Siefert and Wernicke, this expression seems tome altogether too strong, for it is not a question of a real mania at all but of a

hypomanic state which yet cannot be regarded as psychotic. The relatively

mild manic symptoms are not partial manifestations of a periodic mania and

are therefore seldom found in isolation; rather, they are frequently mixed with

other psychopathic features, and this is only what one would expect, since the

borderlines between the various clinical pictures of psychopathic inferiority

are extraordinarily indistinct and fluctuating. Over- accentuation of the ego,

periodicity of various symptoms, such as irritability, depression, exacerbation

of stable abnormalities, hysterical traits, etc., are found in nearly all cases of

degeneracy, without there necessarily being any deeper connection with the

basic symptoms. This is all the more reason for delimiting the picture as

closely  as  possible,  and  the  first  requisite  is  always  the  presence  of  the

fundamental manic symptoms.

1

[192] The following case presents a very mild form of manic mood disorder

bordering on simple psychopathic instability.

[193]  CASE A, born 1875, business man. Heredity: father contracted 

paralysis of the insane twelve years after the birth of the patient. Other 

members of the family healthy. Patient was a bright, clever child, physically 

rather weak. Scarlet fever at 8 years old. States that at school he was absent-

minded and inattentive, always up to tricks. Severe attack of diphtheria in his 

twelfth year, with subsequent paralysis of accommodation and of the palate. 

Was afterwards lazy and superficial in his school-work, but showed great 

capabilities if he took the trouble. Easily moved to tears, became much more 

“difficult to understand” after the diphtheria. Entered high school at 13, found 

the work very easy, was always at the top of his class, extremely gifted but 

lacked perseverance. Early tendency to abuse of alcohol, no intolerance. 

Always in a cheerful mood, without worries. Matriculated with distinction. 

Afterwards he entered the business firm of a relative. Found it didn’t suit 

him, did little work, let himself be distracted by pleasures of all kinds. A year 

later, he volunteered for one year’s military service in the cavalry. Heavy 

abuse of alcohol at first only in merry company, then always before military 

duty, in order to calm his tremor; always had a full bottle by him, “knocked it 

back like anything.” Was the master of ceremonies and life and soul of the 

party. In the last months of military service, apparently only four hours sleep 

per night without fatigue next day. Then another year at home. Did 

practically no work. In recent months he gradually got fits of moodiness which lasted a day and repeated themselves at irregular intervals every two 

months. At these times he was in an abysmal bad humour, sometimes 

irritable, sometimes depressed, had gloomy thoughts, took a pessimistic view 

of the world, was often so irritable that when his mother or sister asked him 

anything he had to keep a grip on himself so as not to “bang both fists on the 

table.” He couldn’t settle down to any work,  a “terrible inner restlessness” 

plagued him continually, an “everlasting restless urge to get away,” to change 

his situation, kept him from any profitable activity. He chased one pleasure 

after another and consumed enormous quantities of alcohol. His relatives 

finally decided to yield to his craving for change and let him go abroad, 

where he obtained a position in a branch of the firm. But things didn’t work 

there either. He flouted the authority of his uncle, who was his chief, annoyed 

him in every conceivable way, covered him with  insults,  and  led  an  utterly

dissolute life, indulging in every kind of excess. He didn’t do a stroke of

work, and after a few months had to be sent home again as a severe alcoholic,

in 1899. He was then put into a home for alcoholics, but paid little attention

to the regime of abstinence and used his days out for alcoholic and sexual

excesses.  He  stayed  there  for  about  six  months  and  then  returned  home,

somewhat better. He did not remain abstinent, but behaved fairly decently

until his proposed engagement fell through, which had a shattering effect on

him. In despair he took to excessive drinking again, so heavily that he had to

be  put  in  the  same  home  for  a  second  time.  There  he  tried  as  before  to

dissimulate his use of alcohol, not always successfully. Twice he ran away,

the second time to Milan, where he got through several hundred marks in a

few days. When his money ran out he telegraphed for more and returned

home with a profound moral hangover. When it was suggested to him, in this

state, that he should be placed in a closed institution, he readily agreed, and

was admitted to Burghölzli on July 22, 1901.

[194]  On  admission  the  patient  was  slightly  inebriated,  euphoric,  very

talkative, showing flight of ideas. Told that his mother would visit him the

next day, he got excited, wept, declared he was not in a fit state to receive

her. In regard to his dipsomania he showed insight, but in regard to its cure he

displayed a very shallow optimism. Physical examination revealed nothing

but a distinct difference in the size of the pupils. For the rest of July things

went  well.  The  patient  was  always  very  animated,  talkative,  cheerful,

amiable, showing plenty of social talent, and a sophistication that never went

very deep and was at best witty. When out for walks he could talk for hourswithout  stopping,  and  jumped  from  one  thing  to  another  in  his  flights  of

ideas. He expressed opinions on every conceivable subject with the greatest

superficiality.  He  proved  to  be  astonishingly  well  read  in  German  and

English  novels  of  the  lighter  sort,  was  always  on  the  go  but  lacked

perseverance. In a short space of time he bought over a hundred books, half

of which he left unread. His room was crammed with newspapers, comics,

picture postcards, photographs. He took drawing lessons and boasted about

his artistic gifts. After three or four lessons he gave up drawing, and the same

thing happened with his riding lessons. He realized that his superficiality was

abnormal and cheerfully admitted it, even priding himself on this specialty of

his: “You see, I’m the most cultured and well-read superficial person,” he

said to me once. By the middle of September his patience was at an end. He

became very moody and irritable, suddenly forced his way out, telegraphed

home to say he couldn’t possibly remain where he was any longer. He wrote

a long letter to the doctors in a huffy, aggressive tone, and several more in the

same  vein  to  his  relatives.  Having  returned,  after  a  few  days  he  became

quieter and more reasonable. Henceforth he was allowed more freedom, and

could go out when he wished. He now began to go out every evening, visiting

mostly light concerts and variety shows, and spent almost the entire morning

in bed. His mood was continuously elated, he did no work but did not feel the

least unhappy about it. This vacuous life continued up to his discharge. He

was convinced of the necessity for abstinence, but overestimated his energy

and powers of resistance. For his former life he lacked all feeling of shame;

could  talk  with  broad  complacency  about  how  he  had  worried  his  uncle

almost sick, and felt no trace of gratitude to him for having taken a great deal

of trouble to put him on the right road again. Similarly, he revelled in stories

of his drinking bouts and other excesses, although there was nothing in the

least praiseworthy about them.

[195] The manic symptoms in this case can be traced back to the high school 

period, and the purely psychopathic ones to the diphtheria in his twelfth year. 

The life the patient led from the time he matriculated was quite abnormal and 

offers a choice of two diagnoses: psychopathic instability or manic mood 

disorder. Moral insanity, which one might also think of, appears to be ruled 

out by the wealth of emotional reactions. It is certainly not a case of simple 

alcoholism,  since  the  psychic abnormality persisted even during abstinence. 

If we exclude the features that could be grouped under ordinary psychopathic 

inferiority, we are left with definite hypomanic symptoms: mild flight of ideas, predominantly elated but quite inadequate mood, overactivity without 

consistency or perseverance. The moral defect is sufficiently explained by the 

superficiality of mood and the transitoriness of affects.

2

[196] The next case concerns a woman whose life took a similar course, but

whose anamnesis, being more detailed, allows us a deeper insight into the

nature of the emotional change.

[197] CASE B, born in 1858, married. Father a neurasthenic eccentric and

drunkard, died of cirrhosis of the liver. Mother had heart trouble, died of

some mental disease, apparently paralysis of the insane. Nothing known of

any severe illnesses in youth. Patient was a bright, uncommonly lively child

and a good pupil. From an early age she had suffered under disagreeable

conditions at home. Her father was a solicitor, her family of good social

standing, but between the parents there was continual strife because the father

had an illegitimate liaison. In her eighteenth year, a male secretary employed

in her father’s business made two violent attempts to rape her, but she did not

dare  to  divulge  them  to  her  parents,  as  the  secretary  threatened  to  make

devastating revelations concerning her father’s affairs. She suffered for years

from the memory of these assaults and from the continual sexual molestations

of the secretary. Gradually she developed hysterical attacks of convulsions,

unaccountable moods, mostly depressions with fits of despair, and to deaden

them she began drinking wine. According to her relatives, she was good-

natured  and  soft-hearted,  but  extremely  weak-willed.  At  22  she  married.

Before her marriage she got the consent of her parents to travel part of the

way to meet her fiancé, who lived in Italy, but did not return with him at

once. Instead, she ran around with him for a couple of days before coming

home again. She was married with great éclat. The marriage, however, was

not a happy one. She felt she was misunderstood by her husband and could

never get accustomed to social etiquette. At parties given in their house she

secretly slipped away and danced in the yard with the servants. After the birth

of a child she became very excitable, partly from weakness, partly because of

the visibly increasing estrangement from her husband. From the early days of

her marriage she had cultivated a taste for fine wines and liqueurs. Now she

drank  more  and  more.  On  account  of  her  increasing  irritability  and

excitement,  her  husband  sent  her  on  a  journey  to  recuperate.  When  she

returned home she found he had started an intimate relationship with the

housekeeper. This was enough to aggravate her already excited condition sogravely that she had to be sent to an institution. She came back after six

months  and  found  that  the  housekeeper,  as  her  husband’s  mistress,  had

completely  supplanted  her.  The  consequence  was  renewed  alcoholic

excesses. She was then admitted to a Swiss mental home.

[198] The following points are taken from her clinical record. On her 

admission, May 13, 1888, she went off into loud self-accusations and 

complained of an inexplicable inner restlessness (which she said had existed 

ever since the sexual assault). She was soon in a better mood, began 

comparing the mental home with the private institution she had been in 

before, praised the latter, complained that she was being boarded as a second-

class patient, criticized the regulations. She was extremely labile, at one 

moment with tears in her eyes, shouting with laughter the next, up to all sorts 

of tricks. She was extraordinarily talkative and told quite openly, in front of 

her fellow patients, without the least shame, how she used to make herself 

drunk. After the alcoholic symptoms had worn off she continued in a very 

labile mood, garrulous, eager for applause, fond  of  ambiguous  stories,  

quick  at  taking  words  the  wrong  way, criticizing the doctors and the 

treatment, “laughing very loudly like a servant girl at quite ordinary jokes,” 

familiar with the staff, socially very entertaining. This emotional lability 

lasted throughout her stay in the asylum. The diagnosis was alcoholism with 

moral defect. In November 1890 her husband was granted a divorce, and this 

was a heavy blow to the patient. She was discharged in December with the 

best intentions for the future. Her income amounted to 2000 francs a year for 

five years. She now lived with a woman friend who had  a great influence 

over her. During this time she appears to have been almost completely 

abstinent. When, in 1895, her income was exhausted, she took a post with her 

friend in a Swiss asylum. But she did not feel satisfied, got on badly with her 

superiors, was very upset when a number of escapes took place in her ward, 

and quit the post after a few months. She then lived alone and began drinking 

again. Before collapsing altogether, she was able to make up her mind to visit 

a clinic of her own accord, and was admitted to Burghölzli on October 19, 

1895.

[199] On her admission she was much the same as on the admission reported

above, only less inebriated. The initial depression quickly disappeared, and

she soon unbosomed herself in exuberant letters to her friend. She was a

“creature of moods,” “never able to hide her feelings,” allowing herself to be

entirely ruled by the mood of the moment. She was extremely active andadapted herself quickly, “cheerful, temperamental, always ready with a bad

joke,”  sometimes  bad-tempered,  often  carrying  on  in  a  rather  sentimental

way. Her behaviour at concerts in the asylum was ostentatious; instead of

singing, she would warble with full-throated laughter. In 1896, on one of her

days out, she suddenly got engaged to another patient, also an alcoholic. In

July  1896  she  was  discharged.  The  medical  report  emphasized  that  her

alcoholism  was  caused  by  her  moods,  which  completely  dominated  her.

Further, that her emotional condition was now more evenly balanced, but that

there  was  still  a  “congenital  lability  of  mood  and  great  emotional

excitability.” After that she lived “in sin” with her fiancé, who soon had a

relapse and started her off drinking

again. He was put in a home, and she, left to herself, tried to make a living in

the grocery trade, but without much success. Once more she took to heavy

drinking,  got  drunk  daily,  frequented  taverns  of  ill  repute,  and  on  one

occasion tore off her clothes in a frenzy of excitement, so that she stood there

in her petticoat. She often turned up at the tavern dressed only in petticoat

and raincoat. In November 1897 she was brought back to the asylum. On

admission she had an hysterical attack with symptoms of delirium tremens.

Then followed deep depressions, which lasted in milder form until January

1898, though this did not prevent her from showing great liveliness on festive

occasions.  Later  she  became  touchy,  flaunted  her  superior  social  position

before others, was at times erotic, tried to flirt with a male patient, singing

him sentimental songs from a distance. She was full of optimistic plans for

the  future,  started  to  learn  typewriting  and  helped  in  the  anatomical

laboratory. In March 1898 she suddenly went out and got mildly drunk, and

received a reprimand which threw her into a blind rage. Next day she was

found in an extreme stage of intoxication, and it turned out that she had made

herself drunk in the laboratory with 96% alcohol. She was wildly excited,

quite unapproachable at first, uttering threats; then manic, with flight of ideas,

pressure of activity, eroticism, and devil-may-care humour. After a few days

she was the same as before, unable to adapt to regulations, flirting with a

manic patient at a concert. Periods of boisterous merriment. Discharged on

October 11, 1900, to take up post as a housekeeper. Worked extraordinarily

well and was much appreciated for her continual gaiety and sociability. From

a  letter  written  at  this  time  we  extract  the  following  passages,  which  are

typical of her extreme self-confidence, exaggerated language abounding in

forceful expressions, and her elated mood:[200] The everlasting mistrust, the everlasting disbelief of these pessimists in

a  final  moral  cure,  saps  your  strength  and  breaks  your  courage.  You  see

yourself abandoned by others and finally you abandon yourself. Then you try

to  deaden  your  torments  of  soul  and  seize  on  any  and  every  means  that

deadens—so long as there’s spirit in it. Thank God I no longer need this

deadening now. Are you pleased with me? Do you believe in my leonine

strength?—!! …

[201] My talent for educating children is a fact which neither the scepticism

of Dr. X nor the shrewdness of Dr. Y can abolish.…

[202] I am so tired in the evenings that my head throbs, as though it had been

used for a drum in the Basel carnival. Under these circumstances you must

bear kindly with me if letters from my hand turn into birds of paradise and

the inclination to ballet dance in ink is at its last gasp.

[203]  In  July  1901  she  went  down  with  influenza,  and  her  employer

inadvisedly gave her wine as a tonic (!), whereupon she got a bottle of wine

sent up every day. On July 7, she was readmitted to Burghölzli for delirium

tremens, having lately drunk methylated spirits and eau de cologne. Now and

then she seemed to have deep depressions with a sentimental tinge, but they

were never so bad that she could not be provoked into wildly gay laughter. At

a concert in August her behaviour was quite manic; she adorned herself with 

three huge roses, flirted openly, showed motor restlessness, behaved 

extremely tactlessly with the others. No insight afterwards. Her “excitability 

reached the highest degree of mania” (July 1901). At a music rehearsal in the 

room of an assistant doctor she was “extremely vivacious and talkative, erotic 

and provocative.” She was sexually very excited at this period, but sometimes 

depressed. She dashed off her copywork in a careless way, wrote pages of 

sentimental scribble showing flights of ideas. She could be roused to all kinds 

of activity, but her energy invariably flagged. Very sensitive, reacting to 

censure with deep depression, all emotional reactions extremely labile and 

immoderate. She had no insight into her lability, greatly overestimated herself

and her powers of resistance, had an inflated sense of her personal value, and 

often made very disdainful remarks about other people. She felt that she still 

had “a task in front of her,” that she “was destined for something higher and 

better,” that not her inferiority  but  her  unfortunate  circumstances  were  to  

blame  for  her

degeneration.  From  August  1902  to  April  1903  she  followed  a  weight-

reducing course, and towards the spring a more stable depression supervened,during which she took more pains with her copywork than before.

[204] The first psychopathic symptoms in this hereditarily tainted patient 

showed themselves from her eighteenth year in the form of marked hysteria 

resulting from sexual traumata. Indications of some emotional abnormality 

apart from the hysteria are present from the age of 22. After her thirtieth year 

we have an accurate clinical history in which superficiality and emotional 

lability are already established. Besides alcoholism, a moral defect was 

diagnosed (1888). In 1896, the alcoholism was recognized as dependent on 

her emotional lability. In the course of years the manifest hysteria entirely 

disappeared except for a few symptoms (sentimental tone of the depressions), 

but the emotional abnormality remained stable. The periodic depressions 

were always of short duration and never so deep that they could not be 

banished by a joke. The only depression of longer duration, which had a 

decidedly improving effect on the patient, occurred under the influence of the 

reducing course and can therefore be regarded as a specific effect of this 

treatment. Depressions under such a treatment also occur with normal 

persons.  The patient’s depressions often had a reactive character, especially 

to censure, and were then merely excessive reactions to a depressing 

stimulus. Spontaneous exacerbations of stable symptoms were never 

observed with certainty; in most cases they were excessive reactions to the 

effects of joy or alcohol. The  patient  was  decidedly manic when drunk. In 

her normal state we find a mild flight of ideas, which expressed itself 

particularly clearly in her writings; a predominantly elated mood with 

optimistic outlook, often indicative of her exaggerated self-esteem; great 

lability of pleasure/pain affects; marked distractibility. Her manic over-

activity showed itself as a rule merely in her extreme vivacity and 

talkativeness, but it only needed some kind of festivity to produce an 

immediate increase of motor activity. The dependence  of  alcoholism,  and  

of  moral  inferiority  in  general,  on emotional abnormality is much clearer 

here than in the first case.

[205] The third case concerns a patient who was chiefly remarkable for her 

social  instability.

[206] CASE C, born in 1876, nurse, unmarried. Heredity: father a drunkard,

died  of  carcinoma  of  the  liver.  Step-sister  (by  the  same  father)  epileptic.

Patient had no severe physical illnesses in youth. Clever at school, also got

good  marks  for  behaviour,  with  few  exceptions.  Once  when  she  got  bad

marks for arithmetic, she tore up the report under the teacher’s eyes. Oncewrote an anonymous letter to the school administration, denouncing certain

teachers for assigning too much work. Once she ran away from school for

two days. She was a very lively child, passionately fond of reading novels

(often half the night). At 16 she left school and went to her sister’s to learn

how to be a seamstress. But she did little work, read most of the time, never

obeyed her sister, quarrelled with her after six months, and then took up

another apprentice post, where she stayed only nine months instead of the

required two years. She was quick to learn though not very diligent, was

usually  very  merry,  but  sometimes  irritable.  Though  “good-natured,”  she

“never took anything much to heart.” She was “burning with travel fever”

and  made  up  her  mind  to  go  to  Geneva.  There  she  found  a  job  as  an

apprentice  seamstress  for  a  year,  remained  for  the  full  period,  but  took

occasional time off, paying her employer for the day. Afterwards she returned

home.  During  this  period  her  diet  consisted  almost  entirely  of  sweets,  of

which she sometimes consumed five francs’ worth a day. Although it finally

sickened her, for a long time afterwards she felt impelled to buy chocolates

whenever she passed a confectioner’s. She would then give them to children

in the street. She borrowed money for her passions in the most frivolous way

from everybody, often just took it from her sister or bullied it out of her.

After about six months she induced a relative to take her to America. Stayed

a month in Chicago without working. Then she worked at a clothes shop, ran

away four days later without giving notice. She then changed her job ten

times in succession, staying a few hours or at most a couple of days in each

of them. Finally found a job that suited her, as a companion. Became ill six

months later with stomach ulcer; returned to Switzerland. She left a job as

receptionist at a hotel after five days because of a quarrel with her employer,

and went back home. A few weeks later she took a job as a housemaid, but

got “sick of it” after eight months. She “could only stay in a job until she

knew the country and the people, then something else had to come along.”

Then she worked as a student nurse in a hospital in Bern. “Sick of it” after

five months, went to another hospital, four months later became ill again with

stomach ulcer, spent several months ill at home. At this point she started an

illegitimate relationship with the dissolute son of a neighbour. On recovering

from her illness, she worked as a shopgirl in Zurich. Spent considerable sums

of money on herself and her friend, whom she supported financially. She

borrowed money everywhere and left her father and sister to pay her debts.

As a result, she was sent to a faith-healing institution for a cure, where shestayed for six months, working fairly well; then another four months as a

maid. She started another intimate relationship, but soon got sick of her lover.

Then seven months as a wardress in an institute for epileptics, followed by

five months as a children’s nurse in a private house, which she left because of

quarrels with one of the maids. She then betook herself to her late lover in

W.,  made  a  violent  scene  but  was  finally  reconciled.  After  that  she  got

another job as a maid in Schaffhausen for a fortnight, then for two days in

Bern, for some weeks in Zurich, for another four weeks in Bern, then again

for a short time in Zurich, then for two months as a nurse in a lunatic asylum,

then again for a few days in W., where she ran through her earnings at the

hotel  and  started  quarrelling  again  with  her  lover.  After  renewed

reconciliation, she returned to Zurich, but soon fell out two more times with

her lover, took another job for two months, then went to Chur “for the fun of

it,” then back to W., in order to make another scene with her lover, then

returned to Zurich for a few days, only to go immediately afterwards to W.

and make a second and this time final scene with her lover. After that she

took a job as a children’s nurse in the Valais, where she stayed two and a half

months. She became ill again with stomach ulcer and returned to Zurich via

W. As she got out of the train at W. the first person she ran into was her

lover, which annoyed her so much that she took the train straight back to

Zurich. On arrival in Zurich, however, she regretted her sudden decision and

immediately seated herself in the train back to W. Alighting on the platform

at  W.,  she  regretted  this  decision  too  and  rushed  back  to  Zurich.  (The

distance between Zurich and W. is an hour and a half by rail.) On returning

from W. after one of her quarrels, she went to a hotel with an unknown man

whom she picked up at the station in Zurich and spent the night with him.

With another she started an erotic conversation and apparently followed him

even into the toilet, causing a public scandal.

[207] Wherever she worked she was liked, as she was constantly busy and a

pleasant companion. She was never quiet, always on the go and excitable.

Lately  the  excitement  increased  visibly,  she  also  talked  much  more  than

before. She had never saved any money; what she earned she spent at once

and incurred debts everywhere.

[208] On the recommendation of Professor M., the patient was admitted to

Burghölzli on April 2, 1903. The report emphasizes the following points:

“The patient suffers from a mild degree of maniacal excitement. The outward

cause may be considered to be an affair with a young man which came tonothing. For several weeks the patient was expansive, unstable, irritable; she

is  excessively  open-handed,  sleeps  little  at  night,  cannot  bear  to  be

contradicted. Her mood is elated. She is talkative, occasionally showing flight

of ideas. She cannot be kept at home because of her expansiveness, she starts

something new every minute, and wants to go to W. in order to wreak her

vengeance on her former fiancé.”

[209] She had a lively, intelligent expression of face, talked a great deal.

Continuous motor restlessness when talking; in ordinary conversation no very

noticeable  flights  of  ideas;  these  only  showed  more  clearly  during  longer

recitals. She was very elated, very erotic, flirting and laughing a great deal;

very labile, weeping easily at the memory of unhappy experiences; liked to

sulk ostentatiously, and once made a violent scene when the doctor refused to

visit her alone in her room, threatened suicide, so that she had to be removed

for a while to the observation room. Soon afterwards she was as euphoric as

ever.  She  was  very  frank  and  enjoyed  telling  of  her  adventures,  but  was

incapable  of  putting  them  down  on  paper  in  an  orderly  fashion.  An

autobiography  still  remains  to  be  attempted  after  several  false  starts.  She

expressed a strong desire to go out, but still harboured thoughts of vengeance

on her ex-fiancé, threatened to shoot him. Had all sorts of adventurous plans

for the future, and once urgently requested to be allowed out in order to

answer a newspaper advertisement for an animal trainer, asserting proudly

that  she  did  not  lack  courage.  In  addition,  she  had  intensive  plans  for

marriage. She took the disorderly life she had lived very lightly, and was

convinced that things would go better in future. She showed slight insight

into the excitement of the last few weeks before her admission. No major

depressions  or  excited  states  were  observed,  and  no  deterioration  of  the

normal state except the present one. Slight increase of excitement during her

periods.

[210] In my account of this case I have purposely given a complete chronicle

of  the  changes  in  social  position  in  order  to  illustrate  the  extraordinary

instability and restlessness of the patient. Over a period of eleven years, she

changed her job no less than thirty-two times, in the great majority of cases

simply because she was “sick of it.” So far as one can rely on the anamnestic

information,  the  abnormal  emotional  state  can  be  followed  back  into

childhood. Apart from the menstrual cycle no periodicity was discoverable.

Depressions  never  seemed  to  arise  spontaneously,  but  were  merely  the

outcome of circumstances. There was no alcoholism, only an enormous abuseof sweets. The findings—mild flight of ideas, talkativeness, predominantly

elated mood, lability, distractibility, pressure of activity, eroticism— all bear

out the diagnosis of manic mood disorder and explain the patient’s erratic and

morally defective career.

4

[211] The fourth case was under investigation on a charge of theft and was

certified by me as of unsound mind, the intensity of manic symptoms being

of so high a degree that even “partial responsibility” seemed to me out of the

question.

[212]  CASE  D,  born  1847,  painter.  Heredity:  father  an  eccentric  person,

intelligent,  very  lively,  frivolous,  always  in  a  merry  mood,  went  in  for

politics  and  litigation,  neglected  his  business  and  his  family,  drank  and

gambled, lost his property and fortune, until he finally came to the poorhouse.

First brother intelligent and gifted, head full of ideas, interested in social and

political problems, died in poverty leaving a pile of debts. Second sister very

extravagant, died in dire poverty. Third brother a moderate drinker, but able

to  support  himself  and  wife.  Fourth  brother  led  a  profligate  life  in  every

respect, a notorious liar, very much come down in the world, living on poor

relief. One son of a normal brother was a notorious scrounger and sot. Patient

had  no  serious  illnesses  in  youth.  A  lively  child,  alert  and  intelligent;

excellent school reports. Was apprenticed after leaving school; worked very

industriously for the first year, clever, made progress. In the course of the

second year he changed, started drinking, neglected his work, extravagant.

Remained four years in the same job, then took to roaming. His dissoluteness

increased, his work grew more and more uneven and careless, and by way of

contrast  he  developed  a  “terrific  opinion  of  himself,”  boasted  of  his

cleverness  and  gifts,  always  passing  himself  off  as  something  quite

extraordinary.  His  roamings  began  at  19.  He  never  stayed  anywhere  for

longer than a few months, was always drinking, dissatisfied, no master was 

good enough for him, always had his “special ideas,” wanted to “be 

appreciated,” thought “everything should be to his liking,” was always 

“worked  up,”  frequently  quit  his  job  without  giving  notice,  sometimes 

without even collecting his wages. In 1871 he returned home utterly destitute, 

looking like a tramp. Despite that, he bragged endlessly and told boastful 

stories about himself and his successes. He remained for some time at home, 

worked eagerly, “always in a hurry.” Suddenly his elated mood changed, he 

became irritable, cantankerous, grumbled about the work, his work-mates, former masters, etc., sometimes getting into a rage and “acting like the devil.” 

Now as before he indulged in drink, and the more he drank the more excited 

he became, giving vent to an unstanchable stream of talk. After a fortnight he 

suddenly packed his things, set forth on his wanderings again, and finally, in 

1873, came to Paris. He found no work there because of the slump, and was 

sent home again by the authorities after five weeks. In 1875 he went to 

Nuremberg. According to the report of his employer there, he was a very 

skilful and efficient worker, but had to be dismissed on account of 

drunkenness. Because of acute manic excitement he had to be kept in 

confinement for a few weeks, and as no real remission ensued, he was packed 

off to Switzerland. He was admitted to Burghölzli on March 21, 1876.

[213]  The  patient  was  elated,  excited,  laughing  away  to  himself,  showed

flight of ideas, made bad jokes, heard voices that told him funny stories,

showed  immense  self-esteem.  No  essential  change  subsequently  occurred

except for a quieting down and cessation of the voices. The illness was taken

for mania, and the patient was discharged as cured in August 1876, although

at the time of his discharge he certainly did not give the impression of being a

normal person. He then began his old wandering life again. He roamed round

Switzerland  like  a  vagabond;  in  November  1876,  as  a  result  of  great

privations and severe cold, he found himself in a delirious state in which it

seemed to him that “he was the pope and had ordered a huge dinner.” In this

state he tried to draw 5000 francs at the post-office and was arrested; on

taking  food  he  suddenly  became  clear  again.  In  1882  he  married.  The

marriage remained childless. His wife had four or five abortions. He stuck to

her for almost a year; then the wanderings were resumed and he stayed with

his wife only off and on. In 1885 he found himself in great straits, and in

desperation conceived the plan of poisoning himself and his wife. But he was

afraid to carry it out, so he fell back on stealing. Up to the beginning of 1886

he committed a series of thefts, was arrested, and in view of his doubtful

mental condition was referred to the doctors in St. Pirminsberg for a medical

opinion. The following points were emphasized in the report:

[214] The patient was in a continuous state of elation, with heightened self- 

confidence, amounting at times to real megalomania. He delighted in making 

mysterious allusions to his importance: “Great things are impending, here in 

the madhouse sits the founder of God’s kingdom on earth.” He composed an 

eighty-page opus intended for the press, largely incoherent in content, 

through which there ran like a red thread his unbounded glorification of himself. In it he addressed himself rhetorically to the pope, deeming himself 

his equal in infallibility, also to Christ, spoke of himself as a new Messiah, 

compared himself to Hercules and Winkelried, etc. Occasionally he went into 

real ecstasies, in which he wrote things like: “The greatest artist of all times 

past and to come shines the shoes of the unfortunate, polishes the floor in St. 

Pirminsberg. As is the son, so is the father and vice versa.—Hurrah for 

Helvetia!!! O stone of the wise, how thou shinest! O D—(his own name), 

what brilliance! Your God, O my companions, has the heart of a child, the 

voice of a lion, the innocence of a dove, and the appearance of one of you!” 

During his stay in the asylum the composition of these pieces formed his 

main occupation. He wrote several pages a day, and when his paper ran out 

he would sing patriotic songs for hours on end in a raucous voice. He was 

always very talkative, spoke in dialect, but when he really got going he fell 

into a literary style. His thought processes were orderly, but with a tendency 

to digression and detailed description. His language abounded in choice 

expressions, with a preference for foreign words, though these were generally 

used correctly. In keeping with his exaggerated self- esteem he always held 

himself aristocratically aloof from the other patients; the warders he snubbed, 

whereas he was always very friendly with the doctors. His situation did not  

worry  him,  he  lived  cheerfully from day to day, full of the greatest hopes 

for the future.  He  never showed any insight into his illness. Once he was in 

a particularly bad mood for several days, very irritable, suspicious, reserved, 

but occasionally cursing and swearing about the asylum. The diagnosis was 

“periodic mania, which might pass over into insanity.” The thefts were put

down to unsoundness of mind.

[215] On October 2, 1886, the patient was transferred to Burghölzli. Until

December his state was the same as in St. Pirminsberg. At the beginning of

December he quieted down a bit; the earlier symptoms continued but were

less intense. He was given some painting to do in the asylum. Among other

things  he  painted  the  asylum  chapel;  it  was  subsequently  discovered  that

between the veins of the marble he had drawn little figures of devils and also

a  not  unskilful  caricature  of  the  asylum’s  priest.  He  was  discharged  on

February 25, 1887. Even during this quieter phase he still produced the same

old ideas, held forth with great pathos on his vocation as a reformer and

world  improver.  After  his  discharge  he  resumed  his  wanderings  in

Switzerland, working a bit but never staying more than a few months in the

same place. In 1891 he stole a great deal of food and was sentenced to sixmonths in the workhouse. In 1893 he got a year for the same reason. In 1894

he was charged with stealing 700 francs. From the fourth day of his detention

on,  he  heard  voices  whispering  outside  his  door,  and  thought  he  could

recognize the voice of one of his nieces, saying: “You will be repaid.” Six

days later he was released. At home the hallucinations persisted for another

day and then suddenly vanished. In 1895 he was sentenced to two years in the

workhouse  for  theft.  In  January  1895  he  was  sent  to  the  penitentiary.

According to the statements of officials there, the patient “had a screw loose”

from  the  beginning  and  soon  aroused  suspicions  of  mental  disorder.  He

accused  the  officials,  quite  without  reason,  of  swindling.  In  solitary

confinement he covered the walls with senseless daubs, asserting that he was

a great artist. At night he was restless, talking loudly to

himself about his “daily occupation.” Now and then he was very irritable. On

August 19, 1895, another medical report was made on him. The following

points were emphasized: “The condition of the patient is much the same as

that described in 1886 in the report from St. Pirminsberg. He showed manic

excitement, flight of ideas, extraordinary elation, and self- esteem, boasting

of his capabilities, his physical prowess, saying that he had known for 25

years how, ‘by means of a certain substance, as with a breath, everything

could be decked in the most gorgeous, dazzling colours’; he could ‘change a

dog into the most beautiful golden scarab in the twinkling of an eye.’ ” He

came out with a lot of similar stories. On November 9 he was moved to

Burghölzli. His condition was the same as in the penitentiary. He gave more

or less logical reasons for his exaggerations. For instance, he got his gilding

effects by brushing over with the right colour; gave up his plan for world

improvement  after  he  had  seen  how  incorrigible  the  world  was.  His

behaviour  varied  as  before;  mostly  he  was  elated  and  excited,  but

intermittently he was irritable, with stormy moods. Though he quieted down

somewhat, his condition remained the same until his discharge on January 16,

1897.

[216] In the weeks preceding his recent arrest he wandered round the 

neighbourhood of his home village and spent the nights in a barn, the walls of 

which he scribbled over with verses and sayings. His clothes were in rags, his 

shoes were tied to his feet with string. Between September 13 and October 3, 

1901, he committed three burglaries with theft at night, taking food, drink, 

tobacco, and clothes. He stated that on the occasion of one of these thefts he 

was very agitated because, while in the cellar, he heard a voice saying: “Go down quickly and leave something for me too.” He was arrested on October 

8, 1901. At the first hearing he pleaded guilty. He was sent to us for 

observation on November 1, 1901. During his stay his behaviour was found 

to be unchanged. On admission he was very cheerful, composed, sure of 

himself, greeted his old acquaintances cordially, was very talkative and 

excitable,  replying  at  great  length  to  every  question  and  tacking  on 

remarks and stories showing flight of ideas. He recounted his life story in a 

coherent manner, keeping fairly well to the facts. At night he slept little, 

mostly lay awake in bed for hours worrying about “scientific” problems. He 

had theories about the origin of meteorites, about the transport of dead bodies 

to the moon, about airships, about the nature of the brain and mental 

processes, etc. He worked industriously and quickly, often talking to himself 

or keeping up an accompaniment of animal noises— miaowing, barking, 

cackling, crowing. When walking about the ward he sometimes went at the 

run, or even on all fours. At work in the fields he was talkative, enjoyed 

teasing others, adorned his hat with roots and leaves  of  vegetables.  He

conceived his ideas at night and put them down, elaborately and extensively,

on paper. His compositions were closely written, looked clean and neat, and

except for the copious use of foreign words the spelling was correct. They

revealed an erudition of sorts, a very good memory, distinct flight of ideas,

with  great  pressure  of  speech  and  forceful  expressions.  Prose  pieces  in

literary  style  or  in  dialect  were  jumbled  together  with  quotations  from

Schiller, verses (his own and other people’s), sentences in French, always

with a connecting thread of meaning which, however, did not go very deep.

No  uniform,  comprehensive  idea  could  be  found  in  any  of  his  writings,

except for an intense subjective feeling of his own value and an unbounded

self-  esteem.  The  language  he  used  was  sometimes  full  of  deep  pathos,

sometimes deliberately paradoxical. He was ready to discuss his ideas, did

not  cling  to  them  obstinately,  but  dropped  them  in  order  to  turn  to  new

problems. It was even possible to talk him out of his meteorite theory and to

wring from him the admission that “even the greatest scholars have been

mistaken.” He would expatiate on all kinds of moral and religious questions,

and displayed a lyrical and almost religious feeling—which did not prevent

him, however, from blaspheming and making a laughing-stock of religious

practices. Once, for example, he performed a gross travesty of the Mass. He

said he was not born to work for his living, had better things to do, and must

wait for the time when all his grand ideas would be realized, when he wouldcreate  educational  establishments  for  the  young,  a  new  system  of  world

communications, etc. He had great hopes of the future, by comparison with

which  all  thought  of  the  actual  present  vanished.  Despite  this  keen

expectation he had no clear picture of the future in his mind, could only

adumbrate vague and fabulous plans which were mostly concocted on the

spur of the moment. But he was convinced that “all would come in good

time,” and hinted that he would perhaps live longer than other men in order to

accomplish his work. His earlier statements that he was the Messiah, “the

founder of God’s new kingdom,” he corrected as symbolisms; he was only

comparing himself to the Messiah and not asserting that he had any more

intimate connection with him or with God. In the same way he disclosed that

what had previously been taken for delusional ideas were exaggerations or

vivid comparisons.

[217]  Occasionally  there  were  angry  moods,  usually  provoked  by

insignificant trifles which at another time would not have been followed by

an  angry  reaction.  For  instance,  he  once  created  a  great  disturbance  at  3

o’clock in the morning, shouting, cursing, and barking like a dog, so that he

woke the whole ward. As usual, he had not slept properly after midnight and

was annoyed by the snoring of a patient. He justified the uproar by saying

that if others were permitted to disturb him with their snoring, then he was

permitted to make a noise at night too.

[218] This patient came of an abnormal family, and at least two of his close 

relatives (father and brother) seem to have had the same mental constitution. 

The picture of manic mood disorder developed after puberty and had 

persisted with occasional exacerbations throughout his life. Here again we 

find a number of symptoms of psychic degeneracy apart from the  

specifically manic ones. The patient was only an occasional alcoholic, 

probably from lack of money and also because, being everlastingly occupied 

with his enormous afflux of ideas, he lacked real leisure for drinking. His 

ideas show certain affinities with “inventor’s paranoia,” but on the one hand 

he lacked the stability and toughness of the  paranoiac,  and  on  the  other  

hand  his  ideas  were  not  fixed  and incorrigible, but were more in the 

nature of inspirations that came to him from his elation and exaggerated self-

esteem. The hallucinatory episodes that are mentioned several times in his 

history cannot easily be related to any known clinical picture; one of them 

seems to have been an effect of exhaustion, another an effect of 

imprisonment, a third an effect of excitement. Magnan regards them as “syndromes épisodiques des dégénérés.” Although we know that “prison 

complexes”7 can occur in all sorts of degenerate subjects, we are unable to

point to any particular underlying psychosis. Again, in our patient we see the

delirious states passing quickly and without after-effects, for which reason

they may best be regarded as syndromes of degeneracy.

[219] Here too we find periodic mood disorders in the form of pathological

irritability.  Once  (1885)  there  was  a  deeper  depression,  when  the  patient

toyed with the idea of suicide. Despite careful investigation we were only 

able to discover this one depression, and it is not even certain whether it 

lasted for an appreciable time or whether it was a sudden change of mood, 

such as usually occurs with manics. Apart from these few features, which do 

not belong absolutely to the picture of mania, the case offers all that is 

necessary for a diagnosis of manic mood disorder. The patient showed 

distinct flight of ideas, a profusion of fanciful thoughts  and words; his 

predominating mood was not merely cheerful and carefree, but manically 

elated, expressing itself all the time in manic tricks and immense pressure of 

activity, which occasionally amounted to purposeless motor hyperactivity. 

His intelligence was good, and he was capable of judging his situation 

perfectly correctly, but the next moment his ideas of grandeur returned, and 

he was swung into them by the force of his overproductive pleasure feelings. 

He led the most miserable life as a vagabond,  roaming  about the countryside  

summer  and  winter, half starved, sleeping in barns and stables, yet in 

flagrant contrast with reality was  forever brooding on lofty schemes of world 

reformation. Significantly, his non-recognition by the rest of humanity was of 

no concern to him, as it would be to a paranoiac. His continual pleasurable 

excitement helped him even over this adversity. From all this we see how 

very much the intellect was taken in tow by the emotions. He was not really 

convinced of his ideas, for he did not mind correcting them theoretically; but 

he hoped for their fulfilment, in contrast to the paranoiac, who hopes because 

he is convinced. This case reminds one forcibly of those miserable lives lived 

by poets and artists who, with small talent and indestructible optimism, eke 

out a hungry existence despite the fact that they possess quite enough 

intelligence to realize their social inadequacy in this form, and enough talent 

and energy, if applied in other directions, to do good and even outstanding 

work in an ordinary profession. The patient can also be compared, up to a 

point, with those individuals whom Lombroso describes as “graphomaniacs.” 

They are psychopaths who, without being paranoid or feeble-minded, overestimate themselves and their ideas in the most absurd way, play about 

with philosophical or medical problems, write vast quantities of rubbish, and 

then ruin themselves by having their works published at their own expense. 

The defective critical faculty of such persons is often due not to feeble-

mindedness, for they can sometimes detect the mistakes of their opponents 

very well indeed, but to an incomprehensible and exorbitant optimism which 

prevents them from seeing objective difficulties and fills them with invincible 

hopes of a better time to come, when they will be justified and rewarded. Our 

patient, however, reminds us also of numerous “higher imbeciles” and 

crackpot inventors whose feeble- mindedness is confined to lack of criticism 

of their own particular quirks, and whose intelligence and efficiency in other 

departments are at least average.

[220] It should be emphasized that in the four cases we have reported the

intelligence was good throughout, in the first and second cases even very

good,  in  flagrant  contrast  to  the  outward  conduct  of  life,  which  was

extraordinarily  inept.  It  is  a  contrast  also  met  with  in  moral  insanity.  No

doubt the majority of cases of moral insanity mentioned in the literature were

more  or  less  feeble-minded,  but  there  can  also  be  no  doubt  that  in  the

majority  of  cases  the  feeble-mindedness  is  not  sufficient  to  explain  their

social incapacity. One gets the impression that the intellectual defect is more

or less irrelevant and that the main emphasis falls on emotional abnormality.

And here it is not so much a lack of ethical feelings that seems to play the

chief  role  as  an  excess  of  instinctual  drives  and  positive  inclinations.  A

simple  lack  of  ethical  feelings  would  be  more  likely  to  favour  the

development of a ruthless, coldly calculating “mauvais sujet” or criminal,

rather than one of those pleasure-seeking individuals, instinctively up in arms

against any form of social restriction, who unthinkingly fly off the rails at

every  point,  often  so  brainlessly  that  the  veriest  imbecile  could  see  the

senselessness of it. Tiling8 has recently pointed out that the main element in

the picture of moral insanity is an excessively sanguine temperament,9 which

serves as too mercurial a basis for the intellectual process and fails to give it

the  necessary  continuity  of  feeling-tone,  lacking  which  there  can  be  no

arguments  and  no  judgments  capable  of  exerting  any  influence  on  the

decisions reached by the will. A great deal has already been said and written

about  the  relation  between  intellect  and  will.  If  there  is  any  field  of

experience that teaches the dependence of action upon the emotions, that field

is  certainly  psychiatry.  The  inferiority  of  the  intellect  as  compared  withinstinctual impulses in regard to voluntary decisions is so striking that the

daily experiences even of a psychologically minded, amateur psychiatrist like

Baumann10  impel  him  to  remark  that  the  specific  activity  of  thought  is

always preceded by something “primarily characterological,” which provides

the necessary disposition for this or that action. Here Baumann is simply

voicing  Schopenhauer’s  “operari  sequitur  esse”  in  other  terms.  What  is

“primarily characterological” is, in the wider sense, the feeling-tone, whether

it  be  too  little  or  too  much  or  perverse;  in  the  narrower  sense  it  is  the

inclinations and drives, the basic psychological phenomena which make up

man’s empirical character, and this character is obviously the determining

factor in the actions of the great majority of people. The role played by the

intellect is mostly a subsidiary one, since all it does at best is to give the

already  existing  characterological  motive  the  appearance  of  a  logically

compelling sequence of ideas, and at worst (which is what usually happens)

to construct intellectual motives afterwards. This view has been expressed in

general and absolute terms by Schopenhauer,11 as follows: “Man ever does

what he wills, and does so by necessity; that is because he is what he wills;

for from what he is there follows by necessity everything he will ever do.”

[221] Even if we admit the fact that numerous decisions are mediated or first

considered by the intellect, we should still not forget that every link in a chain

of  ideas  has  a  definite  feeling-value,  which  is  the  one  essential  thing  in

coming to a decision and without which the idea is an empty shadow. But this

feeling-value, as a partial phenomenon, underlies any changes in the whole

sequence, which in the case of mania results in Wernicke’s “levelling-down

of  ideas.”  Consequently,  even  the  purest  intellectual  process  can  reach  a

decision  simply  through  feeling-values.  Hence  the  prime  motive  for  any

abnormal action, provided that the intellect is fairly well preserved, should be

sought in the realm of affect.

[222]  Wernicke12 regards  moral  insanity  as  a  distant  parallel  to  mania,

supposing the elementary symptom to be a levelling-down of ideas. In most

cases he finds an inner unrest and irritable moods, but omits all the other,

equally  important  manic  symptoms  like  flight  of  ideas,  pressure  of  talk,

morbid euphoria, etc.

[223] In surveying the literature on morally defective persons one cannot fail

to  be  struck  by  the  emotional  excitability  and  lability  so  frequently

reported.13 It would perhaps be worth while, when investigating the morally 

defective, to direct attention mainly to this emotional abnormality, or rather lability, and to consider its incalculable effects on the intellectual processes. 

In this way it might be possible to shed new light on cases which till now 

have been judged only from the standpoint of moral defect, and to regard 

them rather as examples of emotional inferiority in the sense of a relatively 

mild or serious manic mood disorder.  The  greatest  attention  along  the  

lines  suggested  would  be claimed by the cases of moral insanity which 

follow a periodic or cyclic course with “lucid intervals” and paroxysmal 

exultations.

[224] To sum up:

Manic  mood  disorder  is  a  clinical  condition  that  belongs  to  the  field  of

psychopathic inferiority, and is characterized by a stable, hypomanic complex

of symptoms generally dating back to youth.

Exacerbations of uncertain periodicity can be observed.

Alcoholism, criminality, moral insanity, and social instability or incapacity

are, in these cases, symptoms dependent on the hypomanic state.

[225] In conclusion, I would like to thank my chief, Professor Bleuler, for

kindly allowing me to make use of the above material.                                          IV

      A CASE OF HYSTERICAL STUPOR IN A

                    PRISONER IN DETENTION

[226] The following case of hysterical stupor in a prisoner in detention was

referred  to  the  Burghölzli  Clinic  for  a  medical  opinion.  Apart  from  the

publications of Ganser and Raecke, the literature on cases of this kind is very

scanty,  and  even  their  clinical  status  seems  uncertain  in  view  of  Nissl’s

criticisms.2 It therefore seems to me of interest to put such a case on record,  

particularly as  the  special clinical  picture it  presents  is of considerable 

importance for the psychopathology of hysteria in general.

[227] The patient, Godwina F., was born May 15, 1854. Her parents were

stated to have been healthy. Two of her four sisters died of consumption,

another died in a lunatic asylum, the fourth was normal. One brother was also

normal and very steady-going. The second brother was Carl F., an habitual

criminal.  Her  two  illegitimate  daughters  were  both  healthy.  Nothing  was

known  of  any  previous  major  illnesses.  The  patient  came  of  poor

circumstances; she began work in a factory at the age of 14. At 17 she started

a love affair, had her first illegitimate child at 18, her second at 28. She was

entirely dependent on her lover, who provided her regularly with money. She

alleged  that  three  years  earlier  she  had  received  from  him  some  20,000

marks,  which  she  quickly  spent.  Consequently  she  got  into  financial

difficulties,  let  her  hotel  bills  pile  up,  and  then  left  the  hotel,  repeatedly

promising the proprietor that she would pay as soon as she got the sum due–

10,000 marks–from her lover. Suspected of theft, she was arrested on May

31,  at  5  P.M.  At  the  preliminary  hearing  on  the  same  day,  and  on  the

following days, she conducted herself quite correctly, and her behaviour in

custody was altogether quiet and respectable.

[228]  Her  daughter  stated  that  the  patient  had  lately  been  irritable  and

depressed,  which  was  understandable  enough  in  view  of  her  difficult

situation. Otherwise nothing abnormal could be ascertained.

[229] When, on the morning of June 4, 1902, the cell was opened at 6:30, the 

patient was standing “rigid” by the door, came up to the wardress “quite 

rigid” and furiously demanded that she should “give back  the money she had 

stolen from her.” She waved away the food that was put before her, 

remarking that there was “poison in it.” She began to rage and shout, threw herself about in the cell, kept on asking for her money, saying that she 

wanted to see the judge at once, etc. At the call of the wardress, the jailer 

came with his wife and assistant, and together they tried to calm her down. 

Apparently there was a fairly lively scene; they held her by the hands and 

(according to the wardress) also “shook” her. They denied hitting her. The 

patient was then locked up again. When the cell was opened again at 11 

o’clock the patient had torn the top half of her clothes to shreds. She was still 

very worked up, said the jailer had hit her on the head, they had taken the 

money she got from her husband, 10,000 marks, all in gold, which she had 

counted on the table, etc. She showed an acute fear of the jailer.

[230] During the afternoon the patient was quieter. At 6 in the evening the

District  Medical  Officer  found  her  totally  disoriented.  The  following

symptoms  are  worth  noting:  almost  complete  lack  of  memory,  easily

provoked changes of mood, megalomaniac ideas, stumbling speech, complete

insensibility to deep pin-pricks, strong tremor of the hands and head, her

writing shaky and broken. She fancied she was in a luxury hotel, eating rich

food, that the prison personnel were hotel guests. Said she was very wealthy,

had millions; that during the night a man attacked her, who felt cold. At times

she was excitable, screaming and shouting gibberish. She did not know her

own name and could say nothing about her past life and her family. She no

longer recognized money.

[231] On the way to the asylum she was extremely nervous and frightened,

started at every little thing in an exaggerated way, clung to the attendant.

She was admitted at 8 P.M. on June 4.

[232]  The  patient  was  of  medium  height,  physically  well  nourished.  She

looked  exhausted  and  haggard.  Expression  of  the  face  was  nervous  and

tearful, as if she felt utterly helpless and hopeless.

[233]  Her  head,  tongue,  and  hands  trembled.  Depression  in  region  of

fontanelle; circumference of head 55 cm.; biparietal 15 cm.; occipitofrontal

18.5 cm. Pupils reacted normally to light and to accommodation. Gait rather

unsteady. No ataxia, no Romberg sign. Reflexes of forearm and knee- and

ankle-jerks brisk; pharyngeal reflex present.

[234] June 5. Patient passed a quiet night. Today she kept to her bed, quiet

and listless. Ate decently, was clean in her habits. No spontaneous sign of

affect; facial expression indicated a mood of nervous discontent without any

strong affects. She looked at me with a helpless gaze, jumped at all sudden

questions and quick movements. Her mood was very unstable and dependedvery much on the facial expression of her questioner. A serious face made her

cry at once, a laughing face made her laugh, too, and to a stern face she

reacted with instant fear, turned her head away, buried her face in the pillows,

saying: “Don’t hit me.”

[235] There were no symptoms of any major restriction of the field of vision. 

(Accurate tests were impossible owing to her psychic condition.) Skin 

sensibility, or rather sensibility to pain, exhibited peculiarities: at the first 

examination there was total analgesia on the legs and feet for deep, 

unobserved pinpricks, with normal sensibility on the  head  and  arms. After a 

few minutes the picture changed completely: total analgesia on the left arm 

and normal sensibility on the lower limbs—the very places where the 

opposite condition had been observed shortly before. The analgesic areas 

varied without rhyme or reason, being apparently independent of suggestion 

(though this cannot be ruled out with certainty). The striking thing was the 

patient’s behaviour during this examination: she resisted it, but did so in an 

impersonal way, not paying any attention to what I was doing, even when I 

intentionally administered the pricks quite openly, under her very eyes. 

Rather, as if consciously denying the real situation, she looked for some 

unknown cause of the pain in her nightgown or in the bedclothes.

[236]  The following conversation then took place: Where are you? — In 

Munich.

Where are you staying? — In a hotel.

What time is it? — I don’t know. What’s your name? — Don’t know.

Christian name? — Ida. (This was the name of her second daughter.) When

were you born? — I don’t know.

How  long  have  you  been  here?  —  Don’t  know.  Is  your  name  Meier  or

Müller? — Ida Müller. Have you a daughter? — No.

Surely you have! — Yes. Is she married? — Yes. Whom to? — To a man.

What is he? — Don’t know.

Isn’t he the director of a factory? — Yes, he is. (Wrong answer.) Do you

know Godwina F.? — Yes, she’s in Munich.

Are you Godwina F.? — Yes.

I thought your name was Ida Müller? — Yes, my name’s Ida.

Have you ever been to Zurich? — Never, but I’ve stopped with my son-in-

law.

Do you know Mr. Benz? (The son-in-law.) — Don’t know Mr. Benz, never

spoken with him.But you’ve stopped with him, haven’t you? — Yes.

Do you know Carl F? (Her brother.) — Don’t know him. Who am I? — The

headwaiter.

What is this? (A notebook.) — The menu.

Tell me the time. (I showed her my watch, which said 11.) — One o’clock.

What is three times four? — Two.

How many fingers is this (5)? — Three. No, look carefully! — Seven.

Count them. — 1, 2, 3, 5, 7.

Count up to 10. — 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 12.

[237] She couldn’t say the alphabet or do simple multiplication. When she

attempted to write, extremely strong tremors appeared; she could not produce

a single legible word with her right hand but managed a bit better with her

left. She could read only with the utmost difficulty, and frequently misread

the  letters.  With  numbers  it  was  even  worse;  she  could  not  distinguish

between 4 and 5. She recognized objects held before her. No symptoms of

apraxia.  She  proved  very  suggestible.  For  instance,  she  was  told  when

standing by the bed in her nightgown that she had a pretty silk dress on. “Yes,

very pretty,” she said, stroking the nightgown with her hand and looking

down at herself. Then she wanted to lie down in bed again. “But you can’t go

to bed with your clothes on!” Silently she began unbuttoning her nightgown,

then stopped suddenly: “But I’m not wearing a nightgown!”

[238] June 6. The patient’s condition was about the same, but she now knew

her name was F., though she still gave “Ida” as her first name. She knew her

age, but was otherwise totally disoriented.

[239] June 7.

How long have you been here? — A long time. Twenty years? — Yes, a very

long time.

You’ve only been here a week, haven’t you? — Only a week?

Where are you? — In Munich. Must I always keep telling you?

Where are you staying? — In hospital. There are lots of sick people here, but

I’m not sick.

What’s the matter with these sick people? — Headache. Who am I? — The

doctor.

Have you seen me before? — No.

So today is the first time? — No, yesterday.

What day of the week is it? — Sunday. (Wrong answer.) Month? — The

second.Year? — I don’t know. 1899? — Yes.

No, it’s 1892! — Yes, of course.

Or is it 1902? — Yes, yes, 1902! (In an emphatic tone of voice.) No, it’s

1900, of course it’s 1900, I was all muddled up.

Weren’t you in prison recently? — No, I’ve never been in prison. A man with

a beard hit me.

Did that happen here? — Yes. Have you any debts? — No.

Yes, you have! — Well, I have a lot of money. Where from? — (No answer.)

How much? — Quite a lot.

How  much,  then?  —  I  don’t  know,  I  never  counted  it.  It  belongs  to  my

daughter.

Who was the father of your children? — He died a long time ago. How old

are you? — Fifty.

What year were you born? — In May. What year were you born? — I don’t

know.

Is your daughter pregnant? (She was very near her time.) — What’s that

mean?

Is your daughter expecting a baby? — No, it died.

Have you only one daughter? — Yes, only one. But you have two daughters!

— Yes.

What is the name of your married daughter’s husband? — I don’t know.

[240] The patient talked quite well today, only stumbling over the more 

difficult words. She was slow at reading, but didn’t make too many mistakes. 

Comprehension of what she read was much hindered by a high degree of 

distractibility. Only quite short sentences of the simplest order were  

understood and reproduced. Longer sentences were neither understood nor 

reproduced, though the patient did everything she was asked. She recited the 

alphabet faultlessly. Her counting still had gaps: 10, 11, 12, 13, —, 15, 16, 

17, 18, —, 20.

[241] She still confused 4 and 5 when writing. Her writing was very much

distorted by the tremor.

[242] On the following days her condition remained essentially the same.

[243] June 9. Better today, quick reaction, greeted me in a friendly manner.

Orientation in space was correct, she knew her name was Godwina F. But

had no idea when, how, or why she came here. Knew only of one daughter,

Ida. Knew nothing of the existence of her brother, Carl F., nor of her arrest,

her son-in-law, etc. No gross disturbances of sensibility ascertainable.[244] June 10. Received a visit from her daughter Ida this morning. Still

remembered  it  in  the  evening.  Orientation  maintained.  She  asked  the

wardress about the date.

[245] On being told that she was in detention, she exhibited strong affect,

burst into tears, refused to believe it.

[246] June 11. Again a little better than yesterday. She was oriented as to

place  and  time,  but  complained  of  bad  headache.  Lay  quietly  in  bed,

apparently  very  exhausted.  Very  distractible,  and  had  to  be  prodded  into

answering. Her memory of events from June 6 back to several months

before her arrest was grossly impaired. She had only the haziest ideas about

her last stay in Zurich. She knew that she last stayed at a hotel run by a Mr.

König, but could not remember the name of the hotel, despite my insistence.

For the period immediately preceding her arrest, as also for the period of her

detention, she had absolute amnesia. She could only remember that “a man

hit her, not here, but somewhere else, probably in another hospital.”

[247] Her memory starts again from about June 10. She still remembered her

daughter’s visit yesterday, but not her painful agitation on being informed

that she was in detention. She remembered from June 9 or even earlier that

she thought at first she was in Munich (where she had in fact been six months

previously).  Despite  insistent  examination,  nothing  more  could  be

ascertained.

[248] Very nervous and frightened at the least thing. Easily fatigued, and

several times wearily closed her eyes during the conversation.

[249] June 12. Fully oriented. Had all sorts of ideas about her situation.

Thought she came here because she was ill with bad headache and flickering

before her eyes. Said she had been told the police brought her (she got this

from the wardress), but that she knew absolutely nothing about it. Also that

she had been in prison, but did not know how long, maybe a week. In prison

she had been beaten because she said her money had been stolen. She thought

she had put the money on the table and then it suddenly vanished.

[250] She also remembered her large debts and the charge of stealing. She

was extremely nervous and easily tired, rather unclear in the head, and had to

think a long time before answering.

[251] On the following days, no essential change.

[252]  June  18.  Not  so  frightened  or  so  easily  fatigued.  Gave  a  coherent

anamnesis, but it still contained a fair number of errors due to distractibility,

particularly in the dates. Her memory was fairly clear up tothe day of her arrest (May 31); from then on, uncertain. She had to think a

long time before remembering the place where she was arrested; said it was

in the morning (instead of 5 P.M.). She knew she had been up for a hearing,

apparently only once, and said she’d been shut up in the cell for a week. She

said the hearing took place on the first or second day of detention (June 2).

(In reality it was immediately after her arrest, at 6 P.M., and on the following

morning; she was also present at the examination of several witnesses.) She

still  vaguely  remembered  seeing  her  daughter  there.  (The  daughter  was

arrested under the same charge.) She thought she had to sign something, but

did not know what. On the second or third night “she was quite positive that

she put the 10,000 marks which she’d been expecting on the table.” The

money was a great joy to her. Then it seemed as if the door suddenly opened

and a black man came in, with bent head, who seized her by the shoulders

with cold hands and pushed her into the pillows. Suddenly the thought came

to her: “Christ, he’s after my money!” She then came to  herself  from  sheer 

fright, still feeling the cold hands on her shoulders; convinced herself that the 

door was shut, and looked round for her money on the table. It had vanished. 

She was in despair; she could not find her way about and no longer knew 

where she was. Next morning two men and two women came whom she did 

not know. One of the men seized her by the hair and hit her. She screamed 

and “must have lost consciousness.” “It was just like being dead.” When she 

came to herself again, she was lying here (in the asylum) in bed. She thought 

she was in Munich, but the wardress told her it was Zurich.

[253]  She  now  felt  pretty  well,  except  for  the  headache  and  for  sleeping

badly. Only at night she had bad dreams; for instance, of lying on kittens, or

that swarms of cats were crawling over her.

[254]  The  patient  still  exhibited  marked  torpor  and  considerably  reduced

power  of  attention.  Comprehension  good.  Retention  very  bad;  she  failed

altogether to remember stories of any length. She was good at short, simple

sums, but could not solve more complicated ones such as 3 × 17,

7 × 17, 35 ÷ 6, 112 + 73, as she always forgot one part of the calculation.

Rapid blunting of attention owing to high fatigability.

[255] Precise sensibility tests showed poor discrimination between qualities

of  touch  and  temperature,  particularly  in  the  lower  limbs.  Perimetric

examination showed normal field of vision. No analgesia.

[256]  In  the  evening  the  patient  was  put  for  a  short  time  into  hypnotic

somnambulism by means of a few passes and closing of the eyes. Undersuggestion, she drank wine and vinegar from an empty glass. On being told

that it was an apple, she bit a pen wiper and pronounced it very sour.

[257]  Cautious  questioning  revealed  that  the  retrograde  amnesia  for  the

period from May 31 to the night of June 3 disappeared under hypnosis. The

patient related that she was arrested at 5 P.M. on the Bellevueplatz, where she

was taking a walk with her daughter. The daughter was apprehended first,

whereupon the patient, who was a few paces behind her, came up to see what

was  the  matter.  The  hearing  took  place  at  6  P.M.  and  continued  on  the

following morning. (The details were confirmed by the daughter.) The total

amnesia for the period from the night of June 5 to June 10 resisted hypnosis.

No memory of this period could be awakened despite repeated attempts.

[258] The headache disappeared under suggestion. Deep sleep was suggested

for the night, also amnesia for the whole content of the hypnosis. The pains in

the head were much better after she was wakened, and at night she slept

uninterruptedly for eight hours.

[259] On the following days she was hypnotized fairly regularly, with good 

results. In  each hypnosis  she showed  continuity of memory  with the 

previous ones.

[260] June 24. The patient now spent the whole time out of bed, doing some  

kind of handiwork. Except for a certain dreaminess and distractibility, there 

were no more symptoms of note. The retrograde partial amnesia and the total 

amnesia continued unaltered. The patient

proved very suggestible, so that posthypnotic suggestions were realized too.

[261] June 27. Today it was possible to penetrate the total amnesia by a trick.

[262] The patient was put to sleep in the usual way. She at once became

cataleptic and profoundly analgesic.

[263] Are you hypnotized now? — Yes.

Are you asleep? — Yes.

But you can’t be asleep, as you’re talking to me! — Yes, that’s right, I’m not

asleep.

Look out, I’m now going to hypnotize you! (This procedure was repeated

several times. The patient lay quite slack; the slight twitching of the arms that

always occurs under hypnosis stopped.)

Are you asleep now? — (No answer.) Are you asleep? — (No answer.)

You will be able to speak presently! (Passes were made over the mouth.)

Are you asleep? — (Softly and hesitatingly:) Yes. How did you get here? — I

don’t know.You are now in the detention cell, aren’t you? — Yes.

And now the door is opening? — Yes, and a policeman comes in, he’s taking

me to the asylum.

Then how did you get here? — In a cab.

You are now in the cab. — Yes, I’m awfully afraid in the cab, there’s thunder

and lightning and pouring rain. I’m always afraid of the big fat man who

beats me.

Now the cab stops, you are in the asylum. What time is it? — Eight o’clock.

I’m sitting in a little room, a gentleman with a beard comes in and says I

needn’t be afraid, nobody’s going to hit me.… then two women come and

then another, they put me to bed.

[264] Here the memory broke off again. The patient’s statements correspond

exactly with reality. She was brought to the asylum in a cab, by a police

sergeant, at 8 P.M., during a violent thunderstorm. On the way she clung

frantically to the sergeant, saying in a terrified voice that she “was going to

be beaten again.” A doctor was present at her admission, also there were two

senior wardresses, and the nurse came soon afterwards.

[265]  During  the  next  fortnight  the  patient’s  general  condition  underwent

considerable improvement with occasional use of hypnosis. The scope of the

amnesias remained unaltered.

[266]  June  21.  During  the  night  the  patient  suddenly  jumped  out  of  bed,

totally confused, in great terror, absolutely disoriented, and only after much

persuasion could she be quieted down sufficiently to go back to bed. She

stayed in bed this morning, trembling and starting violently when spoken to,

expressing vague fears and complaining of dizziness and headache.

[267] Immediate inquiries revealed that yesterday, at a concert given in the

asylum, she met a male patient who, before being admitted here, had put her

in a very unpleasant situation indeed by blurting out the whole story of her

brother, the habitual criminal, in the hotel where she stayed before her arrest.

She  had  already  complained,  at  the  concert  and  afterwards,  about  the

unpleasant impression the patient made upon her. After being ordered two

hours’ rest in bed, which had a very favourable effect, she was examined with

the utmost care, and gave the following information:

[268] On going to bed yesterday evening she had dizziness and “noises” in

the head. But she slept very well and now felt quite clear. She could not

remember anything unpleasant that happened yesterday. When asked whether

she remembered yesterday’s concert, she suddenly got very red and her eyesfilled with tears, but she said in an indifferent tone of voice

that she remembered the concert quite well—which she proved by 

mentioning various details. Nothing unpleasant had happened at the concert. 

All indirect questions remained without result, only the direct question 

whether she had seen the patient M. reminded her of the incident. She now 

related the affair in an indifferent tone of  voice, without showing any 

noticeable affects.

[269] July 22. Passed the night quietly. No deterioration.

[270] In today’s hypnosis the amnesia for yesterday’s twilight state 

disappeared. She was put back into the state of the previous night on its being 

suggested to her that she was frightened and did not know where she was. 

She then showed how she jumped out of bed. The wardress called out: “Miss 

F., be quiet and go back to bed.” But she did not go back, tried to hide 

herself, and felt terribly frightened; then a  fellow patient came to comfort 

and soothe her. (Details of her account could be objectively  confirmed.)

[271] July 24. Still complained of headache and sleeping badly.

[272]  It  was  suddenly  discovered  that  even  without  double  hypnosis  the

patient had a hypnotic recollection of the twilight state from June 4 to June

10. Her memory now goes back to the morning of June 5, of which she

reproduced the scenes of the visits and the examination with a wealth of

detail. A fair amount was also elicited from the days following the 5th, but

this could not be verified for lack of precise information. As a post- hypnotic

suggestion she was told to remember the episode from the twilight state. In

place  of  the  short  sleep,  the  hypnosis  was  followed  by  hysterical

somnambulism, in which the patient mistook me for her lover and addressed

tender  words  to  “Ferdinand.”  By  means  of  a  few  passes  and  energetic

suggestions for sleeping, the twilight state was terminated and then converted

into simple sleep. Total amnesia after waking. The post-hypnotic suggestion

that she would remember her admission to the asylum was not realized.

[273] The patient was discharged on July 25 under police escort.

[274] On August 8, 1902, she wrote in a letter to an acquaintance in the

asylum: “Ever since I’ve been here [abroad] I’ve felt unwell, when I wake up

at night I don’t know where I am, and I get the feeling that I can’t think any

more. I have to jump up and run about the room until I know where I am

again.”

[275]  The  patient  wrote  that  she  was  in  a  difficult  situation  because  of

money.                                            *

[276] This case has several interesting peculiarities to offer. It is undoubtedly

a purely hysterical ailment.

[277] While in detention, the patient suffered from a delirious twilight state,

which after a short pause passed into a stuporous stage characterized by the

symptom of the “senseless answer,” strong disturbance of attention despite

fairly  good  comprehension,  high  suggestibility,  fatigability,  disorientation,

timidity, nervousness, absence of catatonic symptoms, and disturbances of

sensibility.

[278] In his lecture on a “remarkable example of an hysterical twilight state,”

Ganser,3 in  1897,  gave  a  cursory  account  of  states  which  were  mostly

observed in prisoners in detention. The picture most of the patients present is

one  of  hallucinatory  confusion;  many  exhibit  active  fear,  together  with

various disturbances of sensibility. Generally, after a few days, there is a

striking change, sometimes an improvement, followed by amnesia for the

attack. These states owe their characteristic features to the “symptom of the

senseless  answer,”  which  consists  in  the  patients’  “inability  to  answer

correctly the simplest questions put to them, although it was obvious from the

kind  of  answers  they  gave  that  they  had  understood  the  meaning  of  the

questions  fairly  well.  Their  answers  revealed  a  positively  astounding

ignorance  and  a  surprising  lack  of  knowledge  which  they  definitely  must

have possessed or must still possess.”

[279]  An  alternating  state  of  consciousness  with  defects  of  memory,  in

conjunction with other hysterical symptoms, provides the diagnostic basis for

an  hysterical  twilight  state.  Raecke4 has  made  a  thorough  study  of  such

cases, and particularly of the symptom of the senseless answer. The cases he

published  in  his  first  work  were  not  all  of  the  same  kind  and  were  not,

perhaps,  altogether  unexceptional;  consequently  they  provoked  sharp

criticism from Nissl,5 who accused Raecke of faulty diagnosis and asserted

that  “Ganser’s  symptom  of  irrelevant  talk  is  first  and  foremost  a  special

manifestation of catatonic negativism.” The irrelevant talk of hebephrenics

and catatonics is a very well-known phenomenon, and I do not believe an

observer with any experience could mistake it for the “senseless answers” of

hysterics. The most he could do would be to overlook a catatonia masked by

hysteriform  symptoms.  When  the  inadequate  answers  are  the  direct

manifestation of catatonia, they are clearly characterized as catatonic by the

significant  absence  of  affectivity  and  by  associations  which  seize  onirrelevant  points  in  the  question,  thus  differing  essentially  from  the

deliberately  senseless  answers  of  the  hysteric.  The  irrelevant  talk  of

hebephrenics  is  often  due  merely  to  lack  of  interest,  to  the  “don’t  care”

attitude typical of such patients, perhaps also to negativistic compulsion. The

senseless  answer,  on  the  other  hand,  is  sometimes  a  product  of  semi-

intentional negation, which opposes the effort to give an adequate answer,

and  sometimes  a  product  of  a  deep  restriction  of  consciousness,  which

prevents  conscious  association  of  the  elements  needed  for  an  adequate

answer. As an accompanying phenomenon very typical of these latter cases,

we would emphasize the stuporous behaviour of the majority of the patients.

Raecke, in his second publication,6 describes several such cases of stupor,

having  already  established  stuporous  behaviour  in  three  of  the  five  cases

mentioned in his first publication.

[280] Severe temporary loss of the intellectual faculties is a symptom not

uncommonly  met  with  in  the  field  of  hysteria.  Here  I  would  mention  in

passing the cases of alternating consciousness described by Azam,7  Weir

Mitchell,8 Schroeder van der Kolk,9 MacNish,10 etc. Some of the patients

had, after a prodromal stage of sleep, lost all knowledge even of the simplest

things.  Weir  Mitchell’s  case  did  not  even  know  the  meanings  of  words.

Similar  intellectual  defects  are  also  found  in  the  moria  states  of  young

hysterics.

[281] The phenomenon we are discussing has, however, a very different 

clinical setting in our case, and assumes a special aspect when combined with 

other symptoms. If we take Ganser’s syndrome to mean a passing state of 

altered consciousness, amnesically separated from the normal state, in 

conjunction with exaggerated, negativistic senselessness, then its inner  

affinity with Raecke’s description of stupor in convicts is unmistakable. This 

stupor is often found in  criminals,  generally  soon after  their arrest, and 

may be regarded as a consequence of the excitements  and hardships they 

have undergone. An hallucinatory prodromal stage, preceding the stupor, is 

also found in Ganser’s syndrome with the same clinical symptoms and can 

dominate the situation for a longer or shorter period. Similarly, disturbances 

of sensibility are common to both. The question as to the extent of amnesia is 

very obscure; like most hysterical amnesias, it is difficult and sometimes 

impossible to circumscribe. Course and prognosis are equally uncertain. One 

can only say that in this matter the same is true as in traumatic neuroses, 

where the illness stands in reciprocal relationship to the injuriousness of the cause.

[282] Our case seems to me particularly suited to throw light on those aspects

of the Ganser-Raecke picture which are still relatively unexplored because

they are so difficult to observe, that is, on the still open question of amnesia

and the psychological mechanism of the most characteristic symptoms.

[283]  In  our  patient,  whose  anamnesis  had  nothing  special  to  offer,  the

picture  described  by  Raecke  developed  in  singularly  pure  form  under  the

obvious influence of detention. In the loneliness of solitary confinement she

naturally  became  intensely  preoccupied  with  the  misfortune  that  had

suddenly befallen her; moreover, she was worried about her daughter, who

was in the last stages of pregnancy, and on top of that there was the anxiety

and agitation caused by the charge of theft (which later turned out to be

false). All this led to the outbreak of a delirious state on the fourth night of

her detention, with violent motor excitement. As chief content of the delirium

we find a syndrome which “every prison psychosis can offer for a time.”11 It

consists  of  that  well-known  mixture  of  hallucinatory  wish-fulfilment  and

delusions of being wronged. We must regard as such a symptom of detention

the episode which began like a vivid dream with a wish-fulfilling illusion and

ended in a state of fearful perplexity and lack of judgment, where nothing

could be corrected despite the fact that she was more or less awake. She

dreamt that she received the expected 10,000 marks and put them on the

table; a black figure suddenly comes in and gives her a violent fright; she

leaps  up;  the  hallucinations  vanish,  leaving  behind  them  the  delusions  of

being robbed, poisoned, etc. In the course of the next day the wish-fulfilling

delusion gained the upper hand: the patient thought she was in a luxurious

hotel, was very rich, had millions. At the same time she showed marked

deficiency of intellect, which the prison doctor who was called in took for

dementia paralytica.

[284] This intensification of a wish-fulfilling delusion to a real delusion of

grandeur may perhaps have been due to extreme restriction of the mental

field of vision, since, as Wernicke points out,12 delusions of grandeur may

easily arise when there is a lack of orienting ideas and a predominance of

egotistic thinking. Raecke noticed much the same thing in his cases.

[285] On being admitted to the asylum, the patient presented a picture of the 

most profound restriction of consciousness, with marked anxiety and 

perplexity. A little later this state passed into a quieter phase characterized by 

absolute lack of psychic content; her consciousness was a tabula rasa. Continuity of all memories seems to have been broken; she fancied she was 

in a hotel, but this was rather a matter of guesswork, a faint echo of her 

previous life, than a real misinterpretation of her surroundings  in  delirium.  

She  had  lost  all  knowledge  of  the  simplest things, even of her own name, 

and, as though it occurred to her in a dream, gave her daughter’s name as her 

own. In striking contrast to this marked deficiency of intellect was her good 

comprehension. She understood requests and questions well; only in her 

answers, or rather in her centrifugal psychic performance, was any 

disturbance evident. As might be expected, the power of attention was almost 

entirely absent, so that the whole psychic process was broken up into 

apparently disconnected elements. This picture was completed by her 

suggestibility; anything one told the patient or forced her to do supplied the 

only content in her mental void, and this behaviour was quite consistent with 

her behaviour under hypnosis.

[286] This stuporous state is so far removed from catatonic stupor that the

latter has no bearing whatever on a differential diagnosis of our case.

[287] Despite this apparently absolute mental blank, we have a number of

clues to support the hypothesis of a psychic process, though it is abnormal in

not being illuminated by consciousness.

[288] When asked her Christian name, the patient replied, “Ida.” Ida was the

name of the daughter who was arrested with her. Asked whether she knew

anybody called Godwina F., she replied, “Yes, she is in Munich.” The patient

herself was formerly in Munich. The idea that she was now in Munich, a faint

continuity of memory with her earlier personality, obviously gave her the

shadowy idea of her former real stay in Munich, and hence a recollection of

her real name.

[289] Was she ever in Zurich? “Never, but I’ve stopped there with my son- 

in-law.” The son-in-law did, in fact, live in Zurich, and the name “Zurich” 

stirred up memories of the unpleasant experiences she  had there, which were 

also mainly connected with her son-in-law. This double connection thrust the 

memory of the son-in-law to the forefront, while the obvious answer—that 

she had been in Zurich—was rejected. We shall see more of this curious 

mechanism which is so characteristic of hysterical ailments.

[290] Asked what was the matter with the patients in the asylum, she replied,

“Headache.” This answer shows that she was unconsciously oriented to her

surroundings, but that her supraliminal consciousness could only produce a

distant association to the right idea.[291]  The psychology of the next answer is very similar. Asked whether she 

had recently been in prison, she replied, “No, I’ve never been in prison. A 

man with a beard hit me.” Here again the right answer cannot be given, or 

rather it is flatly denied, and an idea closely associated with it is produced 

instead. The reverse, too, sometimes happens—an affirmative answer is 

given as a result of suggestibility, but must be denied immediately afterwards 

because of her peculiar negativism. Thus, when asked whether it was 1902, 

she answered, “Yes, yes, 1902—no, it’s 1900, of course it’s 1900. I was all 

muddled.”

[292] Her orientation was quite unmistakable, however, in the episode of the

suggested silk dress. The suggestion that she was wearing a silk dress was

realized at once, and lasted until she wanted to undress in order to go to bed.

At  that  moment  the  unconscious  orientation  broke  through;  she  stopped

suddenly  and  said,  “But  I’m  not  wearing  a  nightgown!”  She  knew

subconsciously that she was standing there in her nightgown and that she

would  be  completely  naked  if  she  took  it  off.  The  feeling  of  shame  was

stronger  than  the  suggestion  and  prevented  her  from  undressing—not,

however, with the right motivation, but because of a suggested association to

the right idea.

[293] With the improvement beginning June 9, despite fairly good orientation 

as to time and place, there was a striking defect of memory for all unpleasant 

events in the recent past, including all persons who were in any way 

associated with unpleasant memories for the patient. She remembered only 

her daughter Ida, but had no knowledge of her other daughter and of the son-

in-law she quarrelled with, or of  her brother the criminal. Although on June 

10 she showed continuity of memory with the previous day, she no longer 

remembered the information which she received with such lively affect, 

concerning her arrest and detention. So once again something unpleasant was 

repressed out of the sphere of consciousness.

[294]  As  can  be  seen  from  the  patient’s  history,  the  scope  of  her

consciousness gradually reconstituted itself, except for her defective memory

of the whole period of the twilight state (which remained irreparable up till

the  end  of  observation).  As  already  reported,  elucidation  of  her  summary

memory from the moment of arrest to the outbreak of psychosis in the night

of June 3 presented no difficulty at all. Much greater obstacles stood in the

way of hypnotic elucidation of the twilight state. However, I succeeded in the

end, by making use of two tricks mentioned in the literature. The first wasdevised by Janet.13 In order to put his well-known medium Lucie into a

deeper sleep for a definite purpose, he would hypnotize Lucie II (that is,

Lucie I, already hypnotized into somnambulism) by means of passes, just as

if she were not yet hypnotized. By means of this procedure Janet discovered

Lucie III, whose memory was like a large circle enclosing the two smaller

circles of the memories of Lucie II and Lucie I; that is to say, it had at its

disposal memories not accessible to either of them. As an intermediate state

between Lucie II and Lucie III, Janet found a deep sleep in which Lucie was

absolutely uninfluenceable.14 The same thing was observed in our patient.

The short sleeping state which followed the second dose of hypnotism, and

from  which  it  was  rather  difficult  to  get  the  patient  to  speak,  probably

corresponds to the intermediate state mentioned by Janet.

[295] The second trick I used was the method used by Forel in Naef’s famous

case.15 This consists in putting the patient each time into the appropriate

situation,  thereby  giving  him  points  d’appui  round  which  the  other

associations aggregate like crystals.

[296] By means of these two procedures it was possible to demonstrate that

our hypothesis of an unconscious but none the less certain orientation— even

during  the  deepest  twilight  state—was  correct.  We  therefore  find  the

remarkable fact that the apparently severe disturbance of the psychic process

in the Ganser-Raecke twilight state is merely a superficial one, affecting only

the extent of consciousness, and that the unconscious mental activity is little

affected, if at all.

[297] The psychological mechanism whereby such a disturbance comes about

is nicely illustrated in the story of the little relapse which was observed in the

asylum, when the patient had that unpleasant encounter at the concert. In the

evening she complained of dizziness and noise in her ears, and that night she

suddenly woke up, totally disoriented, confused, and frightened. The next day

she  had  amnesia  for  the  nocturnal  interlude,  and,  when  examined  for  its

aetiology, displayed a systematic negativism that prevented her from saying

what  had  really  happened,  although  the  words  were  almost  put  into  her

mouth. During this recital, she exhibited no adequate affect, but her sudden

blushing and the tears in her eyes showed that the sore spot had been touched.

[298] Here we have the primary phenomenon in the genesis of hysterical

symptoms  which  Breuer  and  Freud  have  termed  hysterical  conversion.16

According to them, every person has a certain threshold up to which he can

tolerate  “unabreacted”  affects  and  allow  them  to  pile  up.  Anything  thatexceeds that threshold leads—cum grano salis!—to hysteria. In the language

of Breuer and Freud, our patient’s threshold had been reached and exceeded

as  a  result  of  her  detention,  and  the  unabreacted  affect—the  “excitement

proceeding from the affective idea”—flowed off into abnormal channels and

got “converted.” Just how it will flow off is “determined” in most cases by

chance or by the individual; that is to say, the line of least resistance is in one

case  the  convulsion  mechanism,  in  another  sensibility,  in  a  third  the

disturbance of consciousness, and so on. In our case, to judge from all the

crucial points in the patient’s history, the determining factor seems to have

been  the  idea  of  forgetting.  Her  “not  knowing”  turns  out  to  be  partly  an

unconscious and partly a half- conscious not wanting to know. Raecke thinks

that the not-knowing he found so remarkable in his patients may be due to

fear, the fear of not knowing the simplest things, which, by auto-suggestion,

leads to a real and effective not-knowing. This may often be true; but with

our patient the semi-intentional repression of anything unpleasant from her

consciousness  was  such  a  striking  and  dominant  feature  that  Ganser’s

symptom  seems  to  be  altogether  accessory.  It  may  be  regarded  as  a

pathologically exaggerated consequence of the unconscious urge to forget,

since her conscious mind drew back not only from feeling-toned ideas but

from other zones of memory as well.

[299] As to the clinical status of our case, we must define it as the “hysterical 

stupor of the convict” in the sense used by Raecke  This special form of 

hysterical illness—if we leave out of account the “prison complex” of 

hallucinations and delusions–may be described on the basis of the material at 

present available as a “prison psychosis,” since, with few exceptions, the 

cases so far known have been observed only in prisoners.

[300] In conclusion, I would like to thank my chief, Professor Bleuler, for his

kindness in referring this case to me.                                          V

                  ON SIMULATED INSANITY

        A MEDICAL OPINION ON A CASE OF

                      SIMULATED INSANITY

[301] Several cases of simulation have recently been published by Bolte,2

who  in  the  course  of  his  article  remarks  that  the  question  of  simulation

presents fewer difficulties in practice than it does in theory. I would not like

to  go  all  the  way  with  this  statement.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  cases  do

occasionally  come  up  for  observation  which  are  extremely  confusing  and

create any amount of difficulty for the specialists who are asked to give a

medical  opinion.  It  is  precisely  on  the  practical  side  that  the  art  of  the

diagnostician  is  sometimes  taxed  to  the  utmost.  Generally  speaking,

simulation used to be suspected much more frequently and injudiciously than

it is now, yet in spite of this the older literature abounds in cases on which the

observers were unable to reach agreement. Today, through our knowledge of

the  various  clinical  pictures  of  dementia  praecox  and  hysteria,  we  have

advanced a step further, and have also gained rather more insight into the

question of simulation, though this is not to say that we have acquired greater

certainty  in  regard  to  doubtful  cases.  We  possess  no  infallible  method  of

unmasking the malingerer and are as dependent as ever on the subjective

impression he makes on the observer. As Bolte rightly points out, it is always

a  risky  business  to  publish  these  cases  at  all,  for  it  requires  considerable

literary talent to lend an air of plausibility to subjective impressions. It is an

unfortunate fact, as Fürstner says,3 that the observer cannot convey to the

reader all the detailed nuances of the picture—the changing facial expression,

the attitude, verbal response, and so forth. Hence no author need be surprised

if the reader doubts his cases of simulation or at least finds in them something

to cavil at. In any conscientious appraisal of simulation there is so much to

take into account and so much to investigate that, in reading a report that is

the least bit summary, one is apt to regret the omission of this or that item

which seems of importance.

[302] Modern diagnostic requirements are far higher than formerly, when, 

strange as it seems, it was often simply a question of whether the case fit into 

the purely theoretical scheme of the psychoses or not. The prolonged 

controversy over the famous case of Reiner Stockhausen [pars. 346ff. below] is particularly instructive in this respect. Since then, the theory of hysteria has 

brought us so much that is new and important that we are obliged to reckon 

with many more factors today than we were twenty years ago. Indeed, it is a 

well-known fact that the majority of malingerers are mentally abnormal and 

consist in the main of degenerates of various descriptions. How frequently 

hysteria occurs in such individuals it is difficult to say, but judging by other 

types of mental degeneracy the percentage must  be very  high, assuming,  of 

course,  that one takes  as hysterical all “psychogenic” symptoms. The 

question of an hysterical disposition is of great importance in diagnosing 

simulation. The lying of hysterics is proverbial, and in the domain of 

psychiatry hysteria furnishes perhaps the most cases of simulation. We have 

reason to suppose that for simulated insanity, too, some importance attaches 

to hysteria, considering that a fairly large number of hysterical psychoses 

occur among persons in detention and among convicts, who are naturally 

greatly interested in simulating. Here I would refer the reader to the 

numerous studies of twilight states recently made by Ganser.

[303] In judging a doubtful case of simulation, one must bear in mind that

successful simulation is not a simple thing at all, but often makes the greatest

demands  in  the  matter  of  shamming,  self-control,  and  psychic  toughness.

This cannot be achieved by mere lying, for the deception must be kept up

with consistency and unshakable will power for weeks or even months on

end. All this requires an extraordinary amount of energy, coupled with an art

of shamming that would do credit to the most accomplished actor. Such cases

are rare, but they nevertheless exist. There can be no doubt that among the

ranks of the degenerate and criminally minded there are persons who possess

a quite unusual amount of energy and self-control, which apparently extends

even  to  the  vasomotor  processes.4 Exceptions  of  this  kind  are  certainly

uncommon,  for  the  criminal  is  characterized,  as  a  rule,  by  an  impulsive

energy that tires quickly, rather than by endurance.

The art of shamming, however, seems to be a gift that is widely disseminated

among criminals. It is found chiefly in thieves and poisoners. The mendacity

of thieves is well known; Krauss5 says of them: “All common criminals lie, 

but their lies are clumsy and palpable. Only thieves lie skilfully and naturally. 

They lie unthinkingly, without a moment’s hesitation, as soon as they open 

their mouths. They no longer even know that they are lying. It has become so 

much second nature to them that they believe their own lies.” In agreement 

with this we find a preponderance of thieves among malingerers. Of the ten malingerers investigated by Fritsch, seven were up for larceny, and two of the 

other three had previous convictions for theft. Among 8,430 admissions to 

this asylum, I  found eleven malingerers.6 Of these, six had been investigated

for offences against property (larceny, embezzlement, swindling), two had

previous convictions for theft, and one had been investigated for attempted

poisoning.

[304] Malingerers in this category of criminals therefore have a natural 

predisposition to  deceive. If  we discount  the degree of  intelligence and 

accidental factors which might assist simulation, then the one who plays his 

role best will be the one who lies most skilfully. The most confident of all 

liars are pathological swindlers, and the convincing thing about their lies is 

the fact that they believe them themselves, as they are no longer able to 

distinguish between truth and fiction. They differ from the actor in that the 

latter always knows when his role is at an end, whereas the former allow 

themselves to be hypnotized by the game they are playing, and keep it up 

with a curious intermingling of two mutually exclusive spheres of thought. 

Delbrück even speaks of a real double consciousness.7 The  more  an  actor

enters into his role the more he loses himself in it, and the more his acting is

accompanied by unconscious emotional movements of the body,8 which is

just  why  he  “acts”  so  convincingly.  The  dramatic  build-up  of  his  role  is

certainly not a pure act of volition, but is chiefly dependent on a special

disposition  whose  essential  ingredient  seems  to  be  a  certain  amount  of

suggestibility. The greater this subjective suggestibility is, the more likely it

is  that  the  role  which  began  as  a  mere  game  will  falsify  the  reality,  so

captivating the subject as to replace his original personality. Pick9 has given 

us a beautiful example of the way a daydream changes into a real twilight 

state. He tells the story of a young girl who flirted with the idea that she was 

an empress. She painted her role in ever more glowing colours, got so 

absorbed in it that in the end it turned into an hysterical twilight state with 

complete splitting  of  consciousness.  The  second  case  reported  by  Pick 

concerns a girl who dreamt herself into sexual situations and finally staged a 

rape on herself by lying naked on the floor and tying herself to the table and 

chairs. An interesting case of this kind is reported in a dissertation done under 

Wernicke:10 A girl fantasized that she was engaged, and she received letters

and  flowers  from  her  fiancé  which  she  had  sent  herself,  with  disguised

handwriting. I observed a case of the same type in a young girl who played

an elaborately contrived dream-role in her somnambulistic twilight states.11Such phenomena are not so very rare and can be observed in all gradations of

intensity, from fanciful exaggerations to genuine twilight states. In all cases

they  begin  with  a  feeling-toned  idea  which  develops  on  the  basis  of

suggestibility  into  an  automatism.  These  experiences  must  be  taken  into

account in a study of simulation. We should not forget that a large number of

malingerers are hysterical12 and therefore provide favourable soil for auto-

suggestions and disturbances of consciousness.

[305] There is a Japanese proverb which says: “Thieving begins with lying.”

In the same way, congenital mendacity and an hysterical disposition are the

beginning of simulation. The art of conscious shamming is a rare gift, so rare

that  it  cannot  be  presumed  in  all  malingerers,  for  sustained  shamming

requires an energy that exceeds the common measure both in quality and

quantity. It ought not to be assumed so long as the commoner symptom of

hysteria cannot be ruled out with certainty. We often find in hysteria all those

mechanisms  which  make  possible  the  most  incredible  toughness  and  a

refinement  of  self-inflicted  pain.  When,  for  instance,  a  work-shy  female

hysteric can burn her feet in the most atrocious way with sulphuric acid,

simply in order to get a free stay in a hospital, or another can kill off her

entire dovecot so as to simulate haemoptysis with the blood, we may expect

even more refined practices in individuals who are acting from feeling- toned

motivations. In such cases we no longer have to reckon with the possibilities

of normal psychology—which would be to credit them with the energy of a

Mucius Scaevola13—but with subconscious mechanisms which far exceed

the strength of the initial conscious impulse and, with the help of anaesthesias

and  other  automatisms,  bring  about  an  auto-suggestion  without  further

assistance  from  consciousness  or  even  at  its  expense.  The  completely

automatic nature of many hysterical symptoms explains their toughness and,

in the case of histrionic performances, their perfection: since no reflective and

deliberating conscious processes intervene, the subconscious complexes can

reach full development. All doubtful cases of simulation should therefore be

examined  for  possible  hysterical  symptoms,  in  the  absence  of  suitable

methods  for  investigating  those  disturbances  of  consciousness  which

unfortunately elude observation all too easily and, in general, form one of the

darkest chapters of psychiatry.

[306] If, then, we try to envisage the psychological mechanism of a twilight 

state on the basis described above, we shall not be surprised if the picture 

contains numerous elements which strike us as contrived and artificial, or even if certain symptoms are recognized as being wilfully produced. We 

should not, however, jump to the false conclusion that the other symptoms 

are being shammed as well. Similarly, technical tricks like the one 

recommended by Jacobi-Jenssen should be used with great caution, for if the 

subject takes over a symptom that has been suggested to him, this does not, in 

accordance with what we said above, decide anything for or against 

simulation. A confession of simulation at the end of the disturbance should be 

received with caution (especially when, as in one case, it followed a threat of 

a week’s solitary confinement in darkness). Paradoxical as it may sound, 

certain experiences with hypnotized patients, who after an obvious hypnosis 

assert that they have not been hypnotized at all, make this caution necessary. 

On no account should one be satisfied in doubtful cases with a mere 

confession of simulation; a thorough catamnesis is needed for full 

elucidation, since only very rarely is objective insight into the inner state of 

the subject possible  during the  actual  psychic disturbance.  Despite 

confession there may easily be, in persons of a hysterical disposition, defects 

of memory that are unknown to the subject himself and can only be 

discovered by means of an accurate catamnesis.

[307] We spoke above of feeling-toned ideas that may have a releasing effect

on an hysterical disposition. How severe the consequences of violent emotion

may  sometimes  be  can  be  seen  from  disturbances  following  accident  and

shock neuroses. Besides the long-term consequences of the affect, we also

find at the moment of the affect itself peculiar disturbances which outlast it

for a longer or shorter period. I refer to the emotional confusion known as

“examination fright,” “stage fright,” or “emotional paralysis.” The latter term

stems from Baetz,14 who, during an earthquake in Japan, noticed in himself a

general paralysis of movement and feeling, despite completely unimpaired

apperception. This accords with numerous other phenomena observed during

and  immediately  after  violent  affects.15  We  all  know  the  tragicomic

confusion exhibited by men during fires, when pillows and mattresses are

carried downstairs and lamps and crockery thrown out of the window.

[308] In accordance with these observations on normal persons, we should 

expect something similar in degenerate subjects, though with abnormalities 

both  quantitative and qualitative. Our knowledge in this respect is 

unfortunately very defective and the case material scanty. I have put together 

a number of observations on this subject, drawn from mental defectives, but 

for the time being they should be regarded as case histories.1

[309] The first case concerns a mental defective who was sent to us for a

medical  opinion  on  a  charge  of  rape.  He  had  given  perfectly  reasonable

answers at all the hearings, but, as the judge doubted whether the accused had

the necessary power of discrimination to recognize the punishable nature of

his  action,  a  medical  opinion  was  asked  for.  On  admission  the  patient

exhibited conspicuously stupid behaviour that made us suspect simulation.

He  spoke  to  nobody,  walked  up  and  down  the  room,  his  hands  stuck

impudently in his pockets, or stood apathetically in a corner and stared into

space. When he was questioned, we had to repeat each question several times

in a loud voice until the answer came. He stuttered, often did not answer at all

but just gaped at the questioner. He was oriented as to time and place, but

was  unable  to  say  why  he  was  in  the  asylum.  There  were  other  striking

peculiarities: when walking up and down the room he often made a sharp

military turn, or would suddenly spin around himself where he stood (there

was a catatonic in the room with him who made similar movements). After

the fifth day his behaviour slowly began to change, he became freer in his

movements, less rigid, demanded to know why he was here, since he was not

mentally ill. Investigation now became possible, and we were immediately

struck by the man’s extraordinary dull-wittedness; all his reactions were very

slow, he had to think a long time before giving particulars, the story of his

life  was  a  jumble  of  fragments  in  chronological  disorder,  made  up  of

unintelligible contradictions. He could no longer remember dates and names

he  had  been  quite  familiar  with  before,  but  described  them  in  a  clumsy,

roundabout fashion. For instance, he had once been dismissed from a firm of

lithographers because he could not stand the smell of acid. He told the story

as follows: “There was a thing standing open where the thing was in, a sort of

little dish, and then I felt sick,” etc. On the following days he grew more

alert, and finally was able to give a clear and coherent account of his affairs.

He had insight for his initial stupidity and explained that it was due to the

great fright he got when he was sent to the asylum, saying that he always felt

that way when he came to a new place.

[310] Was the patient simulating? In my opinion not; he never tried to make

capital out of this strange disturbance afterwards, although, with the stupid

cunning of the mental defective, he sought every possible excuse for getting

himself released. He seemed to regard this abnormal effect of emotion as a

quite ordinary and regular thing. Moreover, it does not seem to me possible tosimulate  confusion  and  dull-wittedness,  and  particularly  “examination

fright,” in so natural a way. Was his imitation of the catatonic intentional,

unintentional, or merely accidental? I would prefer to reserve final judgment

on this case.

2

[311] The second case again has to do with a feeble-minded individual, a 17-

year-old boy who was sent to us for a medical opinion, also on a charge

ofnrape. He behaved very apathetically at first, had an extraordinarily stupid

expression  on  his  face,  and  gave  hesitant  answers  brought  out  with  great

difficulty.  During  his  stay  of  several  weeks  in  the  asylum  his  condition

gradually improved; he became brighter, gave quicker and clearer answers,

and  it  was  noticed  that  he  associated  with  the  warders  and  patients  in  a

natural and unconstrained way much sooner than he did with the doctors. In

order to obtain a more accurate picture of the disturbance I took two series of

association tests, amounting to 324 in all, at an interval of three weeks. The

first series was taken the day after admission. The tests produced the result

shown in Table I.

[312] This list shows very clearly the change in the patient’s mental state.

The preponderance of meaningless reactions, clang reactions, and repetitions

in the first series indicates a state of inhibited association which can best be

described by the word “embarrassment.”16 With regard to the perseveration

and its comparatively large preponderance in the first series, I would not

venture to say anything where the material is so limited. This syndrome may

be regarded as analogous to the one described in Case 1.

                                      TABLE I *[313]  The  following  two  observations  derive  from  investigations  I  am  at

present making with my colleague Dr. Riklin.

[314]  (1)  Embarrassment  is  a  state  in  which  the  attention  cannot  be

concentrated, as it is fixed elsewhere by a strongly accentuated idea. I tried to

reproduce this state by distracting the attention at the moment of association.

This was done as follows: the subject (who was naturally a practised one)was asked to fix his attention on the visual ideas that presented themselves as

the stimulus word was called, but, as in the ordinary test, to react as quickly

as  possible.  He  was  therefore  in  a  state  that  corresponds  more  or  less  to

embarrassment, since his attention was fixed and only a fraction of it was left

over for the reaction simultaneously taking place. The two experiments, made

with two different people, each consisted of 300 separate tests (Table II).

[315] (2) Similar results were obtained in experiments with outer distraction,

where the subject associated while simultaneously making pencil strokes of a

certain length in time to the beating of a metronome. A corresponding change

is shown in Table III (page 170), based on 300 associations.

[316] In this experiment, practice naturally plays an important part, but the

change in the associations is nevertheless very striking. Later on,17 I shall

give  a  detailed  report  on  the  experiments  and  their  significance  for

psychopathology. I think these examples suffice to throw an explanatory light

on the association disturbances of our mental defective.

[317]  We  see  from  these  experiments  that  with  inadequate  investment  of

attention the quality of the associations shows a general deterioration; that is

to say, there is a distinct tendency to produce outer and purely mechanical

associations. A person who thinks in terms of such associations has very poor

powers  of  comprehension  and  assimilation,  and  consequently  comes  very

near to certain states of dementia. This may possibly be the reason for the

feeble-mindedness  heightened  by  emotionality  observed  in  Case  2.  The

findings  here  throw  some  light  on  Case  1,  which  unfortunately  was  not

subjected to detailed psychological investigation. In Case 2, simulation was

quite out of the question, and yet the patient’s behaviour ran much the same

course  as  that  of  the  first.  Is  it  not  possible  that  when  feebleminded  and

degenerate  individuals  are  placed  in  an  asylum  the  unwonted  internment

becomes  associated  with  affects  which  are  neutralized  only  gradually,  in

accordance with the poor adaptability of defectives? So far as it is possible to

judge this matter at all, I should say it is not so much a question of mental

defect  as  of  a  certain  mental  disposition,  also  found  in  other  degenerate

individuals,  which  puts  abnormal  obstacles  in  the  way  of  an  inner

assimilation of affects and new impressions, and thus produces a state of

continual perplexity and embarrassment.

                                      TABLE II *                                      TABLE III *[318] How far this disposition to neutralize affects in a faulty or abnormal

way coincides with hysteria is not easy to determine, but according to Freud’s

theory of hysteria the two are identical. Janet found that the influence of

affects is seen most clearly in hysterical persons, and that it produces a state

of  dissociation  in  which  the  will,  attention,  ability  to  concentrate  are

paralyzed and all the higher psychic phenomena are impaired in the interests

of  the  lower;  that  is,  there  is  a  displacement  towards  the  automatic  side,

where everything that was formerly under the control of the will is now set

free. Speaking of the effect of emotion on hysterical subjects, Janet says:

Emotion has a decomposing action on the mind, reduces its synthesis and

makes it, for the moment, wretched. Emotions, especially depressive ones

such as fear, disorganize the mental syntheses; their action, so to speak, is

analytic, as opposed to that of the will, of attention, of perception, which is

synthetic.18

[319] In his latest work, Janet extends his conception of the influence of

affects to all possible kinds of psychopathic inferiority; he says, as earlier:One of the marks of emotion is that it is accompanied by a decided lowering

of the mental level. It brings about not only the loss of synthesis and the

reduction  to  automatism  which  is  so  noticeable  in  the  hysteric,  but

proportionately to its strength it gradually suppresses the higher phenomena

and lowers tension to the level of the so-called inferior phenomena. Under the

influence  of  emotion,  mental  synthesis,  attention,  the  acquisition  of  new

memories, are seen to disappear; with them diminish or disappear all the

functions of reality, the feeling of and pleasure in reality, confidence and

certitude. In place of these we observe automatic movements.…19

They have a particularly deleterious effect on the memory:

But this dissociative power which belongs to emotion is never more clearly

displayed  than  in  its  effect  on  the  memory.  This  dissociation  can  act  on

memories as they are produced, and constitute continuous amnesia; it can

also act suddenly on a group of memories already formed.20

This effect is of special importance for us, as it explains the disturbance of

memory in cases of emotional confusion and also throws a remarkable light

on the amnesias in Ganser’s twilight states. In the Ganser syndrome which I

analysed,21 the most important feature was an anterograde amnesia which

depended on affective elements. It was evident that the prolonged retrograde

amnesia  also  present  in  this  case  covered  all  the  unpleasant,  powerfully

affective events in the recent past. A relapse suffered by the patient while

under observation was caused by a highly disagreeable affect. Phleps reports

much the same thing in his above-mentioned study of the amnesia which, in

his cases, was present for the causative affect (i.e., the Ljubljana earthquake).

[320] The picture presented by the two patients mentioned above was one of

gross feeble-mindedness, which obviously set in acutely and was not caused

by any demonstrable illness. Further observation showed that the degree of

feeble-mindedness  actually  present  was  not  nearly  so  great.  In  many  so-

called malingerers who sham a high degree of stupidity we find the same

outward behaviour, ranging from conscious, crassly nonsensical talk to the

problematical  borderline  cases  we  have  just  been  discussing.  We  find,

however, in the twilight states described by Ganser, and recently by a number

of  other  writers  as  well,22 symptoms  apparently  indicating  an  almost

impossibly  high  degree  of  feeble-mindedness,  which  in  fact  seems  to  be

based on a purely functional deficiency that can be explained in terms of

psychological  motivations,  as  I  have  shown  above.  Ganser’s  “senseless

answers” are of the same kind as those of the malingerer, only they arise froma twilight state that does not seem to me very far removed clinically from the

cases of emotional stupidity reported earlier.23 If we apply these remarks to

the question of simulation, we can easily imagine that, in cases of emotional

confusion  following  the  excitements  of  arrest,  interrogation,  solitary

confinement, etc.,24 one person will hit on the idea of simulating insanity,

while others will be inclined by the disposition I have described to lapse into

a state of stupidity, in which, according to the mentality of the individual,

conscious  exaggeration,  half-conscious  play-acting,  and  hysterical

automatisms will be fused in an impenetrable mixture, as in the picture of a

traumatic neurosis, where the simulated and the hysterical are inseparably

combined. I would even say that in my view it is but a step from simulation

to Ganser’s syndrome, and that Ganser’s picture is simply a simulation that

has  slipped  out  of  the  conscious  into  the  subconscious.  That  such  a

transposition is possible is proved by the cases of pathological swindling and

pathological  dreaminess.  A  contributory  factor  in  all  this  is  the  abnormal

influence of affects mentioned earlier. The literature on simulation leaves

much to be desired in this respect, as very often in difficult cases the experts

are only too delighted if they can succeed in unmasking one or the other

symptom as simulated, and this leads to the false conclusion that everything

else is “simulation” as well.

3

[321]  Here  I  would  like  to  report  on  a  case25 which  is  instructive  from

several points of view.

[322]  J.,  born  1867,  mill-hand.  Heredity:  father  quick-tempered,  mother’s

sister melancholic, committed suicide.

[323] Nothing special is known of the patient’s youth, except that his father

early prophesied prison for him. At 16½ he ran away from home and began

wandering, working in various textile-mills for about seven years. At 22 he

married. The marriage was not happy, the fault being entirely his own. After

two years he ran away from his wife, taking with him her savings, emigrated

to America, where he lived an adventurous and roving life. Came back after

some  years  to  Germany  and  tramped  through  it  on  foot.  Arrived  in

Switzerland, he made it up again with his wife, who soon afterwards filed a

petition for divorce. He ran away from her a second time, embezzled a sum of

money entrusted to him by a fellow worker, spent the lot, and was arrested

and sentenced to six months’ hard labour (1892). After serving his sentence

he resumed his roamings round Switzerland.[324] In 1894 he was sentenced to a month’s imprisonment for theft. He is

stated to have attempted suicide about this time (though not in connection

with the punishment). After his release he took to the road again until 1896.

From then on he worked uninterruptedly for four years in the same mill. In

1900 he married for the second time. This marriage, too, was unhappy. In

1901 he ran away from his wife, taking with him her savings to the value of

1200 francs. He went on a binge with it for a fortnight, then came back to his

wife with 700 francs. Later (1902) he again took her money and ran away for

good, committing two thefts when the money gave out. He was arrested soon

afterwards and was sentenced to six months’ hard labour for the first theft. It

was not until the spring of 1903 that he was recognized and arrested for

committing  the  second  theft.  At  the  first  hearing  he  gave  his  particulars

correctly,  but  denied  the  charge,  involved  himself  in  contradictions,  and

finally gave quite incoherent and confused answers. In solitary confinement

he  became  restless  at  night,  threw  his  shoes  under  the  bed,  covered  the

window with a blanket “because somebody was always trying to get in.” The

next day he refused food, saying it was poisoned.

Gave  no  more  answers,  saw  spiders  on  the  wall.  The  second  night,  in  a

communal cell, he was restless, insisted that there was somebody under the

bed. The third and fourth day he was apathetic, wouldn’t answer, ate only

when he saw the others eating, maintained that he had killed his wife and that

there was a murderer under the bed with a knife. The prison doctor testified

that the patient gave the impression of being a catatonic.

[325] He was admitted on June 3, 1903, for a medical opinion.

[326] The patient seemed listless, apathetic, his face rigid and stupid-looking.

He could  be  made  to  answer  only  with  difficulty.  Stated his name and 

address correctly, but appeared disoriented as to time and place. He gave five 

fingers held before him as four, ten as eight. Could not tell the time, named 

coins wrongly. He complied with requests correctly but carried them out in a 

senseless manner. When asked to lock the door he persistently tried to put the 

key in upside down. He opened a matchbox by breaking open the side. Strong 

suspicion of simulation. Was put in the observation room. Quiet at night, got 

up only once to move his bed, saying that the decoration on the ceiling would 

fall on top of him. Next day the same. At the examination he gave senseless 

answers and had to be pressed all the time. It was clear that he understood 

questions and requests quite well, but did his best to react to them in the most 

senseless way possible. Could not read or write. Took the pencil in his hand correctly, but held the book upside down, again opened the matchbox from 

the side, but lit a candle and put it out again correctly. He gave quite 

senseless names and values to coins.

[327] Physical examination showed brisk reflexes of forearm and patella.

Sensibility to pain seemed generally reduced, almost non-existent in some

areas, so that there was only a scarcely perceptible reaction to really deep

needle-pricks. The right pupil was somewhat larger than the left; reaction

normal. The face was markedly asymmetrical.

[328] This examination was carried out in a separate room on the same floor 

as the observation room in which the patient had been previously. When the 

examination was over we told him to find his way back to his room by 

himself. He went first in the opposite direction and rattled at a door he had 

not passed before, and was then told to go in the other direction. He now tried 

to open two more doors leading into rooms near the observation room. 

Finally he came to the right one, which was opened for him. He went in, but 

remained standing stiffly by the door. He was told to make his bed, but stood 

there without moving. His bed was in the corner facing him, clearly visible 

from where he stood. So we let him stand. He stood rigid on the same spot 

for an hour and a half, then suddenly turned pale, sweated profusely, asked 

the warder for some water, but fell unconscious to the floor before it arrived. 

After lying on the floor for ten minutes and recovering himself somewhat, he 

was put on his feet again, but rapidly went  into another faint. He was then 

put to bed. He didn’t respond to questions at all, refused food. In the course 

of the afternoon he suddenly got up and threw himself against the door with 

considerable force, head foremost. When the warders tried to restrain him 

because of the danger of suicide, a hand-to- hand fight ensued, and it took 

several warders to subdue him. He was put in a straitjacket, whereupon he 

quickly calmed down. On the night of June 4 he was quiet, turned his bed 

round only once. At the morning visit he suddenly seized hold of the doctor 

and tried to pull him into bed, then seized the warder. Hyoscine injection. On 

the following days he again showed dull and stupid behaviour with 

occasional attacks on doctors and warders, which however never came to 

dangerous blows. He seldom said anything, and what he said was always 

stupid and nonsensical, uttered in an unemotional, toneless voice. He refused 

all food for the first three days, but on the fourth day he began eating again, 

then better every day. On June 7 he suddenly demanded to have a vein 

opened because he had too much blood. When this was refused he sank back into a dull brooding. In contradiction to his apathetic behaviour, however, he 

seemed to take an interest in his surroundings; on seeing a patient in the bed 

next to him offering violent resistance to nasal feeding, he suddenly called 

out that they should tie the man’s feet together, then it would go better. On 

June 8 he was given a strong dose of faradism. Poor reaction. He was told 

that this would happen daily from now on. On the morning of June 9 he was 

suddenly clear, demanded a private interview at which he made the following 

statement:

[329] You know very well that there’s not much the matter with me. When I

was arrested I was so scared and upset thinking of my mother and sisters,

they being so respectable, that I didn’t know what to say, so I got the idea of

making things look worse than they were. But I soon saw you weren’t taken

in, besides I felt such a fool playing the looney, also I got sick of always

lying in bed. I’m sick of everything. I think all the time of killing myself.…

I’m not crazy, yet I sometimes feel I’m not quite right in the head. I didn’t do

this to avoid going to jail, but for the sake of my family. I intended to go

straight, and hadn’t been in jail for nine years until last fall.

[330] When asked how he came to simulate insanity, he said: “I was sorry for

my old mother and regretted what I’d done. I was so frightened and upset that

I thought, well, I’ll make out I’m worse than I am. When I got back to the

cell after the hearing I was at my wit’s end. I would have done away with

myself if I’d had a knife.” He did not seem to be very clear about the purpose

of the simulation, said he “just wanted to see what they would do with him.”

He  gave  adequate  motives  for  his  actions  under  simulated  insanity.  One

striking thing was the statement that despite his four-day fast he had felt no

appetite.  A  thorough  anamnesis  was  now  undertaken,  a  point  of  special

interest being the patient’s remark that he was always driven from place to

place by an “inner unrest.” As soon as he settled in one place for a time, the

vague  urge  for  freedom  came  over  him  again  and  drove  him  away.

Throughout his story he showed a fair amount of uncertainty with regard to

exact  particulars  (years  and  dates,  etc.),  but  his  uncertainty  was  quite

surprising when it came to judging the time of recent happenings. Although

otherwise properly oriented as to time, he maintained that he had been in the

asylum for a fortnight (instead of six days). By the evening of the same day

he had become uncertain again, and now wavered between ten and twelve

days. He recounted the details of his stay in the asylum unclearly, and he no

longer remembered many little incidents, trivial in themselves, that took placeduring his simulation; he also got various things muddled up in time. He had

only a vague memory of his admission and the examination that followed; he

knew that he had been told to put a key in the lock but thought he had done it

correctly. He also remembered the examination on the next day, and said that

the room had been full of doctors, about seven or eight of them (in reality

there were five). He could still remember the details of the examination, but

only when helped. With regard to the scene that took place afterwards, he

made a statement to the following effect:

[331] He remembered quite well how he came out from the examination; we

had turned him loose and he lost his way in the big corridor. It seemed to him

that in order to reach the examination room he had first gone up some steps.

Then, when he found that he did not have to go down any steps, he thought

we wanted to fool him and lead him to the wrong room. Therefore, when we

eventually took him to the sick room, he thought it was not the right room,

nor did he recognize it again, especially when he saw that all the beds were

occupied. (But his bed was empty and clearly visible.) That was why he

remained standing by the door, then he felt queer and fell over. Only when he

was put to bed did he notice that there was a bed unoccupied, that it was his

bed and that he was in the right room.

[332] He treated this intermezzo as if it were simply a misunderstanding,

without the least suspicion that it was something pathological. The dangerous

ruthlessness with which he banged his head against the door he explained as a

deliberate attempt at suicide.

[333] The next day, June 10, we got the patient to do simple additions based 

on Kraepelin’s arithmetic tests. The average performance per minute was 

additions, out of a total of 1,297 additions in 46 minutes. Increased practice 

produced an insignificant result: the difference between the average 

performance in the first and in the second halves amounted to only 1.5 in 

favour of the latter. So not only was the performance very poor, but the 

increased practice proved to be insufficient. In comparison with this 

relatively very easy work the number of errors was abnormally high: 11.2% 

of the additions were wrong; there were 1.5 errors per minute in the first half, 

4.7 in the second half. These findings illustrate very well the rapid tiring of 

energy and attention despite the fact that there was no abnormal psychic 

fatigability. Optic perception was considerably reduced; the patient took a 

surprisingly long time to grasp the simple pictures in  the Meggendorfer 

picture-book. His comprehension of things heard and read was likewise reduced. In reproducing a simple Aesop’s fable, he left out important details 

and made up the rest. His retention, particularly for figures, was poor. As 

already indicated, his memory of events in the not so recent past was 

tolerably good, and he had retained a normal amount of school knowledge. 

No signs of mental defectiveness. No restriction of the field of vision. No 

other hysterical symptoms. Red-green blindness. Reflexes as at the first 

examination. No disturbances of sensibility other than general hypalgesia. 

About a week later (June 19) he was subjected to another thorough 

examination, having maintained correct behaviour in the meantime. No 

changes in his physical condition. Comprehension still not up to normal, but 

a decided improvement noticeable. No improvement in retention, but his 

work-curve showed a change for the better.

[334] For the sake of clarity I give the results of the first and second tests side

  by side:  
                                        TABLE IV


    

                                                            June 10June 19

  Average  performance  per 28.132.4

    minute

  Average  per  minute  for  first 27.431.9

  half

  Average  per  minute  for 28.932.9

  second half

  Error  in  total  number  of 11.2%4.0%

  additions

  Errors per minute for first half 1.51.1

  Errors per minute for second 4.71.5

  half

 

[335]  The  result  of  the  second  test  shows  an  increase  of  4.3  in  the

performance per minute as compared with the first series, and a very definite

reduction in the number of errors. This result may be taken as confirming our

clinical  observations,  in  so  far  as  a  distinct  improvement  in  the  patient’s

energy and attention did in fact occur in the course of a week. Unfortunately,he was not given an association test. On June 23 he made an ostentatious

attempt at suicide by slowly sawing through the skin of his left wrist with a

sharp stone. Afterwards he put up a childish resistance to being bandaged.

[336]  The  medical  opinion  stated  that  the  patient  must  be  assumed

responsible  for  the  theft,  and  therefore  punishable,  but  only  partially

responsible for the offence of simulation.

[337] There can be no doubt that the patient really did simulate. We have to

admit that the simulation was excellent, so good, in fact, that, though we

never  lost  sight  of  the  possibility  of  simulation,  we  sometimes  seriously

thought of dementia praecox or of one of the deeper hysterical twilight states

mentioned  by  Ganser.  The  consistent  masklike  rigidity  of  the  face,  the

dangerous nature of his suicide attempt (banging his head against the door),

the  real  fainting-fit,  the—to  all  appearances—deep  hypalgesia,  are  facts

which cannot easily be explained as mere simulation. For these reasons we

soon discarded the idea of pure simulation on the supposition that, if it really

was  a  case  of  simulation,  there  must  be  some  pathological  factor  in  the

background  which  somehow  lent  a  helping  hand.  Hence  the  sudden

confession came as something of a surprise.

[338] To judge by the material reported above, the patient was a degenerate.

His forgetfulness and lack of concentration point to some form of hysterical

inferiority,  as  grosser  cerebral  lesions  seem  ruled  out  by  the  anamnesis.

Although we have no other direct indications of hysteria, this assumption

nevertheless appears the most probable. (Hypalgesia is a mark of degeneracy

which is also found elsewhere, particularly in criminals.) As we have seen,

the patient got confused at the hearings, and explained that this was due to his

state of desperation at the time, i.e., to a strong affect. The question of the

logical motivation in this case still remains very obscure, and it looks as if he

never  came  to  a  really  clear  decision  to  simulate.  In  his  catamnesis  he

expressly emphasized and reiterated the strong affect he had experienced, and

we have no grounds for not believing him in this point. It looks, rather, as if

the affect played an important aetiological role. Although every feature of the

resulting clinical picture is simulated (with the exception of the fainting-fit),

almost  every  symptom  is  accompanied  by  phenomena  that  cannot  be

simulated. Lest I should lose my way in details, I shall confine myself solely

to  the  fact,  revealed  by  the  catamnesis,  that  at  least  at  times  during  his

simulation  the  patient  had  a  defective  and  faulty  comprehension,  as  was

borne out by the disturbance of attention noted on June 9. Accordingly, hismemory of the critical period also proved strikingly vague. So, together with

simulation, we find real and appreciable disturbances over the whole field of

attention. These disturbances outlive the simulation and get very much better

in the course of a week.

[339] Earlier writers maintain that simulation has a deleterious effect on the

mental state.26 Allowing for diagnostic errors, the impairment will probably

be confined to a disturbance of attention resembling hypnosis; this may offer

a plausible explanation of our case.27 It should not be forgotten, however,

that an alteration of this kind never occurs as a result of a mere decision: a

certain predisposition is needed (what Forel would call a “dissociation”). And

this is where, in my view, the decisive importance of affects comes in. As we

have  already  explained  at  some  length,  affects  have  a  dissociating

(distracting) effect on consciousness, probably because they put a one-sided

and excessive emphasis on a particular idea, so that too little attention is left

over for investment in other conscious psychic activities. In this way all the

more mechanical, more automatic processes are liberated and gradually attain

to independence at the cost of consciousness. Here I would call attention to

the  beautiful  experiments  conducted  by  Binet28 and  Janet29 on

automatization in states of distractibility.

[340] On this foundation Janet based his conception of the influence of 

affects, which holds that automatisms are one and all fostered by 

distractibility (i.e., feebleness of attention) and, as Binet expresses it, thrive 

chiefly on “the psychic shadow side.” The assumption therefore is  that 

certain ideas, which are present in consciousness at the same time as the 

affect but whose content need not be in any way related to it, become 

automatized. This assumption is amply confirmed by clinical experience, and 

particularly by the anamnesis of hysterical tics. Our case, showing a state of 

semi-simulation, has as its essential symptom a strong and stable disturbance 

of attention such as occurs in a hypnotized person, whose attention is 

likewise fixed in a certain direction. Any interesting object can so attract our 

attention that we are “transfixed” by it. Hysterical subjects go even further—

they have a tendency to identify themselves more and more with the object of 

interest, so that not, as in normal persons, a limited, but an unlimited number 

of associations is produced with all their subconscious ties. Owing to the 

peculiar nature of hysteria, these ties can be severed only with the greatest 

difficulty. From this point of view I see our patient as a malingerer whose 

malingering worked only too well, in the sense that it slipped into the subconscious.

[341] It would be desirable if more attention were paid to borderline cases of

this kind. They might, perhaps, throw light on many things which at present

are extremely difficult to explain. Here I am thinking of a case on which

several  medical  opinions  have  already  been  given  by  different  German

clinics. It concerns an accomplished swindler and thief who, the moment he

is  arrested,  sinks  into  a  catatonia-like  stupor  for  months  at  a  stretch.  A

medical opinion was also given on this case in our asylum. The moment he

was  released,  the  patient  suddenly  awoke  from  his  profound,  stuporous

imbecility and took a polite and ceremonious farewell.

[342] I have to thank my colleague Dr. Rüdin for the following case from the

Heidelberg  clinic,  concerning  an  individual  who  had  several  previous

convictions for theft and offences against decency. He had been epileptic for

fourteen years. After his arrest for the second offence against decency in

1898, the patient could scarcely be made to answer at all, and a few days later

became completely mutistic, remaining in a stuporous condition for seven

months  with  unimpaired  orientation.  In  1901  he  was  caught  in  flagrante

committing burglary with theft, became very excitable, then relapsed into his

stuporous attitude for six weeks. In 1902 he was again arrested for theft, but

this  time  he  was  very  timid,  silent,  and  gave  only  the  briefest  answers.

Afterwards  he  became  mutistic  again,  would  not  obey  requests,  but  was

otherwise quite orderly. A medical opinion was given on all three occasions

and he was declared irresponsible on grounds of epileptic stupor.

[343]  Leppmann30 reports  the  following  case  of  “simulation”:  Mentally

defective murderer, who, after making a full confession while in detention,

lapsed  into  a  stuporous  condition  (“depressive  melancholia”).  After  the

“depression” disappeared, he simulated imbecility with loss of memory for

the recent past. Sentenced to fifteen years’ imprisonment. After sentence was

pronounced, the patient immediately relapsed into an apprehensive stupor.

[344] Landgraf31  reports  a  remarkable  case  of  simulation  in  an  habitual

thief.

In  the  second  year  of  his  ten-year  prison  sentence  he  became  imbecilic,

dumb, and kept his eyes closed. He spent eight years in this state, in the sick-

ward, often not eating for weeks on end, usually sleepless, and playing at

night with fruit-stones, buttons, etc. He put up a violent resistance to narcosis

with chloroform. Afterwards he appeared paralysed for a fortnight, and was

incontinent. On the expiry of his sentence he was sent home, imbecilic, blind,and  dumb.  Suddenly  he  left  the  house,  committed  a  series  of  brilliant

robberies. A fortnight later he was caught, and exhibited the same abnormal

behaviour as before. Certified as a malingerer, he was sentenced to ten years’

imprisonment. While in prison he was imbecilic, blind, deaf, and dumb for

ten weeks, never once forgetting his role. Then he opened his eyes and began

working, but remained deaf and dumb until his death.

[345] Marandon de Montyel32 reports on the following case: A menstruating,

psychopathic woman tried to drown her four-year-old child, was arrested,

made a full confession, and gave financial distress as the reason for her deed.

A week later she recanted, shammed amnesia for the deed and its motive,

acted  like  an  imbecile,  did  not  know  either  her  surroundings  or  her  past

(anterograde  amnesia).  On  account  of  simultaneous  depression  she  was

certified  irresponsible  and  interned  in  a  lunatic  asylum,  whereupon  her

condition  improved.  Several  months  later  she  came  up  before  the  public

prosecutor,  manifested  violent  fright,  and  the  next  day  relapsed  into

“simulation.”

[346] The case of Reiner Stockhausen, on which monographs were written by

Jacobi,  Böcker,  Hertz,  and  Richarz  in  1855,33 deserves  mention.

Stockhausen was a degenerate individual, many times convicted for theft and

vagrancy. At one of the hearings he grew confused, gave strikingly senseless

answers (Ganser), mostly negative in character: “It’s all up, I must shoot

myself, always in need of money, but there’s nothing left, everything sold,

everything  gone,”  etc.34 Later  he  was  less  informative,  often  irritable,

muttering  half-intelligible  answers  and  repeating  stereotyped  phrases:

“Haven’t got nothing more, everything’s sold, spent, gone on drink,” etc. He

was extremely unclean in his habits, slept little and fitfully.

[347] Three  of  the  medical  opinions  assumed  simulation,  one  insanity.

Thereupon he was sent to an asylum for a year for observation. At first he

was  very  excitable  and  inaccessible,  then  he  “laid  aside  his  stiffness  and

reserve more and more. He acted like a peaceable, fairly sociable, reasonable

human being.” But as soon as “the conversation turned to things which might

be connected with the crime he was accused of, or as soon as his mental

health or his emotional state was touched upon, he seemed to get violently

indignant  and  at  once  began  talking  like  a  madman.”  A  fourth  medical

opinion assumed simulation because the symptoms observed in the patient

“did  not  accord  with  either  melancholy,  insanity,  craziness,  lunacy,  or

idiocy.” He was sentenced to fifteen years’ imprisonment, but it made noimpression on him. Two years later he was still being examined off and on by

the experts, and each time they found the logical continuation of symptoms

that had already been in existence for three years.

[348] Finally, I would like to mention a case published by Siemens35 of a

young  day-labourer,  who,  falsely  accused  of  murder,  wept  continuously

while in detention, protested his innocence, then refused to answer any more,

kept  on  lamenting  his  fate,  would  not  eat,  slept  badly.  When  excited,  he

smashed  things.  Probably  imbecilic  (reading  and  writing  very  poor).  On

being admitted to the asylum he seemed very frightened, had to be questioned

repeatedly  before  he  would  answer,  said  he  was  not  ill  but  slept  badly,

refused food at first. Later he refused to answer at all, gazed at the doctors

uncomprehendingly, but told the warder the story of his arrest. In spite of his

apathetic behaviour he was provoked to laughter at the jokes of a maniac.

Remained in this state for two months, until his release. Received the news of

his release without moving a muscle. At home he was still taciturn for a time,

indifferent, not working. Then he became normal again, complained about

the wrong he had suffered, denied he was insane.

[349] To our  way  of  thinking,  these  cases  can  hardly  be  regarded  as 

simulation. The  characteristic  feature  of  these  disturbances  is  their 

dependence on external events, mostly of a highly affective nature; this, 

together with their clinical behaviour, brings them closer to the psychogenic 

(“hysterical”) ailments described by Ganser and Raecke, and also 

(particularly the last case) to the kind of stupidity I would describe as 

“emotional.” Freud has offered convincing proof that the chief aetiological 

role in psychogenic disturbances is played by affects. It would therefore be 

worth while to pay more attention than we have done hitherto to repressed 

affects in criminals who exhibit doubtful states. We already have a number of 

pertinent observations; for instance, the intercurrent Ganser syndrome noted 

by Westphal36 can be traced back to emotion, and a similar case is reported

by  Lücke.37 The  recurrence  of  a  Ganser  syndrome  observed  by  me38

conformed absolutely to the Freudian mechanism of repressed affect. One

may therefore, with some justification, regard these peculiar states as due to

the  prolonged  influence  of  affects,  and  in  psychogenic  disorders  it  is  not

surprising  if  all  kinds  of  “faked”  symptoms  creep  in,  depending  on  the

environment.

[350] It is impossible to discuss the question of simulation on the basis of the

existing  case  material  without  making  certain  observations  of  a  generalnature.

[351] First, as regards the material, one can scarcely imagine any that is more

unequal  and  more  difficult  to  evaluate.  In  many  cases  the  method  of

description is at fault, since the main stress is laid on the obvious symptoms,

while the other symptoms—the hysterical ones especially—come off very

badly.  The  investigation  and  “unmasking”  of  symptoms  often  consist  in

technical tricks, if not in old-fashioned cruelties like cold showers, etc. The

standpoint of the earlier writers (which has even been passed on to some of

the books now in vogue)—namely, that anything which does not fit into the

known clinical pictures or into a dogmatic system of ideas is not a disease but

simulation–is  depressing  and  highly  unscientific.  Particularly  damaging  to

description and investigation alike is a diagnostic optimism,39 that accords

very ill with the facts. From time to time we meet with cases of simulation

which can lead the most experienced doctors by the nose for a long time.

There was, for instance, Billod’s patient,40 who simulated nine times with

success; a case of Laurent’s41 simulated successfully for two years; and a

case, “unmasked” on a second examination as a skilled malingerer, who had

been declared incompetent on the authority of a very experienced doctor.42

So we have every reason for caution.

[352]  Secondly,  there  is  another  point  worth  mentioning:  the  concept  of

simulation is not understood by all the authors in the same way. Fürstner43

mentions the following case of “simulation” by seventeen-year-old Sabina S.,

who, spurred on by reading the life of Katharina Emmerich,44 staged an

enormous swindle by passing herself off as a saint. She abstained apparently

from all food, twice drove nails through her insteps to the soles of her feet,

and performed all sorts of miracles which fooled the doctors and officials and

created a great sensation. When examined by Fürstner, she induced true-to-

life tonic and clonic spasms of the eye-muscles and in the face and throat

muscles.  In  the  asylum,  of  course,  her  mystic  abstention  from  food,  etc.,

turned out to be the sheerest swindle, very cleverly done. The purpose of the

whole undertaking, apparently, was that she wanted to stay with a relative,

who functioned as a priest.

[353]  Such  cases  can  hardly  be  described  as  simulation,  for  the  means

employed bear no relation to the ends but are merely symptoms of a known

mental disorder of which history affords us hundreds of examples. When a

criminal simulates insanity, that is a comparatively convenient and simple

means of getting transferred to an asylum, from which he can escape moreeasily. Here the means are adapted to the ends. But when an hysterical girl

tortures herself in order to appear interesting, both means and ends are the

outcome of some morbid mental activity. An hysterical haemorrhage of the

lung is something simulated, “faked,” but that does not make the patient a

simulant; she really is ill, only not ill with consumption. If the doctor calls

her  a  simulant,  he  does  so  merely  because  he  has  not  understood  the

symptom properly, i.e., has not recognized it as hysterical. When Sabina S.

faked miracles she was not a simulant, if by this term we mean a person who

is  genuinely  healthy  and  whose  actions  are  intended  to  conceal  his  inner

healthiness, whereas the abnormal actions of Sabina S. were precisely what

revealed her inner morbidity. In the same way hysterics do not lie,

even  though  what  they  say  is  not  true  in  the  objective  sense.  Wherever

hysteria is involved, the term “simulation” should be used with caution in

order to avoid misunderstandings.

[354]  I  would  like  to  sum  up  the  results  of  my  work  in  the  form  of  the

following conclusions:

There are people in whom the after-effect of violent emotions shows itself in 

the form of a lasting confusion, which one could describe as “emotional   

stupidity.”

Affects, by acting specifically upon the attention, favour the appearance of

psychic automatisms in the widest sense.

A certain number of cases of simulation are probably due to the after- effect

of violent emotions and their automatization (or to auto-hypnosis) and must

therefore be termed pathological.

Ganser’s complex in prisoners can probably be explained in the same way

and  must  be  regarded  as  an  automatized  symptom  closely  related  to

simulation.

[355] In conclusion, I would like to thank my chief, Professor Bleuler, for his

kindness in allowing me to make use of the above material.

A MEDICAL OPINION ON A CASE OF SIMULATED INSANITY1

[356] Simulation of insanity is in general a rather rare phenomenon, being

confined  almost  entirely  to  persons  in  detention  and  convicts.  For  the

ordinary public the fear of the lunatic asylum is too great and this particular

form of simulation too inconvenient for it to be worth their while to seek

illicit advantages in this way. The sort of people who take to simulation have

been found by experience to be composed for the most part of individuals

who show unmistakable signs of mental and physical degeneracy. Experienceshows, therefore, that simulation generally rests on a pathological foundation.

This fact explains why the recognition of simulated insanity is one of the

most difficult tasks of the diagnostic art. If the simulation is recognized and

proved, it immediately raises the question of soundness or unsoundness of

mind, and the answer to this is beset with all kinds of difficulties.

[357] Apart from cases of exaggeration of real or imaginary symptoms, we 

also find a number of peculiar mental states in degenerate subjects whose 

cause can be traced back to the powerful affects produced by the arrest, trial, 

and solitary confinement. Even among normal persons are many whose 

capacity to assimilate strong affects is much worse, and who are unduly 

depressed or irritated by unpleasant emotions and cannot recover their 

composure for a long time afterwards. In the domain of psychopathic 

inferiority, that broad and undefined zone separating the “healthy” from the 

“morbid,” we find the various types of normality caricatured, and here the 

powerful affects manifested by normal individuals take on a character that is 

excessive and odd in every respect. The affective states are often abnormally 

prolonged or abnormally intense; they exert an influence on other parts of the 

psyche or on physical  functions  which  are  not  directly  touched  by  

normal  affects.

Strange, sudden alterations of psychic behaviour may be produced in this 

way, and they are often so striking that they immediately make one think of 

simulation. Such emotional-changes are observed among feebleminded 

persons especially, mostly in the form  of  extreme imbecility. The possibility 

that these states may  occasionally  be combined with conscious exaggeration 

makes the picture even more complicated. It is of some practical importance 

not only for the doctor, but also for the examining official, to be able to 

recognize psychological possibilities of this kind. The following case seems 

to me very instructive in this respect, as it concerns a prisoner who showed 

psychopathic inferiority with half-conscious simulation. The psychological 

and psychiatric side of this case has already been subjected to close study, 

and the findings were recently published in the Journal für Psychologie und 

Neurologie.2 Here I am only putting the medical opinion on record. For the

psychological discussion of this case I must refer the reader to the publication

mentioned below.

[358] The case was referred to us by the District Attorney, Zurich.

REPORT

[359] We were asked to give an opinion on the mental state of I. G., ofRothrist, Canton Aargau, born March 24, 1867, millhand, and in particular to

answer the following questions:

Is the respondent mentally ill?

If Dr. S. is correct in his suppositions, from what other mental illness might

the respondent be suffering?

Since when is this condition presumed to have existed?

[360] The material on which our opinion is based consists of documents 

relating to the theft of a bicycle, of which the respondent is accused; 

documents of the criminal court, Schwyz, relating to theft in 1902; 

documents  of  the  district  court,  Hinwil,  relating  to  theft  in  1894; 

documents of the district court, Baden, relating to embezzlement in 1892; a 

written statement by the respondent’s brother; the deposition of police 

constable S.; and observations made in the asylum.

Previous History

[361] The father of the respondent is stated to have been a respectable but

rather quick-tempered man. The mother is alive and healthy. A brother of the

father is alleged to be a religious crank. A sister of the mother committed

suicide as a result of melancholia. Respondent has no children. His first wife

had a still-birth.

[362] Nothing special is known of the respondent’s youth, except that he was

a naughty boy who was often told by his father that he would end up in

prison. He attended school for eight years. At fifteen he entered a textile mill,

where he worked for a year and a half. One day he ran away from the mill

and found similar work in Turgi. He remained there for sixteen months, and

states that he occasionally sent money home to his parents. Then he wandered

off again and found another job in a textile mill in Wollishofen, where he

remained about five months. After that he wandered about for “many weeks”

and came to Linthal, worked for a year and a half, wandered off again, came

to Ziegelbrücke, where he stayed about three years. At 22 he married. The

marriage was not happy; after two years he ran away from his wife, taking

with him her hard- earned savings, and emigrated to America, where he lived

a roving and adventurous life, and eventually, after many wanderings, found

work as a stoker on a European steamer which took him to Germany. From

Bremen he wandered on foot all through Germany into Switzerland, came to

Wald, worked there for six months, and was also reconciled with his wife.

The reconciliation did not last long, however. After a time the wife filed for a

divorce, which was granted. To this end she made use of the opportunityafforded her by the respondent’s first offence. Apparently, in consequence of

irregular employment, he had gone to Baden in Aargau, where he found work

in a textile mill. He absconded on November 13,

1892, with 275 francs, which had been entrusted to him by his room- mate, as 

the respondent had at his disposal a lockable trunk. He travelled with his 

booty to Zurich, then to Mülhausen, Colmar, Strassburg, Belfort, 

Montbéliard, La Chaux-de-Fonds, Bern, and Glarus, where he was arrested 

on November 27, 1892, just as he was about to draw the dole. The money he 

embezzled had all been spent. He is also said to have had a previous 

conviction with ten days’ imprisonment for fraud, some time in 1892.  He  

received  six  months’  “correctional  punishment”  and  was deprived of his 

civil rights for three years. After serving his sentence he roamed round 

Switzerland aimlessly, working here and there for short periods in various 

jobs. On March 15, he was sentenced to one month’s imprisonment by the 

district court at Hinwil, for having pocketed a pair of pruning shears to the 

value of fr. 4.50. From the certificate of good conduct applied for on this 

occasion it appears that he had been apprehended “shortly before” in a 

“totally destitute condition” in Canton Glarus and had been sent back to his 

home parish; also that he first attempted suicide and showed himself very 

refractory in transit, so that he had to be locked up in the local jail, from 

which he broke out during the night and escaped.

[363] According to his own statement, he wandered or rather tramped round

all the cantons of Switzerland until 1896, when he again found regular work

in a textile mill in Schwanden. States that he remained there for four years

and eight months, and married again in the autumn of 1900. The marriage

was childless and not very happy.

[364] In the summer of 1901 he ran away on the Monday following a Sunday 

night debauch, taking with him a savings book belonging to his wife, 

showing funds amounting to 1200 francs,  which  he  unlawfully drew at the 

bank in Glarus. Accordingly a description of him was circulated in the police 

gazette in Zurich. After a fortnight he came back again and gave his wife 700 

francs. The rest he kept for himself. Eight weeks later he again ran away, 

ostensibly to look for work, taking with him  another  400  francs.  When,  

after  a  little  while,  he  returned,  he pretended to his wife that he had no 

more money left. But evidently he still had about 500 francs. After ten 

months he ran away again, always lodging in inns, and on September 15, 

1902, stole a bicycle standing in front of a house, and on October 26 another bicycle from the corridor of a public-house in Siebnen, Canton Schwyz, 

valued at 200 francs, rode it to Lucerne, and was arrested on October 28, 

1902, as he was about to sell it for 120 francs. He was sentenced to six 

months in the workhouse on November 22, 1902.

[365] Later it was learned that he sold the first bicycle to a mechanic in

Glarus for 70 francs, or rather for a pair of field-glasses valued at 45 francs

and the rest in cash.

[366]  When  questioned  by  the  District  Attorney  on  May  29,  1903,  the

respondent gave his particulars correctly, but denied the charge of theft and

maintained that he had bought the bicycle from one Emil H. at the last church

fête in Wädenswil. From then on his answers were unclear and inconsistent.

[367]  Previous to this the respondent is stated not to have given any 

impression of abnormality. Only in solitary confinement did he become 

restless at night. He threw his shoes under the bed, covered the window with 

a blanket “because somebody was always trying to get in.” The next morning 

he refused nourishment, saying the food was poisoned. Henceforward he 

spoke only when pressed, said there was a spider on the wall, that spiders 

were poisonous, and that this was a sign that he was being poisoned. On the 

night of May 31 he slept in a cell for  four persons. He was restless at night, 

repeatedly asserting that there was someone under the bed. On June 2 his 

behaviour was still the same; he was apathetic, did not speak to the other 

prisoners, but ate when he saw the others eating. The District Medical Officer 

testified that the respondent’s remarks (“they wanted to do him in because he 

had killed his wife,” “he had seen a murderer under the bed with a knife,” 

etc.) and his general behaviour gave the impression of a catatonic state.

Observations Made in the Asylum

[368] On his admission on June 3, 1903, the respondent sat there listlessly

and could only with difficulty be made to answer. The expression of the face

was dull and masklike. He gave his name and address correctly, knew he was

in Zurich, but otherwise did not appear to be oriented as to time and place,

and could not state the year he was born. He persistently gave 5 fingers held

before him as 4, 10 as 8. He could not tell the time, said 5:30 for 5:50, 3:30

for 7:30, and when shown 3:30 said “also 3:30.” He recognized only 5-franc

pieces; 1-franc pieces he called 20 cents. On being given a key and asked to

lock the door, he put the key in upside down. He tried to open a matchbox

sideways. He was then put to bed. During the night he was quiet, but moved

his bed once, remarking that the plaster rose on the ceiling would fall on topof him.

[369] At the examination next morning he gave scanty answers, had to be

continually pressed. He seemed unclear about time and place, said he was in

a hospital in Zurich. He evidently understood all the questions quite well but

gave  senseless  answers,  all  very  curt  and  confined  to  the  fewest  possible

words.

[370] Examples:

What is the name of this hospital? — Zurich Hospital. What sort of people

are in your room? — Sick people. What is the matter with them? — They

can’t walk. Aren’t they wrong in the head? — No, in the legs. How long have

you been here? — Two days.

What day is it? — Saturday.

What day did you arrive? — Wednesday.

What day is it, then? — Saturday. (It was Thursday.) What day is it? —

Sunday.

What holiday was it last Sunday? (Whitsun.) — Singing-festival in Zurich. I

heard singing.

Where were you last Sunday? — In Zurich. What did you do? — Nothing.

Where do you live? — (No answer.) Glarus? Wädenswil? — Glarus.

Where were you before you came here? — Zurich.

What did you do in Zurich? Did you go anywhere? — Wandered around.

[371] Respondent gave no more answers, despite energetic pressing. He was

then  asked  to  do  various  things,  and  it  was  noted  that  he  understood  the

requests  correctly,  as  previously  the  questions,  but  carried  them  out  in  a

deliberately senseless manner.

[372] He was asked to write the word “Rothrist.” He at once took the pen in

his hand and made a zigzag line.

[373] He was asked to read. He held the book upside down, tried to read from

right to left. Called the letter O a “ring,” a 9 (inverted) “5”, a 1 a “line,” a 6

(inverted) “3”, a 4 (inverted) “2”, a 3 (inverted) no answer, a 2

(inverted) “2”, a 3 (inverted) “5”.

[374] Said spontaneously that he “couldn’t read it.”

[375] He was told to hold the book properly. He turned over the pages. The

book was then placed before him. Question: What’s that? Reply: “What are

you? Why are you here?” He could not be made to read.

[376] He was asked to lock the door with a key. He turned the key to the right

to lock, to the left to open, both times with a show of strength. (N.B.: Lockopens to the right.)

[377] He was asked to open a matchbox. First he tried, as yesterday, to break

it open from the side, but on being encouraged opened it properly, struck a

match, also lighted a candle and put it out, both correctly.

[378]  He  was  asked  to  open  the  blade  of  a  pocket-knife:  opened  the

corkscrew.

[379] He was asked to open a spectacles case and put on the spectacles.

Spontaneous remark: “I don’t want any. They aren’t spectacles.” Turned the

case over in his fingers, then opened it correctly when shown how to. Tried to

put the spectacles on upside down.

[380] He was given a purse, with the question: What is that? “A little box.”

What’s in it? “Cigars.” Tried to open it by pulling off the clasp.

[381] Some money (fr. 3.40) was put in front of him with the question: How

much is that? “5 francs.”

[382]  He  was  shown  a  gold  piece  (fr.  20)  and  asked:  How  much  is  that

worth? “Nothing.”

[383] Physical examination showed brisk forearm and patellar reflexes.

[384] Sensibility to pain seemed to be generally reduced, in places almost

non-existent, e.g., on the right forearm. Pupils reacted to pain; right pupil

somewhat  larger  than  the  left;  both  showed  normal  reaction.  Face  rather

asymmetrical, the left eyebrow standing higher than the right. Badly swollen

veins on the left leg. On the left side of the chest, over the second and third

ribs, there was a scar 5½ cm. long and almost 3 cm. broad (caused by the

alleged attempt at suicide).

[385] This examination was carried out in a separate room on the same floor

as the observation room where the respondent had been since the previous

evening. When the examination was over he was told to find his way back to

his room by himself. He went first in the opposite direction and rattled at a

door he had not passed before, and was then told to go in the other direction.

He now tried to open two more doors leading into rooms near the observation

room. Finally he came to the right one, which was opened for him. He went

in, but remained standing by the door. He was told to make his bed, but stood

there rigid, without moving. His bed was in the corner facing him, clearly

visible from where he stood. We let him stand. He stood for 1½ hours on the

same spot, turned pale, sweated profusely, asked the warder for some water,

and suddenly toppled over before it arrived, slipping to the floor full-length

by  the  stove.  His  face  was  pale  purple  and  covered  with  sweat.  He  saidnothing and did not react when spoken to, although he was conscious. After

ten minutes he was put on his feet again, but hardly was he upright than he

turned pale, his pulse very weak, soft, rather rapid. He was then put to bed,

where he lay quiet and silent.

[386] Towards four o’clock in the afternoon he suddenly got up, went to the

door and banged it violently with his head, then took a run and threw himself

head foremost against the door with considerable force. (According to the

head warder, there was such a racket that he thought “everything was falling

to bits” in the  observation  room.)  When  they tried to restrain him he 

struggled so much that he had to be straitjacketed, whereupon he calmed 

down at once.

[387] On the night of June 4 he was quiet, turned his bed round only once,

and then didn’t want to go back again. At the morning visit he suddenly

seized  hold  of  the  doctor  and  tried  to  pull  him  into  bed,  then  seized  the

warder and fought with him. He was given a narcotic by injection. On the

following  days  he  exhibited  the  same  dull,  apathetic  behaviour  with

occasional attacks on doctors and warders, though the attacks were confined

to wrestling and never came to blows. He seldom said anything, and what he

said was always stupid and nonsensical, and was uttered in an unemotional,

toneless voice. He ate nothing for the first three days. On the fourth day he

began to eat a little, then better every day. On June 7 he suddenly announced

to the doctor that he had too much blood, and would they please open a vein

—a request which was naturally not granted. It was also observed that in

contradiction to his apparent apathy he took a lively interest in what was

going on around; for instance he suddenly called out that they ought to tie up

the feet of a patient who was offering violent resistance to nasal feeding, then

it would go better.

[388] On June 8 he was given a strong dose of faradism, and was told that

henceforth this would happen daily and would do a great deal to improve his

condition, particularly his speech.

[389]  On  the  morning  of  June  9  he  was  suddenly  clear,  demanded  an

interview  with  the  director.  He  was  taken  to  a  separate  room,  where  he

delivered the following oration:

[390] “You know very well that there’s not much the matter with me. When I

was arrested I was so scared and upset thinking of my mother and sisters,

they being so respectable, that I didn’t know what to say, so I got the idea of

making things look worse than they were. But I soon saw you weren’t takenin, besides I felt such a fool playing the looney, also I got sick of always

lying in bed. I’m sick of everything. I thought of killing myself. This week I

asked to be bled and I planned to fight against being bandaged and so make

the blood run. I’m not crazy, yet I sometimes feel I’m not quite right in the

head. I didn’t do this to avoid going to jail, but for the sake of my family.… I

hadn’t been in jail for nine years until last fall.” (Wept.)

[391] When asked how he came to simulate insanity, he said: “I was sorry for

my old mother and regretted what I’d done. I was so frightened and upset that

I thought, well, I’ll make out I’m worse than I am. When I got back to the

cell after the hearing I was at my wits’ end. I’d have jumped out of the

window but for the bars. I thought I can’t bring any more disgrace on my

mother and sisters. I’d have had a nice life if only I could have gone straight.

I’ve always gone on the booze instead of working. My wife always told me I

was wrong in the head—naturally, if your head’s full of booze.” He went on

to say that he hadn’t really known what would happen to him if he simulated,

he just wanted to see what we would do. Other people had simulated and got

away with it. He didn’t know he would be taken to Burghölzli, he thought it

would be the cantonal hospital.

[392] In this way he arrived at the idea of pretending to be mad. He hadn’t

eaten anything because he thought he would starve himself. (Another time he

said he had lost his appetite.) He had been in despair and he still was; for all

he cared we could open a vein today, the only reason why he had not killed

himself before was that he did not want to bring more disgrace on his mother

by committing suicide.

[393] He said he feigned fear of poisoning because it gave him an excuse for

not eating. He simulated hallucinations because he knew that mad people

often  saw  such  things.  When  he  was  moved  to  a  communal  cell  he  was

obliged to start eating as soon as he saw the others eating. During this recital

the  respondent  repeatedly  burst  into  tears  and  was  obviously  in  a  very

penitent mood.

[394]  On  this  and  the  following  day  (June  9–10)  he  was  subjected  to  a

thorough examination.

[395] Pupillary, patellar, and other reflexes showed no change. When tested

for sensibility to pain the respondent definitely reacted, but it was clear that

sensibility in general was considerably reduced in a uniform way over the

entire  surface  of  the  body  (hypalgesia).  The  visual  field  showed  no

restriction,  but  he  was  found  to  have  typical  red-green  blindness.Apperception  was  considerably  reduced,  so  that  simple  pictures  were

perceived very slowly and faultily. If he was shown a picture long enough, he

understood it and could describe it correctly. When Aesop’s fable of the ass

in  the  lion’s  skin  was  read  out  to  him,  he  understood  the  meaning  but

reproduced the story very inaccurately:

[396] An ass found a lion’s skin with a dead lion inside it. [This passage was

a  spontaneous  addition  of  the  respondent’s.]  Then  he  took  the  skin  and

wrapped  himself  in  it.  He  ran  round  roaring  like  a  lion.  Then  the  other

animals tore him to pieces. The meaning is: Do not make yourself bigger than

you are.

[397] His retention was likewise reduced, and this was particularly apparent

in reckoning, as he easily forgot one or the other component of a simple sum.

For  instance,  he  could  not  calculate  147  +  178;  even  simpler  sums  were

difficult  for  him,  e.g.,  “15  +  17  =  42–yes,  42,  no,  37.”  He  reckoned  as

follows: “15 + 15 = 30 + 7 = 37–no, 32.” Division was the worst; he could

not solve 92 ÷ 8. Apart from poor aptitude for arithmetic,

the  fault  lay  chiefly  with  his  reduced  retention,  i.e.,  a  so-called  bad 

memory.

[398] Otherwise he showed medium intelligence and a knowledge that was

sufficient and appropriate to his circumstances.

[399] After this he composed an autobiography, running to five and a-half

pages, in which he accepted the chief blame for his unsuccessful life and also

for the unhappy outcome of his two marriages. In the same remorseful and

contrite tone he gave an oral account of his life-history, emphasizing again

and again that he alone was to blame for his criminal career, that he had

drunk foolishly and neglected his work, that an inner unrest always drove him

on his way and prevented him from settling down with his wife; he had never

been able to “submit to the yoke.” Every so often he had to run away, driven

by a vague urge for freedom.

[400]  The  story  of  his  life  was  correct  so  far  as  it  could  be  checked

objectively. He was at fault only in the dates. He also told the story of his

various thefts faithfully and without cover-up. He was surprisingly uncertain,

however, with regard to the temporal location of recent happenings. He was

unsure whether he had been three or four days in Selnau; on the morning of

June  9  he  was  definite  that  he  had  been  a  fortnight  in  the  asylum;  later,

towards afternoon, he thought it was certainly twelve days at least, and in the

evening he hovered between ten and twelve days. Otherwise he was welloriented as to time. He recounted the details of his present stay in a confused

manner, and he no longer remembered many little incidents that took place

during his simulation; he also got various things muddled up in time. He had

only a vague memory of his admission and the examination that followed; he

knew that he had been told to put a key in the lock but thought he had done it

correctly. He remembered also the examination on the next day, and said that

the room had been full of doctors, about seven or eight of them (in reality

there were five). He could still remember the details of the examination, but

only when helped. With regard to the scene that took place afterwards, he

made a statement to the following effect:

[401] He knew quite well how he came out after the examination, we turned

him loose and he lost his way in the big corridor. It seemed to him that in

order to reach the examination room he had first gone up some steps. Then,

when he found he did not have to go down any steps, he thought we wanted

to fool him and lead him to the wrong room. Therefore, when we took him to

the sick room, he thought it was not the right room, nor did he recognize it

again, especially when he saw that all the beds were occupied. That was why

he remained standing by the door. We let him stand there, and then he felt

queer and fell over. Only when he was put to bed did he notice that there was

a bed unoccupied, that it was his bed and that he was in the right room.

[402] The fact that he banged his head against the door so forcefully was, he

explained, due to his desperation; he was in such a state that he didn’t care if

he bashed his head in.

[403]  (Respondent  would  not  admit  the  suicide  attempt  reported  in  the

documents.  He  stated  that  he  had  merely  been  monkeying  about  with  a

revolver, that it had gone off, and that he had no intention of committing

suicide.)

[404] In order to obtain a more accurate picture of his condition at this time

(June 10), we took what is known as his “work-curve.” We put him to adding

up single figures for 46 minutes and then plotted the results (performance and

error) in a curve.3 The striking thing is the low level of performance per

minute despite increasing practice, and the large, rapidly increasing number

of errors. This behaviour was not the result of fatigue; it reflected a state of

peculiar psychic debility and uncertainty.

[405] On the following days the respondent was left to his own devices. He

passed the time in reading and playing cards, and complained off and on of

vague  ailments  (“weak  back,”  etc.),  grumbled  about  the  warders  and  theasylum, saying that there was nothing whatever the matter with half the so-

called patients here, etc.

[406] On June 19 he was subjected to another thorough examination.

[407] His physical condition showed no change.

[408] In his comprehension there was a distinct improvement, for although

his perception was still uncertain and not quick enough, it was quicker and

more accurate than before.

[409]  No  change  could  be  demonstrated  in  his  retention.  Memory  and

calculation were just as uncertain as on June 9.

[410] On the other hand, the work-curve (taken on June 17) showed a distinct 

improvement. Not only was the average performance  higher, there was also 

a considerable drop in the number of errors.

[411] Respondent now exhibited a continual mood of mild depression and

often asked when he could go away.

[412] On June 23 he suddenly made an attempt at suicide by slowly sawing

through  the  skin  of  his  left  wrist  with  a  sharp  stone,  near  the  artery.  On

beginning  to  bleed  he  asked  the  warder  for  a  knife,  because  he  hadn’t

“finished it off properly,” whereupon, of course, the attempt was discovered.

At first he resisted when we tried to stitch and bandage the wound, but gave

way at once when we threatened to have him held down by four warders.

Opinion

[413] The following points are clear from the material set forth under sections

1 and 2:

[414] Respondent has always inclined to lead a work-shy, vagrant existence.

He never remained anywhere for long, was continually moving about and

changing his job; he could not endure the settled life of marriage, quarrelled

with his wife, embezzled her money, and squandered it. If opportunity were

favourable, he several times resorted to stealing. His characteristic instability

was, in his opinion, due to an inner unrest which drove him forth again and

again, even from jobs that might have suited him. He himself was aware of

this peculiarity, and realized also that he had only himself to blame for his

unfortunate career.

[415] Investigation shows that even apart from this peculiarity the respondent

is not quite normal. He exhibits a number of deviations from the norm which,

if  not  exactly  pathological,  must  nevertheless  be  described  as  signs  of

degeneracy; for instance, general reduction of sensibility to pain (hypalgesia),

red-green blindness (Daltonism), reduced attention, poor comprehension ofthings seen and heard, characterized by retardation and lack of accuracy.

[416] This abnormal condition comes nearer to congenital degeneracy than to

any known mental illness. Owing to our meagre knowledge of the family

circumstances no strong hereditary influences could be proved, but they may

nevertheless exist.

[417] One can, if necessary, distinguish certain groups among hereditarily

tainted persons which correspond to definite clinical pictures, according to

the  way  the  symptoms  are  constellated.  The  respondent  comes  closest  to

hysteria, since his chief symptoms—instability of character and forgetfulness

—play a particularly prominent role in hysteria. Red-green blindness, dulling

of the senses in general, are symptoms that are found in various forms of

degeneracy (or “psychopathic inferiority”). His easy emotional excitability,

his inquisitive interest in the asylum’s affairs, and his rash judgments, though

they cannot with certainty be described as hysterical, nevertheless give that

impression. On the other hand, the attempt at suicide, which stopped just at

the point where it began to be dangerous, has a definitely hysterical character.

(This is not to say that a depression cannot sometimes reach such a pitch that

the attempt has a more than merely theatrical outcome.)

[418] In view of the fact that the respondent comes of an otherwise reputable 

family and is not just a moral degenerate, but was prevented from leading a 

steady and useful life mainly on account of his abnormal psychic  disposition,  

we  must  assume  that  the  reasons  he  gave  for simulation, particularly the 

powerful feeling of remorse, were in fact sufficient, although the psychology 

of it is not altogether clear. Indeed, it is remarkable how vague he was in this 

connection, for he had no very clear idea of what he really wanted to gain by 

simulation, and of what would happen to him if he simulated. It is probable 

that the thought uppermost in his mind was that his offence would be 

forgiven him; but, judging by what he told us, he had at the time absolutely 

no conception of the consequences of his actions. It looks very much as if he 

were following an inexplicable urge to extricate himself from his simulation 

rather than a clear train of thought.

[419] With regard to the outward appearance of his condition at that time, it

must be emphasized that apart from a number of minor inconsistencies and

improbabilities  which  always  kept  us  on  the  watch  for  simulation,  the

respondent acted the part of a madman extremely well on the whole —so

well, in fact, that there could be no mistaking a distinct affinity with certain

hysterical twilight states on the one hand and with certain forms of dementiapraecox  (tension  neurosis)  on  the  other.  The  dull  facial  expression,  the

ruthlessness with which he banged his head against the door, his real fainting-

fit,  all  these  are  facts  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  explain  as  pure

simulation. So even at this stage we had the impression that, if simulation

were  present  at  all,  there  must  still  be  some  pathological  factor  in  the

background which enabled the respondent to play his strenuous role. Further

observation fully confirmed this conjecture. According to his own subsequent

confession, it was an intentionally simulated insanity, but, without his either

knowing it or willing it, it succeeded so well that it almost turned into real

insanity— that is to say, it began to take on pathological features, because the

meticulous imitation of a semi-imbecilic state had an effect on the normal

activity of the mind, and this showed itself in various symptoms which could

no  longer  be  simulated.  What  the  respondent  said  about  the  scene  in  the

observation room is proof of this. His bad memory, which moreover was

particularly  defective  for  the  whole  period  of  simulation,  cannot  be  held

responsible for the above report of the incident, since it was a quite positive

memory of a falsification of perception which cannot be regarded as normal

and which sufficiently explains the oddity of the situation at the time. We see

from  this  that  the  respondent  already  had  a  pathologically  indistinct  and

definitely  falsified  perception  of  his  environment.  Further  proof  of  the

supposed  disturbance  of  consciousness  is  furnished  by  the  respondent’s

obvious  helplessness,  which  led  to  his  fainting-fit.  He  could  easily  have

altered his position or done something to avoid fainting from discomfort,

without  necessarily  stepping  outside  his  role.  The  remark  that  he  had  no

appetite  at  the  beginning  of  his  hunger-strike  is  also  significant.  All  this

suggests  that  the  intention  to  simulate  insanity  became  a  powerful  auto-

suggestion which blurred his consciousness and in this way influenced his

actions regardless of his conscious will. This also gives us the key to his

histrionic feats. There are numerous cases known to science of deceptions

which started off as conscious and became, by auto-suggestion, involuntary

and unconscious, and also much more convincing and consistent. Into this

category  fall,  in  particular,  all  cases  of  pathological  lying  (pseudologia

phantastica).

[420]  These  phenomena  are  observed  as  a  rule  in  hysterically  disposed

persons, which is an additional reason for suspecting the respondent of some

hysterical degeneracy.

[421] Although certain episodes doubtless came about only as a result of therestriction  and  blurring  of  consciousness,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the

respondent  occasionally  dropped  the  mask  and  showed  an  interest  in  his

surroundings that contradicted his apparent apathy.

[422] The most probable hypothesis is that he acted the greater part of his

seeming  insanity  with  conscious  intent,  but  that  certain  elements  in  the

simulation worked on him so convincingly that they acquired the force of an

overmastering suggestion and so induced a genuine auto-hypnosis. That these

abnormal psychic processes had an injurious effect on his mental activity in

other ways is shown by the difference between the work-curve on the second

day after simulation ceased and nine days later.

[423] As is clear from the respondent’s own statements, the development of 

simulation was attended by strong affects. Affects always have a disturbing 

influence on consciousness, as they place undue emphasis on feeling-toned 

thought-processes and thus obscure any others that may be present. Hence it 

is understandable that the respondent was not very clear as to what he wanted 

to gain by simulation. In our opinion, the initial affects were the source of the 

overmastering suggestion to simulate that later  ensued. That this 

phenomenon of partly conscious, partly unconscious simulation could come 

about at all was evidently due to the respondent’s hysterical disposition, and 

the most outstanding feature of this disposition is an abnormal dissociability 

of consciousness, which, the moment a strong affect appears, can easily lead 

to mental confusion and the  formation of suggestions which are very 

difficult to combat. Altogether, the psychological mechanism of his 

simulation seems to us to suggest that the initial psychic weakness was the 

final cause of the idea of simulation. The respondent was probably aware of 

the confusion wrought by his emotions, and he may have converted it into the 

wish to go mad rather than bring more disgrace on his mother through 

another penal conviction.

[424] However that may be, it is sufficient to show that his simulation had

pathological features and that it appears to have been influenced, even in

origin, by causes that were not quite normal.

[425] We have no reason to suppose that the same or a similar disturbance of

consciousness existed before his imprisonment, that is to say, at the time the

offence  was  committed;  moreover,  it  is  very  improbable  there  was  any

pathological  disturbance  at  that  time—unless,  of  course,  one  chooses  to

regard  his  ordinary  state  of  congenital  degeneracy  as  such  a  disturbance.

Degenerative symptoms of this kind are, however, found in a large number ofhabitual criminals who must be considered fully responsible in the eyes of the

law. On the other hand, we are of the opinion that the psychological state in

which the decision to simulate was taken is  not  quite  the  same  as  the  one  

designated  by  the  term “responsibility,” because in the former case there 

was an undeniable predisposition which underlay the wish to simulate and 

fostered it in such a manner that we must suppose the respondent was acting 

under abnormal influences which considerably restricted his freedom of will.

[426] We therefore conclude that insanity within the meaning of the law was

not present at the time the theft was committed, but that partial responsibility

must be assumed for the simulation.

[427] Further, having regard to the fact that the simulation was for the most

part  conscious,  and  that  a  spontaneous  twilight  state  is  in  consequence

precluded, the respondent must also be deemed punishable.

[428] We therefore answer the questions put to us as follows:

[429] 1. The respondent is not at the moment mentally ill.

He  is,  on  the  other  hand,  in  a  condition  of  psychopathic  inferiority  with

hysterical features.

This  condition  has  existed  presumably  since  birth.  It  does  not  preclude

responsibility  for  theft;  but  partial  responsibility  must  be  assumed  for

simulation.                                          VI

    A THIRD AND FINAL OPINION ON TWO

CONTRADICTORY PSYCHIATRIC DIAGNOSES

  ON THE PSYCHOLOGICAL DIAGNOSIS OF

                                      FACTS

[430] It is not so very uncommon for two psychiatric diagnoses to reach

contradictory  conclusions,  especially  when,  as  in  the  present  case,  it  is  a

question of the very elastic borderline between complete irresponsibility and

partial responsibility. The peculiarity of this case consists firstly in the fact

that the medical expert was confronted, not with the defendant herself, but

merely with the reports that had previously been passed on her. In adopting

this procedure, the authorities were swayed by the reflection that the material

already amassed in these reports was so exhaustive that further observation

would be superfluous. The medical expert was able to concur with this view.

Secondly, the case is of interest inasmuch as it gave rise to a discussion of

principle concerning the relation—a very important one in practice—of moral

defect  to  hysteria.  The  medical  expert  would  like  to  submit  the  views

expressed  in  the  final  opinion  for  the  consideration  of  his  professional

colleagues.

[431] Our opinion is based on the existing records, etc., the legal records

being specified under “Documents.”

[432] At the same time we have tried to form our own judgment on the basis

of two consultations with the defendant in prison.

Questions Asked by the Examining Magistrate

[433] (i). May one assume, from the psychiatric reports (Opinions A and

that  Mrs.  Z.  is  totally  irresponsible,  or  is  it  a  case  of  partial 

responsibility only?

(ii).  Was  the  material  at  the  disposal  of  the  Governors  of  Asylum  B.

complete?

Opinion A: November 17, 1904

[434] THE FACTS: Mrs. Z. defrauded two women of 200 marks by telling

them she had a ticket in the Hungarian state lottery, and had drawn a high

prize (38,000 or 180,000 marks). She now needed the money to pay for her

ticket, so that she could collect the winnings.[435] EXAMINATION: To the examining magistrate the defendant stated

that in November 1903 a certain August Baumann had offered her further

lottery tickets to the value of 2000 francs. In order to buy them, she had tried

to raise the money.

[436]  The  examination  showed,  however,  that  in  1900  and  1901  she  had

relieved  a  certain  B.  [another  person]  of  4000  francs  by  telling  the  same

story. Nevertheless, the defendant maintained the existence of Mr. Baumann

with such obstinacy that it was at first conjectured she might perhaps be his

victim.

[437]  Despite  exhaustive  inquiries,  Baumann’s  existence  could  not  be

proved. But as the defendant stuck to her story, and the evidence of several

witnesses raised the question of her mental health, the examining magistrate

considered  it  possible  that  she  was  suffering  from  pathological  self-

deception. For these reasons she was recommended for a medical opinion.

[438] DOCUMENTS: The Opinion was based on the documents then in 

existence, the following being of special interest: The records of the Cantonal 

Court of G.; a report from the penitentiary in G., which states: “Z. is a 

pleasure-seeking, dissolute person and a first-class impostor. Her behaviour 

in the penitentiary was entirely normal, there was never any sign of a psychic 

defect”; and, finally, a report from the District Medical Officer  of  K.,  

September  1904,  which  assumed  an  abnormal  mental

condition  and  limited  responsibility  on  the  grounds  of  various  nervous

troubles, such as the unshakable “self-suggestion” of Baumann’s existence

and  the  incomplete  correction  of  an  anxiety  dream  she  had  in  prison.  In

addition,  there  were  a  number  of  important  testimonies  representing  the

defendant as mentally abnormal.

[439]  Observation  began  on  September  28,  1904,  and  the  Opinion  was

delivered  on  November  17.  The  observation  established  the  presence  of

hysterical  symptoms,  and  that  the  belief  in  Baumann’s  existence  was  a

pathological  self-deception  in  which  the  defendant  herself  believed.  She

admitted that she obtained the money by fraud, but insisted that she meant to

pay it back as soon as she received her winnings.

[440] There were no other disturbances of intelligence and consciousness.

[441]  CONCLUSION  DRAWN  BY  THE  OPINION:  The  most  important

finding  is  the  presence  of  hysteria.  Basic  to  all  hysteria  is  an  hysterical

character, which is generally congenital. “Experience shows that persons of

this  kind  habitually  lie  even  when  there  is  no  need  to,  and  invent  wholestories,” which, however, have reality value for the person concerned. “It

goes without saying that with constitutionally hysterical persons lying and

fraud cannot be judged in the same way as with normal people; they succumb

more  easily  to  an  already  existing  tendency  to  deceive,  their  lies  readily

suggest themselves, and many of the checks which prevent normal people

from lying and cheating do not operate in these persons.”

[442] The Opinion assumed partial responsibility.

[443] CRITICISM OF THE OPINION: The previous history is incomplete,

as it is based almost entirely on the documents. That, however, is not the fault

of  Asylum  A.,  but  of  its  distance  from  Switzerland,  which  prevented  a

personal examination. Examination by letter would have been impossible.

The discovery of hysterical symptoms is not particularly difficult, hence the

risk of deception is small. Moreover the examining doctors X. and Y. are

professionals  of  good  repute.  Although  greater  completeness  would  have

been desirable, the findings are nevertheless not only reliable but sufficient to

warrant the above conclusion.

[444] The important question of how far the belief in Baumann’s existence

influenced her actions is not discussed. If she really believed in Baumann and

his lottery tickets, her fraudulent manipulations would be bound to appear

much less reprehensible to her, as she could always exculpate herself in her

own eyes by telling herself that she would pay the money back again. This

kind  of  reasoning  would  appeal  very  much  to  the  weak  character  of  an

hysteric, a fact which ought to have played a considerable part in determining

the degree of responsibility. Opinion A seems to assume that the defendant

did believe in Baumann. In that case there is an omission in the Opinion

which makes the whole conclusion appear doubtful. But if the defendant was

lying,  if  she  purposely  put  the  blame  on  somebody  unknown,  then  the

conclusion reached by the Opinion could still be correct, even though it takes

no stand on this question.

Opinion B: March 23, 1905

[445] THE FACTS: Mrs. Z. defrauded a certain H. of 700 francs. She told the

injured party that she had a ticket in the Budapest lottery, which had won

—first 135,000 and then 270,000 francs. On various pretexts of

secondary  importance  she  induced  H.  to  give  her  considerable  sums  of

money from time to time, thus repeating the game as before.

[446] EXAMINATION: At the hearing the defendant again insisted that she

had received a lottery ticket from the agent Baumann. In view of the fact thatone medical opinion had already been submitted, the examining magistrate

thought it advisable to obtain a second.

[447]  DOCUMENTS:  The  Opinion  was  based  on  the  documents  then

available  (list  of  documents  followed).  Private  inquiries  concerning  the

defendant were also initiated by the asylum.

[448] This material is much more complete than in Opinion A. We refrain

from giving in detail all the valuable points of view arising out of the above

material, and refer the reader to the “Conclusions” below. They confirm at

some length that the defendant was from the beginning a morally defective

psychopath, who already had a variegated record of offences behind her.

[449] Observation began on January 19, 1905, and the Opinion was delivered

on March 23, 1905. The period of observation was therefore sufficiently long

to  warrant  a  very  thorough  appreciation  of  her  psychic  state.  The  main

finding was again a number of undoubted hysterical symptoms. (The fact that

other physical disturbances of a different nature were found in Opinion B is

of no special importance: hysterical symptoms can change very rapidly.) As

in Opinion A, no pathological defect of intelligence and no disturbance of

consciousness could be demonstrated. The far more thorough investigation of

her mental state proved, first and foremost, the existence of an hysterical

character  with  all  its  subsidiary  symptoms—unsociableness,  irritability,

tendency to lie and to intrigue, bad memory, etc.

[450] Here too the belief in the existence of Baumann proved unshakable (at

least to all appearances). The defendant maintained that she had spent the

best part of the money on Baumann’s tickets. In her relations with those

about her she showed her sly and rebellious nature.

[451]  CONCLUSIONS  DRAWN  BY  THE  OPINION:  From  the  life  and

behaviour of the defendant, who has an hereditary taint, it is abundantly clear

that she suffers from hysteria. Her hysterical character expresses itself in the

form of crass egotism. She manifests an extraordinary lack of feeling towards

her relatives, her former husband, and her fiancé, both of whom she swindled

without scruple. In the sexual sphere she knows no moral restraints. She is

pleasure-seeking and extravagant. Her extreme instability and moodiness are

characteristic. Her feelings vary inordinately.

[452] She knows what is permitted and what is not, but is totally wanting in

moral feeling.

[453]  The  belief  in  the  existence  of  Baumann  must  be  regarded  as  a

pathological fraud which she has gradually talked herself into believing.[454] Her unlawful actions must be regarded as symptoms of her hysterical

aberration. She is therefore totally irresponsible. Her illness has developed

with her personality. She is therefore incurable.

[455] The defendant is a danger to the community, and it is necessary to

protect  society  from  her  machinations.  Considering  the  craftiness  of  her

procedure, this would seem best accomplished by permanent internment in a

closed institution.

[456] CRITICISM OF THE OPINION: The material leaves nothing to be

desired; it is more than sufficient to establish constitutional hysteria. In our

view, however, the Opinion goes decidedly too far in its conclusions.

[457] It establishes quite correctly that there is a total lack of moral feelings, 

but that is not an hysterical symptom and does not belong in any way to the 

hysterical character. There are thousands of severe hysterics who have  very  

sensitive moral  feelings,  and there are  just  as many hardened criminals 

who show no signs of hysteria. Moral defect and hysteria are two completely 

different things, which occur independently of one another, as everyday 

experience shows.

[458]  As  may  be  elicited  from  the  Opinion,  the  defendant  is  a  morally

defective person who, besides that, is hysterical. Only her moral defect can

lead  to  criminality,  not  her  hysteria;  otherwise  all  hysterics  would  be

criminals, which is contrary to all experience.

[459] Consequently, the conclusion that the unlawful actions are symptoms

of hysteria falls to the ground, and the question of responsibility appears in

quite another light, a point to which we shall return later on.

[460] Despite thorough discussion, the question of belief in Baumann does 

not  find  a  satisfactory  solution  in  this  Opinion  either.  Nevertheless, 

thanks to its greater thoroughness, one can see much more clearly here that 

this question is of no particular significance as regards her freedom of action. 

Before she ever got this idea, the defendant lied, defrauded, indulged in 

sexual activity to excess, and, in the case of the offence mentioned in Opinion 

B, acted with full consciousness of defrauding. It therefore seems completely 

out of the question that any pathological compulsion emanated from this idea.

[461]  One  could  perhaps  say  that  the  general  idea  of  fraudulent  action

depended on belief in the existence of Baumann, supposing that this belief

was really present. Be that as it may, it is at any rate certain that the defendant

carried out the details of her frauds with clear consciousness. For instance,

she journeyed to K., ostensibly to pay for the tickets, but returned after a fewdays loaded with new clothes and presents.

[462] The correct conclusion to be drawn from Opinion B, therefore, is that

she acted unlawfully in consequence of her moral defect. One must, however,

agree with the Opinion in so far as the undoubted existence of hysteria had a

considerable influence on her actions.

Final Opinion

[463] From the material collected under Opinions A and B, it seems to us

proven beyond a doubt that Z. is a morally defective and hysterical person.

[464] Moral defect (moral insanity) is a congenital condition characterized by

the absence of moral feelings. Hysteria never causes a moral defect; it can at

most mask the existence of such, or exaggerate its pre-existing influence on a

person’s actions. Hysteria is a morbid condition, congenital or acquired, in

which the affects are exceedingly powerful. Hence the patients are more or

less the continual victims of their affects. At the same time, however, hysteria

generally determines only the quantity, not the quality, of the affects. The

quality  is  given  by  the  patient’s  character.  A  soft-hearted  person,  if  she

becomes hysterical, will

simply burst into tears more easily, a ruthless person will become harder, and

one who is inclined to excess will fall victim to her inclinations even more

unresistingly than before. It is in this manner that we have to envisage the

influence of hysteria on criminal actions.

[465] A person who is morally defective from the beginning and who is or

becomes hysterical therefore has even less power of resistance than one who

is  only  morally  defective.  This  behaviour  is  brought  out  very  nicely  in

Opinion  B.  No  sooner  is  she  released  from  prison  than  the  defendant

immediately succumbs again to the temptation of fraud. She brings off her

coups with consummate skill and has, so far as one can judge, a positively

uncanny  influence  over  her  victims.  As  Opinion  B  rightly  remarks,  these

artful powers of persuasion must be put down to hysteria, for in hysteria there

is  always  so  much  feeling  and  such  a  natural  gift  for  play-acting  that,

however  much  they  lie  and  exaggerate,  hysterics  will  always  find  people

gullible enough to believe them. Even doctors are often taken in by their

wiles.

[466] Neither of the Opinions has proved that the defendant was acting under

the compulsion of a pathological conviction, a delusional idea (Baumann), or

a pathological and irresistible instinct. Both stress that she knew her actions

were immoral. A clouding of consciousness at the moment of the deed islikewise out of the question.

[467]  The  defendant  simply  gives  way  to  her  evil  inclinations.  She  acts

exactly  like  any  common  criminal.  Her  hysteria  fosters  her  actions  and

prevents  any  resolutions  to  the  contrary.  It  does  this  because  only  evil

inclinations  are  present.  If  good  ones  were  there  too,  the  hysteria  would

occasionally foster them as well, as happens in hysterical persons who are not

morally defective. This shows that the essential thing can only be the moral

defect.

[468] Is the defendant legally irresponsible on account of her moral defect?

[469]  Every  habitual  criminal  is  morally  defective,  and  is  thus  ill  in  a

scientific  sense.  The  law,  however,  as  it  stands  at  present,  claims  all

individuals who recognize the punishable nature of their actions and who are

not acting under an irresistible compulsion.

[470]  The  juridical  conception  of  irresponsibility  therefore  includes  all

psychic abnormalities with the exception of moral defect. So if we adhere to

the  meaning  of  the  law,  moral  defect  should  logically  not  be  taken  into

account in adjudging the question of responsibility.

[471] In the present case, is the hysteria by itself strong enough to cause total

irresponsibility?

[472] As the Münsterling Opinion [B] makes clear, the defendant is morally

defective. If such a defect is present and offences are committed, they must

naturally be connected first of all with the moral defect, since they are two

things  that  go  together  unconditionally.  If  the  offences  are  to  arise  from

hysteria, it must be shown from the character of the offences that they have

their roots in hysteria and not in moral defect.

[473] Are the defendant’s offences specifically hysterical?

[474] No proof of this has been furnished. To all appearances it is a question 

of conscious and intentional fraud, of a kind common among skilled 

impostors. Its roots lie in evil inclinations and lack of resistance to them. But 

that is not hysterical. The only point where one might surmise a specifically  

hysterical motive  is the  question of  Baumann. But  it is precisely here that 

the greatest mistrust is to be recommended. The Baumann swindle served a 

purpose, and on one occasion it very nearly came off (in K.). Opinion B 

emphasizes that the defendant once said she would not let herself be 

hypnotized, as she was “not obliged to tell the doctors the whole truth.” In 

view of this remark it may be supposed that she had more insight into her 

swindles than she was credited with. It therefore behoves us to exercise the greatest caution in regard to the Baumann swindle. On the occasion of the

present offence, the undersigned had a lengthy talk with the defendant on this

point  and  ascertained  that  this  time  she  swindled  on  purpose,  in  order  to

obtain money. Baumann played no part in it at all. She also assured me that

she  did  not  possess  any  tickets,  but  she  still  maintains  the  existence  of

Baumann to this day with the greatest positiveness and many tears, so that it

is extremely difficult to resist the impression of his reality. However, the only

point of practical importance here is that in the present instance she swindled

on her own account, quite clearly and without beating about the bush, as once

before in 1900. It is also clear that no hysterical motivation may be inferred

for her offences.

[475] These offences, and particularly their remarkably sure results, must be

understood  as  the  co-operative  action  of  moral  defect  and  hysteria,  the

hysteria being merely an accessory influence in respect of the offence. Owing

to  the  strength  of  their  affects,  hysterical  persons  are  always  their  own

victims; they do not belong to themselves, as it were, but to the momentary

affect. Consequently, their actions are always being compromised by passing

moods. We all know how much these can obscure our judgment and hinder

reflection. With a higher degree of hysteria, such as the defendant exhibits,

the decisions of the will are always influenced by abnormal affects, which is

not the case with normal people, who can calmly weigh the pros and cons of

their actions. Hysteria therefore limits the subject’s responsibility.

[476]  Accordingly,  we  answer  your  questions  thus,  to  the  best  of  our

knowledge and conscience:

(i).  On  the  basis  of  Opinions  A  and  B,  only  a  diminished  or  partial

responsibility can be assumed.

(ii). The material collected under Opinion B is put together with so much care

and thoroughness that one could hardly add anything more than subsidiary

details to its completeness.

[477] The standpoint of the Opinion [B] means nothing less, in practice, than

an  abandonment  of  the  scientific  conception  of  moral  defect.  The  logical

conclusion to be drawn would be the exclusion of moral defectives from the

legal conception of insanity. In theory this might be described as a retrograde

step or concession to the lay psychologist’s interpretation of criminal law,

and in practice as a lack of consideration for society. We, as doctors of the

mentally ill, should pay no attention to either reproach, for our first charge is

to watch over the welfare of the state institutions committed to our care. Ifwe, too, now put into practice our theory of the mental sickness of moral

defectives,  we  find  that  with  increasing  psychological  education  of  the

judiciary our institutions are getting choked with criminals, thanks to our

altruistic  medical  reports.  Conditions  in  an  asylum  will  rapidly  become

untenable. (Just now in Burghölzli, only one more criminal is needed to make

the  situation  quite  impossible.)  In  this  way  we  ruin  the  character  and

reputation of an asylum completely, and no one could blame a respectable

family if it did everything in its power not to send an unfortunate mentally

sick relative into the villainous hubbub of a criminal ward. The presence of

criminals completely poisons the tone of the place, and its spirit as a hospital.

In  addition,  only  a  very  few  asylums  have  the  equipment  for  confining

criminals.  The  more  the  legal  experts  realize  the  futility  of  the  existing

criminal  practice,  the  more  they  will  insist  upon  getting  rid  of  their

permanently incorrigible clients by interning them in a lunatic asylum, on the

increasingly popular plea that society must be protected. Naturally criminal

justice wants that, but why must the asylum suffer for it? The asylum should

never  become  the  executive  organ  of  criminal  law.  By  relieving  criminal

justice of inconvenient elements we do not make them better, we merely ruin

our  asylums.  So  long  as  society  is  unwilling  to  alter  the  laws  relating  to

criminal justice, it must also discover to its cost that, as a result of the rapidly

increasing  number  of  partially  responsible  persons,  the  most  dangerous

criminals are turned loose against it at ever shorter intervals. Only in this way

can the pressing need for reforms be demonstrated to the public.

ON THE PSYCHOLOGICAL DIAGNOSIS OF FACTS1

[478]  As  readers  of  the  Centralblatt  may  be  aware,  the  “psychological

diagnosis  of  facts”  has  recently  been  the  object  of  some  discussion.  The

essence of psychological diagnosis consists in bringing to light, by means of

associations, the complex of ideas relating to a crime. In our work on “The

Associations of Normal Subjects,”2 Riklin and I put forward the concept of

the  “feeling-toned  complex”  and  described  its  effects  on  the  associations;

these  effects  were  examined  in  greater  detail  in  my  inaugural  paper  on

“Reaction-Time in the Association Experiment.” The discovery of feeling-

toned complexes in the associations of insane persons has been of great help

to us in our diagnostic work for the past two years, as is apparent from a

number of publications by Riklin and myself.

[479] After the publication of my studies in word-association, an article by

Wertheimer  and  Klein  appeared  in  Volume  XV  of  the  Archiv  fürKriminalanthropologie und Kriminalistik, on the psychological diagnosis of

facts.3 The authors discuss, in the main, the possibility of finding, through

the associations, the feeling-toned complex relating to a crime committed in

the past. As Messrs. Wertheimer and Klein are erroneously described as the

“discoverers” of this idea, I would like to clarify the situation by taking this

opportunity to remark that, so far as the experiment is concerned, the honour

of the title of discoverer belongs to Galton or Wundt. The concept of feeling-

toned complexes, however, and the determination of their specific effects on

association, derive from the Zurich Clinic, and more particularly from the

“Diagnostische Assoziationsstudien” published in the Journal für Psychologie

und  Neurologie,  1904–5.  If  Wertheimer  and  Klein  had  had  a  little  more

respect for the workers before them in this field, and had cited the source

from which they appropriated their seemingly original ideas, they could have

spared themselves sundry unpleasant discussions (cf. Weygandt’s criticism in

the latest issue of Aschaffenburg’s Monatsschrift4).

[480]  Wertheimer’s  merit  is  confined  at  present  to  having  emphasized  a

special instance of the feeling-toned complex—crime—and the possibility of

discovering it from the associations. I am privately informed that experiments

in this direction are in progress, though as yet they do not seem to have

advanced much beyond the laboratory stage.

[481] Readers may be interested to know that today I succeeded for the first

time in testing out, on a delinquent, our method of discovering complexes,

and with excellent results.

[482] A detailed account of the case will appear in a forthcoming issue of the

Schweizerische Zeitschrift für Strafrecht.5 I permit myself only a brief report

on the case now:

[483] Yesterday evening an elderly gentleman came to see me, obviously in a

state of great agitation. He told me that he had staying with him a young man

of eighteen, whose guardian he was. Some weeks ago he noticed from time to

time  that  small  sums  of  money  were  missing  from  his  cashbox,  now

amounting to over 100 francs. He at once informed the police, but was unable

to bring proofs against any one person. He rather suspected his ward, but had

no absolute proof of this. If he knew that his ward was the thief, he would

prefer to settle the matter on the quiet, so as to spare the feelings of the boy’s

highly respectable family. But first he wanted to know for certain whether his

ward was really a thief. He now asked me to hypnotize the young man and

question him under hypnosis. As can readily be understood, I declined thisstrange  request,  but  proposed  instead  an  association  test,  which  could  be

rendered  plausible  enough  in  the  form  of  a  consultation  (the  suspected

delinquent had wanted to consult me once before on account of mild nervous

troubles). His guardian agreed to the plan and this morning the young man

turned up for the consultation. I had, of course, previously equipped my list

of one hundred stimulus words with the critical words designed to hit the

complex. The experiment went off smoothly; but in order to determine the

critical reactions still more precisely I decided to employ my reproduction

procedure as well. The complex for the theft was then revealed so plainly by

the associations that I was able to tell the young man with quiet assurance:

“You  have  been  stealing.”  He  paled,  was  completely  nonplussed  for  a

moment, and after a little hesitation broke down and tearfully admitted to the

theft.

[484] I would merely like to add, in this provisional report, that the effects of

a theft complex on the associations are naturally exactly the same as in the

case of any other complex of similar emotional intensity. For further details I

must refer the reader to the forthcoming publication.

             ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY

                                   CHAPTER I

  ON THE PSYCHOLOGY AND PATHOLOGY OF SO-CALLED

                              OCCULT PHENOMENA

In that wide field of psychopathic deficiency where Science has demarcated

the  diseases  of  epilepsy,  hysteria  and  neurasthenia,  we  meet  scattered

observations  concerning  certain  rare  states  of  consciousness  as  to  whose

meaning  authors  are  not  yet  agreed.  These  observations  spring  up

sporadically  in  the  literature  on  narcolepsy,  lethargy, automatisme

ambulatoire,  periodic  amnesia,  double  consciousness,  somnambulism,

pathological dreamy states, pathological lying, etc.

These  states  are  sometimes  attributed  to  epilepsy,  sometimes  to  hysteria,

sometimes to exhaustion of the nervous system, or neurasthenia, sometimes

they are allowed all the dignity of a disease sui generis. Patients occasionally

work through a whole graduated scale of diagnoses, from epilepsy, through

hysteria, up to simulation. In practice, on the one hand, these conditions can

only  be  separated  with  great  difficulty  from  the  so-called  neuroses,

sometimes  even  are  indistinguishable  from  them;  on  the  other,  certain

features in the region of pathological deficiency present more than a mere

analogical relationship not only with phenomena of normal psychology, but

also with the psychology of the supernormal, of genius. Various as are the

individual phenomena in this region, there is certainly no case that cannot be

connected by some intermediate example with the other typical cases. This

relationship in the pictures presented by hysteria and epilepsy is very close.

Recently the view has even been maintained that there is no clean-cut frontier

between epilepsy and hysteria, and that a difference[2] is only to be noted in

extreme cases. Steffens says, for example—"We are forced to the conclusion

that in essence hysteria and epilepsy are not fundamentally different, that the

cause of the disease is the same, but is manifest in a diverse form, in different

intensity and permanence."

The demarcation of hysteria and certain borderline cases of epilepsy from

congenital and acquired psychopathic mental deficiency likewise presents the

greatest  difficulties.  The  symptoms  of  one  or  other  disease  everywhere

invade the neighbouring realm, so violence is done to the facts when they are

split off and considered as belonging to one or other realm. The demarcation

of  psychopathic  mental  deficiency  from  the  normal  is  an  absolutelyimpossible  task,  the  difference  is  everywhere  only  "more  or  less."  The

classification in the region of mental deficiency itself is confronted by the

same difficulty. At best, certain classes can be separated off which crystallise

round some well-marked nucleus through having peculiarly typical features.

Turning  away  from  the  two  large  groups  of  intellectual  and  emotional

deficiency,  there  remain  those  deficiencies  coloured  pre-eminently  by

hysteria  or  epilepsy  (epileptoid)  or  neurasthenia,  which  are  not  notably

deficiency  of  the  intellect  or  of  feeling.  It  is  essentially  in  this  region,

insusceptible of any absolute classification, that the above-named conditions

play their part. As is well known, they can appear as part manifestations of a

typical  epilepsy  or  hysteria,  or  can  exist  separately  in  the  realm  of

psychopathic  mental  deficiency,  where  their  qualifications  of  epileptic  or

hysterical are often due to the non-essential accessory features. It is thus the

rule  to  place  somnambulism  among  hysterical  diseases,  because  it  is

occasionally  a  phenomenon  of  severe  hysteria,  or  because  mild  so-called

hysterical  symptoms  may  accompany  it.  Binet  says:  "Il  n'y  a  pas  une

somnambulisme,  état  nerveux  toujours  identique  à  lui-même,  il  y  a  des

somnambulismes."  As  one  of  the  manifestations  of  a  severe  hysteria,

somnambulism is not an unknown phenomenon, but as a pathological entity,

as  a  disease sui  generis,  it  must[3]  be  somewhat  rare,  to  judge  by  its

infrequency  in  German  literature  on  the  subject.  So-called  spontaneous

somnambulism,  resting  upon  a  foundation  of  hysterically-tinged

psychopathic deficiency, is not a very common occurrence and it is worth

while to devote closer study to these cases, for they occasionally present a

mass of interesting particulars.

Case of Miss Elise K., aged 40, single; book-keeper in a large business; no

hereditary taint, except that it is alleged a brother became slightly nervous

after  family  misfortune  and  illness.  Well  educated,  of  a  cheerful,  joyous

nature, not of a saving disposition, always occupied with some big idea. She

was very kind-hearted and gentle, did a great deal both for her parents, who

were living in very modest circumstances, and for strangers. Nevertheless she

was not happy, because she thought she did not understand herself. She had

always enjoyed good health till a few years ago, when she is said to have

been treated for dilatation of the stomach and tapeworm. During this illness

her hair became rapidly white, later she had typhoid fever. An engagement

was terminated by the death of her fiancé from paralysis. She had been very

nervous for a year and a half. In the summer of 1897 she went away forchange of air and treatment by hydropathy. She herself says that for about a

year she has had moments during work when her thoughts seem to stand still,

but  she  does  not  fall  asleep.  Nevertheless  she  makes  no  mistakes  in  the

accounts  at  such  times.  She  has  often  been  to  the  wrong  street  and  then

suddenly noticed that she was not in the right place. She has had no giddiness

or attacks of fainting. Formerly menstruation occurred regularly every four

weeks, and without any pain, but since she has been nervous and overworked

it  has  come  every  fourteen  days.  For  a  long  time  she  has  suffered  from

constant headache. As accountant and book-keeper in a large establishment,

the  patient  has  had  very  strenuous  work,  which  she  performs  well  and

conscientiously. In addition to the strenuous character of her work, in the last

year she had various new worries. Her brother was suddenly divorced.[4] In

addition to her own work, she looked after his housekeeping, nursed him and

his child in a serious illness, and so on. To recuperate, she took a journey on

the 13th September to see a woman friend in South Germany. The great joy

at  seeing  her  friend  from  whom  she  had  been  long  separated,  and  her

participation in some festivities, deprived her of her rest. On the 15th, she and

her friend drank half a bottle of claret. This was contrary to her usual habit.

They then went for a walk in a cemetery, where she began to tear up flowers

and  to  scratch  at  the  graves.  She  remembered  absolutely  nothing  of  this

afterwards. On the 16th she remained with her friend without anything of

importance  happening.  On  the  17th  her  friend  brought  her  to  Zürich.  An

acquaintance  came  with  her  to  the  Asylum;  on  the  way  she  spoke  quite

sensibly, but was very tired. Outside the Asylum they met three boys, whom

she described as the "three dead people she had dug up." She then wanted to

go to the neighbouring cemetery, but was persuaded to come to the Asylum.

She  is  small,  delicately  formed,  slightly  anæmic.  The  heart  is  slightly

enlarged to the left, there are no murmurs, but some reduplication of the

sounds, the mitral being markedly accentuated. The liver dulness reaches to

the border of the ribs. Patella-reflex is somewhat increased, but otherwise no

tendon-reflexes. There is neither anæsthesia, analgesia, nor paralysis. Rough

examination of the field of vision with the hands shows no contraction. The

patient's hair is a very light yellow-white colour; on the whole she looks her

age. She gives her history and tells recent events quite clearly, but has no

recollection of what took place in the cemetery at C. or outside the Asylum.

During the night of the 17th-18th she spoke to the attendant and declared she

saw the whole room full of dead people—looking like skeletons. She was notat all frightened, but was rather surprised that the attendant did not see them

too. Once she ran to the window, but was otherwise quiet. The next morning,

while still in bed, she saw skeletons, but not in the afternoon. The following

night  at  four  o'clock  she  awoke  and  heard  the  dead  children  in  the

neighbouring[5] cemetery cry out that they had been buried alive. She wanted

to go out to dig them up, but allowed herself to be restrained. Next morning

at seven o'clock she was still delirious, but recalled accurately the events in

the cemetery at C. and those on approaching the Asylum. She stated that at C.

she wanted to dig up the dead children who were calling her. She had only

torn up the flowers to free the graves and to be able to get at them. In this

state Professor Bleuler explained to her that later on, when in a normal state

again,  she  would  remember  everything.  The  patient  slept  in  the  morning,

afterwards was quite clear, and felt herself relatively well. She did indeed

remember  the  attacks,  but  maintained  a  remarkable  indifference  towards

them. The following nights, with the exception of those of the 22nd and the

25th September, she again had slight attacks of delirium, when once more she

had to deal with the dead. The details of the attacks differed, however. Twice

she saw the dead in her bed, but she did not appear to be afraid of them, she

got  out  of  bed  frequently,  however,  because  she  did  not  want  "to

inconvenience the dead"; several times she wanted to leave the room.

After a few nights free from attacks there was a slight one on the 30th Sept.,

when she called the dead from the window. During the day her mind was

clear.  On  the  3rd  of  October  she  saw  a  whole  crowd  of  skeletons  in  the

drawingroom, as she afterwards related, during full consciousness. Although

she doubted the reality of the skeletons, she could not convince herself that it

was a hallucination. The following night, between twelve and one o'clock—

the earlier attacks were usually about this time—she was obsessed with the

idea of dead people for about ten minutes. She sat up in bed, stared at a

corner and said: "Well, come!—but they're not all there. Come along! Why

don't you come? The room is big enough, there's room for all; when all are

there, I'll come too." Then she lay down with the words: "Now they're all

there,"  and  fell  asleep  again.  In  the  morning  she  had  not  the  slightest

recollection of any of these attacks. Very short attacks occurred in the nights

of the 4th, 6th,[6] 9th, 13th and 15th of October, between twelve and one

o'clock. The last three occurred during the menstrual period. The attendant

spoke to her several times, showed her the lighted street-lamps, and trees; but

she did not react to this conversation. Since then the attacks have altogetherceased. The patient has complained about a number of troubles which she had

had  all  along.  She  suffered  much  from  headache  the  morning  after  the

attacks. She said it was unbearable. Five grains of Sacch. lactis promptly

alleviated this; then she complained of pains in both fore-arms, which she

described  as  if  it  were  a  teno-synovitis.  She  regarded  the  bulging  of  the

muscles in flexion as a swelling, and asked to be massaged. Nothing could be

seen objectively, and no attention being paid to it, the trouble disappeared.

She complained exceedingly and for a long time about the thickening of a

toenail, even after the thickened part had been removed. Sleep was often

disturbed. She would not give her consent to be hypnotised for the night-

attacks. Finally on account of headache and disturbed sleep she agreed to

hypnotic treatment. She proved a good subject, and at the first sitting fell into

deep sleep with analgesia and amnesia.

In  November  she  was  again  asked  whether  she  could  now  remember  the

attack on the 19th September which it had been suggested that she would

recall. It gave her great trouble to recollect it, and in the end she could only

state the chief facts, she had forgotten the details.

It should be added that the patient was not superstitious, and in her healthy

days had never particularly interested herself in the supernatural. During the

whole  course  of  treatment,  which  ended  on  the  14th  November,  great

indifference was evinced both to the illness and the cure. Next spring the

patient returned for out-patient treatment of the headache, which had come

back during the very hard work of these months. Apart from this symptom

her condition left nothing to be desired. It was demonstrated that she had no

remembrance of the attacks of the previous autumn, not even of those of the

19th  September  and  earlier.  On  the[7]  other  hand,  in  hypnosis  she  could

recount the proceedings in the cemetery and during the nightly disturbances.

By  the  peculiar  hallucination  and  by  its  appearance  our  case  recalls  the

conditions  which  V.  Kraft-Ebing  has  described  as  "protracted  states  of

hysterical  delirium."  He  says:  "Such  conditions  of  delirium  occur  in  the

slighter  cases  of  hysteria.  Protracted  hysterical  delirium  is  built  upon  a

foundation  of  temporary  exhaustion.  Excitement  seems  to  determine  an

outbreak, and it readily recurs. Most frequently there is persecution-delirium

with  very  violent  anxiety,  sometimes  of  a  religious  or  erotic  character.

Hallucinations of all the senses are not rare, but illusions of sight, smell and

feeling are the commonest, and most important. The visual hallucinations are

especially visions of animals, pictures of corpses, phantastic processions inwhich dead persons, devils and ghosts swarm. The illusions of hearing are

simply sounds (shrieks, howlings, claps of thunder) or local hallucinations,

frequently with a sexual content."

This patient's visions of corpses, occurring almost always in attacks, recall

the states occasionally seen in hystero-epilepsy. There likewise occur specific

visions which, in contrast with protracted delirium, are connected with single

attacks.

(1) A lady 30 years of age with grande hystérie had twilight states in which

as a rule she was troubled by terrible hallucinations; she saw her children

carried  away  from  her,  wild  beasts  eating  them  up,  and  so  on.  She  has

amnesia for the content of the individual attacks.

(2) A girl of 17, likewise a semi-hysteric, saw in her attacks the corpse of her

dead mother approaching her to draw her to her. Patient has amnesia for the

attacks.

These  are  cases  of  severe  hysteria  wherein  consciousness  rests  upon  a

profound stage of dreaming. The nature of the attack and the stability of the

hallucination alone show a certain kinship with our case, which in this respect

has  [8]numerous  analogies  with  the  corresponding  states  of  hysteria.  For

instance,  with  those  cases  where  a  psychical  shock  (rape,  etc.)  was  the

occasion  for  the  outbreak  of  hysterical  attacks,  and  where  at  times  the

original incident is lived over again, stereotyped in the hallucination. But our

case gets its specific mould from the identity of the consciousness in the

different attacks. It is an "Etat Second" with its own memory and separated

from the waking state by complete amnesia. This differentiates it from the

above-mentioned twilight states and links it to the so-called somnambulic

conditions.

Charcot divides the somnambulic states into two chief classes:—

1. Delirium with well-marked incoordination of representation and action.

2. Delirium with co-ordinated action. This approaches the waking state.

Our case belongs to the latter class.

If  by  somnambulism  be  understood  a  state  of  systematised  partial

waking,  any  critical  review  of  this  affection  must  take  account  of  those

exceptional cases of recurrent amnesias which have been observed now and

again. These, apart from nocturnal ambulism, are the simplest conditions of

systematised partial waking. Naef's case is certainly the most remarkable in

the literature. It deals with a gentleman of 32, with a very bad family history

presenting numerous signs of degeneration, partly functional, partly organic.In consequence of over-work at the age of 17 he had a peculiar twilight state

with  delusions,  which  lasted  some  days  and  was  cured  with  a  sudden

recovery of memory. Later he was subject to frequent attacks of giddiness

and  palpitation  of  the  heart  and  vomiting;  but  these  attacks  were  never

attended  by  loss  of  consciousness.  At  the  termination  of  some  feverish

illness [9]he suddenly travelled from Australia to Zürich, where he lived for

some weeks in careless cheerfulness, and only came to himself when he read

in the paper of his sudden disappearance from Australia. He had a total and

retrograde  amnesia  for  the  several  months  which  included  the  journey  to

Australia, his sojourn there and the return journey.

Azam has published a case of periodic amnesia. Albert X., 12-1/2 years old,

of hysterical disposition, was several times attacked in the course of a few

years  by  conditions  of  amnesia  in  which  he  forgot  reading,  writing  and

arithmetic, even at times his own language, for several weeks at a stretch. The

intervals were normal.

Proust has published a case of Automatisme ambulatoire with pronounced

hysteria which differs from Naef's in the repeated occurrence of the attacks.

An educated man, 30 years old, exhibits all the signs of grande hystérie; he is

very suggestible, has from time to time, under the influence of excitement,

attacks of amnesia which last from two days to several weeks. During these

states  he  wanders  about,  visits  relatives,  destroys  various  objects,  incurs

debts, and has even been convicted of "picking pockets."

Boileau  describes  a  similar  case  of  wandering-impulse.  A  widow  of  22,

highly hysterical, became terrified at the prospect of a necessary operation for

salpingitis; she left the hospital and fell into a state of somnambulism, from

which she awoke three days later with total amnesia. During these three days

she had travelled a distance of about 60 kilometres to fetch her child.

William James has described a case of an "ambulatory sort."

The Rev. Ansel Bourne, an itinerant preacher, 30 years of age, psychopathic,

had on a few occasions attacks of loss of consciousness lasting one hour. One

day  (January  17,  1887)  he  suddenly  disappeared  from  Greene,  after

having  taken  551  dollars  out  of  the  bank.  He  remained  hidden  for  two

months. During this time he had taken a little shop under the name of H. J.

Browne  in  Norriston,  Pa.,  and  had  carefully  attended  to  all  purchases,

although he had never done this sort of work before. On March 14, 1887, he

suddenly  awoke  and  went  back  home,  and  had  complete  amnesia  for  the

interval.Mesnet publishes the following case:—

F.,  27  years  old,  sergeant  in  the  African  regiment,  was  wounded  in  the

parietal  bone  at  Bazeilles.  Suffered  for  a  year  from  hemiplegia,  which

disappeared  when  the  wound  healed.  During  the  course  of  his  illness  the

patient  had  attacks  of  somnambulism,  with  marked  limitation  of

consciousness; all the senses were paralysed, with the exception of taste and a

small  portion  of  the  visual  sense.  The  movements  were  co-ordinated,  but

obstacles in the way of their performance were overcome with difficulty.

During  the  attacks  he  had  an  absurd  collecting-mania.  By  various

manipulations  one  could  demonstrate  a  hallucinatory  content  in  his

consciousness; for instance, when a stick was put in his hand he would feel

himself transported to a battle scene, would place himself on guard, see the

enemy approaching, etc.

Guinon and Sophie Waltke made the following experiments on hysterics:—

A  blue  glass  was  held  in  front  of  the  eyes  of  a  female  patient  during  a

hysterical attack; she regularly saw the picture of her mother in the blue sky.

A red glass showed her a bleeding wound, a yellow one an orange-seller or a

lady with a yellow dress.

Mesnet's case reminds one of the cases of occasional attacks of shrinkage of

memory.

MacNish communicates a similar case.

An apparently healthy young lady suddenly fell into an abnormally long and

deep sleep—it is said without prodromal symptoms. On awaking she had

forgotten the words for and the knowledge of the simplest things. She had

again to learn to read, write, and count; her progress was rapid in this re-

learning.  After  a  second  attack  she  again  woke  in  her  normal  state,  but

without recollection of the period when she had forgotten things. These states

alternated  for  more  than  four  years,  during  which  consciousness  showed

continuity within the two states, but was separated by an amnesia from the

consciousness of the normal state.

These selected cases of various forms of changes of consciousness all throw a

certain light upon our case. Naef's case presents two hysteriform eclipses of

memory, one of which is marked by the appearance of delusions, and the

other  by  its  long  duration,  contraction  of  the  field  of  consciousness,  and

desire to wander. The peculiar associated impulses are specially clear in the

cases  of  Proust  and  Mesnet.  In  our  case  the  impulsive  tearing  up  of  the

flowers,  the  digging  up  of  the  graves,  form  a  parallel.  The  continuity  ofconsciousness which the patient presents in the individual attacks recalls the

behaviour of the consciousness in MacNish's case; hence our case may be

regarded  as  a  transient  phenomenon  of  alternating  consciousness.  The

dreamlike hallucinatory content of the limited consciousness in our case does

not,  however,  justify  an  unqualified  assignment  to  this  group  of double

consciousness.  The  hallucinations  in  the  second  state  show  a  certain

creativeness which seems to be conditioned by the auto-suggestibility of this

state. In Mesnet's case we noticed the appearance of hallucinatory processes

from simple stimulation of touch. The patient's subconsciousness employs

simple  perceptions  for  the  automatic  construction  of  complicated  scenes

which then take possession of the limited consciousness. A somewhat similar

view must be taken about our patient's hallucinations; at least, the external

conditions which gave rise to the appearance of the hallucinations seem to

strengthen our supposition. The walk in the cemetery induces the vision of

the skeletons; the meeting with the three boys arouses the hallucination of

children buried alive whose voices the patient hears at night-time. She arrived

at the cemetery in a somnambulic state, which on this occasion was specially

intense in consequence of her having taken alcohol. She performed actions

almost  instinctively  about  which  her  subconsciousness  nevertheless  did

receive certain impressions. (The part played here by alcohol must not be

underestimated. We know from experience that it does not only act adversely

upon these conditions, but, like every other narcotic, it gives rise to a certain

increase  of  suggestibility.)  The  impressions  received  in  somnambulism

subconsciously form independent growths, and finally reach perception as

hallucinations.  Thus  our  case  closely  corresponds  to  those  somnambulic

dream-states which have recently been subjected to a penetrating study in

England and France.

These lapses of memory, which at first seem without content, gain a content

by  means  of  accidental  auto-suggestion,  and  this  content  builds  itself  up

automatically  to  a  certain  extent.  It  achieves  no  further  development,

probably  on  account  of  the  improvement  now  beginning,  and  finally  it

disappears  altogether  as  recovery  sets  in.  Binet  and  Féré  have  made

numerous experiments on the implanting of suggestions in states of partial

sleep.  They  have  shown,  for  example,  that  when  a  pencil  is  put  in  the

anæsthetic hand of a hysteric, letters of great length are written automatically

whose  contents  are  unknown  to  the  patient's  consciousness.  Cutaneous

stimuli in anæsthetic regions are sometimes perceived as visual images, or atleast  as  vivid  associated  visual  presentations.  These  independent

transmutations of simple stimuli must be regarded as primary phenomena in

the  formation  of  somnambulic  dream-pictures.  Analogous  manifestations

occur  in  exceptional  cases  within  the  sphere  of  waking  consciousness.

Goethe, for instance, states that when he sat down, lowered his head and

vividly conjured up the image of a flower, he saw it undergoing changes of

its own accord, as if entering into new combinations.

In half-waking states these manifestations are relatively frequent in the so-

called  hypnagogic  hallucinations.  The  automatisms  which  the  Goethe

example illustrates are differentiated from the truly somnambulic, inasmuch

as  the  primary  presentation  is  a  conscious  one  in  this  case;  the  further

development of the automatism is maintained within the definite limits of the

original presentation, that is, within the purely motor or visual region.

If the primary presentation disappears, or if it is never conscious at all, and if

the  automatic  development  overlaps  neighbouring  regions,  we  lose  every

possibility of a demarcation between waking automatisms and those of the

somnambulic state; this will occur, for instance, if the presentation of a hand

plucking  the  flower  gets  joined  to  the  perception  of  the  flower  or  the

presentation of the smell of the flower. We can then only differentiate it by

the more or less. In one case we then speak of the "waking hallucinations of

the  normal,"  in  the  other,  of  the  dream-vision  of  the  somnambulists.  The

interpretation of our patient's attacks as hysterical becomes more certain by

the demonstration of a probably psychogenic origin of the hallucination. This

is confirmed by her troubles, headache and teno-synovitis, which have shown

themselves amenable to suggestive treatment. The ætiological factor alone is

not  sufficient  for  the  diagnosis  of  hysteria;  it  might  really  be  expected a

priori that in the course of a disease which is so suitably treated by rest, as in

the treatment of an exhaustion-state, features would be observed here and

there  which  could  be  interpreted  as  manifestations  of  exhaustion.  The

question arises whether the early lapses and later somnambulic attacks could

not be conceived as states of exhaustion, so-called "neurasthenic crises." We

know that in the realm of psychopathic mental deficiency there can arise the

most  diverse  epileptoid  accidents,  whose  classification  under  epilepsy  or

hysteria is at least doubtful. To quote C. Westphal: "On the basis of numerous

observations, I maintain that the so-called epileptoid attacks form one of the

most universal and commonest symptoms in the group of diseases which we

reckon among the mental diseases and neuropathies; the mere appearance ofone or more epileptic or epileptoid attacks is not decisive for its course and

prognosis. As mentioned, I have used the concept of epileptoid in the widest

sense for the attack itself."

The epileptoid moments of our case are not far to seek; the objection can,

however, be raised that the colouring of the whole picture is hysterical in the

extreme. Against this, however, it must be stated that every somnambulism is

not eo ipso hysterical. Occasionally states occur in typical epilepsy which to

experts  seem  parallel  with  somnambulic  states,  or  which  can  only  be

distinguished by the existence of genuine convulsions.

As Diehl shows, in neurasthenic mental deficiency crises also occur which

often confuse the diagnosis. A definite presentation-content can even create a

stereotyped repetition in the individual crisis. Lately Mörchen has published a

case of epileptoid neurasthenic twilight state.

I am indebted to Professor Bleuler for the report of the following case:—

An educated gentleman of middle age—without epileptic antecedents—had

exhausted himself by many years of over-strenuous mental work. Without

other prodromal symptoms (such as depression, etc.) he attempted suicide

during a holiday; in a peculiar twilight state he suddenly threw himself into

the water from a bank, in sight of many persons. He was at once pulled out

and retained but a fleeting remembrance of the occurrence.

Bearing these observations in mind, neurasthenia must be allowed to account

for  a  considerable  share  in  the  attacks  of  our  patient,  Miss  E.  K.  The

headaches and the teno-synovitis point to the existence of a relatively mild

hysteria,  generally  latent,  but  becoming  manifest  under  the  influence  of

exhaustion.  The  genesis  of  this  peculiar  illness  explains  the  relationship

which has been described between epilepsy, hysteria and neurasthenia.

Summary.—Miss  Elise  K.  is  a  psychopathic  defective  with  a  tendency  to

hysteria. Under the influence of nervous exhaustion she suffers from attacks

of epileptoid giddiness whose interpretation is uncertain at first sight. Under

the influence of an unusually large dose of alcohol the attacks develop into

definite somnambulism with hallucinations, which are limited in the same

way  as  dreams  to  accidental  external  perceptions.  When  the  nervous

exhaustion is cured the hysterical manifestations disappear.

In  the  region  of  psychopathic  deficiency  with  hysterical  colouring,  we

encounter numerous phenomena which show, as in this case, symptoms of

diverse defined diseases, which cannot be attributed with certainty to any one

of them. These phenomena are partially recognised to be independent; forinstance, pathological lying, pathological reveries, etc. Many of these states,

however, still await thorough scientific investigation; at present they belong

more  or  less  to  the  domain  of  scientific  gossip.  Persons  with  habitual

hallucinations,  and  also  the  inspired,  exhibit  these  states;  they  draw  the

attention of the crowd to themselves, now as poet or artist, now as saviour,

prophet or founder of a new sect.

The genesis of the peculiar frame of mind of these persons is for the most

part lost in obscurity, for it is only very rarely that one of these remarkable

personalities can be subjected to exact observation. In view of the often great

historical importance of these persons, it is much to be wished that we had

some scientific material which would enable us to gain a closer insight into

the  psychological  development  of  their  peculiarities.  Apart  from  the  now

practically  useless  productions  of  the  pneumatological  school  at  the

beginning of the nineteenth century, German scientific literature is very poor

in this respect; indeed, there seems to be real aversion from investigation in

this field. For the facts so far gathered we are indebted almost exclusively to

the labours of French and English workers. It seems at least desirable that our

literature  should  be  enlarged  in  this  respect.  These  considerations  have

induced me to publish some observations which will perhaps help to further

our knowledge concerning the relationship of hysterical twilight-states and

enlarge the problems of normal psychology.          CASE OF SOMNAMBULISM IN A


        PERSON WITH NEUROPATHIC


        INHERITANCE (SPIRITUALISTIC


                                  MEDIUM).

The following case was under my observation in the years 1899 and 1900. As

I was not in medical attendance upon Miss S. W., a physical examination for

hysterical stigmata unfortunately could not be made. I kept a complete diary

of the séances, which I filled up after each sitting. The following report is a

condensed account from these notes. Out of regard for Miss S. W. and her

family a few unimportant dates have been altered and a few details omitted

from the story, which for the most part is composed of very intimate matters.

Miss S. W., 15½ years old. Reformed Church. The paternal grandfather was

highly  intelligent,  a  clergyman  with  frequent  waking  hallucinations

(generally  visions,  often  whole  dramatic  scenes  with  dialogues,  etc.).  A

brother of the grandfather was an imbecile eccentric, who also saw visions. A

sister of the grandfather, a peculiar, odd character. The paternal grandmother

after some fever in her 20th year (typhoid?) had a trance which lasted three

days, from which she did not awake until the crown of her head had been

burned by a red-hot iron. During states of excitement later on she had fainting

fits  which  were  nearly  always  followed  by  a  brief  somnambulism  during

which she uttered prophesies. Her father was likewise a peculiar, original

personality with bizarre ideas. All three had waking hallucinations (second-

sight, forebodings, etc.). A third brother was also eccentric and odd, talented

but one-sided. The mother has an inherited mental defect often bordering on

psychosis. The sister is a hysteric and visionary and a second sister suffers

from "nervous heart attacks." Miss S. W. is slenderly built, skull somewhat

rachitic, without pronounced hydrocephalus, face rather pale, eyes dark with

a peculiar penetrating look. She has had no serious illnesses. At school she

passed  for  average,  showed  little  interest,  was  inattentive.  As  a  rule  her

behaviour  was  rather  reserved,  sometimes  giving  place,  however,  to

exuberant joy and exaltation. Of average intelligence, without special gifts,

neither musical nor fond of books, her preference is for handwork—and day

dreaming. She was often absent-minded, misread in a peculiar way whenreading  aloud,  instead  of  the  word Ziege  (goat),  for  instance,  said Gais,

instead of Treppe (stair), Stege; this occurred so often that her brothers and

sisters  laughed  at  her.  There  were  no  other  abnormalities;  there  were  no

serious  hysterical  manifestations.  Her  family  were  artisans  and  business

people  with  very  limited  interests.  Books  of  mystical  content  were  never

permitted  in  the  family.  Her  education  was  faulty;  there  were  numerous

brothers and sisters and thus the education was given indiscriminately, and in

addition the children had to suffer a great deal from the inconsequent and

vulgar, indeed sometimes rough, treatment of their mother. The father, a very

busy business man, could not pay much attention to his children, and died

when S. W. was not yet grown up. Under these uncomfortable conditions it is

no wonder that S. W. felt herself shut in and unhappy. She was often afraid to

go home, and preferred to be anywhere rather than there. She was left a great

deal with playmates and grew up in this way without much polish. The level

of her education is relatively low and her interests correspondingly limited.

Her knowledge of literature is also very limited. She knows the common

school songs by heart, songs of Schiller and Goethe and a few other poets, as

well  as  fragments  from  a  song  book  and  the  psalms.  Newspaper  stories

represent her highest level in prose. Up to the time of her somnambulism she

had never read any books of a serious nature. At home and from friends she

heard about table-turning and began to take an interest in it. She asked to be

allowed to take part in such experiments, and her desire was soon gratified. In

July 1899, she took part a few times in table-turnings with some friends and

her brothers and sisters, but in joke. It was then discovered that she was an

excellent "medium." Some communications of a serious nature arrived which

were received with general astonishment. Their pastoral tone was surprising.

The spirit said he was the grandfather of the medium. As I was acquainted

with the family I was able to take part in these experiments. At the beginning

of  August,  1899,  the  first  attacks  of  somnambulism  took  place  in  my

presence. They took the following course: S. W. became very pale, slowly

sank to the ground, or into a chair, shut her eyes, became cataleptic, drew

several deep breaths, and began to speak. In this stage she was generally quite

relaxed; the reflexes of the lids remained, as did also tactile sensation. She

was sensitive to unexpected noises and full of fear, especially in the initial

stage.

She did not react when called by name. In somnambulic dialogues she copied

in a remarkably clever way her dead relations and acquaintances, with alltheir peculiarities, so that she made a lasting impression upon unprejudiced

persons.  She  also  so  closely  imitated  persons  whom  she  only  knew  from

descriptions that no one could deny her at least considerable talent as an

actress. Gradually gestures were added to the simple speech, which finally

led to "attitudes passionelles" and complete dramatic scenes. She took up

postures  of  prayer  and  rapture,  with  staring  eyes,  and  spoke  with

impassionate  and  glowing  rhetoric.  She  then  made  use  exclusively  of  a

literary German which she spoke with an ease and assurance quite contrary to

her  usual  uncertain  and  embarrassed  manner  in  the  waking  state.  Her

movements were free and of a noble grace, depicting most beautifully her

varying emotions. Her attitude during these states was always changing and

diverse in the different attacks. Now she would lie for ten minutes to two

hours  on  the  sofa  or  the  ground,  motionless,  with  closed  eyes;  now  she

assumed a half-sitting posture and spoke with changed tone and speech; now

she would stand up, going through every possible pantomimic gesture. Her

speech was equally diversified and without rule. Now she spoke in the first

person, but never for long, generally to prophesy her next attack; now she

spoke of herself (and this was the most usual) in the third person. She then

acted as some other person, either some dead acquaintance or some chance

person,  whose  part  she  consistently  carried  out  according  to  the

characteristics she herself conceived. At the end of the ecstasy there usually

followed  a  cataleptic  state  with flexibilitas cerea,  which  gradually  passed

over into the waking state. The waxy anæmic pallor which was an almost

constant  feature  of  the  attacks  made  one  really  anxious;  it  sometimes

occurred at the beginning of the attack, but often in the second half only. The

pulse  was  then  small  but  regular  and  of  normal  frequency;  the  breathing

gentle,  shallow,  or  almost  imperceptible.  As  already  stated,  S.  W.  often

predicted  her  attacks  beforehand;  just  before  the  attacks  she  had  strange

sensations,  became  excited,  rather  anxious,  and  occasionally  expressed

thoughts of death: "she will probably die in one of these attacks; during the

attack her soul only hangs to her body by a thread, so that often the body

could  scarcely  go  on  living."  Once  after  the  cataleptic  attack  tachypnœa

lasting two minutes was observed, with a respiration rate of 100 per minute.

At first the attacks occurred spontaneously, afterwards S. W. could provoke

them  by  sitting  in  a  dark  corner  and  covering  her  face  with  her  hands.

Frequently the experiment did not succeed. She had so-called "good" and

"bad" days. The question of amnesia after the attacks is unfortunately veryobscure. This much is certain, that after each attack she was quite accurately

orientated  as  to  what  she  had  gone  through  "during  the  rapture."  It  is,

however, uncertain how much she remembered of the conversations in which

she served as medium, and of changes in her surroundings during the attack.

It often seemed that she did have a fleeting recollection, for directly after

waking she would ask: "Who was here? Wasn't X or Y here? What did he

say?" She also showed that she was superficially aware of the content of the

conversations. She thus often remarked that the spirits had communicated to

her before waking what they had said. But frequently this was not the case. If,

at her request, the contents of the trance speeches were repeated to her she

was often annoyed about them. She was then often sad and depressed for

hours together, especially when any unpleasant indiscretions had occurred.

She would then rail against the spirits and assert that next time she would beg

her guides to keep such spirits far away. Her indignation was not feigned, for

in the waking state she could but poorly control herself and her emotions, so

that every mood was at once mirrored in her face. At times she seemed only

slightly or not at all aware of the external proceedings during the attack. She

seldom noticed when any one left the room or came in. Once she forbade me

to enter the room when she was awaiting special communications which she

wished to keep secret from me. Nevertheless I went in, and sat down with the

three other sitters and listened to everything. Her eyes were open and she

spoke to those present without noticing me. She only noticed me when I

began to speak, which gave rise to a storm of indignation. She remembered

better, but still apparently only in indefinite outlines, the remarks of those

taking part which referred to the trance speeches or directly to herself. I could

never discover any definite rapport in this connection.

In addition to these great attacks which seemed to follow a certain law in

their  course,  S.  W.  produced  a  great  number  of  other  automatisms.

Premonitions,  forebodings,  unaccountable  moods  and  rapidly  changing

fancies were all in the day's work. I never observed simple states of sleep. On

the other hand, I soon noticed that in the middle of a lively conversation S.

W.  became  quite  confused  and  spoke  without  meaning  in  a  peculiar

monotonous way, and looked in front of her dreamily with half-closed eyes.

These  lapses  usually  lasted  but  a  few  minutes.  Then  she  would  suddenly

proceed: "Yes, what did you say?" At first she would not give any particulars

about these lapses, she would reply off-hand that she was a little giddy, had a

headache, and so on. Later she simply said: "they were there again," meaningher spirits. She was subjected to the lapses much against her will; she often

tried to defend herself: "I do not want to, not now, come some other time; you

seem to think I only exist for you." She had these lapses in the streets, in

business, in fact anywhere. If this happened to her in the street, she leaned

against a house and waited till the attack was over. During these attacks,

whose  intensity  was  most  variable,  she  had  visions;  frequently  also,

especially  during  the  attacks  where  she  turned  extremely  pale,  she

"wandered"; or as she expressed it, lost her body, and got away to distant

places whither her spirits led her. Distant journeys during ecstasy strained her

exceedingly;  she  was  often  exhausted  for  hours  after,  and  many  times

complained  that  the  spirits  had  again  deprived  her  of  much  power,  such

overstrain was now too much for her; the spirits must get another medium,

etc.  Once  she  was  hysterically  blind  for  half  an  hour  after  one  of  these

ecstasies. Her gait was hesitating, feeling her way; she had to be led; she did

not  see  the  candle  which  was  on  the  table.  The  pupils  reacted.  Visions

occurred in great numbers without proper "lapses" (designating by this word

only the higher grade of distraction of attention). At first the visions only

occurred at the beginning of the sleep. Once after S. W. had gone to bed the

room became lighted up, and out of the general foggy light there appeared

white glittering figures. They were throughout concealed in white veil-like

robes, the women had a head-covering like a turban, and a girdle. Afterwards

(according to the statements of S. W.), "the spirits were already there" when

she went to bed. Finally she also saw the figures in bright daylight, though

still somewhat blurred and only for a short time, provided there were no

proper lapses, in which case the figures became solid enough to take hold of.

But S. W. always preferred darkness. According to her account the content of

the vision was for the most part of a pleasant kind. Gazing at the beautiful

figures  she  received  a  feeling  of  delicious  blessedness.  More  rarely  there

were terrible visions of a dæmonic nature. These were entirely confined to

the  night  or  to  dark  rooms.  Occasionally  S.  W.  saw  black  figures  in  the

neighbouring streets or in her room; once out in the dark courtyard she saw a

terrible copper-red face which suddenly stared at her and frightened her. I

could not learn anything satisfactory about the first occurrence of the vision.

She states that once at night, in her fifth or sixth year, she saw her "guide,"

her grandfather (whom she had never known). I could not get any objective

confirmation from her relatives of this early vision. Nothing of the kind is

said  to  have  happened  until  her  first  séance.  With  the  exception  of  thehypnagogic  brightness  and  the  flashes,  there  were  no  rudimentary

hallucinations,  but  from  the  beginning  they  were  of  a  systematic  nature,

involving  all  the  sense-organs  equally.  So  far  as  concerns  the  intellectual

reaction to these phenomena it is remarkable with what curious sincerity she

regarded her dreams. Her entire somnambulic development, the innumerable

puzzling events, seemed to her quite natural. She looked at her whole past in

this light. Every striking event of earlier years stood to her in necessary and

clear  relationship  to  her  present  condition.  She  was  happy  in  the

consciousness  of  having  found  her  real  life-task.  Naturally  she  was

unswervingly convinced of the reality of her visions. I often tried to present

her with some sceptical explanation, but she invariably turned this aside; in

her usual condition she did not clearly grasp a reasoned explanation, and in

the semi-somnambulic state she regarded it as senseless in view of the facts

staring her in the face. She once said: "I do not know if what the spirits say

and teach me is true, neither do I know if they are those by whose names they

call themselves, but that my spirits exist there is no question. I see them

before me, I can touch them, I speak to them about everything I wish, as

naturally as I'm now talking to you. They must be real." She absolutely would

not listen to the idea that the manifestations were a kind of illness. Doubts

about her health or about the reality of her dream would distress her deeply;

she felt so hurt by my remarks that when I was present she became reserved,

and for a long time refused to experiment if I was there; hence I took care not

to express my doubts and thoughts aloud. From her immediate relatives and

acquaintances she received undivided allegiance and admiration—they asked

her advice about all kinds of things. In time she obtained such an influence

upon her followers that three of her brothers and sisters likewise began to

have hallucinations of a similar kind. Their hallucinations generally began as

night-dreams of a very vivid and dramatic kind; these gradually extended into

the waking time, partly hypnagogic, partly hypnopompic. A married sister

had extraordinary vivid dreams which developed from night to night, and

these appeared in the waking consciousness; at first as obscure illusions, next

as real hallucinations, but they never reached the plastic clearness of S. W.'s

visions. For instance, she once saw in a dream a black dæmonic figure at her

bedside in animated conversation with a white, beautiful figure, which tried

to restrain the black one; nevertheless the black one seized her and tried to

choke her, then she awoke. Bending over her she then saw a black shadow

with a human contour, and near by a white cloudy figure. The vision onlydisappeared when she lighted a candle. Similar visions were repeated dozens

of times. The visions of the other two sisters were of a similar kind, but less

intense.

This  particular  type  of  attack  with  the  complete  visions  and  ideas  had

developed in the course of less than a month, but never afterwards exceeded

these limits. What was later added to these was but the extension of all those

thoughts  and  cycles  of  visions  which  to  a  certain  extent  were  already

indicated quite at the beginning. As well as the "great" attacks and the lesser

ones, there must also be noted a third kind of state comparable to "lapse"

states.  These  are  the semi-somnambulic  states.  They  appeared  at  the

beginning or at the end of the "great" attacks, but also appeared without any

connection with them. They developed gradually in the course of the first

month. It is not possible to give a more precise account of the time of their

appearance. In this state a fixed gaze, brilliant eyes, and a certain dignity and

stateliness of movement are noticeable. In this phase S. W. is herself, her own

somnambulic ego.

She is fully orientated to the external world, but seems to stand with one foot,

as it were, in her dream-world. She sees and hears her spirits, sees how they

walk about in the room among those who form the circle, and stand first by

one person, then by another. She is in possession of a clear remembrance of

her  visions,  her  journeys  and  the  instructions  she  receives.  She  speaks

quietly, clearly and firmly and is always in a serious, almost religious frame

of mind. Her bearing indicates a deeply religious mood, free from all pietistic

flavour,  her  speech  is  singularly  uninfluenced  by  her  guide's  jargon

compounded of Bible and tract. Her solemn behaviour has a suffering, rather

pitiful aspect. She is painfully conscious of the great differences between her

ideal world at night and the rough reality of the day. This state stands in sharp

contrast to her waking existence; there is here no trace of that unstable and

inharmonious  creature,  that  extravagant  nervous  temperament  which  is  so

characteristic for the rest of her relationships. Speaking with her, you get the

impression of speaking with a much older person who has attained through

numerous  experiences  to  a  sure  harmonious  footing.  In  this  state  she

produced her best results, whilst her romances correspond more closely to the

conditions of her waking interests. The semi-somnambulism usually appears

spontaneously,  mostly  during  the  table  experiments,  which  sometimes

announced by this means that S. W. was beginning to know beforehand every

automatic communication from the table. She then usually stopped the table-turning and after a short time passed more or less suddenly into an ecstatic

state. S. W. showed herself to be very sensitive. She could divine and reply to

simple  questions  thought  of  by  a  member  of  the  circle  who  was  not  a

"medium," if only the latter would lay a hand on the table or on her hand.

Genuine thought-transference without direct or indirect contact could never

be achieved. In juxtaposition with the obvious development of her whole

personality the continued existence of her earlier ordinary character was all

the  more  startling.  She  imparted  with  unconcealed  pleasure  all  the  little

childish experiences, the flirtations and love-secrets, all the rudeness and lack

of education of her parents and contemporaries. To every one who did not

know her secret she was a girl of fifteen and a half, in no respect unlike a

thousand other such girls. So much the greater was people's astonishment

when they got to know her in her other aspect. Her near relatives could not at

first grasp this change: to some extent they never altogether understood it, so

there was often bitter strife in the family, some of them taking sides for and

others  against  S.  W.,  either  with  enthusiastic  over-valuation  or  with

contemptuous censure of "superstition." Thus did S. W., during the time I

watched her closely, lead a curious, contradictory life, a real "double life"

with two personalities existing side by side or closely following upon one

another  and  contending  for  the  mastery.  I  now  give  some  of  the  most

interesting details of the sittings in chronological order.

First and second sittings, August, 1899. S. W. at once undertook to lead the

"communications." The "psychograph," for which an upturned glass tumbler

was used, on which two fingers of the right hand were laid, moved quick as

lightning  from  letter  to  letter.  (Slips  of  paper,  marked  with  letter  and

numbers, had been arranged in a circle round the glass.) It was communicated

that the "medium's" grandfather was present and would speak to us. There

then followed many communications in quick sequence, of a most religious,

edifying nature, in part in properly made words, partly in words with the

letters transposed, and partly in a series of reversed letters. The last words

and sentences were produced so quickly that it was not possible to follow

without first inverting the letters. The communications were once interrupted

in abrupt fashion by a new communication, which announced the presence of

the writer's grandfather. On this occasion the jesting observation was made:

"Evidently the two 'spirits' get on very badly together." During this attempt

darkness  came  on.  Suddenly  S.  W.  became  very  disturbed,  sprang  up  in

terror, fell on her knees and cried "There, there, do you not see that light, thatstar there?" and pointed to a dark corner of the room. She became more and

more disturbed, and called for a light in terror. She was pale, wept, "it was all

so strange, she did not know in the least what was the matter with her." When

a candle was brought she became calm again. The experiments were now

stopped.

At the next sitting, which took place in the evening, two days later, similar

communications from S. W.'s grandfather were obtained. When darkness fell

S. W. suddenly leaned back on the sofa, grew pale, almost shut her eyes, and

lay there motionless. The eyeballs were turned upwards, the lid-reflex was

present  as  well  as  tactile  sensation.  The  breathing  was  gentle,  almost

imperceptible. The pulse small and weak. This attack lasted about half an

hour, when S. W. suddenly sighed and got up. The extreme pallor, which had

lasted throughout the whole attack, now gave place to her usual pale pink

colour. She was somewhat confused and distraught, indicated that she had

seen all sorts of things, but would tell nothing. Only after urgent questioning

would she relate that in an extraordinary waking condition she had seen her

grandfather  arm-in-arm  with  the  writer's  grandfather.  The  two  had  gone

rapidly by in an open carriage, side by side.

III. In the third séance, which took place some days later, there was a similar

attack of more than half an hour's duration. S. W. afterwards told of many

white, transfigured forms who each gave her a flower of special symbolic

significance. Most of them were dead relatives. Concerning the exact content

of their talk she maintained an obstinate silence.

IV. After S. W. had entered into the somnambulic state she began to make

curious  movements  with  her  lips,  and  made  swallowing  gurgling  noises.

Then she whispered very softly and unintelligibly. When this had lasted some

minutes she suddenly began to speak in an altered deep voice. She spoke of

herself  in  the  third  person.  "She  is  not  here,  she  has  gone  away."  There

followed several communications of a religious kind. From the content and

the  way  of  speaking  it  was  easy  to  conclude  that  she  was  imitating  her

grandfather, who had been a clergyman. The content of the talk did not rise

above the mental level of the "communications." The tone of the voice was

somewhat forced, and only became natural when, in the course of the talk,

the voice approximated to the medium's own.

(In later sittings the voice was only altered for a few moments when a new

spirit manifested itself.)

Afterwards there was amnesia for the trance-conversation. She gave hintsabout  a  sojourn  in  the  other  world,  and  she  spoke  of  an  undreamed-of

blessedness which she felt. It must be further noted that her conversation in

the  attack  occurred  quite  spontaneously,  and  was  not  in  response  to  any

suggestions.

Directly after this séance S. W. became acquainted with the book of Justinus

Kerner,  "Die  Seherin  von  Prevorst."  She  began  thereupon  to  magnetise

herself towards the end of the attack, partly by means of regular passes, partly

by curious circles and figures of eight, which she described symmetrically

with both arms. She did this, she said, to disperse the severe headaches which

occurred after the attacks. In the August séances, not detailed here, there were

in addition to the grandfather numerous spirits of other relatives who did not

produce anything very remarkable. Each time when a new one came on the

scene the movement of the glass was changed in a striking way; it generally

ran along the rows of letters, touching one or other of them, but no sense

could be made of it. The orthography was very uncertain and arbitrary, and

the  first  sentences  were  frequently  incomprehensible  or  broken  up  into  a

meaningless medley of letters. Generally automatic writing suddenly began at

this  point.  Sometimes  automatic  writing  was  attempted  during  complete

darkness. The movements began with violent backward jerks of the whole

arm, so that the paper was pierced by the pencil. The first attempt at writing

consisted of numerous strokes and zigzag lines about 8 cm. high. In later

attempts  there  came  first  unreadable  words,  in  large  handwriting,

which gradually became smaller and clearer. It was not essentially different

from the medium's own. The grandfather was again the controlling spirit.

V. Somnambulic attacks in September, 1899. S. W. sits upon the sofa, leans

back, shuts her eyes, breathes lightly and regularly. She gradually becomes

cataleptic, the catalepsy disappears after about two minutes, when she lies in

an apparently quiet sleep with complete muscular relaxation. She suddenly

begins to speak in a subdued voice: "No! you take the red, I'll take the white,

you can take the green, and you the blue. Are you ready? We will go now."

(A pause of several minutes during which her face assumes a corpse-like

pallor. Her hands feel cold and are very bloodless.) She suddenly calls out

with a loud, solemn voice: "Albert, Albert, Albert," then whispering: "Now

you speak," followed by a longer pause, when the pallor of the face attains

the highest possible degree. Again, in a loud solemn voice, "Albert, Albert,

do you not believe your father? I tell you many errors are contained in N.'s

teaching. Think about it." Pause. The pallor of the face decreases. "He's very