  becomes so lost and submerged in this image that finally its abstract

  truth is set above the reality of life; and because life might disturb the

    enjoyment of abstract beauty, it gets completely suppressed. He turns

  himself into an abstraction, he identifies with the eternal validity of the

  image and petrifies in it, because for him it has become a redeeming

  formula. He divests himself of his real self and puts his whole life into

  his abstraction, in which he is, so to speak, crystallized.

[500] The empathetic type suffers a similar fate. Since his activity, his life

is empathized into the object, he himself gets into the object because the

empathized content is an essential part of himself. He becomes the object.

He identifies himself with it and in this way gets outside himself. By turning

himself into an object he desubjectivizes himself. Worringer says:

In empathizing this will to activity into another object, we are in the other

object. We are delivered from our individual being as long as our inner

urge for experience absorbs us into  an external object, a form outside

ourselves. We feel our individuality flowing into fixed bounds that contrast

with the  boundless diversity of individual consciousness. In this  self-

objectivation lies a self-alienation. This affirmation of our individual need

for activity represents, at the same time, a  restriction of its unlimited

possibilities, a negation of its irreconcilable diversities. For all our inner urge

to activity, we have to rest within the limits of this objectivation.

17

[501] Just as for the abstracting type the abstract image is a bulwark against

the destructive effects of the unconsciously animated object,

18 so for the empathetic type the transference to the object is a defence

  against the disintegration caused by inner subjective factors, which for

  him consist in limitless fantasies and corresponding impulses to action.

  The extraverted neurotic  clings as tenaciously to the object of his

    transference as, according to Adler, the introverted neurotic clings to his

  “guiding fiction.” The introvert abstracts his “guiding fiction” from his

  good and bad experiences of objects, and relies on  his formula to

  protect him from the limitless possibilities life offers.

[502] Abstraction and empathy, introversion and  extraversion, are

mechanisms of adaptation and defence. In so far as they make for adaptation,

they protect a man from external dangers. In so far as they are directed

functions,

19 they liberate him from fortuitous impulses; indeed they are  an actual  defence against them since they make self-alienation possible. As our

  daily psychological experience shows, there are very many people who

  are completely identified with their directed (or “valuable”) function,

  among them the very types we are discussing. Identification with the

  directed function has an undeniable advantage in that a man can best

  adapt to collective demands and expectations; moreover, it also enables

  him to keep out of the way of his inferior, undifferentiated, undirected

    functions by self-alienation. In  addition, “selflessness” is always

  considered a particular virtue from the standpoint of social morality.

  On the other  hand, we also have to bear in mind the great

  disadvantage  which identification with the directed function entails,

  namely, the degeneration  of the individual.  No doubt man can  be

    mechanized to a very considerable extent, but not to the point of giving

  himself up completely, or only at the cost of the gravest injury. For the

  more he identifies with one function, the more he invests it with libido,

  and the more he withdraws libido from the other functions. They can

  tolerate being deprived of libido for even quite long periods, but in the end

  they will react. Being drained of libido, they gradually sink below the

    threshold of consciousness, lose their associative connection with it, and

  finally lapse into the unconscious. This is a regressive development, a

    reversion to the infantile and finally to the archaic level. Since man has

  spent only a few thousand years in a cultivated state, as  opposed to

  several hundred thousand years in a state of savagery, the archaic modes

  of functioning are still extraordinarily vigorous and easily reactivated.

  Hence, when certain functions disintegrate by being deprived of libido,

  their archaic foundations in the unconscious become operative again.

[503] This state brings about a dissociation of the personality, since the

archaic modes of functioning have no direct connection with consciousness

and no negotiable  bridges exist between it and the unconscious.

Consequently, the further the process of self-alienation goes, the further the

unconscious functions sink down to the archaic level. The influence of the

unconscious increases proportionately. It begins to provoke symptomatic

disturbances of the directed function, thus producing that vicious circle

characteristic of so many neuroses: the patient tries to compensate the

disturbing influences by special feats on the part of the directed function, and

the competition between them is often carried to the point  of nervous

collapse.[504] The possibility of self-alienation by identification with the directed

function does not depend solely on a rigid restriction to the one function,

but also on the fact that the directed function is itself a principle that

makes self-alienation necessary. Thus every directed function demands the

strict exclusion of everything not suited to its nature: thinking excludes all

disturbing feelings, just as feeling excludes all disturbing thoughts. Without

the repression of everything alien to itself, the directed function could never

operate at all. On the other hand, since the self-regulation of the living

organism requires by its very nature the harmonizing of the whole human

being, consideration of the less favoured functions forces itself upon us as a

vital necessity and an unavoidable task in the education of the human race.                                        VIII          THE TYPE PROBLEM IN MODERN

                                PHILOSOPHY

                    WILLIAM JAMES’ TYPES

[505] The existence of two types has also been discovered  in modern

pragmatic philosophy, particularly in the philosophy of William James.

1 He says:

The history of philosophy is, to a great extent, that of a certain clash of human

temperaments. … Of whatever temperament a professional philosopher is, he

tries, when philosophizing, to sink the fact of his temperament. … Yet his

temperament really gives him a stronger bias than any of his more strictly

objective premises. It loads the evidence for him one way or the other,

making for a more sentimental or a more  hard-hearted view of the

universe, just as this fact or that  principle would. He trusts his

temperament. Wanting a  universe that suits it, he believes in any

representation of the universe that does suit it. He feels men of opposite

temper to be out of key with the world’s character, and in his heart

considers them incompetent and “not in it,” in the philosophic business, even

though they may far excel him in dialectical ability.

Yet in the forum he can make no claim, on the bare ground of  his

temperament, to superior discernment or authority. There  arises thus a

certain insincerity in our philosophic discussions;  the potentest of all our

premises is never mentioned.

2

[506] Whereupon James proceeds to the characterization of  the two

temperaments. Just as in the domain of manners and customs we distinguish

conventional and easy-going persons,  in politics authoritarians and

anarchists, in literature purists and realists, in art classicists and romantics,

so in philosophy, according to James, we find two types, the “rationalist”

and the “empiricist.” The rationalist is “your devotee of abstract and eternal

principles.” The empiricist is the “lover of facts in all their crude variety”

(p. 9). Although no man can dispense either with facts or with principles,

they nevertheless give rise to entirely different points of view according to

whether the accent falls on one side or on the other.

[507] James makes “rationalism” synonymous with “intellectualism,” and

“empiricism” with “sensationalism.” Although in my opinion this equation

is not tenable, we will follow James’ line of thought for the time being,reserving our criticism until later. In his view, intellectualism is associated

with an idealistic and optimistic tendency, whereas empiricism inclines to

materialism and a very qualified and uncertain optimism. Intellectualism is

always monistic. It begins with the whole, with the universal, and unites

things;  empiricism begins with the part and makes the whole into an

assemblage. It could therefore be described as pluralistic. The rationalist is a

man of feeling, but the empiricist is a hard-headed creature. The former is

naturally disposed to a belief in free will, the latter to fatalism. The

rationalist is inclined to be dogmatic, the empiricist sceptical (pp. 10ff.).

James calls the rationalist tender-minded, the empiricist tough-minded. It is

obvious that he is trying to put his finger  on the characteristic mental

qualities of the two types. Later,  we shall examine this characterization

rather more closely. It is interesting to hear what James has to say about

the prejudices each type cherishes about the other (pp. 12f.):

They have a low opinion of each other. Their antagonism, whenever as

individuals their temperaments have been intense, has formed in all ages a

part of the philosophic atmosphere of the time. It forms a part of the

atmosphere today. The tough think of the tender as sentimentalists and

soft-heads. The tender feel the tough to be unrefined, callous, or brutal. …

Each type believes the other to be inferior to itself.

James tabulates the qualities of the two types as follows:

Tender-minded Tough-minded

Rationalistic (going byEmpiricist (going by “facts”) “principles”)

Intellectualistic Sensationalistic

Idealistic Materialistic

Optimistic        Pessimistic

Religious        Irreligious

Free-willist       Fatalistic

Monistic         Pluralistic

Dogmatical       Sceptical

[508] This list touches on a number of problems we have met with in the

chapter on realism and nominalism. The tender-minded have certain features

in common with the realists, and the tough-minded with the nominalists. As I

have pointed out, realism corresponds to introversion, and nominalism to

extraversion. The controversy about universals undoubtedly forms part of

that “clash of temperaments” in philosophy to which James alludes. These

associations tempt one to think of the tender-minded as introverted and thetough-minded as extraverted, but it remains to be seen  whether this

equation is valid or not.

[509] With my somewhat limited knowledge of James’ writings, I have not

been able to discover any more detailed definitions or descriptions of the

two types, although he frequently refers to these two kinds of thinking, and

incidentally describes them as “thin” and “thick.” Flournoy

3 interprets “thin” as “mince, ténu, maigre, chétif,” and “thick” as “épais,

solide, massif, cossu.” On one occasion, as we have seen, James calls the

tender-minded “soft-heads.”

Both “soft” and “tender” suggest something delicate, mild, gentle, hence

weak, subdued, and rather powerless, in contrast  to “thick” and “tough,”

which are resistant qualities, solid and  hard to change, suggesting the

nature of matter. Flournoy accordingly elucidates the two kinds of thinking

as follows:

It is the contrast between the abstract way of thinking—that is, the purely

logical and  dialectical way  so dear  to  philosophers, but which failed to

inspire James with any confidence and appeared to him fragile, hollow, and

thin because too remote from particular objects—and the concrete way of

thinking, which nourishes itself on the facts of experience and never leaves

the solid earthy region of tortoise-shells or other positive data.

4

[510] We should not, however, conclude from this comment that James has

a bias in favour of concrete thinking.

He appreciates both standpoints: “Facts are good, of course … give us lots of

facts. Principles are good … give us plenty of principles.” A fact never

exists only as it is in itself, but also as we see it. When, therefore, James

describes concrete thinking as “thick” and “tough,” he is saying that for him

this kind of thinking has something about it that is substantial and resistant,

while abstract thinking appears to him weak, thin, and colourless, perhaps

even (if we go along with Flournoy) sickly and decrepit. Naturally such a

view is possible only for a person who has made an a priori connection

between substantiality and concrete thinking—and that, as we have said, is

just  where the question of temperament comes in. When the  empiricist

attributes a resistant substantiality to his concrete thinking, from the abstract

point of view he is deceiving himself, because substantiality or hardness is

a property of external facts and not of empirical thinking. Indeed, the latter

proves to be singularly feeble and ineffective; far from holding its own inthe face of external facts, it is always running after them and depending

on them, and, in consequence, hardly rises above the level of a purely

classifying or descriptive activity. Qua thinking, therefore, is very weak and

unself-reliant, because it has no stability in  itself but only in objects,

which gain ascendency over it as  determining values. It is a thinking

characterized by a succession of sense-bound representations, which are set

in motion less by the inner activity of thought than by the changing stream

of sense-impressions. A series of concrete representations conditioned by

sensuous perceptions is not exactly what the abstract thinker would call

thinking, but at best only passive apperception.

[511] The temperament that favours concrete thinking and endows it with

substantiality is thus distinguished by a  preponderance of sensuously

conditioned representations as contrasted with active apperception, which

springs from a subjective act of the will and seeks to organize such

representations in accordance with the intentions of a given idea. In a  

word, what  counts for  this temperament is  the object: the object is

empathized, it leads a quasi-independent existence in the ideational world of

the subject, and comprehension follows as a kind of after-thought. It is

therefore an extraverting temperament, for the thinking of the extravert is

concretistic. Its stability lies outside in the empathized object, which is why

James calls it “tough.” For anyone who espouses concrete thinking, i.e.,

the representation of facts, abstract thinking  must appear feeble and

ineffective, because he measures it by the stability of concrete, sense-bound

objects. For the man who is on the side of abstraction, it is not the

sensuously determined representation but the abstract idea that is the

decisive factor.

[512] Currently, an idea is held to be nothing more than the abstraction of a

sum of experiences. One likes to think of the human mind as, originally, a

tabula rasa that gradually gets covered with perceptions and experiences of

life and the  world. From this standpoint, which is the standpoint of

empirical science in general, an idea cannot be anything else  but an

epiphenomenal, a posteriori abstraction from experiences, and consequently

even feebler and more colourless than they are. We know, however, that

the mind cannot be a tabula rasa, for epistemological criticism shows us

that certain categories of thinking are given a priori; they are antecedent to

all experience and appear with the first act of thought, of which they are

its preformed determinants. What Kant demonstrated in respect of logicalthinking is true of the whole range of the psyche. The psyche is no more a

tabula rasa to begin with than is the mind proper (the  thinking area).

Naturally the concrete contents are lacking, but the potential contents are

given a priori by the inherited and preformed functional disposition. This is

simply the product of the brain’s functioning throughout the whole ancestral

line, a deposit of phylogenetic experiences and  attempts at adaptation.

Hence the new-born brain is an immensely old instrument fitted out for

quite specific  purposes, which does not only apperceive passively but

actively arranges the experiences of its own accord and enforces certain

conclusions and judgments. These patterns of experience are by no means

accidental or arbitrary; they follow strictly preformed conditions which are

not transmitted by experience as contents of apprehension but are the

preconditions of all apprehension. They are ideas ante rem, determinants of

form, a kind of pre-existent ground-plan that gives the stuff of experience a

specific configuration, so that  we may think of them, as Plato did, as

images, as schemata,  or as inherited functional  possibilities which,

nevertheless, exclude other possibilities or at any rate limit them to a very

great extent. This explains why even fantasy, the freest activity of the

mind, can never roam into the infinite (although it seems that way to the

poet) but remains anchored to these preformed patterns, these primordial

images. The fairytales of the most widely separated races show, by the

similarity of their motifs, the same tie. Even the images that underlie certain

scientific theories—ether, energy, its transformations and constancy, the

atomic theory, affinity, and so on—are proof of this restriction.

[513] Just as concrete thinking is dominated and guided by  sensuously

conditioned representations, abstract thinking is  dominated by

“irrepresentable” primordial images lacking specific content. They remain

relatively inactive so long as  the  object  is  empathized and  thus  made  a

determinant of thought. But if the object is not empathized, and loses its

dominance over the thinking process, the energy denied to it accumulates in

the subject. It is now the subject who is  unconsciously empathized; the

primordial images are awakened from their slumber and emerge as operative

factors  in the thinking process, but in irrepresentable form, rather like

invisible stage managers behind the scenes. They are irrepresentable because

they lack content, being nothing but activated functional possibilities, and

accordingly they seek something to fill them out. They draw the stuff of

experience into their empty forms, representing themselves in facts ratherthan representing facts. They clothe themselves with facts, as it were. Hence

they are not, in themselves, a known point d’appui, as is the empirical

fact in concrete thinking, but  become experienceable only through the

unconscious shaping of the stuff of experience. The empiricist, too, can

organize this material and give it shape, but he models it as far as

possible on a concrete idea he has built up on the basis of past experience.

[514] The abstract thinker, on the other hand, uses an unconscious model,

and only afterwards, from the finished product, does he experience the

idea to which he has given shape. The empiricist is always inclined to

assume that the abstract thinker shapes the stuff of experience in a quite

arbitrary fashion from some colourless, flimsy, inadequate  premise,

judging the latter’s mental processes by his own. But the actual premise, the

idea or primordial image, is just as unknown to the abstract thinker as is the

theory which the empiricist will in due course evolve from experience after

so and so many experiments. As I have shown in the first chapter,

5 the one type (in this case the empiricist) sees only the  individual

object and interests himself in its behaviour, while the other, the abstract

thinker, sees mainly the similarities between objects, and disregards their

singularity because he finds security in reducing the multiplicity of the

world to something uniform and coherent. The empiricist finds similarities

frankly tiresome and disturbing, something that  actually hinders him

from recognizing the object’s singularity. The more the individual object is

  empathized, the more easily he discerns its singularity, and the more he

loses sight of its similarities with other objects. If only he knew how to

  empathize other objects as well, he would be far more capable of sensing

and recognizing their similarities than the abstract thinker, who sees them

only from outside.

[515] It is because he empathizes first one object and then another—always

a time-consuming procedure—that the concrete thinker is very slow to

recognize the similarities between them, and for this reason his thinking

appears sluggish and viscid. But his empathy is fluid. The abstract thinker

seizes on similarities quickly, puts general characteristics in the place of

individual objects, and shapes the stuff of experience by his own mental

activity, though this  is just as powerfully influenced by the shadowy

primordial image as the concrete thinker is by the object. The greater the

influence the object has on thinking, the more it stamps its characteristics

on the conceptual image. But the less the object works on the mind, themore the primordial idea will set its seal on experience.

[516] The excessive importance attached to objects gives rise in science to

a certain kind of theory favoured by specialists, which for instance cropped

up in psychiatry in the form of the “brain mythology” mentioned in Chapter

VI (par. 479). In all such theories an attempt is made to elucidate a very

wide range of experience in terms of principles which, though applicable

over a small area, are wholly inappropriate  for other fields. Conversely,

abstract thinking, by taking cognizance of individual facts only because of

their similarities with others, formulates a general hypothesis which, while

presenting the leading idea in more or less pure form, has as little to do with

the nature of concrete facts as a myth. When carried to extremes, therefore,

both types of thinking create a mythology, the one expressed concretely in

terms of cells, atoms, vibrations, etc., the other abstractly in terms of

“eternal” ideas. At least extreme empiricism has the advantage of presenting

the facts as purely as possible, just as extreme idealism reflects the primordial

images as in a mirror. The theoretical results of the one are limited by its

empirical material, just as the practical results of the other are confined to a

presentation of the psychological idea. Because the contemporary scientific

attitude is exclusively concretistic and empirical, it has no appreciation of the

value of ideas, for facts rank higher than knowledge of the primordial forms

in which the human mind conceives them. This swing towards concretism

is a comparatively recent development, a relict of the Enlightenment. The

results are indeed astonishing, but they have led to an accumulation of

empirical material whose very immensity is productive of more confusion

than clarity. The inevitable outcome is scientific separatism and specialist 

mythology, which  spells death to  universality. The  predominance of

empiricism not only means the suppression  of active thinking; it also

imperils the building of theories in any branch of science. The dearth of

general viewpoints, however, caters to the construction of mythical theories,

just as much as does the absence of empirical criteria.

[517] I am therefore of the opinion that James’  “tough-minded” and

“tender-minded,” as descriptive terms, are onesided and at bottom conceal

a certain prejudice.  Nevertheless, it should at least be clear from this

discussion that his characterization deals with the same types which I have

termed introverted and extraverted.THE CHARACTERISTIC PAIRS OF OPPOSITES

                          IN JAMES’ TYPES

a. Rationalism versus Empiricism

[518]  I have already discussed this pair of opposites in the  preceding

section, conceiving it as the opposition between  ideologism and

empiricism. I avoided the term “rationalism”  because concrete empirical

thinking is just as “rational” as active ideological thinking. Both forms are

governed by reason. Moreover, there is not only a logical rationalism but a

rationalism of feeling, for rationalism as such is a general psychological

attitude to the rationality of feeling as well as  thought. Conceiving

rationalism in this way, I find myself at  odds with the historical and

philosophical view which uses “rationalistic” in the sense of “ideological”

and sees in  rationalism the supremacy of the idea. Certainly modern

philosophers have stripped reason of its purely ideal character and are fond of

describing it as a faculty, a drive, an intention, even a  feeling or, indeed, a

method.  At  any  rate,  psychologically considered, it is a certain attitude

governed, as Lipps says, by the “sense of objectivity.” Baldwin regards it as

the “constitutive, regulative principle of mind.”

6 Herbart conceives reason as “the capacity for reflection.”

7 Schopenhauer says it has only one function, the forming of concepts, and

  from this one function “all the above-mentioned manifestations of reason

  which distinguish the life of man from that of the brutes may easily be

  explained. The application or non-application of this function is all that is

  meant by what men have everywhere and always  called rational or

    irrational.”

8 The “above-mentioned manifestations” refer to certain expressions of

  reason listed by Schopenhauer; they include  “the control of the

  emotions and passions, the capacity for  drawing conclusions and

  formulating general principles …  the united action of several

    individuals … civilization, the  state, also science, the storing up of

    experience,” etc.

9 If, as Schopenhauer asserts, it is the function of reason to  form

    concepts, it must possess the character of a particular psychic attitude

  whose function it is to form concepts through the activity of thought. It is

  entirely in this sense of an attitude that Jerusalem10 conceives reason, as a disposition of the will which enables us to make

  use of reason in our decisions and to control our passions.

[519] Reason, therefore, is the capacity to be reasonable, a definite attitude

that enables us to think, feel, and act in accordance with objective values.

From the empirical standpoint

these objective values are the product of experience, but from the ideological

standpoint they are the result of a positive act of rational evaluation, which

in the Kantian sense would be the “capacity to judge and act in accordance

with fundamental principles.” For Kant, reason is the source of the idea,

which he defines as a “rational concept whose object is not to be found in

experience,” and which contains the “archetype  [Urbild]  of  all practical

employment of reason … a regulative principle for the sake of thorough

consistency in our empirical use of the rational faculty.”

11 This is a genuinely introverted view, and it may be contrasted with the

  empirical view of Wundt, who declares that reason belongs to a group

  of complex intellectual functions which, with their “antecedent phases

  that give them an indispensable sensuous substrate,” are lumped together

  “in one general expression.”

It is self-evident that this concept “intellectual” is a survival from

the old faculty psychology, and suffers, if possible, even more than

such old concepts as memory, reason, fantasy, etc., from confusion

with logical points of view which have  nothing to do with

psychology, so that the more various the  psychic  contents it

embraces, the more  indefinite and  arbitrary it becomes. … If,

from the standpoint of scientific psychology, there is no such

thing as memory, reason, or fantasy, but only elementary psychic

processes and their connections with one another, which from

lack of discrimination one lumps together under those names,

still less can there be “intelligence” or “intellectual functions” in

the sense of a homogeneous concept corresponding to some

strictly delimited datum. Nevertheless there remain cases where it

is useful to avail oneself of these concepts borrowed  from the

inventory of faculty psychology, even though using  them in a

sense modified by the psychological approach. Such  cases arisewhen we encounter complex phenomena of very heterogeneous

composition, phenomena that demand consideration on account

of the regularity of their combination and above all on practical

grounds; or when the  individual consciousness presents certain

definite trends in its  disposition and structure; or when the

regularity of the  combination necessitates  an analysis of such

complex psychic dispositions. But in all these cases it is naturally

incumbent  on psychological research not to remain rigidly

dependent on the general concepts thus formed, but to reduce

them whenever possible to their simple factors.

12

[520] Here speaks the extravert: I have italicized the passages that are

specially characteristic. Whereas for the introvert “general concepts” like

memory, reason,  intelligence, etc. are “faculties,” i.e., simple basic

functions  that comprise the multitude of psychic processes governed by

them, for the extraverted empiricist they are nothing but  secondary,

derivative concepts, elaborations of elementary processes which for him are

far more important. No doubt from this standpoint such concepts are not

to be circumvented, but in principle one should “reduce them whenever

possible to their simple factors.” It is self-evident that for the empiricist

anything except reductive thinking is simply out of the question, since for

him general concepts are mere derivatives from experience. He recognizes

no “rational  concepts,” no a priori ideas, because his passive,

apperceptive thinking is oriented by sense impressions. As a result of this

attitude, the object is always emphasized; it is the agent prompting him to

insights and complicated ratiocinations, and these require the existence of

general  concepts which merely serve to comprise certain groups of

phenomena under a collective name. Thus the general concept  naturally

becomes a secondary factor, having no real existence apart from language.

[521] Science, therefore, can concede to reason, fantasy, etc. no right to

independent existence as long as it maintains that the only things that really

exist are elementary facts perceived by the senses. But when, as with the

introvert, thinking is oriented by active apperception, reason, fantasy, and

the rest acquire the value of basic functions, of faculties  or activities

operating from within, because for him the accent  of value lies on theconcept and not on the elementary processes covered and comprised by the

concept. This type of thinking is synthetic from the start. It organizes the

stuff of experience along the lines of the concept and uses it as a “filling”

for ideas. Here the concept is the agent by virtue of its own inner potency,

which seizes and shapes the experienced material. The extravert supposes

that the source of this power is merely arbitrary choice, or else a premature

generalizing of experiences which in themselves are limited. The introvert

who is unconscious of the psychology of his own thought-processes, and

who may even have adopted the  vogue for empiricism as his guiding

principle, is defenceless in the face of this reproach. But the reproach is

nothing but a projection of the extravert’s psychology. For the active thinking

type draws the energy for his  thought-processes neither from arbitrary

choice nor from experience, but from the idea, from the innate functional

form which his introverted attitude has activated. He is not conscious of

this source, since by reason of its a priori lack of content he can recognize

the idea only after he has given shape to it, that is, from the form his

thinking imposes on the data of experience. For the extravert, however, the

object and the elementary process are important and indispensable because

he unconsciously projects the idea into the object, and can reach the idea

only through the accumulation and comparison of the empirical material.

The two types are opposed in a remarkable way: the one shapes the material

out of his own unconscious idea and thus comes to experience; the other

lets himself be guided by the material which  contains his unconscious

projection and thus comes to the idea. There is something intrinsically

irritating about this conflict of attitude, and, at bottom, it is the cause of the

most heated and futile scientific discussions.

[522] I trust that the foregoing sufficiently illustrates my  view that

rationalism, i.e., the elevation of reason into a  principle,  is as much a  

characteristic of empiricism as of ideologism. Instead of ideologism, we

might have used the term “idealism,” but the antithesis of this would be

“materialism,” and we could hardly say that the opposite of the materialist

is the ideologist. The history of philosophy shows that the materialist can

just as often be ideological in his thinking, that is, when he does not think

empirically, but starts with the general idea of matter.                  INTELLECTUALISM VERSUS

                            SENSATIONALISM

[523] Sensationalism connotes extreme empiricism. It  postulates sense-

experience as the sole and exclusive source  of knowledge. The

sensationalistic attitude is wholly oriented  by objects of sense. James

evidently means an intellectual rather than an aesthetic sensationalism, and

for this reason “intellectualism” is not exactly an appropriate term for its

opposite number. Psychologically speaking, intellectualism is an attitude that

gives

the main determining value to the intellect, to cognition on the conceptual

level. But with such an attitude I can also be a sensationalist, for instance

when my thinking is occupied with concrete concepts all derived from sense-

experience. For the same reason, the empiricist may be intellectualistic.

Intellectualism and rationalism are employed promiscuously in philosophy,

so in this case too one would have to use ideologism as the antithesis of

sensationalism, in so far as the  latter is, in essence, only an extreme

empiricism.

b. Idealism versus Materialism

[524] One may have already begun to wonder whether by “sensationalism”

James merely meant an extreme empiricism,  i.e., an intellectual

sensationalism as surmised above, or whether by “sensationalistic” he really

meant “sensuous”—the quality pertaining to sensation as a function quite

apart from the intellect. By “pertaining to sensation” I  mean true

sensuousness, not in the vulgar sense of voluptas,  but a psychological

attitude in which the orienting and determining factor is not so much the

empathized object as  the mere fact of sensory excitation. This attitude

might also be described as reflexive, since the whole mentality depends on

and culminates in sense-impressions. The object is neither  cognized

abstractly nor  empathized, but  exerts  an  effect  by  its  very nature and

existence, the subject being oriented  exclusively by sense-impressions

excited by the object. This  attitude would correspond to a primitive

mentality. Its  antithesis and corollary is the intuitive attitude, which is

distinguished by an immediate sensing or apprehension that  depends

neither on thinking nor on feeling but is an inseparable combination of

both. Just as the object of sense appears before the perceiving subject, so

the psychic content appears before the intuitive, as a quasi-hallucination.[525] That  James should describe the  tough-minded as both

“sensationalistic” and “materialistic” (and “irreligious” to boot) makes it

even more doubtful whether he had in mind the same type antithesis that I

have. Materialism, as  commonly understood, is an attitude oriented by

“material” values—in other words, a kind of moral sensationalism.

Hence James’ characterization

would present a very unfavourable picture if we were to impute to these

terms their common meaning. This is certainly not what James intended,

and his own words about  the types should suffice to remove any such

misunderstanding. We are probably not wrong in assuming that what he

had in mind was chiefly the philosophical meaning of those terms. In this

sense materialism is certainly an attitude oriented by material values, but

these values are factual rather than sensuous, referring to objective and

concrete reality. Its antithesis is idealism, in the philosophical sense of a

supreme valuation of the idea. It cannot be a moral idealism that is meant

here, for then we would have to assume, contrary to James’ intention, that

by materialism he meant moral sensationalism. But if by materialism he

meant an attitude oriented by factual values, we are once again in a position

to find in this attitude the quality of extraversion, so that our doubts are

dispelled. We have already seen that philosophical idealism corresponds to

introverted ideologism.  But moral idealism would not be especially

characteristic of the introvert, for the materialist can be a moral idealist too.

c. Optimism versus Pessimism

[526] I doubt very much whether this well-known  antithesis of human

temperaments can be applied to James’ types. Is the empirical thinking of

Darwin also pessimistic, for instance? Certainly Darwin is a pessimist for

one who has an idealistic view of the world and sees the other type through

the lens of his unconsciously projected feelings. But this does not mean that

the empiricist himself takes a pessimistic view of the world. Or again, to

follow the Jamesian typology, can it be said that the thinker Schopenhauer,

whose view of the world is purely idealistic (like the pure idealism of the

Upanishads), is by any chance an optimist? Kant himself, an extremely pure

introverted type, is as remote from either optimism or pessimism as any of

the great empiricists.

[527] It seems to me, therefore, that this antithesis has nothing to do with

James’ types. There are optimistic  introverts as well as optimistic

extraverts, and both can be pessimists. But it is quite possible that Jamesslipped into this error as a result of an unconscious projection. From the

idealist standpoint, a materialistic or empirical or positivist view of the

world seems utterly cheerless and is bound to be felt as pessimistic. But the

same view of the world seems optimistic to the man who has put his faith in

the god “Matter.” For the idealist the materialistic view severs the vital

nerve, because his main  source of strength—active apperception and

realization of the primordial images—is sapped. Such a view of the world

must appear completely pessimistic to him, as it robs him of all hope of

ever again seeing the eternal idea embodied in reality. A world composed

only of facts means exile and everlasting homelessness. So when James

equates the materialistic with the pessimistic point of view, we may infer

that he personally is on the side of idealism—an inference that might easily

be corroborated by numerous other traits from the life of this philosopher.

This might also explain why the tough-minded are saddled with the three

somewhat dubious epithets “sensationalistic,” “materialistic,” “irreligious.”

The inference is further corroborated by that passage in Pragmatism where

James likens the mutual aversion of the two types to a meeting between

Bostonian tourists and the inhabitants of Cripple Creek.

13 It is a comparison hardly flattering to the other type, and it allows one to

infer an emotional dislike which even a strong sense of justice could not

entirely suppress. This little foible seems to me an amusing proof of the

mutually irritating differences between the two types. It may seem rather

petty to  make such a point of these incompatibilities of feeling, but

numerous experiences have convinced me that it is just such feelings as

these, lurking in the background, that bias even the  nicest reasoning and

obstruct understanding. It is easy to imagine that the inhabitants of Cripple

Creek might also view the Bostonian tourists with a jaundiced eye.RELIGIOUSNESS VERSUS IRRELIGIOUSNESS

[528] The validity of this antithesis naturally depends on the definition of

religiousness. If James conceives it entirely from the idealist standpoint, as

an attitude in which religious ideas  (as opposed to feelings) play the

dominant role, then he is certainly right to characterize the tough-minded as

irreligious. But James’ thought is so wide and so human that he can

hardly have failed to see that a religious attitude can equally  well be

determined by feeling. He himself says: “But our esteem for facts has not

neutralized in us all religiousness. It is itself almost religious. Our scientific

temper is devout.”

14

[529] Instead of reverence for “eternal” ideas, the empiricist has an almost

religious belief in facts. It makes no difference, psychologically, whether a

man is oriented by the idea of God or by the idea of matter, or whether

facts are  exalted into the determinants of his attitude. Only when this

orientation becomes absolute does it deserve the name “religious.” From

such an exalted standpoint, facts are just as worthy of being absolutes as the

idea, the primordial image,

which is the imprint left on man’s psyche by his collision for millions of

years with the hard facts of reality. At any rate, absolute surrender to facts

can never be described as irreligious from the psychological point of view.

The tough-minded indeed have their empiricistic religion, just as the tender-

minded have an idealistic one. It is also a phenomenon of  our  present 

cultural epoch that science is dominated by the object and religion by the

subject, i.e., by  the subjective idea—for the idea had to take refuge

somewhere after having been ousted from its place in science by the object.

If religion is understood as a phenomenon of our culture in this sense, then

James is right in describing the empiricist as irreligious, but only in this

sense. For since philosophers are not a separate class of men, their types

will also extend beyond the philosopher to all civilized humanity. On these

general grounds it is surely not permissible to class  half of civilized

humanity as irreligious. We also know from the psychology of primitives

that the religious function is an essential component of the psyche and is

found always and everywhere, however undifferentiated it may be.

[530] In the absence of some such limitation  of James’  concept of

“religion,” we must once again assume that he was thrown off the rails by

his emotions, as can happen all too easily.d. Indeterminism versus Determinism

[531] This antithesis is very interesting psychologically. It stands to reason

that the empiricist thinks causally, the necessary connection between cause

and effect  being  taken  as  axiomatic. The empiricist is oriented by the

empathized object; he is, as it were, “actuated” by the external fact and

impressed with a sense of the necessity of effect following cause. It is

psychologically quite natural that the impression of the inevitability of the

causal connection should force itself on such an attitude. The identification

of the inner psychic processes with external facts is implied from the start,

because in the act of empathy  a considerable  sum of the  subject’s

activity, of his own life, is unconsciously invested in  the object. The

empathetic type is thereby assimilated to the object, although it feels as if

the object were assimilated to him. But whenever the value of the object is

emphasized, it at once assumes an importance which in its turn influences

the subject, forcing him to a “dissimilation” from himself.

15 Human psychology is chameleon-like, as the practising psychologist

  knows from daily experience. So whenever the object predominates, an

    assimilation to the object takes place. Identification with the love-object

  plays no small role in analytical psychology, and the psychology of

    primitives swarms with examples of dissimilation in favour of the totem

  animal or ancestral spirit. The stigmatization of saints in medieval and

  even in recent times is a similar phenomenon. In the imitatio Christi

    dissimilation is exalted into a principle.

[532] In view of  this undoubted capacity of the human  psyche for

dissimilation, the carrying over of objective causal  connections into the

subject can readily be understood. The  psyche then labours under the

impression of the exclusive validity of the causal principle, and the whole

armoury of the theory of knowledge is needed to combat the overmastering

power of this impression. This is further aggravated by the fact that the

very nature of the empirical attitude prevents one from believing in inner

freedom, since any proof, indeed any possibility of proof, is lacking. What

use is that vague,  indefinable feeling of freedom in face of the

overwhelming mass of objective proofs to the contrary? The determinism

of the empiricist, therefore, is a foregone conclusion, provided that he

carries his thinking that far and does not prefer, as often happens, to live in

two compartments—one for science, and the other for the religion he has

taken over from his parents or from his surroundings.[533] As we have seen, idealism consists essentially in an  unconscious

activation of the idea. This activation may be due to an aversion for empathy

acquired later in life, or it may be present at birth as an a priori attitude

fashioned and favoured by nature (in my practical experience I have seen

many such cases). In this latter case the idea is active from the beginning,

though, because of its lack of content and its irrepresentability, it does not

appear in consciousness. Yet, as  an invisible inner dominant, it gains

ascendency over all external facts and communicates a sense of its own

autonomy and freedom to the subject, who, in consequence of his inner

assimilation to the idea, feels independent and free in relation to the object.

When the idea is the principal orienting factor, it assimilates the subject just

as completely as the subject tries to assimilate the idea by shaping the stuff 

of  experience. Thus, as in the case of his attitude to the object, the subject is

dissimilated from himself, but this time in the reverse sense and in favour of

the idea.

[534] The inherited primordial image outlives all time and  change,

preceding and superseding all individual experience.  It must thus be

charged with immense power. When it is activated, it communicates a

distinct feeling of power to the subject by assimilating him to itself through

his unconscious inner empathy. This would account for his feeling of

independence, of freedom, and of living forever (cf. Kant’s  threefold

postulate: God, freedom, and immortality). When the subject feels within

him the sway of the idea over the reality of facts, the idea of freedom

naturally forces itself upon him. If his idealism is unalloyed, he is bound to

believe in free will.

[535] The antithesis here discussed is highly characteristic of our types. The

extravert is distinguished by his craving for the object, by his empathy and

identification with the object, his voluntary dependence on the object. He is

influenced by the object in the same degree as he strives to assimilate it. The

introvert is distinguished by his self-assertion vis-à-vis the object.

He struggles against any dependence on the object, he repels  all its

influences, and even fears it. So much the more is he dependent on the

idea, which shields him from external reality and gives him the feeling of

inner freedom—though he  pays for this with a very noticeable power

psychology.

e. Monism versus Pluralism

[536] It follows from what we have already said that the idea-orientedattitude must tend towards monism. The idea  always possesses an

hierarchical character, no matter whether it is derived from a process of

abstraction or exists a priori as an unconscious form. In the first case it is

the apex of an edifice, so to speak, the terminal point that sums up

everything that lies below it; in the second case it is the unconscious

law-giver, regulating the possibilities and logical necessities of thought. In

both cases the idea has a sovereign quality. Although a plurality of ideas

may be present, one of them always succeeds in gaining the upper hand for

a time and constellates the other psychic elements in a monarchic pattern.

It is equally clear that the object-oriented attitude always tends towards a

plurality of principles, because the  multiplicity of objective qualities

necessitates a plurality of concepts without which the nature of the object

cannot be properly interpreted. The monistic tendency is a characteristic of

introversion, the pluralistic of extraversion.

f. Dogmatism versus Scepticism

[537] It is easy to see in this case too that dogmatism is the attitude par

excellence that clings to the idea, although an unconscious realization of

the idea is not necessarily  dogmatic. It is none the less true that the

forceful way in which an unconscious idea realizes itself gives outsiders

the impression that the idea-oriented thinker starts out with a dogma that

squeezes experience into a rigid ideological mould. It is equally clear that

the object-oriented thinker will be sceptical about all ideas from the start,

since his primary concern is to let every object and every experience speak

for itself, undisturbed by general concepts. In this sense  scepticism is a

necessary condition of all empiricism. Here we have another pair of opposites

that confirms the essential similarity between James’ types and my own.            GENERAL CRITICISM OF JAMES’

                                  TYPOLOGY

[538] In criticizing James’ typology, I must first stress that  it is almost

exclusively concerned with the thinking qualities  of the types. In a

philosophical work one could hardly expect  anything else. But the bias

resulting from this philosophical setting easily leads to confusion. It would

not be difficult to show that such and such a quality is equally characteristic

of the opposite type, or even several of them. There are, for instance,

empiricists who are dogmatic, religious, idealistic,  intellectualistic,

rationalistic, etc., just as there are ideologists  who are materialistic,

pessimistic, deterministic, irreligious, and so on. It is true, of course, that

these terms cover  extremely complex facts and that all sorts of subtle

nuances have to be taken into account, but this still does not get rid of the

possibility of confusion.

[539] Taken individually, the Jamesian terms are too broad and give an

approximate picture of the type antithesis only when taken as a whole.

Though they do not reduce it to a simple formula, they form a valuable

supplement to the picture of the types we have gained from other sources.

James  deserves credit for being the first to draw attention to the

extraordinary importance of temperament in colouring  philosophical

thought. The whole purpose of his pragmatic approach is to reconcile the

philosophical antagonisms resulting from temperamental differences.

[540] Pragmatism is a widely ramifying philosophical movement, deriving

from English philosophy,

16 which restricts the value of “truth” to its practical efficacy and usefulness,

    regardless  of whether or not it may be contested from some other

    standpoint. It is characteristic of James to begin his exposition  of

  pragmatism with this type antithesis, as if to demonstrate and justify the

  need for a pragmatic approach. Thus the drama already acted out in the

  Middle Ages is repeated. The antithesis at that time took the form of

  nominalism versus  realism, and it was Abelard who attempted to

  reconcile the two in his “sermonism” or conceptualism. But since the

  psychological standpoint was completely lacking, his  attempted

  solution was marred by its logical and intellectualistic bias. James dug

  deeper and grasped the conflict at its psychological root, coming up with

  a pragmatic solution. One should not, however, cherish any illusions  about its value: pragmatism is but a makeshift, and it can  claim

  validity only so long as no sources are discovered, other than intellectual

  capacities coloured by temperament, which might reveal new elements

  in the formation of philosophical concepts. Bergson, it is true, has drawn

  attention to the role of intuition and to the possibility of an “intuitive

  method,” but it remains a mere pointer. Any proof of the method is

  lacking and will not be easy to furnish, notwithstanding Bergson’s

  claim that his “élan vital” and “durée créatrice” are products of intuition.

  Aside from these intuitive concepts, which derive  their psychological

    justification from the fact that they were  current even in antiquity,

    particularly in Neoplatonism,  Bergson’s method is not intuitive but

  intellectual. Nietzsche made far greater use of the intuitive source and

  in so doing freed himself from the bonds of the intellect in shaping his

    philosophical ideas—so much so that his intuition carried him outside the

  bounds of a purely philosophical system and led to the creation of a work

  of art which is largely inaccessible to  philosophical criticism. I am

  speaking, of course, of Zarathustra and not of the collection of

    philosophical aphorisms, which are accessible to  philosophical criticism

  because of their predominantly intellectual method. If one may speak

  of an intuitive method at all, Zarathustra is in my

view the best example of it, and at the same time a vivid illustration of

how the problem can be grasped in a  non-intellectual and yet

philosophical way. As forerunners of Nietzsche’s intuitive approach I would

mention Schopenhauer and Hegel, the former because his intuitive feelings

had such a decisive influence on his thinking, the latter because of the

intuitive ideas that  underlie his whole system. In both cases, however,

intuition was subordinated to intellect, but with Nietzsche it ranked above

it.

[541] The conflict between the two “truths” requires a pragmatic attitude if

any sort of justice is to be done to the other standpoint. Yet, though it

cannot be dispensed with, pragmatism presupposes too great a resignation

and almost unavoidably leads to a drying up of creativeness. The solution of

the conflict of opposites can come neither from the intellectual compromise

of conceptualism nor from a pragmatic assessment of the practical value of

logically irreconcilable views, but only from a positive act of creation which

assimilates the opposites as necessary elements of  co-ordination, in the

same way as a co-ordinated muscular  movement depends on theinnervation of opposing muscle groups. Pragmatism can be no more than a

transitional attitude preparing the way for the creative act by removing

prejudices. James and Bergson are signposts along the road which German

philosophy—not of the academic sort—has  already trodden. But it was

really Nietzsche who, with a violence peculiarly his own, struck out on the

path to the future. His creative act goes beyond the unsatisfying pragmatic

solution just as fundamentally as pragmatism itself, in acknowledging the

living value of a truth, transcended the  barren one-sidedness and

unconscious conceptualism of post-Abelardian philosophy—and still there

are heights to be climbed.                                          IX

      THE TYPE PROBLEM IN BIOGRAPHY

[542] As one might expect, biography too has its contribution to make to

the problem of psychological types.  For  this  we  are  indebted  mainly to

Wilhelm Ostwald, who,  by  comparing the biographies of a number of

outstanding scientists, was able to establish a typical psychological pair of

opposites which he termed the classic and romantic types.

1

Whereas the former is characterized by the all-round perfection of each of

his works, and at the same time by a rather retiring disposition and a

personality that has but little influence on his immediate surroundings, the

romantic stands out by reason of just the opposite qualities. His peculiarity

lies not so much in the perfection of each individual work as in the variety

and striking originality of numerous works following one another in rapid

succession, and in the direct  and powerful influence he has upon his

contemporaries.

It should also be emphasized that the speed of mental reaction is a decisive

criterion for determining to which type a scientist belongs. Discoverers with

rapid reactivity are romantics, those with slower reactions are classics.

2

[543] The classic type is slow to produce, usually bringing forth the ripest

fruit of his mind relatively late in life (p. 89). A never-failing characteristic

of the classic type, according to Ostwald, is “the absolute need to stand

unblemished in the public eye” (p. 94). As a compensation for his “lack of

personal influence, the classic type is assured an all the more potent effect

through his writings” (p. 100).

[544] There seem, however, to be limitations to this effect, as the following

episode from the biography of Helmholtz testifies. A propos Helmholtz’s

mathematical researches  concerning the effects of induction shocks, his

colleague Du Bois-Reymond wrote to the scientist: “You must—please don’t

take this amiss—devote yourself much more carefully to the problem of

abstracting yourself from your own scientific standpoint, and put yourself in

the position of those who know nothing of what it is all about, or what it is

you want to discuss.” To which Helmholtz replied: “This time I really did

take pains with my paper, and I thought that at last I might be satisfied with

it.” Ostwald comments: “He does not consider the reader’s point of view atall, because, true to his classic type, he is writing for himself, so that the

presentation seems irreproachable to him, while to others it is not.” What

Du  Bois-Reymond says in the same letter to Helmholtz is entirely

characteristic: “I read your treatise and the summary several times without

understanding what you have actually done, or the way you  did it. …

Finally I discovered your method myself, and now I am gradually beginning

to understand your paper.”

3

[545] This is a thoroughly typical event in the life of the classic type who

seldom or never succeeds in “setting like minds on fire with his own” (p.

100). It shows that the influence ascribed to him through his writings is as

a rule posthumous, i.e., it appears after he has been disinterred from his

works, as happened in the case of Robert Mayer. Moreover, his writings

often seem unconvincing, uninspiring, lacking any direct personal appeal,

because the way a man writes is, after all, just as much an expression of

himself as the way he talks or lectures. Hence any influence the classic type

exerts depends much less on the outwardly stimulating  qualities of his

writings than on the fact that these are all that finally remain of him, and that

only from them can his achievement be reconstructed. It is also evident from

Ostwald’s description that the classic type seldom communicates what he is

doing and the way he does it, but only the final result, regardless of the fact

that his public has no notion how he arrived at it. Evidently the way and

the method of working are of little importance to him just because they are

most intimately linked with his personality, which is something he always

keeps in the background.

[546] Ostwald compares his two types with the four  classical

temperaments,

4 with special reference to the speed of reaction,  which in his view is

fundamental. Slow reactions are  correlated with phlegmatic and

melancholic temperaments,  quick reactions with the sanguine and the

choleric. He regards the sanguine and the phlegmatic as the average types,

whereas  the choleric and the melancholic seem to him morbid

exaggerations of the basic character.

[547] If one glances through the biographies of Humphry Davy and Liebig

on the one hand, and Robert Mayer and Faraday on the other, it is easy

to see that the former are  distinctly romantic, sanguine, and choleric,

while the latter are just as clearly classic, phlegmatic, and melancholic. Thisobservation of Ostwald’s seems to me entirely convincing,  since the

doctrine of the four temperaments was in all probability based on the same

empirical principles as  Ostwald’s classic and romantic types. The four

temperaments are obviously differentiations in terms of affectivity, that is,

they are correlated with manifest affective reactions. But this is a superficial

classification from the psychological point of  view; it judges only by

appearances. According to it, the man  who is outwardly calm and

inconspicuous in his behaviour has a phlegmatic temperament. He looks

phlegmatic and is  therefore classed as  phlegmatic.  In  reality  he  may  be

anything  but phlegmatic; he may have a profoundly sensitive, even

passionate nature, his intense, introverted emotionality  expressing itself

through the greatest outward calm. Jordan, in his typology, takes this fact into

account. He judges not merely from the surface impression, but from a

deeper observation of human nature. Ostwald’s criteria of distinction  are

based on appearances, like the old division into temperaments. His romantic

type is characterized by a quick outward reaction; the classic type may

react just as quickly, but within.

[548] As one reads Ostwald’s biographies, one can see at a glance that the

romantic type corresponds to the extravert, and  the classic type to the

introvert. Humphry Davy and Liebig are perfect examples of the one, and

Mayer and Faraday of the other. The outward reaction characterizes the

extravert, just as the inward reaction is the mark of the introvert. The

extravert has no especial difficulty in expressing himself; he  makes his

presence felt almost involuntarily, because his whole nature goes outwards

to the object. He gives himself  easily to the  world in a form that is

pleasing and acceptable, and it is always understandable even when it is

unpleasing. Because of  his quick reactivity and discharge of emotion,

valuable and worthless psychic contents will be projected together into the

object; he will react with winsome manners as well as with dour thoughts

and affects. For the same reason these contents will have undergone little

elaboration and are therefore easily  understood; the quick succession of

immediate reactions produces a series of images that show the public the

path he has followed and the means by which he has attained his result.

[549] The introvert, on the other hand, who reacts almost entirely within,

cannot as a rule discharge his reactions except in explosions of affect. He

suppresses them, though they may be just as quick as those of the extravert.

They do not appear on the surface, hence the introvert may easily give theimpression of slowness. Since immediate reactions are always  strongly

personal, the extravert cannot help asserting his personality. But  the  

introvert hides  his  personality by suppressing all his immediate reactions.

Empathy is not his aim, nor the transference of contents to the object, but

rather abstraction from the object. Instead of immediately discharging his

reactions he prefers to elaborate them inwardly for a long time before

finally coming out with the finished product. His constant endeavour is to

strip the product of everything personal and to present it divested of all

personal relationships. The matured fruit of prolonged inner  labour, it

emerges into the world in a highly abstract and depersonalized form. It is

therefore difficult to understand, because the public lacks all knowledge

of the preliminary stages and the way he attained his result. A personal

relation to his public is also lacking, because the introvert in suppressing

himself shrouds his personality from the public eye. But often enough it is

just the personal relationship which brings about an understanding where

mere intellectual  apprehension fails. This must constantly be borne in

mind when passing judgment on the introvert’s development. As a rule one

is badly informed about the introvert because his real self is not visible. His

incapacity for immediate outward reaction keeps his personality hidden. His

life therefore  affords ample scope for fantastic interpretations and

projections should his achievements ever make him an object  of general

interest.

[550] So when Ostwald says that “early mental maturity” is characteristic of

the romantic type, we must add that, though this is quite true, the classic

type is just as capable of early maturity, but hides his products within

himself, not intentionally of course, but from an incapacity for immediate

expression. As a result of deficient differentiation of feeling, a  certain

awkwardness lingers on in the introvert, a real infantilism in his personal

relations with other people. His outward personality is so uncertain and

indefinite, and he himself is so sensitive in this respect, that he dares to

appear before the public only with what in his own eyes is a perfect product.

He prefers to let his work speak for him, instead of taking up the cudgels on

its behalf. The natural result of such an attitude is a considerably delayed

appearance on the world’s stage, so that it is easy to accuse him of late

maturity. But this superficial judgment overlooks the fact that the infantilism

of the apparently early matured and outwardly differentiated extravert is

all internal, in his relation to his inner world. It only reveals itself later inlife, in some moral immaturity or, as is often the case, in an astonishing

infantilism of thought. As Ostwald observes, conditions for development

and growth are more favourable for the romantic than for the classic type.

His convincing appearance before  the public and his outward reactions

allow his personal importance to be immediately recognized. In this way

many valuable relations are quickly built up which enrich his work and give

it breadth (p. 374), whereas the other remains hidden and his lack of personal

relations limits any extension of his field of work, though his activity gains

in depth and his work has a lasting value.

[551] Both types are capable of enthusiasm. What fills the extravert’s heart

flows out of his mouth, but the enthusiasm of the introvert is the very thing

that seals his lips. He kindles no flame in others, and so he lacks colleagues

of equal calibre. Even if he had any desire to impart his knowledge, his

laconic  manner of expression and the mystified incomprehension it

produces are enough to deter him from further efforts at communication, and

it frequently happens that no one  believes he has anything out of the

ordinary to say. His  manner of expression, his “personality,” appear

commonplace on a superficial view, whereas the romantic looks intrinsically

“interesting” and understands the art of pandering to this impression by

fair means or foul. His very glibness provides a suitable  background for

brilliant ideas and helps the public over the  gaps in his thinking. The

emphasis Ostwald lays on the successful academic careers of the romantics is

therefore very much to the point. The romantic empathizes his students and

knows the right word at the right moment. But the classic type is sunk in his

own thoughts and problems and completely overlooks the difficulties his

students have in understanding him. Ostwald says of Helmholtz:

5

In spite of his prodigious learning, wide experience, and  richly creative

mind, he was never a good teacher. He never reacted on the instant, but

only after a long time. Confronted by a student’s question in the laboratory,

he would promise to think it over, and only after several days would he

bring the answer. This turned out to be so remote from the predicament of

the student that only in the rarest cases could the latter see any connection

between the difficulty he had experienced and the nicely rounded theory of a

general problem subsequently  expounded to him. Not only was the

immediate help lacking on which every beginner largely relies, but also any

guidance adapted to the student’s own personality, that would have helpedhim to outgrow the natural dependence of the beginner and win to complete

mastery of his subject. All these  deficiencies are directly due to the

teacher’s inability to react instantaneously to the student’s needs, so that,

when the desired reaction does come, its effect is entirely lost.

[552] Ostwald’s explanation in terms of the introvert’s slowness to react

does not seem to me sufficient. This is no sort of proof that Helmholtz

possessed a slow reactivity. He  merely reacted inwardly rather than

outwardly. He had not empathized his student and so did not understand

what he  needed. His attitude was entirely directed to his own thoughts;

consequently, he reacted not to the personal need of the student but to the

thoughts which the student’s question had  aroused in himself, and he

reacted so rapidly and thoroughly that he immediately perceived a further

connection which, at that moment, he was incapable of evaluating and

handing back in fully developed, abstract form. This was not because his

thinking was too slow, but because it was impossible for him to grasp, all in

a moment, the full extent of the problem he had divined. Not observing

that the student had no inkling of any such problem, he naturally thought

that this was what had to be dealt with, and not some extremely simple and

trivial piece of advice which could have been given on the spot if only he had

been able to see what the student needed in order to get on with his work.

But, being an introvert, he had not empathized the other’s psychology; his

empathy had gone inwards to his own theoretical problems, and simply

went on spinning the threads taken over from the student’s problem while

entirely ignoring his needs. From the academic standpoint, naturally, this

peculiar attitude is highly unsuitable quite apart from the  unfavourable

impression it makes. The introverted teacher is  to all appearances slow,

somewhat eccentric, even thick-headed; because of this he is underestimated

not only by the wider public but also by his own colleagues, until one day his

thoughts are taken up and elaborated by other investigators.

[553] The mathematician Gauss had such a distaste for teaching that he used

to inform each of his students that his course of lectures would probably not

take place at all, hoping in this way to disembarrass himself of the necessity

of giving them. Teaching was repugnant to him because it meant having to

“pronounce scientific results in his lectures without first having checked and

polished every word of the text. To be obliged to communicate his findings

to others without such verification must have felt to him as though he

were exhibiting himself before strangers in his nightshirt” (p. 380).Here Ostwald puts his finger on a very essential point we have already

mentioned—the introvert’s dislike of anything other than entirely impersonal

communications.

[554] Ostwald points out that the romantic is usually  compelled to

terminate his career comparatively early because of increasing exhaustion.

This fact, also, Ostwald attributes to the greater speed of reaction. Since in

my opinion the speed of mental reaction is still far from having been

explained scientifically, and there is as yet no proof that outward reactions

are quicker than inward ones, it seems to me that the earlier exhaustion of the

extraverted discoverer must be essentially connected not so much with the

speed of reaction as with the outward reactions peculiar to his type. He

begins to publish very early, quickly makes a name for himself, and soon

develops  an intensive activity, both academically and as a writer; he

cultivates personal relationships among a wide circle of  friends and

acquaintances and, in addition to all this, takes an unusual interest in the

development of his pupils. The introverted pioneer begins to publish later;

his works succeed one another at longer intervals, and are usually sparing

in expression; repetitions of a theme are avoided unless something entirely

new can be introduced into them. The  pithy and laconic style of his

scientific communications, frequently omitting all indications about the way

he arrived at his results, prevents any general understanding or acceptance of

his work, and so he remains unknown. His distaste for teaching does not

bring him pupils; his lack of renown precludes relations with a large circle

of acquaintances; as a rule he lives a retired life, not merely from necessity

but also from choice. Thus he avoids the danger of expending himself too

lavishly. His inward reactions draw him constantly back to the narrow path

of his researches; these in themselves are very exacting, proving as time

goes on to be so exhausting as to permit of no incidental expenditures on

behalf of others. The situation is complicated by the fact that the public

success of the romantic has an invigorating effect, but this is often denied to

the classic type, who is therefore forced to seek his sole satisfaction in

perfecting his research work. In  the light of these considerations, the

relatively premature exhaustion of the romantic genius, if demonstrable at

all, seems to me to depend more on the outward reaction than on a quicker

reactivity.

[555] Ostwald does not pretend that his type division is absolute in the

sense that every investigator can be shown at once to belong to one type orthe other. He is, however, of the opinion that the “really great men” can

definitely be classed in one or the other category with respect to speed of

reaction, while “average people” much more frequently occupy the middle

range (pp. 372f.). In conclusion I would like to observe that Ostwald’s

biographies contain material that has in part a very valuable bearing on the

psychology of types, and strikingly exhibit the coincidence of the romantic

with the extravert and the classic with the introvert.    GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE TYPES

                              INTRODUCTION

[556] In the following pages I shall attempt a general description of the

psychology of the types, starting with the two basic types I have termed

introverted and extraverted. This will be followed by a description of those

more special  types whose peculiarities are due to the fact that the

individual adapts and orients himself chiefly by means of his  most

differentiated function. The former I would call attitude-types, distinguished

by the direction of their interest, or of the movement of libido; the latter I

would call function-types.

[557] The attitude-types, as I have repeatedly emphasized in the preceding

chapters, are distinguished by their attitude to the object. The introvert’s

attitude is an abstracting one; at  bottom, he is always intent on

withdrawing libido from the object, as though he had to prevent the object

from gaining power over him. The extravert, on the contrary, has a positive

relation to the object. He affirms its importance to such an extent that his

subjective attitude is constantly related to and oriented by the object. The

object can never have enough value for him, and its importance must

always be increased. The two types are so different and present such a

striking contrast that their existence becomes quite obvious even to the

layman once it has been pointed out. Everyone knows those reserved,

inscrutable, rather shy people who form the strongest possible contrast to

the open, sociable, jovial, or at least friendly and approachable characters

who are on good terms with everybody, or quarrel with everybody, but

always relate to them in some way and in turn are affected by them.

[558] One is naturally inclined, at first, to regard such differences as mere

idiosyncrasies of character peculiar to individuals.

But anyone with a thorough knowledge of human nature will soon discover

that the contrast is by no means a matter of isolated individual instances

but of typical attitudes which are far more common than one with limited

psychological experience would assume. Indeed, as the preceding chapters

may have shown, it is a fundamental contrast, sometimes quite clear,

sometimes obscured, but always apparent when  one is dealing with

individuals whose personality is in any way pronounced. Such people are

found not merely among the educated, but in all ranks of society, so that our

types can be discovered among labourers and peasants no less than amongthe most highly differentiated members of a community. Sex makes no

difference either; one finds the same contrast among women of all classes.

Such a widespread distribution could hardly have come about if it were

merely a question of a conscious and deliberate choice of attitude. In that

case, one would surely find one particular attitude in one particular class of

people linked together by a  common education and background and

localized accordingly. But that is not so at all; on the contrary, the types seem

to be distributed quite at random. In the same family  one child is

introverted, the other extraverted. Since the facts show that the attitude-type

is a general phenomenon having  an apparently random distribution, it

cannot be a matter of conscious judgment or conscious intention, but must

be due to some unconscious, instinctive cause. As a general psychological

phenomenon, therefore, the type antithesis  must have some kind of

biological foundation.

[559] The relation between subject and object, biologically considered, is

always one of adaptation, since every relation between subject and object

presupposes the modification of  one  by  the other  through reciprocal

influence. Adaptation consists in these constant modifications. The typical

attitudes to the object, therefore, are processes of adaptation. There are in

nature two fundamentally different modes of adaptation which ensure the

continued existence of the living organism. The one consists in a high rate of

fertility, with low powers of defence and short duration of life for the single

individual; the  other consists in equipping the individual with numerous

means of self-preservation plus a low fertility rate. This  biological

difference, it seems to me, is not merely analogous  to, but the actual

foundation

of, our two psychological modes of adaptation. I must content myself with

this broad hint. It is sufficient to note that the  peculiar nature of the

extravert constantly urges him to expend and propagate himself in every

way, while the tendency of the introvert is to defend himself against all

demands from outside, to conserve his energy by withdrawing  it from

objects, thereby consolidating his own position. Blake’s intuition did not err

when he described the two classes of men as “prolific” and “devouring.”

1 Just as, biologically, the two modes of adaptation work equally well

and are successful in their own way, so too with the typical attitudes. The

one achieves its end by a  multiplicity of relationships, the other by

  monopoly.[560] The fact that children often exhibit a typical attitude  quite

unmistakably even in their earliest years forces us to  assume that it

cannot be the struggle for existence in the ordinary sense that determines

a particular attitude. It might be objected, cogently enough, that even the

infant at the breast has to perform an unconscious act of psychological

adaptation, in that the mother’s influence leads to specific reactions in the

child. This argument, while supported by incontestable evidence, becomes

rather flimsy in face of the equally incontestable fact that two children of

the same mother may exhibit contrary attitudes at an early age, though no

change in the mother’s attitude can be demonstrated.  Although nothing

would induce me to underrate the  incalculable importance of parental

influence, this familiar  experience compels me to conclude that the

decisive factor must be looked for in the disposition of the child. Ultimately,

it must be the individual disposition which decides whether the child will

belong to this or that type despite the constancy  of external conditions.

Naturally I am thinking only of normal cases. Under abnormal conditions,

i.e., when the mother’s own attitude is extreme, a similar attitude can be

forced on the children too, thus violating their individual disposition, which

might have opted for another type if no abnormal external influences had

intervened. As a rule, whenever such a falsification of type takes place as

a result of parental influence, the individual becomes neurotic later, and

can be cured only by developing the attitude consonant with his nature.

[561] As to the individual disposition, I have nothing to say except that there

are obviously individuals who have a greater capacity, or to whom it is more

congenial, to adapt in one way  and not in another. It may well be that

physiological causes of which we have no knowledge play a part in this. I

do not think it improbable, in view of one’s experience that a reversal of

type often proves exceedingly harmful to the physiological well-being of the

organism, usually causing acute exhaustion.                  THE EXTRAVERTED TYPE

[562] In our description of this and the following types it is necessary, for

the sake of clarity, to distinguish between the psychology of consciousness

and the psychology of the  unconscious. We shall first describe the

phenomena of consciousness.              THE GENERAL ATTITUDE OF

                            CONSCIOUSNESS

[563] Although it is true that everyone orients himself in accordance with

the data supplied by the outside world, we see every day that the data in

themselves are only relatively  decisive. The fact that it is cold outside

prompts one man to put on his overcoat, while another, who wants to get

hardened, finds this superfluous. One man admires the latest tenor because

everybody else does, another refuses to do so, not because he  dislikes him,  

but because in  his view  the subject of universal admiration is far from

having been proved admirable. One man resigns himself to circumstances

because experience has shown him that nothing else is possible, another is

convinced that though things have gone the same way a thousand times

before, the thousand and first time will be different. The one allows himself

to be oriented by the given facts, the other holds in reserve a view which

interposes itself between him and the objective data. Now,  when

orientation by the object predominates in such a way that decisions and

actions are determined not by subjective views but by objective conditions,

we speak of an extraverted attitude. When this is habitual, we speak of an

extraverted type. If a man thinks, feels, acts, and actually lives in a way that

is directly correlated with the objective conditions and their demands, he is

extraverted. His life makes it perfectly clear that it is the object and not this

subjective view  that plays the determining role in his consciousness.

Naturally he has subjective views too, but their determining value is less

than that of the objective conditions. Consequently, he never expects to

find any absolute factors in his own inner life, since the only ones he

knows are outside himself. Like Epimetheus, his inner life is subordinated to

external  necessity, though not without a struggle; but it is always the

objective determinant that wins in the end. His whole consciousness looks

outward, because the essential and decisive determination always comes

from outside. But  it  comes from outside only because that is where he

expects it to come from. All the peculiarities of his psychology, except those

that depend on the primacy of one particular psychological function or on

idiosyncrasies of character, follow from this basic attitude. His interest and

attention are  directed to objective happenings, particularly those in his

immediate environment. Not only people but things seize and  rivet his

attention. Accordingly, they also determine his actions, which are fullyexplicable on those grounds. The actions of the extravert are recognizably

related to external conditions. In so far as they are not merely reactive to

environmental stimuli, they have a character that is always adapted to the

actual circumstances, and they find sufficient play within the limits of the

objective situation. No serious effort is made to transcend these bounds. It

is the same with  his interest: objective happenings have an almost

inexhaustible fascination for him, so that ordinarily he never  looks for

anything else.

[564] The moral laws governing his actions coincide with the demands of

society, that is, with the prevailing moral  standpoint. If this were to

change, the extravert’s subjective  moral guidelines would change

accordingly, without this altering his general psychological habits in any

way. This strict determination by objective factors does not mean, as one

might suppose, a complete let alone ideal adaptation to  the general

conditions of life. In the eyes of the extravert, of course, an adjustment of

this kind to the objective situation must seem like complete adaptation,

since for him no other criterion exists. But from a higher point of view it

by no means follows that the objective situation is in all circumstances a

normal one. It can quite well  be temporarily or locally abnormal. An

individual who adjusts himself to it is admittedly conforming to the style of

his environment, but together with his whole surroundings he  is in an

abnormal situation with respect to the universally valid laws of life. He

may indeed thrive in such surroundings, but only up to the point where he

and his milieu meet with disaster for transgressing these laws. He will share

the general collapse to exactly the same extent as he was adjusted to the

previous situation. Adjustment is not adaptation; adaptation  requires far

more than merely going along smoothly with the conditions of the moment.

(Once again I would remind the  reader of Spitteler’s Epimetheus.) It

requires observance of laws more universal than the immediate conditions

of time and place. The very adjustment of the normal extraverted type is his

limitation. He owes his normality on the one hand to his ability to fit into

existing conditions with comparative ease. His requirements are limited to

the objectively possible, for instance to the career that holds out good

prospects at this particular moment; he does what is needed of him, or what

is expected of him, and refrains from all innovations that are not entirely self-

evident or that in any way exceed the expectations of those around him.

On the other hand, his normality must also depend essentially on whetherhe takes account of his subjective needs and requirements, and this is just

his weak point, for the tendency of his type is so outer-directed that even

the most obvious of all subjective facts, the condition of his own body,

receives scant attention. The body is not sufficiently objective or “outside,”

so that the satisfaction of elementary needs which are indispensable to

physical well-being is no longer given its due. The body accordingly suffers,

to say nothing of the psyche. The extravert is usually unaware of this latter

fact, but it is all the more apparent to his household. He feels his loss of

equilibrium only when it announces itself in abnormal body  sensations.

These he cannot ignore. It is quite natural that he should regard them as

concrete and “objective,” since with his type of mentality they cannot be

anything else—for him. In others he at once sees “imagination” at work.

A too extraverted attitude can also become so oblivious of the subject that

the latter is sacrificed completely to so-called objective demands—to the

demands, for instance, of a continually expanding business, because orders

are piling up and profitable opportunities have to be exploited.

[565] This is the extravert’s danger: he gets sucked into  objects and

completely loses himself in them. The resultant  functional disorders,

nervous or physical, have a compensatory value, as they force him into an

involuntary  self-restraint. Should the symptoms be functional, their

peculiar character may express his psychological situation in symbolic form;

for instance, a singer whose fame has risen to dangerous heights that tempt

him to expend too much energy suddenly finds he cannot sing high notes

because of some nervous inhibition. Or a man of modest beginnings who

rapidly reaches a social position of great influence with wide prospects is

suddenly afflicted with all the symptoms of a mountain sickness.

2 Again, a man about to marry a woman of doubtful character whom he

adores and vastly overestimates is seized with a nervous spasm of the

  oesophagus and has to restrict himself to two cups of milk a day, each

of which takes him three hours to consume. All visits to the adored

are effectively stopped, and he has no choice but to devote himself to

the nourishment of his body. Or a man who can no longer carry  the

weight of the huge business he has built up is afflicted with nervous

attacks of thirst and speedily falls a victim to hysterical alcoholism.

[566] Hysteria is, in my view, by far the most frequent neurosis of the

extraverted type. The hallmark of classic hysteria is an exaggerated rapport

with persons in the  immediate environment and an adjustment tosurrounding conditions that amounts to imitation. A constant tendency to

make himself interesting and to produce an impression is a basic feature of

the hysteric. The corollary of this is his  proverbial suggestibility, his

proneness to another person’s influence. Another unmistakable sign of the

extraverted hysteric is his effusiveness, which occasionally carries him into

the realm of fantasy, so that he is accused of the  “hysterical lie.” The

hysterical character begins as an exaggeration of the normal attitude; it is

then complicated by compensatory reactions from the unconscious,  which

counteract the exaggerated extraversion by means of physical symptoms

that force the libido to introvert. The reaction of the unconscious produces

another class of symptoms having a more introverted character, one of

the most typical being a morbid intensification of fantasy activity.

[567] After this general outline of the extraverted attitude we shall now

turn to a description of the modifications which  the basic psychological

functions undergo as a result of this attitude.    THE ATTITUDE OF THE UNCONSCIOUS

[568] It may perhaps seem odd that I should speak of an “attitude of the

unconscious.” As I have repeatedly indicated, I regard the attitude of the

unconscious as compensatory to consciousness. According to this view, the

unconscious has as good a claim to an “attitude” as the latter.

[569] In the preceding section I emphasized the tendency to one-sidedness in

the extraverted attitude, due to the ascendency of the object over the course

of psychic events. The extraverted type is constantly tempted to expend

himself for the apparent benefit of the object, to assimilate subject to object.

I have discussed in some detail the harmful  consequences of an

exaggeration of the extraverted attitude,  namely, the suppression of the

subjective factor. It is only to

be expected, therefore, that the psychic compensation of the  conscious

extraverted attitude will lay special weight on the subjective factor, and that

we shall find a markedly egocentric tendency in the unconscious. Practical

experience proves this to be the case. I do not wish to cite case material at

this point, so must refer my readers to the ensuing sections, where I try to

present the characteristic attitude of the unconscious in  each function-

type. In this section we are concerned simply with the compensation of the

extraverted attitude in general, so I shall confine myself to describing the

attitude of the unconscious in equally general terms.

[570] The attitude of the unconscious as an effective complement to the

conscious extraverted attitude has a  definitely introverting character. It

concentrates the libido on the subjective factor, that is, on all those needs

and demands that are

stifled or  repressed by  the conscious  attitude. As  may be  gathered from

what was said in the previous section, a purely objective orientation does

violence to a multitude of subjective impulses, intentions, needs, and desires

and deprives them of the libido that is their natural right. Man is not a

machine that can be remodelled for  quite other purposes  as occasion

demands, in the hope that it will go on functioning as regularly as before

but in a quite different way. He carries his whole history with him; in his

very structure is written the history of mankind. This historical element in

man represents a vital need to which a wise psychic economy must respond.

Somehow the past must come alive and participate in the present. Total

assimilation to the object will always arouse the protest of the suppressed

minority of those elements that belong to the past and have existed fromthe very beginning.

[571] From these general considerations it is easy to see  why the

unconscious demands of the extravert have an  essentially primitive,

infantile, egocentric character. When Freud says that the unconscious “can

do nothing but wish” this is very largely true of the unconscious of the

extravert. His adjustment to the objective situation and his assimilation to

the object prevent low-powered subjective impulses from  reaching

consciousness. These impulses (thoughts, wishes, affects, needs, feelings,

etc.) take on a regressive character according to the degree of repression;

the less they are  acknowledged, the more infantile and archaic they

become.  The conscious attitude robs them of all energy that is readily

disposable, only leaving them the energy of which it cannot deprive them.

This residue, which still possesses a potency not to be underestimated, can

be described only as primordial instinct. Instinct can never be eradicated in

an individual by  arbitrary measures; it requires the slow, organic

transformation of many generations to effect a radical change, for instinct is

the energic expression of the organism’s make-up.

[572] Thus with every repressed impulse  a considerable  amount of

energy ultimately remains, of an instinctive character, and preserves its

potency despite the deprivation  that made it unconscious. The more

complete the conscious attitude of extraversion is, the more infantile and

archaic the unconscious attitude

will be. The egoism which characterizes the extravert’s  unconscious

attitude goes far beyond mere childish selfishness; it verges on the ruthless

and the brutal. Here we find in full flower the incest-wish described by

Freud. It goes without saying that these things are entirely unconscious and

remain hidden from the layman so long as the extraversion of

the conscious attitude is not extreme. But whenever it is exaggerated, the

unconscious comes to light in symptomatic form; its egoism, infantilism,

and archaism lose their original compensatory character and appear in more

or less open opposition to the conscious attitude. This begins as an absurd

exaggeration of conscious standpoint, aiming at a further repression of the

unconscious, but usually it ends in a reductio ad absurdum of the

conscious attitude and hence in catastrophe. The catastrophe may take an

objective form, since the objective aims gradually become falsified by the

subjective. I remember the case of a printer who, starting as a  mere

employee, worked his way up after years of hard struggle till  at last hebecame the owner of a flourishing business. The more it expanded, the

more it tightened its hold on him, until finally it swallowed up all his other

interests.  This proved his ruin. As an unconscious compensation of his

exclusive interest in the business, certain memories of his childhood came

to life. As a child he had taken great delight in painting and drawing. But

instead of renewing this capacity for its own sake as a compensating hobby,

he channelled it into his business and began wondering how he might

embellish his products in an “artistic” way. Unfortunately his  fantasies

materialized: he actually turned out stuff that suited his own primitive and

infantile taste, with the result that after a very few years his business went

to pieces. He acted in accordance with one of our “cultural ideals,” which

says that any enterprising person has to concentrate everything on the one

aim in view. But he went too far, and merely fell a victim to the power of his

infantile demands.

[573] The catastrophe can, however, also be subjective and take the form of

a nervous breakdown. This invariably happens when the influence of the

unconscious finally

paralyzes all conscious action. The demands of the unconscious then force

themselves imperiously on consciousness and bring about a

disastrous split which shows itself in one of two ways: either the subject no

longer knows what he really wants and nothing interests him, or he wants too

much at once and has too many interests, but in impossible things. The

suppression of infantile and primitive demands for cultural reasons easily

leads to a neurosis or to the abuse of narcotics such as alcohol, morphine,

cocaine, etc. In more extreme cases the split ends in suicide.

[574] It  is an outstanding peculiarity of unconscious impulses that, when

deprived of energy by lack of conscious  recognition, they take on a

destructive character,  and this  happens as soon as they cease to be

compensatory. Their compensatory function ceases as soon as they reach a

depth corresponding to a cultural level absolutely incompatible with our own.

From this moment the unconscious impulses form a block in every way

opposed to the conscious attitude, and its  very existence leads to open

conflict.

[575] Generally speaking, the compensating attitude of the  unconscious

finds expression in the maintenance of the psychic equilibrium. A normal

extraverted attitude does not, of course, mean that the individual invariably

behaves in accordance with the extraverted schema. Even in the sameindividual many psychological processes may be observed that involve the

mechanism of introversion. We call a mode of behaviour extraverted only

when the mechanism of extraversion predominates. In these cases the most

differentiated function is always employed in an extraverted way, whereas

the inferior functions are introverted; in other

words, the superior function is the most conscious one and completely

under conscious control, whereas the less differentiated functions are in

part unconscious and far less  under the control of consciousness. The

superior function is always an expression of the conscious personality, of its

aims, will, and general performance, whereas the less differentiated functions

fall into the category of things that simply “happen” to one. These things

need not be mere slips of the tongue or pen and other such oversights, they

can equally well be half or three-quarters intended, for the less differentiated

functions also possess a slight degree of consciousness. A classic example

of this is the extraverted feeling type, who enjoys an excellent feeling rapport

with the people

around him, yet occasionally “happens” to express opinions  of

unsurpassable tactlessness. These opinions spring from his inferior and half-

conscious thinking, which, being only partly  under his control and

insufficiently related to the object, can be quite ruthless in its effects.

[576] The less differentiated functions of the extravert  always show a

highly subjective colouring with pronounced  egocentricity and personal

bias, thus revealing their close  connection with the unconscious. The

unconscious is continually coming to light through them. It should not be

imagined that the unconscious lies permanently buried under  so many

overlying strata that it can only be uncovered, so to speak, by a laborious

process of excavation. On the contrary,  there is a constant influx of

unconscious contents into the conscious psychological process, to such a

degree that at times it is hard for the observer to decide which character

traits belong to the conscious and which to the unconscious personality.

This difficulty is met with mainly in people who  are given to express

themselves more profusely than others.

Naturally it also depends very largely on the attitude of the  observer

whether he seizes hold of the conscious or the unconscious character of the

personality. Generally speaking, a judging observer will tend to seize on

the conscious character, while a perceptive observer will be more influenced

by the unconscious character, since judgment is chiefly concerned with theconscious motivation of the psychic process, while perception registers the

process itself. But in so far as we apply judgment and perception in equal

measure, it may easily happen that a personality appears to us as both

introverted and extraverted, so that we cannot decide at first  to which

attitude the superior function belongs. In such cases only a thorough analysis

of the qualities of each function can help us to form a valid judgment. We

must observe which function is completely under conscious control, and

which functions have a haphazard and spontaneous character. The former

is always more highly differentiated than the latter, which also possess

infantile and primitive traits. Occasionally the superior function gives  the

impression of normality, while  the others have something abnormal or

pathological about them.        THE PECULIARITIES OF THE BASIC

        PSYCHOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS IN THE

                  EXTRAVERTED ATTITUDE

Thinking

[577] As a consequence of the general attitude of extraversion, thinking is

oriented by the object and objective data. This gives rise to a noticeable

peculiarity. Thinking in general is fed on the one hand from subjective and

in the last resort unconscious sources, and on the other hand from

objective data transmitted by sense-perception. Extraverted  thinking is

conditioned in a larger measure by the latter than by the former. Judgment

always presupposes a criterion; for the extraverted judgment, the criterion

supplied by external conditions is the valid and determining one, no matter

whether it be represented directly by an objective, perceptible fact or by an

objective idea; for an objective idea is equally determined by external data

or borrowed from outside even  when it is subjectively sanctioned.

Extraverted thinking, therefore, need not necessarily be purely concretistic

thinking; it can just as well be purely ideal thinking, if for instance it can

be shown that the ideas it operates with are largely borrowed from outside,

i.e., have been transmitted by  tradition and education. So in judging

whether a particular thinking is extraverted or not we must first ask: by

what criterion does it judge—does it come from outside, or is its origin

subjective? A further criterion is the direction the thinking takes in drawing

conclusions—whether it is principally directed outwards or  not. It is no  

proof of  its extraverted nature that it is preoccupied with concrete objects,

since my thinking may be preoccupied with a concrete object either because

I  am abstracting my thought from it or because  I am concretizing my  

thought through  it. Even when my thinking is preoccupied with concrete

things and could be described as extraverted to that extent, the direction it

will take still remains an essential characteristic and an open  question—

namely, whether or not in its further course it leads back again to objective

data, external facts, or generally  accepted ideas.  So far  as the  practical

thinking of the business man, the technician, or the scientific investigator is

concerned, its outer-directedness is obvious enough. But in the

case of the philosopher it remains open to doubt when his thinking is

directed to ideas. We then have to inquire whether these ideas are simply

abstractions from objective experience, in which case they would representhigher collective concepts comprising a sum of objective facts, or whether

(if they are clearly not abstractions from immediate experience) they may not

be derived from tradition or borrowed from the intellectual atmosphere of

the time. In the latter case, they fall into the category of objective data, and

accordingly this thinking should be called extraverted.

[578] Although I do not propose to discuss the nature of  introverted

thinking at this point, reserving it for a later section (pars. 628–31), it is

essential that I should say a few words about it before proceeding further.

For if one reflects on what I have just said about extraverted thinking, one

might  easily conclude that this covers everything that is ordinarily

understood as thinking. A thinking that is directed neither to objective facts

nor to general ideas, one might argue, scarcely deserves the name “thinking”

at all. I am fully aware that our age and its most eminent representatives

know and  acknowledge only the extraverted type of thinking. This is

largely because all the thinking that appears visibly on the surface in the

form of science or philosophy or even art either derives directly from objects

or else flows into general ideas. For both these reasons it appears essentially

understandable, even though it may not always be self-evident, and it is

therefore regarded as valid. In this sense it might be said that the extraverted

intellect oriented by objective data is actually  the only one that is

recognized. But—and now I come to the question of the introverted intellect

—there also exists an entirely different kind of thinking, to which the

term “thinking” can hardly be denied: it is a kind that is oriented neither by

immediate experience of objects nor by traditional ideas. I reach this other

kind of thinking in the following  manner: when my thoughts are

preoccupied with a concrete object or a general idea, in such a way that the

course of my thinking eventually leads me back to my starting-point, this

intellectual process is not the only psychic process that is going on in  

me. I will  disregard  all those  sensations  and  feelings which become

noticeable as a more or less disturbing accompaniment to my train of thought,

and will merely point out that this very thinking process which starts from

the object and returns to the object also stands in a constant relation to

the subject. This relation is a sine qua non, without which no thinking

process whatsoever could take place. Even though my thinking process is

directed, as far as possible, to objective data, it  is still my  subjective

process, and it can neither avoid nor dispense with this  admixture of

subjectivity. Struggle as I may to give an objective orientation to my train ofthought, I cannot shut out the parallel subjective process and its running

accompaniment  without extinguishing the very spark of life from my

thought. This parallel process has a natural and hardly avoidable tendency to

subjectify the objective data and assimilate them to the subject.

[579] Now when the main accent lies on the subjective process, that other

kind of thinking arises which is opposed to extraverted thinking, namely, that

purely subjective  orientation which I call introverted. This thinking is

neither determined by objective data nor directed to them; it is a thinking

that starts from the subject and is directed to subjective ideas or subjective

facts. I do not wish to enter more fully into this kind of thinking here; I

have merely

established its existence as the necessary complement of  extraverted

thinking and brought it into clearer focus.

[580] Extraverted thinking, then, comes into existence only  when the

objective orientation predominates. This fact does nothing to alter the logic

of thinking; it merely constitutes that  difference between thinkers which

James considered a matter of temperament. Orientation to the object, as

already explained, makes no essential change in the thinking function; only

its appearance is altered. It has the appearance of being captivated by the

object, as though without the external orientation it simply could not exist.

It almost seems as though it were a mere sequela of external facts, or as

though it  could reach its highest point only when flowing into some

general idea. It seems to be constantly affected by the objective data and to

draw conclusions only with their consent. Hence it gives one the impression

of a certain lack of freedom, of occasional short-sightedness, in spite of all

its  adroitness within the area circumscribed by the object. What I  am

describing is simply the impression this sort of thinking  makes on the

observer, who must himself have a different standpoint, otherwise it would

be impossible for him to observe the phenomenon of extraverted thinking

at all. But because of his different standpoint he sees only its outward

aspect, not its essence,  whereas the thinker himself can apprehend its

essence but not its outward aspect. Judging by appearances can never do

justice to  the  essence of  the  thing,  hence  the  verdict is  in  most  cases

depreciatory.

[581] In its essence this thinking is no less fruitful and creative than

introverted thinking, it merely serves other ends. This difference becomes

quite palpable when extraverted thinking appropriates material that is thespecial province of introverted thinking; when, for instance, a subjective

conviction is explained analytically in terms of objective data or as being

derived from objective ideas. For our scientific consciousness, however,

the difference becomes even more  obvious when  introverted thinking

attempts to  bring  objective  data into connections not warranted by the

object—in other words, to subordinate them to a subjective idea. Each type

of thinking senses the other as an encroachment on its own province, and

hence a sort of shadow effect is produced, each revealing to the other its

least favourable aspect. Introverted thinking then appears as something quite

arbitrary, while extraverted thinking seems dull and banal. Thus the two

orientations are incessantly at war.

[582] One might think it easy enough to put an end to this conflict by

making a clear distinction between objective and  subjective data.

Unfortunately, this is impossible, though not a few have attempted it. And

even if it were possible it would  be a disastrous proceeding, since in

themselves both orientations are one-sided and of limited validity, so that

each needs the influence of the other. When objective data predominate

over thinking to any great extent, thinking is sterilized, becoming a mere

appendage of the object and no longer capable of abstracting itself into an

independent concept. It is then reduced to a kind of “after-thought,” by

which I do not mean “reflection” but a purely imitative  thinking which

affirms nothing beyond what was visibly and immediately present in the

objective data in the first place. This thinking naturally leads directly back

to the object, but never beyond it, not even to a linking of experience with an

objective idea. Conversely, when it has an idea for an object, it is quite

unable to experience its practical, individual value, but remains stuck in a 

more  or  less  tautological position. The  materialistic  mentality is an

instructive example of this.

[583] When extraverted thinking is subordinated to objective data as a

result of over-determination by the object, it engrosses itself entirely in the

individual experience and accumulates a mass of undigested empirical

material. The oppressive weight of individual experiences having little or

no connection with one another produces a dissociation of thought which

usually requires psychological compensation. This must consist in some

simple, general idea that gives coherence to the disordered whole, or at

least affords the possibility of such. Ideas like “matter” or “energy” serve

this purpose. But when the thinking depends primarily not on objectivedata but on some second-hand idea, the very poverty of this thinking is

compensated by an all the more  impressive accumulation of facts

congregating round a narrow and sterile point of view, with the result that

many valuable and meaningful aspects are completely lost sight of. Many of

the allegedly scientific outpourings of our own day owe their existence to

this wrong orientation.
The Extraverted Thinking Type

[584] It is a fact of experience that the basic psychological functions seldom

or never all have the same strength or degree of development in the same

individual. As a rule, one  or the other function predominates, in both

strength and development. When thinking holds prior place among the

psychological functions, i.e., when the life of an individual is  mainly

governed by reflective thinking so that every important action proceeds, or

is intended to proceed, from intellectually considered motives, we may

fairly call this a thinking type. Such a type may be either introverted or

extraverted. We will first discuss the extraverted thinking type.

[585] This type will, by definition, be a man whose constant endeavour—

in so far, of course, as he is a pure type—is to make all his activities

dependent on intellectual conclusions, which in the last resort are always

oriented by objective data, whether these be external facts or generally

accepted ideas. This type of man elevates objective reality, or an objectively

oriented intellectual formula, into the ruling principle not only for himself but

for his whole environment. By this formula good and evil are measured,

and beauty and ugliness  determined. Everything that agrees with this

formula is right, everything that contradicts it is wrong, and anything that

passes by it indifferently is merely incidental. Because this formula seems

to embody the entire meaning of life, it is made into a universal law which

must be put into effect  everywhere all the time, both individually and

collectively. Just as the extraverted thinking type subordinates himself to his

formula, so, for their own good, everybody round him must obey it too,

for whoever refuses to obey it is wrong—he is resisting the universal law,

and is therefore unreasonable,  immoral, and without a conscience. His

moral code forbids him to tolerate exceptions; his ideal must under all 

circumstances be  realized, for in  his  eyes it  is  the purest  conceivable

formulation of objective reality, and therefore must also be a universally

valid truth, quite indispensable for the salvation of mankind. This is not

from any great love for his neighbour, but from the higher standpoint ofjustice and truth. Anything in his own nature that appears to invalidate this

formula is a mere imperfection, an accidental failure, something to be

eliminated on the next occasion, or, in the event of further failure, clearly

pathological. If tolerance for the sick, the suffering, or the abnormal should

chance to be an ingredient of the formula, special provisions will be made for

humane societies, hospitals, prisons, missions, etc., or at least  extensive

plans will be drawn up. Generally the motive of justice and truth is not

sufficient to ensure the actual execution of such projects; for this, real

Christian charity is needed, and this has more to do with feeling than with

any  intellectual formula. “Oughts” and “musts” bulk large in this

programme. If the formula is broad enough, this type may play a very

useful role in social life as a reformer or public prosecutor or purifier of

conscience, or as the propagator of important innovations. But the more

rigid the formula, the more he develops into a martinet, a quibbler, and a

prig, who would like to force himself and others into one mould. Here we

have the two extremes between which the majority of these types move.

[586] In accordance with the nature of the extraverted attitude, the influence

and activities of these personalities are the more favourable and beneficial

the further from the centre their radius extends. Their best aspect is to be

found at the  periphery of their sphere of influence. The deeper we

penetrate into their own power province, the more we feel the unfavourable

effects of their tyranny. A quite different life pulses at the periphery, where

the truth of the formula can be felt as a valuable adjunct to the rest. But the

closer we come to centre of power where the formula operates, the more life

withers away from everything that does not conform to its  dictates.

Usually it is the nearest relatives who have to taste

the unpleasant consequences of the extraverted formula, since they are the

first to receive its relentless benefits. But in the end it is the subject himself

who suffers most—and this brings us to the reverse side of the psychology of

this type.

[587] The fact that an intellectual formula never has been and never will be

devised which could embrace and express the manifold possibilities of life

must lead to the inhibition or exclusion of other activities and ways of living

that are just as important. In the first place, all those activities that are

dependent on feeling will become repressed in such a type—for instance,

aesthetic activities, taste, artistic sense, cultivation of friends, etc. Irrational

phenomena such as religious experiences, passions, and suchlike are oftenrepressed to the point of complete unconsciousness. Doubtless there are

exceptional people who are able to sacrifice their entire life to a particular

formula, but for most of us such exclusiveness is impossible in the long run.

Sooner or later, depending on outer circumstances or inner disposition, the

potentialities repressed by the intellectual  attitude will make themselves

indirectly felt by disturbing the  conscious conduct of life. When the

disturbance reaches a definite pitch, we speak of a neurosis. In most cases

it does not go so far, because the individual instinctively allows  himself

extenuating modifications of his formula in a suitably rationalistic guise, thus

creating a safety valve.

[588] The relative or total unconsciousness of the tendencies and functions

excluded by the conscious attitude keeps them in an undeveloped state. In

comparison with the conscious function they are inferior. To the extent that

they are unconscious, they become merged with the rest of the unconscious

contents and  acquire a bizarre character. To the extent that they are

conscious, they play only a secondary role, though one of considerable

importance for the over-all psychological picture. The first function to be

affected by the conscious inhibition is feeling, since it is the most opposed

to the rigid  intellectual formula and is therefore repressed the most

intensely. No function can  be  entirely eliminated—it can  only  be greatly

distorted. In so far as feeling is compliant and lets itself be subordinated, it

has to support the conscious attitude  and adapt to its aims. But this is

possible only up to a point; part of it remains refractory and has to be

repressed. If the  repression is successful, the subliminal feeling then

functions in a way that is opposed to the conscious aims, even producing

effects whose cause is a complete enigma to the individual. For example,

the conscious altruism of this type, which is often quite extraordinary,

may be thwarted by a secret self-seeking which gives a selfish twist to

actions that in themselves are disinterested. Purely ethical intentions may

lead him into critical situations which sometimes have more  than a

semblance of being the outcome of motives far from ethical. There are

guardians of public morals who suddenly find themselves in compromising

situations, or rescue workers who are themselves in dire need of rescue.

Their  desire to save others leads them to employ means which are

calculated to bring about the very thing they wished to avoid. There are

extraverted idealists so consumed by their desire for the salvation of mankind

that they will not shrink from any lie or trickery in pursuit of their ideal. Inscience there are not a  few painful examples of highly respected

investigators who are so convinced of the truth and general validity of

their formula that they have not scrupled to falsify evidence in its favour.

Their sanction is: the end justifies the means. Only an  inferior feeling

function, operating unconsciously and in secret, could seduce otherwise

reputable men into such aberrations.

[589] The inferiority of feeling in this type also manifests itself in other

ways. In keeping with the objective formula, the conscious attitude becomes

more or less impersonal, often to  such a degree that personal interests

suffer. If the attitude is extreme, all personal considerations are lost sight

of, even those affecting the subject’s own person. His health is neglected,

his social position deteriorates, the most vital interests of his family—health,

finances, morals—are violated for the sake of the ideal. Personal sympathy

with others must in any case suffer unless they too happen to espouse the

same ideal. Often the closest members of his family, his own children,

know such a father only as a cruel tyrant, while the outside world resounds

with the fame of his humanity. Because of the highly impersonal character of

the conscious attitude, the unconscious feelings are extremely personal and

oversensitive, giving rise to secret prejudices—a readiness, for instance, to

misconstrue any opposition to his formula as  personal ill-will, or a

constant tendency to make negative assumptions about other people in

order to invalidate their arguments in advance—in defence, naturally, of his

own  touchiness. His unconscious sensitivity makes him sharp in  tone,

acrimonious, aggressive. Insinuations multiply. His feelings have a sultry

and resentful character—always a mark  of the inferior function.

Magnanimous as he may be in sacrificing himself to his intellectual goal,

his feelings are petty, mistrustful, crotchety, and conservative. Anything

new that is not already contained in his formula is seen through a veil of

unconscious hatred and condemned accordingly. As late as the middle of

the last century a certain doctor, famed for his humanitarianism, threatened

to dismiss an assistant for daring to use a thermometer, because the formula

decreed that temperature must be taken by the pulse.

[590] The more the feelings are repressed, the more deleterious is their

secret influence on thinking that is  otherwise beyond reproach. The

intellectual formula, which because of its intrinsic value might justifiably

claim general recognition, undergoes a characteristic alteration as a result of

this unconscious personal sensitiveness: it becomes rigidly dogmatic. Theself-assertion of the personality is transferred to the formula. Truth is no

longer allowed to speak for itself; it is identified with the subject and

treated like a sensitive darling whom an evil-minded critic has wronged. The

critic is demolished, if possible with personal invective, and no argument is

too gross to be used against him. The truth must be trotted out, until finally it

begins to dawn on the public that it is not so much a question of truth as of its

personal begetter.

[591] The  dogmatism of  the  intellectual formula  sometimes  undergoes

further characteristic alterations, due not so much  to the unconscious

admixture of repressed personal feelings as to a contamination with other

unconscious factors which have become fused with them. Although reason

itself tells us that every intellectual formula can never be anything more

than a partial truth and can never claim general validity, in practice the

formula gains such an ascendency that all other possible standpoints are

thrust into the background. It usurps the place of all more general, less

definite, more modest and therefore more truthful views of life. It even

supplants that  general view of life we call religion. Thus the formula

becomes a religion, although in essentials it has not the slightest connection

with anything religious. At the same  time, it assumes the essentially

religious quality of absoluteness. It becomes an intellectual superstition. But

now all the psychological tendencies it has repressed build up a counter-

position in the unconscious and give rise to paroxysms of doubt. The more

it tries to fend off the doubt, the more fanatical the conscious attitude

becomes, for  fanaticism is nothing but over-compensated doubt. This

development ultimately leads to an exaggerated defence of the conscious

position and to the formation of a counter-position in the unconscious

absolutely opposed to it; for instance, conscious rationalism is opposed by

an extreme irrationality, and a scientific attitude by one that is archaic and

superstitious. This explains those bigoted and ridiculous views well-known

in the history of science which have proved stumbling-blocks to many an

eminent investigator.  Frequently the unconscious counter-position is

embodied in a woman. In my experience this type is found chiefly among

men, since, in general, thinking tends more often to be a  dominant

function in men than in women. When thinking dominates in a woman it

is usually associated with a predominantly intuitive cast of mind.

[592] The thinking of the extraverted type is positive, i.e., productive. It

leads  to  the  discovery  of new  facts  or  to  general  conceptions based ondisparate empirical material. It is  usually synthetic too. Even when it

analyses it constructs, because it is always advancing beyond the analysis

to a new combination, to a further conception which reunites the analysed

material in a different way or adds something to it.One could call this kind of judgment predicative. A characteristic feature, at

any rate, is that it is never absolutely depreciative or destructive, since it

always substitutes a fresh value for the one destroyed. This is because the

thinking of this type is the main channel into which his vital energy flows.

The steady flow of life manifests itself in his thinking, so that his thought

has a progressive, creative quality. It is not stagnant or regressive. But it

can become so if it fails to retain prior place in his consciousness. In that

case it loses the quality of a positive, vital activity. It follows in the wake

of other functions and  becomes Epimethean, plagued by afterthoughts,

contenting itself with constant broodings on things past and gone, chewing

them over in an effort to analyse and digest them.  Since the creative

element is now lodged in another function, thinking no longer progresses: it

stagnates. Judgment takes on a distinct quality of inherence: it confines itself

entirely to the range of the given material, nowhere overstepping it. It is

satisfied with more or less abstract statements which do not impart any

value to the material that is not already inherent in it. Such judgments are

always oriented to the object, and they  affirm nothing more about an

experience than its objective  and intrinsic meaning. We may easily

observe this type of thinking in people who cannot refrain from tacking on

to an impression or experience some rational and doubtless very  valid

remark which in no way ventures beyond the charmed circle of the objective

datum. At bottom such a remark merely says: “I have understood it because

afterwards I can think it.”  And there the matter ends. At best such a

judgment amounts to no more than putting the experience in an objective

setting, where it quite obviously belonged in the first place.

[593] But whenever a function other than thinking  predominates in

consciousness to any marked degree, thinking, so far as it is conscious at all

and not directly dependent on the dominant function, assumes a negative

character. If it is subordinated to the dominant function it may actually wear a

positive aspect, but closer scrutiny will show that it simply mimics the

dominant function, supporting it with arguments that clearly contradict the

laws of logic proper to thinking. This kind of thinking is of no interest for

our present discussion. Our concern is rather with the nature of a thinking

which cannot subordinate itself to another function but remains true to its own

principle. To observe and investigate this thinking is not easy, because it is

more or less constantly repressed by the conscious attitude. Hence, in the

majority of cases, it must first be  retrieved from  the background  ofconsciousness, unless it should come to the surface accidentally in some

unguarded moment. As a rule it has to be enticed with some such question

as “Now what do you really think?” or “What is your private view of the

matter?” Or perhaps  one  may  have  to  use a little cunning, framing the

question something like this: “What do you imagine, then, that I really think

about it?”  One  should adopt this device when the real thinking is

unconscious and therefore projected. The thinking that is  enticed to the

surface in this way has characteristic qualities, and it was these I had in mind

when I described it as negative. Its habitual mode is best expressed by the two

words “nothing but.” Goethe personified this thinking in the figure of

Mephistopheles. Above all it shows a distinct tendency to trace the object

of its judgment back to some banality or other, thus stripping it of any

significance in its own right. The trick is to make it appear dependent on

something quite commonplace. Whenever a conflict arises between two

men over something apparently objective and impersonal, negative thinking

mutters “Cherchez la femme.” Whenever somebody defends or advocates a

cause, negative thinking never asks about its importance but simply: “What

does he get out of it?”

The dictum ascribed to Moleschott, “Der Mensch ist, was er isst” (man is

what he eats, or, rendered more freely, what you  eat you are), likewise

comes under this heading, as do many other aphorisms I need not quote here.

[594] The destructive quality of this thinking, as well as its  limited

usefulness on occasion, does not need stressing. But there is still another

form of negative thinking, which at first glance might not be recognized as

such, and that is theosophical thinking, which today is rapidly spreading in

all parts of the world, presumably in reaction to the materialism of the recent

past. Theosophical thinking has an air that is not in the least reductive,

since it exalts everything to a transcendental and world-embracing idea. A

dream, for instance, is no longer just a dream, but an experience “on

another plane.” The hitherto inexplicable fact of telepathy is very simply

explained as “vibrations” passing from one person to another. An ordinary

nervous complaint is explained by the fact that something has collided

with the “astral body.” Certain ethnological peculiarities of the dwellers on

the Atlantic  seaboard are easily accounted for by the submergence of

Atlantis, and so on. We have only to open a theosophical book to be

overwhelmed by the realization that everything is already explained, and 

that  “spiritual science” has  left no enigmas unsolved. But, at bottom, thiskind of thinking is just as negative as materialistic thinking. When the latter

regards psychology as chemical changes in the ganglia or as the extrusion

and retraction of cell-pseudopodia or as an internal secretion, this is just as

much a superstition as theosophy. The only difference is that materialism

reduces everything to physiology, whereas theosophy reduces everything to

Indian  metaphysics. When a dream is traced back to an overloaded

stomach, this is no explanation of the dream, and when we  explain

telepathy as vibrations we have said just as little. For what are “vibrations”?

Not only are both methods of  explanation futile, they are actually

destructive, because by diverting interest away from the main issue, in one

case to the stomach and in the other to imaginary vibrations, they hamper any

serious investigation of the problem by a bogus explanation. Either kind of

thinking is sterile and sterilizing. Its negative quality is due to the fact that it

is so indescribably cheap, impoverished, and lacking in creative energy. It

is a thinking taken in tow by other functions.
Feeling

[595] Feeling in the extraverted attitude is likewise oriented by objective

data, the object being the indispensable  determinant of the quality of

feeling. The extravert’s feeling is always in harmony with objective values.

For anyone who has known feeling only as something subjective, the nature

of extraverted feeling will be difficult to grasp, because it has detached

itself as much as possible from the subjective factor and subordinated itself

entirely to the influence of the object.  Even when it appears not to be

qualified by a concrete object, it is none the less still under the spell of

traditional or generally accepted values of some kind. I may feel moved, for

instance, to say that something is “beautiful” or “good,” not because I find it

“beautiful” or “good” from my own subjective feeling about it, but because

it is fitting and politic to call it so, since a contrary judgment would upset

the general feeling situation. A feeling judgment of this kind is not by any

means a pretence or a lie, it is simply an act of adjustment. A painting, for

instance, is called “beautiful” because a painting hung in a drawing room and

bearing a well-known signature is generally assumed to be beautiful, or

because to call it  “hideous” would presumably offend the family of its

fortunate possessor, or because the visitor wants to create a  pleasant

feeling atmosphere, for which purpose everything  must be felt as

agreeable. These feelings are governed by an objective criterion. As such

they are genuine, and represent the feeling function as a whole.[596] In precisely the same way as extraverted thinking strives to rid

itself of subjective influences, extraverted feeling has to undergo a process

of differentiation before it is finally denuded of every subjective trimming.

The valuations resulting from the act of feeling either correspond directly

with objective values or accord with traditional and generally  accepted

standards. This kind of feeling is very largely responsible for  the  fact that 

so  many  people flock  to the theatre or to concerts, or go to church, and

do so moreover with their feelings correctly adjusted. Fashions, too, owe

their whole existence to it, and, what is far more valuable, the positive

support of social, philanthropic, and other such  cultural institutions. In

these matters extraverted feeling proves itself a creative factor. Without it, a

harmonious social  life would be impossible. To that extent extraverted

feeling is  just as beneficial and sweetly reasonable in its effects as

extraverted thinking. But these salutary effects are lost as soon as the

object gains ascendency. The force of extraverted  feeling then pulls the

personality into the object, the object  assimilates him, whereupon the

personal quality of the  feeling, which constitutes its chief charm,

disappears. It  becomes cold, “unfeeling,” untrustworthy. It has ulterior

motives, or at least makes an impartial observer suspect them.

It no longer makes that agreeable and refreshing impression  which

invariably accompanies genuine feeling; instead, one suspects a pose, or that

the person is acting, even though he  may  be  quite  unconscious  of  any

egocentric  motives.  Over-extraverted feeling may satisfy aesthetic

expectations, but it does not speak to the heart; it appeals merely to the

senses or—worse still—only to reason. It can provide the  aesthetic

padding for a situation, but there it stops, and beyond that its effect is nil. It

has become sterile. If this  process  goes  any  further,  a  curiously

contradictory dissociation of feeling results: everything becomes an object

of feeling valuations, and innumerable relationships are entered into which

are all at variance with each other. As this situation would become quite

impossible if the subject received anything like due emphasis, even the last

vestiges of a real personal standpoint are suppressed. The subject becomes so

enmeshed in the network of individual feeling  processes that to the

observer it seems as though there were merely a feeling process and no

longer a subject of feeling. Feeling in this state has lost all human warmth;

it gives the impression of being put on, fickle, unreliable, and in the worst

cases hysterical.The Extraverted Feeling Type

[597] As feeling is undeniably a more obvious characteristic of feminine

psychology than thinking, the most pronounced feeling  types  are to  be  

found among  women. When extraverted feeling predominates we speak of

an extraverted feeling type. Examples of this type that I can call to mind are,

almost without exception, women. The woman of  this type follows her

feeling as a guide throughout life. As a result of upbringing her feeling has

developed into an adjusted function subject to conscious control. Except in

extreme cases, her feeling has a personal quality, even though she may have

repressed the subjective factor  to  a  large  extent.  Her personality appears

adjusted in relation to external conditions. Her feelings harmonize with

objective situations and general values. This is seen nowhere more clearly

than in her love choice: the “suitable” man is loved, and no one else; he is

suitable not because he appeals to her hidden subjective  nature—about

which she usually knows nothing—but  because he comes up to all

reasonable expectations in the matter of age, position, income, size and

respectability of his family, etc. One could easily reject such a picture as

ironical or cynical, but I am fully convinced that the love feeling of this type

of woman is in perfect accord with her choice. It is genuine and not just

shrewd. There are countless “reasonable” marriages of this kind and they are

by no means the worst. These women are good companions and excellent

mothers so long as the husbands and children are  blessed with the

conventional psychic constitution.

[598] But one can feel “correctly” only when feeling is not disturbed by

anything else. Nothing disturbs feeling so much as thinking. It is therefore

understandable that in this type thinking will be kept in abeyance as much

as possible. This does not mean that the woman does not think at all; on

the contrary, she may think a great deal and very cleverly, but her thinking is

never sui generis—it is an Epimethean appendage to her feeling. What she

cannot feel, she cannot consciously think. “But I can’t think what I don’t

feel,” such a type said to me once in indignant tones. So far as her feeling

allows, she can think very well, but every conclusion, however logical, that

might lead to a disturbance of feeling is rejected at the outset. It is simply

not thought. Thus everything that fits in with objective values is good, and

is loved, and everything else seems to her to exist in a world apart.

[599] But a change comes over the picture when the importance of the object

reaches a still higher level. As already explained, the subject then becomes soassimilated to the object that the subject of feeling is completely engulfed.

Feeling loses its personal quality, and becomes feeling for its own sake; the

personality seems wholly dissolved in the feeling of the moment. But since

actual life is a constant succession of situations that evoke different and

even contradictory feelings, the personality gets split up into as  many

different feeling states. At one moment one is this, at another something

quite different—to all appearances, for in reality such a multiple personality

is impossible. The basis of  the ego always remains the same and

consequently finds itself at odds with the changing feeling states. To the

observer, therefore, the display of feeling no longer appears as a personal

expression of the subject but as an alteration of the ego—a mood, in other

words. Depending on the degree of dissociation between the ego and the

momentary state of  feeling, signs of self-disunity will become clearly

apparent, because the originally compensatory attitude of the unconscious has

turned into open opposition. This shows itself first of all in extravagant

displays of feeling, gushing  talk, loud expostulations, etc., which ring

hollow: “The lady doth protest too much.” It is at once apparent that some

kind of resistance is being over-compensated, and one begins to wonder

whether these demonstrations might not turn out quite different. And a little

later they do. Only a very slight alteration in the situation is needed to call

forth at once just the opposite pronouncement  on the selfsame  object. As

a  result  of  these  experiences the observer is unable to  take either

pronouncement seriously. He begins to reserve judgment. But since, for this

type, it is of the highest  importance to establish an intense feeling of

rapport with the  environment, redoubled efforts are now required to

overcome this reserve. Thus, in the manner of a vicious circle, the situation

goes from bad to worse. The stronger the feeling relation to the object,

the more the unconscious opposition comes to the surface.

[600] We have already seen that the extraverted feeling type suppresses

thinking most of all because this is the  function most liable to disturb

feeling. For the same reason, thinking totally shuts out feeling if ever it

wants to reach any kind of pure results, for nothing is more liable to

prejudice and falsify thinking than feeling values. But, as I have said,

though the thinking of the extraverted feeling type is repressed as an

independent function, the repression is not complete; it is repressed only

so far as its inexorable logic drives it to conclusions that are incompatible

with feeling. It is suffered to exist as a servant of feeling, or rather as itsslave. Its backbone is broken; it may not operate on its own account, in

accordance with its own laws. But since logic nevertheless exists and

enforces its inexorable conclusions, this must take place somewhere, and

it takes place outside  consciousness, namely in the unconscious.

Accordingly the  unconscious of this type contains  first and foremost a

peculiar kind of thinking, a thinking that is infantile, archaic, negative. So

long as the conscious feeling preserves its personal quality, or, to put it

another way, so long as the personality is not swallowed up in successive

states of feeling, this unconscious thinking remains compensatory. But as

soon as the personality is dissociated and dissolves into a succession of

contradictory feeling states, the identity of the ego is lost and the subject

lapses into the unconscious. When this happens, it gets associated with the

unconscious thinking  processes and occasionally helps them to the

surface. The stronger the conscious feeling is and the more ego-less it

becomes, the stronger grows the unconscious opposition. The unconscious

thoughts gravitate round just the most valued objects and mercilessly strip

them of their value. The “nothing but” type of thinking comes into its own

here, since it effectively depotentiates all feelings that are bound to the

object. The unconscious thinking reaches the surface in the  form of

obsessive ideas which are invariably of a negative  and depreciatory

character. Women of this type have  moments when the most hideous

thoughts fasten on the very  objects most valued by their feelings. This

negative thinking utilizes every infantile prejudice or comparison for the

deliberate purpose of casting aspersions on the feeling value, and musters

every primitive instinct in the attempt to come  out with “nothing but”

interpretations. It need hardly be  remarked that this procedure also

mobilizes the collective unconscious and activates its store of primordial

images, thus bringing with it the possibility of a regeneration of attitude on a

different basis. Hysteria, with the characteristic infantile sexuality of its

unconscious world of ideas, is the principal form of neurosis in this type.
Summary of the Extraverted Rational Types

[601] I call the two preceding types rational or judging types because

they are characterized by the supremacy of the  reasoning and judging

functions. It is a general distinguishing mark of both types that their life is,

to a great extent,  subordinated to rational judgment. But we have to

consider whether by “rational” we are speaking from the standpoint of the

individual’s subjective psychology or from that of the  observer, whoperceives and judges from without. This observer could easily arrive at a

contrary judgment, especially  if he intuitively apprehended merely the

outward behaviour of the person observed and judged accordingly. On the

whole, the life of this type is never dependent on rational judgment alone; it

is influenced in almost equal degree by unconscious  irrationality. If

observation is restricted to outward behaviour, without any concern for the

internal economy of the individual’s consciousness, one may get an even

stronger impression of the irrational and  fortuitous nature of certain

unconscious manifestations than  of the reasonableness of his conscious

intentions and  motivations. I therefore base my judgment on what the

individual feels to be his conscious psychology. But I am willing to grant

that one could equally well conceive and present such a psychology from

precisely the opposite angle. I  am also convinced that, had I myself

chanced to possess a  different psychology, I would have described the

rational types in the reverse way, from the standpoint of the unconscious

—as irrational, therefore. This aggravates the  difficulty of a lucid

presentation of psychological matters and  immeasurably increases the

possibility of misunderstandings.  The arguments provoked by these

misunderstandings  are, as a  rule, quite hopeless because each side is

speaking at cross purposes. This experience is one reason the more for

basing my presentation on the conscious psychology of the individual, since

there at least we have a definite objective footing, which completely drops

away the moment we try to  base our psychological rationale on the

unconscious. For in that case the observed object would have no voice in

the matter at all, because there is nothing about which he is more uninformed

than his own unconscious. The judgment is then  left entirely to the

subjective observer—a sure guarantee that it will be based on his own

individual psychology, which would be forcibly imposed on the observed.

To my mind, this is the case with the psychologies of both Freud and

Adler. The individual is completely at the mercy of the judging observer,

which can never be the case when the conscious  psychology  of the

observed is accepted as a basis. He after all is the only competent judge,

since he alone knows his conscious motives.

[602] The rationality that characterizes the conscious conduct of life in both

these types involves a deliberate  exclusion of  everything irrational and

accidental. Rational judgment, in such a psychology, is a force that coerces

the untidiness and fortuitousness of life into a definite pattern, or at leasttries to do so. A definite choice is made from among all the possibilities it

offers, only the rational ones  being accepted; but on the other hand the

independence and  influence  of  the psychic functions which aid the

perception of life’s happenings are consequently  restricted. Naturally this

restriction of sensation and intuition is not  absolute.  These  functions  exist

as  before,  but  their  products are subject to the choice made by rational

judgment. It is not the intensity of a sensation as such that decides

action, for instance, but judgment. Thus, in a sense, the  functions of

perception share the same fate as feeling in the case of the first type, or

thinking in that of the second. They are relatively repressed, and therefore

in an inferior state of differentiation. This gives a peculiar stamp to the

unconscious of both our types: what they consciously and intentionally do

accords with reason (their reason, of course), but what happens to them

accords with the nature of infantile, primitive sensations and intuitions. At all

events, what happens to these types is irrational (from their standpoint). But

since there are vast numbers of people whose lives consist more of what

happens to them than of actions governed by rational intentions, such a

person, after observing them closely, might easily describe both our types

as irrational. And one has to  admit that only too often a man’s

unconscious makes a far  stronger impression on an observer than his

consciousness  does, and that his actions are of considerably more

importance than his rational intentions.

[603] The rationality of both types is object-oriented and dependent on

objective data. It accords with what is collectively considered to be rational.

For them, nothing is rational save what is generally considered as such.

Reason, however, is in large part subjective and individual. In our types

this part is repressed, and increasingly so as the object gains in importance.

Both the subject and his subjective reason, therefore, are in constant danger

of repression, and when they succumb to it they fall under the tyranny of

the unconscious, which in this case possesses very unpleasant qualities.

Of its peculiar thinking we have already spoken. But, besides that, there

are primitive sensations that express themselves compulsively, for instance

in the form of compulsive pleasure-seeking in every conceivable form; there

are also primitive intuitions that can become a positive torture to the person

concerned and to everybody in his vicinity. Everything that is unpleasant

and painful, everything that is disgusting, hateful, and evil, is sniffed out or

suspected, and  in most cases it is a half-truth calculated to provokemisunderstandings of the most poisonous  kind. The antagonistic

unconscious elements are so strong  that they frequently disrupt the

conscious rule of reason; the  individual becomes the victim of chance

happenings, which exercise a compulsive influence over him either because

they  pander to his sensations or because he intuits their  unconscious

significance.
Sensation

[604] Sensation, in the extraverted attitude, is pre-eminently conditioned by

the object. As sense perception, sensation is naturally dependent on objects.

But, just as naturally, it is also dependent on the subject, for which reason

there is subjective sensation of a kind entirely different from  objective

sensation. In the extraverted attitude the subjective component of sensation,

so far as its conscious application is  concerned, is either inhibited or

repressed. Similarly, as an  irrational function, sensation is largely

repressed when thinking or feeling holds prior place; that is to say, it is a

conscious function only to the extent that the rational attitude  of

consciousness permits accidental perceptions to become conscious contents

—in a word, registers them. The sensory function is, of course, absolute in

the stricter sense;  everything is seen or heard, for instance, to the

physiological  limit, but not everything attains the threshold value a

perception must have in order to be apperceived. It is  different when

sensation itself is paramount instead of merely seconding another function.

In this case no element of objective sensation is excluded and nothing is

repressed (except the subjective component already mentioned).

[605] As sensation is chiefly conditioned by  the  object, those objects that

excite the strongest sensations will be  decisive for the individual’s

psychology. The result is a strong sensuous tie to the object. Sensation is

therefore a vital function equipped with the strongest vital instinct. Objects

are valued in so far as they excite sensations, and, so far as lies within the

power of sensation, they are fully accepted into consciousness whether

they are compatible with rational judgments or not.  The  sole criterion  of 

their  value  is the  intensity of the sensation produced by their objective

qualities. Accordingly, all objective processes which excite any sensations

at all make their appearance in consciousness.

However, it is only concrete, sensuously perceived objects or processes that

excite sensations for the  extravert; those, exclusively, which everyone

everywhere would sense as concrete. Hence the orientation of such anindividual accords with purely sensuous reality. The judging,  rational

functions are subordinated to the concrete facts of sensation, and thus

have all the qualities of the less  differentiated functions, exhibiting

negative, infantile, and  archaic traits. The function most repressed is

naturally the opposite of sensation—intuition, the function of unconscious

perception.
The Extraverted Sensation Type

[606] No other human type can equal the extraverted sensation type in

realism. His sense for objective facts is extraordinarily developed. His life

is an accumulation of actual experiences of concrete objects, and the more

pronounced his type, the less use does he make of his experience. In certain

cases the events in his life hardly deserve the name “experience” at all.

What he experiences  serves at most as a guide to fresh sensations;

anything new that comes within his range of interest is acquired by way of

sensation and has to serve its ends. Since one is inclined to regard a highly

developed reality-sense as a sign of rationality, such people will be esteemed

as very rational. But in actual fact this is not the case, since they are just as

much  at the mercy of their sensations in the face of irrational,  chance

happenings as they are in the face of rational ones. This type—the majority

appear to be men—naturally does not think he is at the “mercy” of sensation.

He would ridicule this view as quite beside the point, because sensation for

him is a concrete expression of life—it is simply real life lived to the full.

His whole aim is concrete enjoyment, and his morality is  oriented

accordingly. Indeed, true enjoyment has its own special morality, its own

moderation and lawfulness, its own unselfishness and willingness to make

sacrifices. It by no means follows that he is just sensual or gross, for he

may differentiate his sensation to the finest pitch of aesthetic purity without

ever deviating from his principle of concrete sensation however abstract his

sensations may be. Wulfen’s Der Genussmensch: ein Cicerone im

rücksichtslosen Lebensgenuss3 is the unvarnished confession

of a type of this sort, and the book seems to me worth reading on that account

alone.

[607] On the lower levels, this type is the lover of tangible reality, with

little inclination for reflection and no desire to  dominate. To feel the

object, to have sensations and if possible enjoy them—that is his constant

aim. He is by no means unlovable; on the contrary, his lively capacity for

enjoyment makes him very good company; he is usually a jolly fellow,

and sometimes a refined aesthete. In the former case the great problems of

life hang on a good or indifferent dinner; in the latter, it’s all a question of

good taste. Once an object has given him a sensation, nothing more remains

to be said or done about it. It cannot be anything except concrete and real;

conjectures that go beyond the concrete are admitted only on condition that

they enhance sensation. The intensification does not necessarily have to be

pleasurable, for this type need not be a common voluptuary; he is merely

desirous of the strongest sensations, and these, by his very nature, he can

receive only from outside. What comes from inside seems to him morbid

and suspect. He always reduces  his thoughts and feelings to objective

causes, to influences emanating from objects, quite unperturbed by the

most glaring violations of logic. Once he can get back to tangible reality in

any form he can breathe again. In this respect he is surprisingly credulous.

He will unhesitatingly connect a psychogenic symptom with a drop in the

barometer, while on the other hand the existence of a psychic conflict

seems to him morbid imagination. His love is unquestionably rooted in the

physical attractions of its object. If normal, he is  conspicuously well

adjusted to reality. That is his ideal, and it even makes him considerate of

others. As he has no ideals connected with ideas, he has no reason to act

in any way contrary to the reality of things as they are. This manifests

itself in all the externals of his life. He dresses well, as befits the occasion;

he keeps a good table with plenty of drink for his friends, making them

feel very grand, or at least giving them to understand that his refined taste

entitles him to make a few demands of them. He may even convince them

that certain sacrifices are decidedly worth while for the sake of style.

[608] The more sensation predominates, however, so that  the subject

disappears behind the sensation, the less agreeable does this type become.

He develops into a crude  pleasure-seeker, or else degenerates into an

unscrupulous,  effete aesthete. Although the object has become quiteindispensable to him, yet, as something existing in its own right, it is none

the less devalued. It is ruthlessly exploited and squeezed dry, since now its

sole use is to stimulate sensation. The bondage to the object is carried to the

extreme  limit. In consequence, the unconscious is forced out of its

compensatory role into open opposition. Above all, the repressed intuitions

begin to assert themselves in the form of  projections. The wildest

suspicions arise; if the object is a sexual one, jealous fantasies and anxiety

states gain the upper hand. More acute cases develop every sort of phobia,

and, in particular, compulsion symptoms. The pathological contents have a

markedly unreal character, with a frequent moral or religious streak. A

pettifogging captiousness follows, or a  grotesquely punctilious morality

combined with primitive, “magical” superstitions that fall back on abstruse

rites. All these things have their source in the repressed inferior functions

which have been driven into harsh opposition to the conscious attitude, and

they appear in a guise that is all the more striking because they rest on the

most absurd assumptions, in complete contrast to the conscious sense of

reality. The whole structure of thought and feeling seems, in this second

personality, to be twisted into a pathological parody: reason turns into hair-

splitting pedantry, morality into dreary moralizing and blatant Pharisaism,

religion into ridiculous superstition, and intuition, the noblest gift of man,

into meddlesome officiousness, poking into every corner; instead of gazing

into the far distance, it descends to the lowest level of human meanness.

[609] The specifically compulsive character of the neurotic symptoms is the

unconscious counterpart of the easy-going attitude of the pure sensation

type, who, from the standpoint of rational judgment, accepts indiscriminately

everything that happens. Although this does not by any means imply an

absolute lawlessness and lack of restraint, it nevertheless deprives him of the

essential restraining power of judgment.  But rational judgment is a

conscious coercion which the rational type appears to impose on himself of

his own free  will. This coercion overtakes the sensation type from the

unconscious, in the

form of compulsion. Moreover, the very existence of a judgment means

that the rational type’s relation to the object will never become an absolute

tie, as it is in the case of the sensation type. When his attitude attains an

abnormal degree  of one-sidedness, therefore, he is in danger of being

overpowered by the unconscious in the same measure as he is consciously in

the grip of the object. If he should become neurotic, it is much harder totreat him by rational means because the functions which the analyst must

turn to are in a relatively undifferentiated state, and little or no reliance can

be placed on them. Special techniques for bringing emotional pressure to

bear are often needed in order to make him at all conscious.
Intuition

[610] In the extraverted attitude, intuition as the function of unconscious

perception is wholly directed to external objects. Because intuition is in the

main an unconscious process, its nature is very  difficult to  grasp. The

intuitive function is  represented in consciousness by an attitude of

expectancy, by

vision and penetration; but only from the subsequent result  can it be

established how much of what was “seen”  was actually in the object, and

how much was “read into” it. Just as sensation, when it is the dominant

function, is not a mere reactive process of no further significance for the

object, but an activity that seizes and shapes its object, so intuition is not

mere perception, or vision, but an active, creative process that puts into the

object just as much as it takes out. Since it does this unconsciously, it also

has an unconscious effect on the object.

[611] The primary function of intuition, however, is simply  to transmit

images, or perceptions of relations between things,  which could not be

transmitted by the other functions or only in a very roundabout way. These

images have the value of specific insights which have a decisive influence

on action  whenever intuition is given priority. In this case, psychic

adaptation will be grounded almost entirely on intuitions. Thinking, feeling,

and sensation are then largely repressed, sensation being the one most

affected, because, as the conscious sense function, it offers the greatest

obstacle to intuition. Sensation is a hindrance to clear, unbiassed, naïve

perception; its intrusive sensory stimuli direct attention to the  physical

surface, to the

very things round and beyond which intuition tries to peer.  But since

extraverted intuition is directed predominantly to objects, it actually comes

very close to sensation; indeed, the expectant attitude to external objects is

just as likely to make use of sensation. Hence, if intuition is to function

properly, sensation must to a large extent be suppressed. By sensation I mean

in this instance the simple and immediate sense-impression understood as a

clearly defined physiological and psychic datum. This must be expressly

established beforehand because, if I ask an intuitive how he orients himself,he will speak of things that are almost  indistinguishable from sense-

impressions. Very often he will even use the word “sensation.” He does

have sensations, of course, but he is not guided by them as such; he uses

them  merely as starting-points for his perceptions. He selects them  by

unconscious predilection. It is not the strongest sensation,  in the

physiological sense, that is accorded the chief value,  but any sensation

whatsoever whose value is enhanced by the intuitive’s unconscious attitude.

In this way it may eventually come to acquire the chief value, and to his

conscious mind it appears to be pure sensation. But actually it is not so.

[612] Just as extraverted sensation strives to reach the highest pitch of

actuality, because this alone can give the appearance of a full life, so

intuition tries to apprehend the widest range of possibilities, since only

through envisioning possibilities is intuition fully satisfied. It seeks to

discover what possibilities the objective situation holds in store; hence, as a

subordinate function (i.e., when not in the position of priority), it is the

auxiliary that automatically comes into play when no other function can

find a way out of a hopelessly blocked situation. When it is the dominant

function, every ordinary situation in life seems like a locked room which

intuition has  to  open.  It  is  constantly seeking  fresh  outlets and  new

possibilities in external life. In a very short time every existing situation

becomes a prison for the intuitive, a chain that has to be broken. For a time

objects appear to have an exaggerated value, if they should serve to bring

about a  solution, a deliverance, or lead to the discovery of a new

possibility. Yet no sooner have they served their purpose as stepping-stones

or bridges than they lose their value  altogether and are discarded as

burdensome

appendages. Facts are acknowledged only if they open new possibilities of

advancing beyond them and delivering the individual from their power.

Nascent possibilities are compelling motives from which intuition cannot

escape and to which all else must be sacrificed.
The Extraverted Intuitive Type

[613] Whenever intuition predominates, a peculiar and  unmistakable

psychology results. Because extraverted intuition is oriented by the object,

there is a marked dependence on  external situations, but  it  is  altogether

different from the dependence of the sensation type. The intuitive is never to

be found in the world of accepted reality-values, but he has a keen nose for

anything new and in the making. Because he is always seeking out newpossibilities, stable conditions suffocate him. He seizes on new objects or

situations with great intensity, sometimes with  extraordinary enthusiasm,

only to abandon them  cold-bloodedly, without any compunction and

apparently without remembering them, as soon as their range is known and

no further developments can be divined. So long as a new possibility is in the

offing, the intuitive is bound to it with the shackles of fate. It is as though his

whole life vanished in the new situation. One gets the impression, which

he himself shares, that he has always just reached a final turning-point, and

that from now on he can think and feel nothing else. No  matter how

reasonable and suitable it may be, and although every conceivable argument

speaks for its stability, a day will come when nothing will deter him from

regarding as a prison  the very situation that seemed to promise him

freedom and deliverance, and from acting accordingly. Neither reason nor

feeling can restrain him or frighten him away from a new possibility,

even though it goes against all his previous  convictions. Thinking and

feeling, the indispensable  components of conviction, are his inferior

functions, carrying no weight and hence incapable of effectively withstanding

the power of intuition. And yet these functions are the only ones that could

compensate its supremacy by supplying the judgment which the intuitive

type totally lacks. The intuitive’s morality is governed neither by thinking

nor by feeling; he has his own characteristic morality, which consists in a

loyalty to his vision and in voluntary

submission to its authority. Consideration for the welfare of others is weak.

Their psychic well-being counts as little with him as does his own. He has

equally little regard for their convictions and way of life, and on this

account he is often put down as an immoral and unscrupulous adventurer.

Since his intuition is concerned with externals and with ferreting out their

possibilities, he readily turns to professions in which he can exploit these

capacities to the full. Many business tycoons, entrepreneurs, speculators,

stockbrokers, politicians, etc., belong to this type. It would seem to be more

common  among women, however, than among men. In women the

intuitive capacity shows itself not so much in the professional  as in the

social sphere. Such women understand the art of exploiting every social

occasion, they make the right social connections, they seek out men with

prospects only to abandon everything again for the sake of a new possibility.

[614] It goes without saying that such a type is uncommonly important

both economically and culturally. If his intentions are good, i.e., if hisattitude is not too egocentric, he can render exceptional service as the

initiator or promoter of new enterprises. He is the natural champion of

all minorities with a future. Because he is able, when oriented more to people

than things, to make an intuitive diagnosis of  their abilities and

potentialities, he can also “make” men. His capacity to inspire courage or to

kindle enthusiasm for  anything new is unrivalled, although he may

already have dropped it by the morrow. The stronger his intuition, the more

his ego becomes fused with all the possibilities he envisions. He brings his

vision to life, he presents it convincingly and  with dramatic fire, he

embodies it, so to speak. But this is not play-acting, it is a kind of fate.

[615] Naturally this attitude holds great dangers, for all too  easily the

intuitive may fritter away his life on things and people, spreading about

him an abundance of life which others live and not he himself. If only he

could stay put, he would reap the fruits of his labours; but always he must

be running after a new possibility, quitting his newly planted fields while

others gather in the harvest. In the end he goes away empty. But when the

intuitive lets things come to such a pass, he also has his own unconscious

against him. The unconscious of the intuitive bears some resemblance to that

of the sensation type.

Thinking and feeling, being largely repressed, come up with  infantile,

archaic thoughts and feelings similar to those of the countertype. They take

the form of intense projections which are just as absurd as his, though they

seem to lack the  “magical” character of the latter and are chiefly

concerned with quasi-realities such as sexual suspicions, financial hazards,

forebodings of illness, etc. The difference seems to be due to the repression

of real sensations. These make  themselves felt when, for instance, the

intuitive suddenly finds himself entangled with a highly unsuitable woman—

or, in the case of a woman, with an unsuitable man—because

these persons have stirred  up the archaic sensations. This  leads to an

unconscious, compulsive tie which bodes nobody any good. Cases of this

kind are themselves symptomatic of compulsion, to which the intuitive is as

prone as the sensation type. He claims a similar freedom and exemption

from restraint, submitting his decisions to no rational judgment and relying

entirely on his nose for the possibilities that chance throws in his way. He

exempts himself from the restrictions  of reason only to fall victim to

neurotic compulsions in the form of over-subtle ratiocinations, hairsplitting

dialectics, and a compulsive tie to the sensation aroused by the object. Hisconscious attitude towards both sensation and object is one of  ruthless

superiority. Not that he means to be ruthless or superior—he simply does

not see the object that everyone else sees and rides roughshod over it,

just as the sensation type has no eyes for its soul. But sooner or later the

object takes revenge in  the form of  compulsive hypochondriacal  ideas,

phobias, and every imaginable kind of absurd bodily sensation.
Summary of the Extraverted Irrational Types

[616] I call the two preceding types irrational for the reasons previously

discussed, namely that whatever they do or do not do is based not on

rational judgment but on the sheer intensity of perception. Their perception

is directed simply and solely to events as they happen, no selection being

made by judgment. In this respect they have a decided advantage over the

two judging types. Objective events both conform to law and are accidental.

In so far as they conform to law, they are accessible to reason; in so far as

they are accidental, they are not.

Conversely, we might also say that an event conforms to law  when  it

presents an aspect accessible to reason, and that when it presents an aspect

for which we can find no law we call it  accidental. The postulate of

universal lawfulness is a postulate of reason alone, but in no sense is it a

postulate of our perceptive functions. Since these are in no way based on the

principle of reason and its postulates, they are by their  very nature

irrational. That is why I call the perception types “irrational” by nature. But

merely because they subordinate judgment to perception, it would be quite

wrong to regard them as “unreasonable.” It would be truer to say that they

are in the highest degree empirical. They base themselves exclusively on

experience—so exclusively that, as a rule, their judgment cannot keep pace

with their experience. But the judging functions are none the less present,

although they  eke out a largely unconscious existence. Since the

unconscious, in spite of its separation from the conscious  subject, is

always appearing on the scene, we notice in the actual life of the irrational

types striking judgments and acts of choice, but they take  the form of

apparent sophistries,  cold-hearted criticisms, and a seemingly calculating

choice of persons and situations. These traits have a rather infantile and even

primitive character; both types can on occasion be astonishingly naïve, as

well as ruthless, brusque, and violent. To the rational types the real character

of these people might well appear rationalistic and calculating in the worst

sense. But this judgment would be valid only for their unconscious, andtherefore quite incorrect for their conscious psychology, which is entirely

oriented by perception, and because of its  irrational nature is quite

unintelligible to any rational judgment. To the rational mind it might even

seem that such a  hodge-podge of accidentals hardly deserves the name

“psychology” at all. The irrational type ripostes with an  equally

contemptuous opinion of his opposite number: he sees him as something only

half alive, whose sole aim is to fasten the fetters of reason on everything

living and strangle it with judgments. These are crass extremes, but they

nevertheless occur.

[617] From the standpoint of the rational type, the other might easily be

represented as an inferior kind of rationalist—when, that is to say, he is

judged by what happens to him. For what happens to him is not accidental

—here he is the master—

instead, the accidents that befall him take the form of rational judgments and

rational intentions, and these are the things he stumbles over. To the rational

mind this is something almost unthinkable, but its unthinkableness merely

equals the astonishment of the irrational type when he comes up against

someone who puts rational ideas above actual and living happenings. Such a

thing seems to him scarcely credible. As a rule it is quite hopeless to discuss

these things with him as  questions of principle, for all rational

communication is just  as alien and repellent to him as it would be

unthinkable for the rationalist to enter into a contract without mutual

consultation and obligation.
 

[618] This brings metheof the

toproblempsychic

relationship betweentwo types.Following

thethe

terminology of the French school of hypnotists, psychic

relationship is known in modern psychiatry as “rapport.” Rapport consists

essentially in a feeling of agreement in spite of acknowledged differences.

Indeed, the recognition of existing differences, if it be mutual, is itself a

rapport, a feeling of agreement. If in a given case we make this feeling

conscious to a higher degree than usual, we discover that it is not just a

feeling whose nature cannot be analysed further, but at the same time an

insight or a content of cognition which presents the point of agreement inconceptual form. This rational presentation is valid only for the rational

types, but not for the irrational, whose rapport is based not on judgment but

on the parallelism of living events. His feeling of agreement comes from

the common perception of a sensation or intuition. The rational type would

say that rapport with the irrational depends purely on chance. If, by some

accident, the objective situations are exactly in tune, something like a human

relationship takes place, but nobody can tell how valid it is or how long it

will last. To the rational type it is often a  painful thought that the

relationship will last just as long as  external circumstances and chance

provide a common interest. This does not seem to him particularly human,

whereas it is precisely in this that the irrational type sees a  human

situation of particular beauty. The result is that each regards the other as a

man destitute of relationships, who cannot be relied upon, and with whom

one can never get on decent terms. This unhappy outcome, however, is

reached only when one makes a conscious effort to assess the nature of

one’s  relationships with others. But since this kind of psychological

conscientiousness is not very common, it frequently happens that despite an

absolute difference of standpoint a rapport nevertheless comes about, and

in the following way: one party, by unspoken projection, assumes that the

other is, in all essentials, of the same opinion as himself, while the other

divines or senses an objective community of interest, of which, however,

the former has no conscious inkling and whose existence he would at

once dispute, just as it would never occur to the other that his relationship

should be based on a common point of view. A rapport of this kind is by

far the most frequent; it rests on mutual projection, which later becomes the

source of many misunderstandings.

[619] Psychic relationship, in the extraverted attitude, is always governed

by objective factors and external  determinants. What a man is within

himself is never of any decisive significance. For our present-day culture

the  extraverted attitude to the problem of human relationships is  the

principle that counts; naturally the introverted principle occurs too, but it is

still the exception and has to appeal to the tolerance of the age.              THE INTROVERTED TYPE              THE GENERAL ATTITUDE OF

                            CONSCIOUSNESS

[620] As I have already explained in the previous section, the introvert is

distinguished from the extravert by the fact that he does not, like the latter,

orient himself by the object  and by objective data, but by subjective

factors. I also mentioned

4 that the introvert interposes a subjective view between the perception of

the object and his own action, which prevents the action from assuming

a character that fits the objective situation. Naturally this is a special

  instance, mentioned by way of example and intended to serve only as a

  simple illustration. We must now attempt a formulation on a broader basis.

[621] Although the introverted consciousness is naturally aware of external

conditions, it selects the subjective determinants as the decisive ones. It is

therefore oriented by the factor in  perception and cognition which

responds to the sense  stimulus in accordance with the individual’s

subjective disposition. For example, two people see the same object, but they

never see it in such a way that the images they receive are absolutely

identical. Quite apart from the variable acuteness of the sense organs and

the personal equation, there often exists a radical difference, both in kind and

in degree, in the psychic assimilation of the perceptual image. Whereas the

extravert continually appeals to what comes to him from the object, the

introvert relies principally on what the sense impression constellates in the

subject. The difference in the case of a single apperception may, of course,

be very delicate, but in the total psychic economy it makes itself felt in

the highest degree, particularly in the effect it has on the ego. If I  may

anticipate, I consider the viewpoint which inclines, with  Weininger, to

describe the introverted attitude as philautic,  autoerotic, egocentric,

subjectivistic, egotistic, etc., to be misleading in principle and thoroughly

depreciatory. It reflects the normal bias of the extraverted attitude in regard

to the nature of the introvert. We must not forget—although the extravert is

only too prone to do so—that perception and cognition are not purely

objective, but are also subjectively conditioned. The world exists not merely

in itself, but also as it appears to me. Indeed, at bottom, we have absolutely

no criterion that could help us to form a judgment of a world which was

unassimilable by the subject. If we were to ignore the subjective factor, it

would be a complete denial of the great doubt as to the possibility ofabsolute cognition. And this would mean a relapse into the stale and hollow

positivism that marred the turn of the century—an attitude of intellectual

arrogance accompanied by crudeness of feeling, a violation of life as stupid

as it is presumptuous. By overvaluing our capacity for objective cognition we

repress the importance of the subjective factor, which simply means a

denial of the subject. But what is the subject? The subject is man himself

—we are the subject. Only a sick mind could forget that cognition must

have a subject, and that there is no knowledge whatever and therefore no

world at all unless “I know” has been said, though with this statement

one has already expressed the subjective limitation of all knowledge.

[622] This applies to all the psychic functions: they have a subject which is

just as indispensable as the object. It is  characteristic of our present

extraverted sense of values that the word “subjective” usually sounds like

a reproof; at all events the epithet “merely subjective” is brandished like

a weapon over the head of anyone who is not boundlessly convinced of the

absolute superiority of the object. We must therefore be quite clear as to

what “subjective” means in this  inquiry. By the subjective factor I

understand that  psychological action or reaction which merges with the

effect produced by the object and so gives rise to a new psychic datum. In

so far as the subjective factor has, from the earliest times and among all

peoples, remained in large measure  constant, elementary perceptions and

cognitions being almost universally the same, it is a reality that is just as

firmly established as the external object. If this were not so, any sort  of

permanent and essentially unchanging reality would be  simply

inconceivable, and any understanding of the past would be impossible. In

this sense, therefore, the subjective factor is as ineluctable a datum as the

extent of the sea and the  radius of the earth. By the same token, the

subjective factor has all the value of a co-determinant of the world we live in,

a factor that can on no account be left out of our calculations. It is another

universal law, and whoever bases himself on it has a foundation as secure, as

permanent, and as valid as the man who relies on the object. But just as the

object and objective  data do not remain permanently the same, being

perishable and subject to chance, so too the subjective factor is subject to

variation and individual hazards. For this reason its value is also merely

relative. That is to say, the excessive  development of the introverted

standpoint does not lead to a better and sounder use of the subjective factor,

but rather to an artificial subjectivizing of consciousness which can hardlyescape the reproach “merely subjective.” This is then counterbalanced by a

de-subjectivization which takes the  form of an exaggerated extraverted

attitude, an attitude aptly described by Weininger as “misautic.” But since

the introverted attitude is based on the ever-present, extremely real, and

absolutely indispensable fact of psychic adaptation,  expressions like

“philautic,” “egocentric,” and so on are out  of place and objectionable

because they arouse the  prejudice that it is always a question of the

beloved ego. Nothing could be more mistaken than such an assumption.

Yet one is continually meeting it in the judgments of the extravert on the

introvert. Not, of course, that I wish to  ascribe this error to individual

extraverts; it is rather to be put down to the generally accepted extraverted

view which is by no means restricted to the extraverted type, for it has just

as  many representatives among introverts, very much to their  own

detriment. The reproach of being untrue to their own nature can justly be

levelled at the latter, whereas this at least cannot be held against the former.

[623] The introverted attitude is normally oriented by the psychic structure,

which is in principle hereditary and is inborn in the subject. This must not be

assumed, however, to be simply identical with the subject’s ego, as is implied

by the above designations of Weininger; it is rather the psychic structure of

the subject prior to any ego-development. The really fundamental subject,

the self, is far more comprehensive than the ego, since the former includes

the  unconscious  whereas the latter  is essentially the focal point  of

consciousness. Were the ego identical with the self, it would  be

inconceivable how we could sometimes see ourselves in dreams in quite

different forms and with entirely different  meanings. But it is a

characteristic peculiarity of the introvert, which is as much in keeping with

his own inclination as with the general bias, to confuse his ego with the self,

and to exalt it as the subject of the psychic process, thus bringing about the

aforementioned subjectivization of consciousness which alienates him from

the object.

[624] The psychic structure is the same as what Semon calls “mneme”

5 and  what I  call the “collective unconscious.” The individual  self is a

portion or segment or representative of something present in all living

  creatures, an exponent of the specific mode of psychological behaviour,

which varies from species  to species and is inborn in each of its

  members. The inborn mode of acting has long been known as instinct,

and for the inborn mode of psychic apprehension I have proposed theterm archetype.

6 I may assume that what is understood by instinct is familiar to everyone. It

is another matter with the archetype. What I understand by it is identical

with the “primordial image,” a term borrowed from Jacob Burckhardt, 7

and I describe it as such in the Definitions that conclude this book. I must

here refer the reader to the definition “Image.”

8

[625] The archetype is a symbolic formula which always  begins to

function when there are no conscious ideas present, or when conscious ideas

are inhibited for internal or external reasons. The contents of the collective

unconscious are represented in consciousness in the form of pronounced

preferences and definite ways of looking at things. These  subjective

tendencies and views are generally regarded by the  individual as being

determined by the object—incorrectly, since they have their source in the

unconscious structure of the psyche and are merely released by the effect of

the object. They are stronger than the object’s influence, their psychic

value is higher, so that they superimpose themselves on all impressions.

Thus, just as it seems incomprehensible to the introvert that the object

should always be the decisive factor, it remains an enigma to the extravert

how a subjective standpoint can be superior to the objective situation. He

inevitably comes to the conclusion that the introvert is either a  conceited

egoist or crack-brained bigot. Today he would be suspected of harbouring

an unconscious power-complex. The introvert certainly lays himself open to

these suspicions, for his positive, highly generalizing manner of expression,

which  appears to rule out every other opinion from the start, lends

countenance to all the extravert’s prejudices. Moreover the inflexibility of

his subjective judgment, setting itself above all objective data, is sufficient in

itself to create the impression of  marked egocentricity. Faced with this

prejudice the introvert is usually at a loss for the right argument, for he is

quite unaware of the unconscious but generally quite valid assumptions on

which his subjective judgment and his subjective perceptions are based. In

the fashion of the times he looks outside for an answer, instead of seeking

it behind his own consciousness. Should he become neurotic, it is the sign

of an almost complete identity of the ego with the self; the importance of

the self is reduced to nil, while the ego is inflated beyond measure. The

whole world-creating force of the subjective factor becomes concentrated in

the ego, producing a boundless power-complex and a fatuous egocentricity.Every psychology which reduces the essence of  man to the unconscious

power drive springs from this kind of  disposition. Many of Nietzsche’s

lapses in taste, for example, are due to this subjectivization of consciousness.    THE ATTITUDE OF THE UNCONSCIOUS

[626] The predominance of the subjective factor in consciousness naturally

involves a devaluation of the object. The object is not given the importance

that belongs to it by right. Just as it plays too great a role in the extraverted

attitude, it has too little meaning for the introvert. To the extent that his

consciousness is subjectivized and excessive  importance attached to the

ego, the object is put in a position which in the end becomes untenable. The

object is a factor whose power cannot be denied, whereas the ego is a

very limited and fragile thing. It would be a very different matter if the self

opposed the object. Self and world are  commensurable factors; hence a

normal introverted attitude is as justifiable and valid as a normal extraverted

attitude. But if the ego has usurped the claims of the subject, this naturally

produces, by way of compensation, an unconscious reinforcement of the

influence of the object. In spite of positively convulsive efforts to ensure

the superiority of the ego, the object comes to exert an overwhelming

influence, which is all the more invincible because it seizes on the individual

unawares and forcibly obtrudes itself on his consciousness. As a result of the

ego’s unadapted relation to the object—for a desire to dominate it is not

adaptation—a compensatory relation arises in the unconscious which makes

itself felt as an absolute and irrepressible tie to the object. The more the ego

struggles to preserve its independence, freedom  from obligation, and

superiority, the more it becomes  enslaved to the objective data. The

individual’s freedom of mind is fettered by the ignominy of his financial

dependence, his freedom of action trembles in the face of public opinion,

his moral superiority collapses in a morass of inferior relationships, and

his desire to dominate ends in a pitiful craving to be loved. It is now the

unconscious that takes care of the relation to the object, and it does so in

a way that is calculated to bring the illusion of power and the fantasy of

superiority to utter ruin. The object assumes terrifying proportions in spite of

the conscious attempt to degrade it. In consequence, the ego’s efforts to

detach itself from the object and get it under control become all the more

violent. In the end it surrounds itself with  a regular system of defences

(aptly described by Adler) for the purpose of preserving at least the illusion

of superiority. The introvert’s alienation from the object is now complete; he

wears himself out with defence measures on the one hand, while on the

other he makes fruitless attempts to impose his will on the object and assert

himself. These efforts are constantly being frustrated by the overwhelmingimpressions received from the object. It continually imposes itself on him

against his will, it arouses in him the most disagreeable and intractable

affects and persecutes him at every step. A tremendous inner struggle is

needed all the time in order to “keep going.” The typical form his neurosis

takes is psychasthenia, a malady characterized on the one hand by extreme

sensitivity and on the other by great proneness to exhaustion and chronic

fatigue.

[627] An analysis of the personal unconscious reveals a mass of power

fantasies coupled with fear of objects which he  himself has forcibly

activated, and of which he is often enough the victim. His fear of objects

develops into a peculiar  kind of cowardliness; he shrinks from making

himself or his opinions felt, fearing that this will only increase the object’s

power. He is terrified of strong affects in others, and is hardly ever free from

the dread of falling under hostile influences. Objects possess puissant and

terrifying qualities for him—qualities he cannot consciously discern in

them, but which he imagines he sees through his unconscious perception.

As his relation to the object is very largely repressed, it takes place via the

unconscious, where it becomes charged with the latter’s qualities. These

qualities are mostly infantile and archaic, so that the relation to the object

becomes primitive too, and the object seems endowed with magical powers.

Anything strange and new arouses fear and mistrust, as though concealing

unknown perils; heirlooms  and suchlike are attached to his soul as by

invisible threads; any change is upsetting, if not positively dangerous, as it

seems to denote a magical animation of the object. His ideal is a lonely

island where nothing moves  except what he permits to move. Vischer’s

novel, Auch Einer,  affords deep insight into this side of the introvert’s

psychology, and also into the underlying symbolism of the  collective

unconscious. But this latter question I must leave to one side, since it is not

specific to a description of types but is a general phenomenon.        THE PECULIARITIES OF THE BASIC

        PSYCHOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS IN THE

                  INTROVERTED ATTITUDE

Thinking

[628] In the section on extraverted thinking I gave a brief description of

introverted thinking (pars. 578–79) and must  refer to it again here.

Introverted thinking is primarily oriented by the subjective factor. At the

very least the  subjective factor expresses itself as a feeling of guidance

which ultimately determines judgment. Sometimes it appears as a more or

less complete image which serves as a criterion. But whether introverted

thinking is concerned with concrete or with abstract objects, always at the

decisive points it is oriented by subjective data. It does not lead from

concrete experience back again to the object, but always to the subjective

content. External facts are not the aim and origin of this thinking, though the

introvert would often like to make his thinking appear so. It begins with

the subject and leads back to the subject, far though it may range into the

realm of actual reality. With regard to the establishment of new facts it is

only indirectly of value, since new views rather than knowledge of new

facts are its main concern. It formulates questions and creates theories, it

opens up new prospects and insights, but with regard to facts its attitude is

one of reserve. They are all very well as illustrative examples, but they must

not be allowed to predominate. Facts are collected as  evidence for a

theory, never for their own sake. If ever this  happens, it is merely a

concession to the extraverted style. Facts are of secondary importance for

this kind of thinking;  what seems to it of paramount importance is the

development and presentation of the subjective idea, of the initial symbolic

image hovering darkly before the mind’s eye.

Its aim is never an intellectual reconstruction of the concrete fact, but a

shaping of that dark image into a luminous idea. It wants to reach reality, to

see how the external fact will fit into and fill the framework of the idea, and

the creative power of this thinking shows itself when it actually creates an

idea which, though not inherent in the concrete fact, is yet the  most

suitable abstract expression of it. Its task is completed when the idea it has

fashioned seems to emerge so inevitably from the external facts that they

actually prove its validity.

[629] But no more than extraverted thinking can wrest a sound empiricalconcept from concrete facts or create new ones can introverted thinking

translate the initial image into an idea adequately adapted to the facts. For,

as in the former case the purely empirical accumulation of facts paralyzes

thought and smothers their meaning,  so in the latter  case  introverted

thinking shows a dangerous tendency to force the facts into the shape of its

image, or to ignore them altogether in order to give fantasy free play. In

that event it will be impossible for the finished product—the idea—to

repudiate its derivation from  the dim  archaic image. It  will have  a

mythological streak which one is apt to interpret as “originality” or, in more

pronounced cases, as mere whimsicality, since its archaic character is not

immediately apparent to specialists unfamiliar with mythological motifs.

The subjective power of conviction exerted by an idea of this kind is usually

very great, and it is all the greater the less it  comes into contact with

external facts. Although it may seem to the originator of the idea that his

meagre store of facts is the actual source of its truth and validity, in reality

this is not so, for the idea derives its convincing power from the unconscious

archetype, which, as such, is eternally valid and true. But this truth is so

universal and so symbolic that it must first be assimilated to the recognized

and recognizable knowledge of the time before it can become a practical

truth of any value for life. What would causality be, for instance, if it could

nowhere be recognized in practical causes and practical effects?

[630] This kind of thinking easily gets lost in the immense truth of the

subjective factor. It creates theories for their own sake, apparently with an

eye to real or at least possible facts, but always with a distinct tendency to

slip over from the world of ideas into mere imagery. Accordingly, visions

of numerous  possibilities appear on the scene, but none of them ever

becomes a reality, until finally images are produced which no longer express

anything externally real, being mere symbols  of the ineffable and

unknowable. It is now merely a mystical thinking and quite as unfruitful as

thinking that remains bound to objective data. Whereas the latter sinks to

the level of a mere representation of facts, the former evaporates into a

representation of the irrepresentable, far beyond anything that  could be

expressed in an image. The representation of facts has an incontestable

truth because the subjective factor is excluded and the facts speak for

themselves. Similarly, the  representation of the irrepresentable has an

immediate, subjective power of conviction because it demonstrates its own

existence. The one says “Est, ergo est”; the other says  “Cogito, ergocogito.” Introverted thinking carried to extremes arrives at the evidence of

its own subjective existence, and extraverted thinking at the evidence of its

complete identity with the objective fact. Just as the latter abnegates itself

by evaporating into the object, the former empties itself of each and every

content and has to be satisfied with merely existing. In both cases the

further development of life is crowded out of the thinking function into the

domain of the other psychic functions, which till then had existed in a state

of relative unconsciousness. The  extraordinary impoverishment of

introverted thinking is compensated by a wealth of unconscious facts.

The more consciousness is impelled by the thinking function to confine

itself within the smallest and emptiest circle—which seems, however, to

contain all the riches of the gods—the more the unconscious fantasies will

be enriched by a multitude of  archaic contents, a veritable

“pandaemonium” of irrational and magical figures, whose physiognomy will

accord with the nature of the function that will supersede the thinking

function as the vehicle of life. If it should be the intuitive function, then

the “other side” will be viewed through the eyes of a Kubin or a Meyrink.

9 If it is the feeling function, then quite unheard-of and fantastic feeling

relationships will be formed, coupled with contradictory and unintelligible

value judgments. If it is the sensation function, the

senses will nose up something new, and never experienced before, in and

outside the body. Closer examination of these  permutations will easily

demonstrate a recrudescence of  primitive psychology with all its

characteristic features. Naturally, such experiences are not merely primitive,

they are also symbolic; in fact, the more primordial and aboriginal they

are, the more they represent a future truth. For  everything old in the

unconscious hints at something coming.

[631] Under ordinary circumstances, not even the attempt  to get to the

“other side” will be successful—and still less the redeeming journey through

the unconscious. The passage

across is usually blocked by conscious resistance to any subjection of the

ego to the realities of the unconscious and their determining power. It is a

state of dissociation, in other  words a neurosis characterized by inner

debility and  increasing cerebral exhaustion—the symptoms of

psychasthenia.
The Introverted Thinking Type

[632] Just as we might take Darwin as an example of the  normalextraverted thinking type, the normal introverted thinking type could be

represented by Kant. The one speaks with facts, the other relies on the

subjective factor. Darwin ranges over the wide field of objective reality.

Kant restricts himself to a critique of knowledge. Cuvier and Nietzsche

would form an even sharper contrast.

[633] The introverted thinking type is characterized by the primacy of the

kind of thinking I have just described. Like his extraverted counterpart, he is

strongly influenced by ideas,  though his ideas have their origin not in

objective data but in his subjective foundation. He will follow his ideas

like the extravert, but in the reverse direction: inwards and not outwards.

Intensity is his aim, not extensity. In these fundamental respects he differs

quite unmistakably from his extraverted counterpart. What distinguishes the

other, namely his intense relation to objects, is almost completely lacking in

him as in every introverted type. If the object is a person, this person has a

distinct feeling that he matters only in a negative way; in milder cases he is

merely conscious of being de trop, but with a more extreme type he feels

himself warded off as something definitely disturbing. This negative relation

to the  object, ranging from  indifference to aversion, characterizes every

introvert and makes a  description of  the  type exceedingly difficult.

Everything about him tends to disappear and get concealed. His judgment

appears cold, inflexible, arbitrary, and ruthless, because it relates far less to

the object than to the subject. One can feel nothing in it that might possibly

confer a higher value on the object; it always bypasses the object and

leaves one with a feeling of the subject’s superiority. He may be polite,

amiable, and kind, but one is constantly aware of a certain uneasiness

betraying an ulterior motive—the disarming of an opponent, who must at all

costs be pacified and placated lest he prove himself a nuisance. In no sense,

of course, is he an opponent, but if he is at all sensitive he will feel

himself repulsed, and even belittled.

[634] Invariably the object has to submit to a certain amount of neglect,

and in pathological cases it is even  surrounded with quite unnecessary

precautionary measures. Thus this type tends to vanish behind a cloud of

misunderstanding, which gets all the thicker the more he attempts to assume,

by way of compensation and with the help of his inferior functions, an air

of urbanity which contrasts glaringly with his real nature. Although he will

shrink from no danger in building up his world of ideas, and never shrinks

from thinking a thought because it might prove to be dangerous, subversive,heretical, or wounding to other people’s feelings, he is none the less beset

by the greatest anxiety if ever he has to make it an objective reality. That

goes against the grain. And when he does put his ideas into the world, he

never introduces them like a mother solicitous for her children, but simply

dumps them there and gets extremely annoyed if they fail to thrive on their

own account. His amazing unpracticalness and horror of publicity in any

form have a hand in this. If in his eyes his product appears correct and

true, then it must be so in practice, and others have got to bow to its truth.

Hardly ever will he go out of his way to win anyone’s appreciation of it,

especially anyone of influence. And if ever he brings himself to do so, he

generally sets about it so clumsily that it has just the opposite of the effect

intended. He usually has bad experiences with rivals in his own field because

he never understands how to curry their favour; as a rule he only succeeds

in showing them how entirely superfluous

they are to him. In the pursuit of his ideas he is generally  stubborn,

headstrong, and quite unamenable to influence. His suggestibility to personal

influences is in strange contrast to this. He  has only  to  be convinced  of a  

person’s  seeming  innocuousness to lay himself open to the most

undesirable elements. They seize hold of him from the unconscious. He lets

himself be brutalized and exploited in the most ignominious way if only he

can be left in peace to pursue his ideas. He simply does not see when he is

being plundered behind his back and wronged in practice, for to him the

relation to people and things is secondary and the objective evaluation of

his product is something he remains unconscious of. Because he thinks

out his problems to the limit, he complicates them and constantly gets

entangled in his own scruples and misgivings. However clear to him the

inner structure of his thoughts may be, he is not in the least clear where or

how they link up with the world of reality. Only with the greatest difficulty

will he bring himself to admit that what is clear to him may not be equally

clear to  everyone. His style is cluttered with all sorts of adjuncts,

accessories, qualifications, retractions, saving clauses, doubts, etc., which all

come from his scrupulosity. His work goes slowly and with difficulty.

[635] In his personal relations he is taciturn or else throws  himself on

people who cannot understand him, and for him this is one more proof of

the abysmal stupidity of man. If for  once he is understood, he easily

succumbs to credulous overestimation of his prowess. Ambitious women

have only to know how to take advantage of his cluelessness in practicalmatters to make an easy prey of him; or he may develop into a misanthropic

bachelor with a childlike heart. Often he is  gauche in his behaviour,

painfully anxious to escape notice, or else remarkably unconcerned and

childishly naïve. In his own special field of work he provokes the most

violent opposition, which he has no notion how to deal with, unless he

happens to be seduced by his primitive affects into  acrimonious and

fruitless polemics. Casual acquaintances  think him inconsiderate and

domineering. But the better one knows him, the more favourable one’s

judgment becomes, and his closest friends value his intimacy very highly.

To outsiders he seems prickly, unapproachable, and arrogant, and sometimes

soured as a result of his anti-social prejudices. As a personal teacher he has

little influence, since the mentality of his students is strange to him. Besides,

teaching has, at bottom, no interest for him unless it happens to provide him

with a theoretical problem. He is a poor teacher, because all the time he is

teaching his thought is occupied with the material itself and not with its

presentation.

[636] With the intensification of his type, his convictions become all the

more rigid and unbending. Outside influences are shut off; as a person, too,

he becomes more unsympathetic to his wider circle of acquaintances, and

therefore more dependent on his intimates. His tone becomes personal and

surly, and though his ideas may gain in profundity they can no longer be

adequately expressed in the material at hand. To compensate for this, he

falls back on emotionality and touchiness. The outside influences he has

brusquely fended off attack him from within, from the unconscious, and in

his efforts to defend himself he attacks things that to outsiders seem utterly

unimportant. Because of the subjectivization of  consciousness resulting

from his lack of relationship to the object, what secretly concerns his own

person now seems to him of extreme importance. He begins to confuse

his subjective truth with his own personality. Although he will not try to

press his convictions on anyone personally, he will burst out with vicious,

personal retorts against every criticism,  however just. Thus his isolation

gradually increases. His  originally fertilizing ideas become destructive,

poisoned by the sediment of bitterness. His struggle against the influences

emanating from the unconscious increases with his external isolation, until

finally they begin to cripple him. He thinks his  withdrawal into ever-

increasing solitude will protect him from the unconscious influences, but as

a rule it only plunges him deeper into the conflict that is destroying himfrom within.

[637] The thinking of the introverted type is positive and  synthetic in

developing ideas which approximate more and more to the eternal validity

of the primordial images. But as their connection with objective experience

becomes more and more tenuous, they take on a mythological colouring and

no longer hold true for the contemporary situation. Hence his thinking is

of value for his contemporaries only so long as it  is manifestly and

intelligibly related to the known facts of the time.

Once it has become mythological, it ceases to be relevant and runs on in

itself. The counterbalancing functions of feeling, intuition, and sensation

are comparatively unconscious and inferior, and therefore have a primitive

extraverted character that accounts for all the troublesome influences from

outside to which the introverted thinker is prone. The various protective

devices and psychological minefields which such  people surround

themselves with are known to everyone, and I can spare myself a description

of them. They all serve as a defence against “magical” influences—and

among them is a vague fear of the feminine sex.
Feeling

[638] Introverted feeling is determined principally by the subjective factor.

It differs quite as essentially from extraverted feeling as introverted from

extraverted thinking. It is extremely difficult to give an intellectual account

of the introverted feeling process, or even an approximate description of it,

although the peculiar nature of this kind of feeling is very noticeable once

one has become aware of it. Since it is conditioned subjectively and is

only secondarily  concerned with the object, it seldom appears on the

surface  and is generally misunderstood. It is a feeling which seems to

devalue the object, and it therefore manifests itself for the  most part

negatively. The existence of positive feeling can be inferred only indirectly.

Its aim is not to adjust itself to the  object, but to subordinate it in an

unconscious effort to realize  the underlying images. It is continually

seeking an image which has no existence in reality, but which it has seen

in a kind of vision. It glides unheedingly over all objects that do not fit in

with its aim. It strives after inner intensity, for which the objects serve at

most as a stimulus. The depth of this feeling can only be guessed—it can

never be clearly grasped. It makes people silent and difficult of access; it

shrinks back like a violet from the brute nature of the object in order to fill

the depths of the subject. It comes out with negative  judgments orassumes an air of profound indifference as a means of defence.

[639] The primordial images are, of course, just as much ideas as feelings.

Fundamental ideas, ideas like God, freedom, and immortality, are just as

much feeling-values as they are significant ideas. Everything, therefore, that

we have said about introverted thinking is equally true of introverted feeling,

only here everything is felt while there it was thought. But the very fact that

thoughts can generally be expressed more intelligibly than feelings demands

a more than ordinary descriptive or artistic ability before the real wealth

of this feeling can be even approximately presented or communicated to the

world. If subjective thinking can be understood only with difficulty because

of its unrelatedness, this is true in even higher degree of subjective feeling. In

order to communicate with others, it has to find an external form not only

acceptable to itself, but capable also of arousing a parallel feeling in them.

Thanks to the relatively great inner (as well as outer) uniformity of human

beings, it is actually possible to do this, though the form acceptable to

feeling is extraordinarily difficult to find so long as it is still mainly oriented

to the fathomless store of primordial images. If, however, feeling is falsified

by an egocentric attitude, it at once becomes unsympathetic, because it is

then concerned mainly with the ego. It inevitably creates the impression of

sentimental self-love, of trying to  make itself interesting, and even of

morbid self-admiration.

Just as the subjectivized consciousness of the introverted thinker, striving

after abstraction to the nth degree, only succeeds in intensifying a thought-

process that is in itself empty, the intensification of egocentric feeling only

leads to  inane transports of feeling for their own sake. This is the

mystical, ecstatic stage which opens the way for the extraverted functions

that feeling has repressed. Just as introverted thinking is counterbalanced by

a primitive feeling, to which objects attach themselves with magical force,

introverted feeling is counterbalanced by a primitive thinking,  whose

concretism and slavery to facts surpass all bounds. Feeling progressively

emancipates itself from the object and creates for itself a freedom of action

and conscience that is  purely subjective, and may even renounce all

traditional values. But so much the more does unconscious thinking fall a

victim to the power of objective reality.
The Introverted Feeling Type

[640] It is principally among women that I have found the predominance of

introverted feeling. “Still waters run deep” is very true of such women. Theyare mostly silent, inaccessible, hard to understand; often they hide behind a

childish or banal mask, and their temperament is inclined to melancholy.

They neither shine nor reveal themselves. As they are mainly guided by

their subjective feelings, their true motives generally remain hidden. Their

outward demeanour is harmonious, inconspicuous, giving an impression of

pleasing repose, or of sympathetic response, with no desire to affect others,

to impress, influence, or change them in any way. If this outward aspect is

more pronounced, it arouses a suspicion of indifference and coldness, which

may actually turn into a  disregard for the comfort and well-being of

others. One is distinctly aware then of the movement of feeling away from

the object. With the normal type, however, this happens only  when the

influence of the object is too strong. The feeling of harmony, therefore, lasts

only so long as the object goes its own moderate way and makes no attempt

to cross the other’s  path. There is little effort to respond to the real

emotions of  the other person; they are more often damped down and

rebuffed, or cooled off by a negative value judgment. Although there is a

constant readiness for peaceful and harmonious co-existence, strangers are

shown no touch of amiability, no gleam of responsive warmth, but are met

with apparent indifference or a repelling coldness. Often they are made to

feel entirely superfluous. Faced with anything that might carry her away or

arouse enthusiasm, this type observes a benevolent though critical neutrality,

coupled with a faint trace of superiority that soon takes the wind out of the

sails of a sensitive person. Any stormy emotion, however, will be struck

down with murderous coldness, unless it happens to catch the woman on

her unconscious side—that is, unless it  hits her feelings by arousing a

primordial image. In that case she simply feels paralysed for the moment,

and this in due course invariably produces an even more obstinate resistance

which will hit the other person in his most vulnerable spot. As  far as

possible, the feeling relationship is kept to the safe  middle path, all

intemperate passions being resolutely  tabooed. Expressions of feeling

therefore remain niggardly, and the other person has a permanent sense of

being undervalued once he becomes conscious of it. But this need  not

always be so, because very often he remains unconscious of the lack of

feeling shown to him, in which case the unconscious demands of feeling

will produce symptoms designed to compel attention.

[641] Since this type appears rather cold and reserved, it might seem on a

superficial view that such women have no feelings at all. But this wouldbe quite wrong; the truth is,  their feelings are intensive rather than

extensive. They develop in depth. While an extensive feeling of sympathy

can express itself in appropriate words and deeds, and thus quickly gets

back to normal again, an intensive sympathy, being shut off from every

means of expression, acquires a passionate depth that comprises a whole

world of misery and simply gets benumbed. It may perhaps break out in

some extravagant form and lead to an astounding act of an almost heroic

character, quite unrelated either to the subject herself or to the object that

provoked the outburst. To the outside world, or to the blind eyes of the

extravert, this intensive sympathy looks like coldness, because usually it

does nothing visible, and an extraverted consciousness is unable to believe in

invisible forces. Such a misunderstanding is a common occurrence in the

life of this type, and is used as a weighty argument against the possibility of

any deeper feeling relation with the object. But the real object of this

feeling is only dimly divined by the normal type herself. It may express itself

in a secret religiosity anxiously guarded from profane eyes, or in intimate

poetic forms that are kept equally well hidden, not  without the secret

ambition of displaying some kind of superiority over the other person by

this means. Women often express a good deal of their feelings through their

children, letting their passion flow secretly into them.

[642] Although this tendency to overpower or coerce the other person with

her secret feelings rarely plays a disturbing role in the normal type, and

never leads to a serious attempt of this kind, some trace of it nevertheless

seeps through into the personal effect they have on him, in the form of a

domineering influence often difficult to define. It is sensed as  a sort of

stifling or oppressive feeling which holds everybody around her under a

spell. It gives a woman of this type a mysterious power that may prove

terribly fascinating to the extraverted man, for it touches his unconscious.

This power comes from the deeply felt, unconscious images, but consciously

she is apt to relate it to the ego, whereupon her influence becomes debased

into a personal tyranny. Whenever the unconscious subject is identified

with the ego, the mysterious power of intensive feeling turns into a banal

and overweening desire to dominate, into vanity and despotic bossiness.

This produces a type of woman notorious for her unscrupulous ambition

and mischievous cruelty. It is a change, however, that leads to neurosis.

[643] So long as the ego feels subordinate to the unconscious subject, and

feeling is aware of something higher and mightier than the ego, the type isnormal. Although the  unconscious thinking is archaic, its reductive

tendencies help to compensate the occasional fits of trying to exalt the ego

into the subject. If this should nevertheless happen as a result of complete

suppression of the counterbalancing subliminal processes, the unconscious

thinking goes over into open  opposition and gets projected. The

egocentrized subject now comes to feel the power and importance of the

devalued  object. She begins consciously to feel “what other people

think.” Naturally, other people are thinking all sorts of mean  things,

scheming evil, contriving plots, secret intrigues, etc. In order to forestall

them, she herself is obliged to start counter-intrigues, to suspect others and

sound them out, and weave counterplots. Beset by rumours, she must make

frantic efforts to get her own back and be top dog. Endless clandestine

rivalries spring up, and in these embittered struggles she will shrink from

no baseness or meanness, and will even prostitute her virtues in order to play

the trump card. Such a state of affairs must end in exhaustion. The form of

neurosis is neurasthenic rather than hysterical, often with severe physical

complications, such as anaemia and its sequelae.
Summary of the Introverted Rational Types

[644] Both the  foregoing types may  be termed rational,  since they are

grounded on the functions of rational judgment. Rational judgment is based

not merely on objective but also on subjective data. The predominance of

one or the other factor, however, as a result of a psychic disposition

often existing from early youth, will give the judgment a corresponding bias.

A  judgment that is  truly  rational will  appeal to the objective and  the

subjective factor equally and do justice to both. But that would be an ideal

case and would presuppose an equal development of both extraversion and

introversion. In practice, however, either movement excludes the other, and,

so long as this dilemma remains, they cannot exist side by side but at best

successively. Under ordinary conditions,  therefore, an ideal rationality is

impossible. The rationality of a rational type always has a typical bias. Thus,

the judgment of the introverted rational types is undoubtedly rational, only it

is oriented more by the subjective factor. This does not necessarily imply

any logical bias, since the bias lies in the premise. The premise consists in

the predominance of the  subjective factor prior to all conclusions and

judgments. The superior value of the subjective as compared with the

objective factor appears self-evident from the beginning. It is not a question

of assigning this  value,  but,  as we  have  said,  of  a natural dispositionexisting before all rational valuation.  Hence, to the introvert, rational

judgment has many nuances  which differentiate it from that of the

extravert. To mention  only the most general instance, the chain of

reasoning that leads to the subjective factor seems to the introvert somewhat

more rational than the one that leads to the object. This difference, though

slight and practically unnoticeable in individual cases, builds up in the end

to unbridgeable discrepancies which are the more irritating the less one is

aware of the minimal shift of standpoint occasioned by the psychological

premise. A capital error regularly creeps in here, for instead of recognizing

the difference in the premise one tries to demonstrate a fallacy in the

conclusion. This recognition is a difficult matter for every rational type,

since it undermines the apparently absolute validity of  his  own principle and

delivers him over to its antithesis, which for him amounts to a catastrophe.

[645] The introvert is far more subject to misunderstanding  than the

extravert, not so much because the extravert is a more merciless or critical

adversary than he himself might be, but because the style of the times which

he himself imitates works against him. He finds himself in the minority,

not in numerical relation to the extravert, but in relation to the  general

Western view of the world as judged by his feeling. In so far as he is a

convinced participator in the general style, he  undermines his  own

foundations; for the general style, acknowledging as it  does only the

visible and tangible values, is opposed to his specific principle. Because of

its invisibility, he is obliged to depreciate the subjective factor, and must

force himself to  join  in the extraverted overvaluation of the object. He

himself sets the subjective factor at too low a value, and his feelings of

inferiority are his chastisement for this sin. Little wonder, therefore, that it

is precisely in the present epoch, and  particularly in those movements

which are somewhat ahead of the time, that the subjective factor reveals

itself in exaggerated, tasteless forms of expression bordering on caricature.

I refer to the art of the present day.

[646] The undervaluation of his own principle makes the  introvert

egotistical and forces on him the psychology of the underdog. The more

egotistical he becomes, the more it seems to him that the others, who are

apparently able, without qualms, to conform to the general style, are the

oppressors against whom he must defend himself. He generally does not see

that his chief error lies in not depending on the subjective factor with the

same trust and devotion with which the extravert relies on the object. Hisundervaluation of his own principle makes his leanings towards egotism

unavoidable,  and because of this he fully deserves the censure of the

extravert. If he remained true to his own principle, the charge of egotism

would be altogether false, for his attitude would be justified by its effects in

general, and the misunderstanding would be dissipated.
Sensation

[647] Sensation, which by its very nature is dependent on the object and

on objective stimuli, undergoes considerable  modification in the

introverted attitude. It, too, has a subjective factor, for besides the sensed

object there is a sensing subject who adds his subjective disposition to the

objective stimulus. In the introverted attitude sensation is  based

predominantly on the subjective component of perception. What I mean by

this is best illustrated by works of art which reproduce external objects. If,

for instance, several  painters were to paint the same landscape, each

trying to reproduce it faithfully, each painting will be different from the

others, not merely because of differences in ability, but chiefly because of

different ways of seeing; indeed, in some of the paintings there will be a

distinct psychic difference in mood and the treatment of colour and form.

These qualities betray the influence of the subjective factor. The subjective

factor in sensation is essentially the same as in the other functions we

have discussed. It is an unconscious disposition which alters the sense-

perception at its source, thus depriving it of the character of a purely

objective influence. In this case,  sensation is related primarily to the

subject and only secondarily to the object. How extraordinarily strong the

subjective factor can be is shown most clearly in art. Its  predominance

sometimes amounts to a complete suppression of the object’s influence, and

yet the sensation remains sensation even though it has become a perception

of the  subjective factor and the object has sunk to the level of a mere

stimulus. Introverted sensation is oriented accordingly. True  sense-

perception certainly exists, but it always looks as though the object did not

penetrate into the subject in its own right, but as though the subject were

seeing it quite differently, or saw quite other things than other people see.Actually, he perceives the same things as everybody else, only he does

not stop at the purely objective influence, but concerns himself with the

subjective perception excited by the objective stimulus.

[648] Subjective perception is markedly different from the objective. What

is perceived is either not found at all in the object, or is, at most, merely

suggested by it. That is, although the perception can be similar to that of

other men, it is not immediately derived from the objective behaviour of

things. It does not impress one as a mere product of consciousness—it is too

genuine for that. But it makes a definite psychic impression because elements

of a higher psychic order are discernible in it. This order, however, does not

coincide with the contents of consciousness. It has to do  with

presuppositions or dispositions of the collective  unconscious, with

mythological images, with primordial  possibilities of ideas. Subjective

perception is characterized by the meaning that clings to it. It means more

than the mere image of the object, though naturally only to one for whom

the subjective factor means anything at all. To another, the reproduced

subjective impression seems to suffer from the  defect of not being

sufficiently like the object and therefore to have failed in its purpose.

[649] Introverted sensation apprehends the background of  the physical

world rather than its surface. The decisive thing is not the reality of the

object, but the reality of the subjective  factor, of the primordial images

which, in their totality, constitute a psychic mirror-world. It is a mirror with

the peculiar faculty of reflecting the existing contents of consciousness not

in their known and customary form but, as it were, sub specie aeternitatis,

somewhat as a million-year-old consciousness might see them. Such a

consciousness would see the becoming and passing away of  things

simultaneously with their momentary existence in the present, and not only

that, it would also see what was before their becoming and will be after

their passing hence. Naturally this is only a figure of speech, but one that I

needed in order to illustrate in some way the peculiar nature of introverted

sensation. We could say that introverted sensation transmits an image which

does not so much reproduce the object as spread over it the patina of age-

old subjective experience and the shimmer of events still unborn. The bare

sense impression develops in depth, reaching into the past and future, while

extraverted sensation seizes on the momentary existence of things open to

the light of day.
The Introverted Sensation Type[650] The predominance of introverted sensation produces a definite type,

which  is  characterized by certain  peculiarities.  It is an irrational type,

because it is oriented amid the flux of events not by rational judgment but

simply by what happens. Whereas the extraverted sensation type is guided

by the intensity of objective influences, the introverted type is guided by

the intensity of the subjective sensation excited by the objective stimulus.

Obviously therefore, no proportional  relation exists between object and

sensation, but one that is apparently quite unpredictable and arbitrary. What

will make an impression and what will not can never be seen in advance, and

from outside. Did  there exist an  aptitude for expression in  any way

proportional to the intensity of his sensations, the irrationality of this type

would be extraordinarily striking. This is the case, for instance, when an

individual is a creative artist. But since this is the exception, the introvert’s

characteristic difficulty in expressing himself also conceals his irrationality.

On the contrary, he may be conspicuous for his calmness and passivity, or

for his rational self-control. This peculiarity, which often leads a superficial

judgment astray, is really due to his unrelatedness to objects. Normally the

object is not consciously devalued in the least, but its stimulus is removed

from it and immediately  replaced by a subjective reaction no longer

related to the reality of the object. This naturally has the same effect as

devaluation. Such a type can easily make one question why one should

exist at all, or why objects in general should have any justification for their

existence since everything essential still goes on happening without them.

This doubt may be justified in extreme cases, but not in the normal, since

the objective stimulus is absolutely necessary to sensation and  merely

produces something different from what the external situation might lead

one to expect.

[651] Seen from the outside, it looks as though the effect of the object did

not penetrate into the subject at all. This impression is correct inasmuch as a

subjective content does, in fact, intervene from the unconscious and intercept

the  effect of the object. The intervention may be so abrupt that  the

individual appears to be shielding himself directly from  all objective

influences. In more serious cases, such a protective defence actually does

exist. Even with only a slight increase in the power of the unconscious, the

subjective  component of sensation becomes so alive that it almost

completely obscures the influence of the object. If the object is a person, he

feels completely devalued, while the subject has an illusory conception ofreality, which in pathological cases goes so far that he is no longer able

to distinguish

between the real object and the subjective perception. Although so vital a

distinction reaches the vanishing point only in near-psychotic states, yet

long before that the subjective perception can influence thought, feeling,

and action to an excessive degree despite the fact that the object is clearly

seen in all its reality. When its influence does succeed in penetrating into

the subject—because of its special intensity or because of its complete

analogy with the  unconscious image—even the normal type will be

compelled to act in accordance with the unconscious model. Such action has

an illusory character unrelated to objective reality and is  extremely

disconcerting. It instantly reveals the reality-alienating subjectivity of this

type. But when the influence of the object does not break  through

completely, it is met with well-intentioned neutrality,  disclosing little

sympathy yet constantly striving to soothe and adjust. The too low is

raised a little, the too high is  lowered, enthusiasm is damped down,

extravagance restrained, and anything out of the ordinary reduced to the

right formula—all this in order to keep the influence of the object within

the necessary bounds. In this way the type  becomes a menace to his

environment because his total  innocuousness is not altogether above

suspicion. In that case he easily becomes a victim of the aggressiveness

and domineeringness of others. Such men allow themselves to be abused

and then take their revenge on the most unsuitable  occasions with

redoubled obtuseness and stubbornness.

[652] If no capacity for artistic expression is present, all impressions sink

into the depths and hold consciousness under a spell, so that it becomes

impossible to master their fascination by giving them conscious expression.

In general, this type can organize his impressions only in archaic ways,

because thinking and feeling are relatively unconscious and, if conscious at

all, have at their disposal only the most necessary, banal, everyday means of

expression. As conscious functions, they are wholly incapable of adequately

reproducing his subjective perceptions. This type, therefore, is uncommonly

inaccessible to objective understanding, and he usually fares no better in

understanding himself.

[653] Above all, his development alienates him from the reality of the

object, leaving him at the mercy of his subjective perceptions, which orient

his consciousness to an archaic reality, although his lack of comparativejudgment keeps him wholly unconscious of this fact. Actually he lives in a

mythological world, where men, animals, locomotives, houses, rivers, and

mountains appear either as benevolent deities or as malevolent demons. That

they appear thus to him never enters his head, though that is just the effect

they have on his judgments and actions. He judges and acts as though he had

such powers to deal with; but this begins to strike him  only when he

discovers that his sensations are totally different from reality. If he has any

aptitude for objective reason, he will sense this difference as morbid; but if

he remains faithful to his irrationality, and is

ready to grant his sensations reality value, the objective world will appear a

mere make-believe and a comedy. Only in extreme cases, however, is this

dilemma  reached. As  a rule he  resigns himself to his isolation and the

banality of the world, which he has unconsciously made archaic.

[654] His unconscious is distinguished chiefly by the  repression of

intuition, which consequently acquires an  extraverted and archaic

character. Whereas true extraverted  intuition is possessed of a singular

resourcefulness, a “good

nose” for objectively real possibilities, this archaicized intuition has an

amazing flair for all the ambiguous, shadowy, sordid, dangerous possibilities

lurking in the background. The real and conscious intentions of the object

mean nothing to it; instead, it sniffs out every conceivable archaic motive

underlying such an intention. It therefore has a dangerous and destructive

quality that contrasts glaringly with the well-meaning innocuousness of the

conscious attitude. So long as the individual does not hold too aloof from the

object, his unconscious intuition has a salutary compensating effect on the

rather fantastic and overcredulous attitude of consciousness. But as soon as

the unconscious becomes antagonistic, the archaic intuitions come to the

surface and exert their pernicious influence, forcing themselves on the

individual and producing compulsive ideas of the most perverse kind. The

result is usually a compulsion neurosis, in which the hysterical features are

masked by symptoms of exhaustion.
Intuition

[655] Introverted intuition is directed to the inner object, a term that might

justly be applied to the contents of the unconscious. The relation of inner

objects to consciousness is entirely analogous to that of outer objects, though

their reality is not physical but psychic. They appear to intuitive perception

as subjective images of things which, though not to be met with in theoutside world, constitute the contents of  the unconscious, and  of  the  

collective unconscious in particular. These contents per se are naturally not

accessible to experience, a quality they have in common with external

objects. For just as external objects correspond  only relatively  to our

perception of them, so the phenomenal forms of the inner objects are also

relative—products of their (to us) inaccessible essence and of the peculiar

nature of the intuitive function.

[656] Like sensation, intuition has its subjective factor, which is suppressed

as much as possible in the extraverted attitude but is the decisive factor in

the intuition of the introvert. Although his intuition may be stimulated by

external objects, it does not concern itself with external possibilities but

with what the external object has released within him. Whereas introverted

sensation is mainly restricted to the perception, via the unconscious, of the

phenomena of  innervation and is arrested there, introverted intuition

suppresses this side of the subjective factor and perceives the image that

caused the innervation. Supposing, for instance, a man is overtaken by an

attack of psychogenic vertigo. Sensation is arrested by the peculiar nature of

this disturbance of innervation, perceiving all its qualities, its intensity, its

course, how it arose and how it passed, but not advancing beyond that to

its content, to the thing that caused the disturbance. Intuition, on the other

hand, receives from  sensation only the impetus to its own immediate

activity; it peers behind the scenes, quickly perceiving the inner image that

gave rise to this particular form of expression—the attack of vertigo. It sees

the image of a tottering man pierced through the heart by an arrow. This

image fascinates the intuitive activity; it is arrested by it, and seeks to

explore every detail of it. It holds fast to the vision, observing with the

liveliest interest how the picture changes, unfolds, and finally fades.

[657] In this way introverted intuition perceives all the  background

processes of consciousness with almost the same distinctness as extraverted

sensation registers external objects.  For intuition, therefore, unconscious

images acquire the dignity of things. But, because intuition excludes the co-

operation of sensation, it obtains little or no knowledge of the disturbances

of innervation or of the physical effects  produced by the unconscious

images. The images appear as though detached from the subject, as though

existing in themselves without any relation to him. Consequently, in the

above-mentioned example, the introverted intuitive, if attacked by vertigo,

would never imagine that the image he perceived might in some way refer tohimself. To a judging type this naturally seems almost inconceivable, but it is

none the less a fact which I have often come across in my dealings with

intuitives.

[658] The remarkable indifference of the extraverted intuitive to external

objects is shared by the introverted intuitive in relation to inner objects.

Just as the extraverted  intuitive is continually scenting out new

possibilities, which he pursues with equal unconcern for his own welfare

and for that of others, pressing on quite heedless of human considerations

and tearing down what has just been built in his everlasting search for

change, so the introverted intuitive moves from image to image, chasing

after every possibility in the teeming womb of the unconscious, without

establishing any connection between them and himself. Just as the world of

appearances can never become a moral problem for the man who merely

senses it, the world of inner images is never  a moral problem for the

intuitive. For both of them it is an  aesthetic problem, a matter of

perception, a “sensation.” Because of this, the introverted intuitive has little

consciousness of his own bodily existence or of its effect on others. The

extravert would say: “Reality does not exist for him, he gives himself up to

fruitless fantasies.” The  perception of the images of the unconscious,

produced in such inexhaustible abundance by the creative energy of life, is

of course fruitless from the standpoint of immediate utility. But since these

images represent possible views of the world which may give life a new

potential, this function, which to the outside world is the strangest of all, is

as indispensable to the total psychic economy as is the corresponding human

type to the psychic life of a people. Had this type not existed, there would

have been no prophets in Israel.

[659] Introverted intuition apprehends the images arising from the a priori

inherited foundations of the unconscious.  These archetypes, whose

innermost nature is inaccessible to experience, are the precipitate of the

psychic functioning of  the whole ancestral line; the accumulated

experiences of  organic life in general, a million times repeated, and

condensed into types. In these archetypes, therefore, all  experiences are

represented which have happened on this planet since primeval times. The

more frequent and the more intense they were, the more clearly focussed

they become in the archetype. The archetype would thus be, to borrow from

Kant, the noumenon  of the image which intuition perceives and, in

perceiving, creates.[660] Since the unconscious is not just something that lies  there like a

psychic caput mortuum, but coexists with us and is constantly undergoing

transformations which are inwardly  connected with the general run of

events, introverted intuition, through its perception of these inner processes,

can  supply certain data which may be of the utmost importance  for

understanding what is going on in the world. It can even  foresee new

possibilities in more or less clear outline, as well  as events which later

actually do happen. Its prophetic foresight is explained by its relation to the

archetypes, which  represent the laws governing the course of all

experienceable things.
The Introverted Intuitive Type

[661] The peculiar nature of introverted intuition, if it gains the ascendency,

produces a peculiar type of man: the mystical dreamer and seer on the one

hand, the artist and the crank on the other. The artist might be regarded as

the normal representative of this type, which tends to confine itself to the

perceptive character of intuition. As a rule, the intuitive stops at perception;

perception is his main problem, and—in the case of a creative artist—the

shaping of his perception. But the crank is content with a visionary idea by

which he himself is shaped and determined. Naturally the intensification of

intuition often results in an extraordinary aloofness of the individual from

tangible reality; he may even become a complete enigma to his immediate

circle. If he is an artist, he  reveals strange, far-off things in his art,

shimmering in all  colours, at once portentous and banal, beautiful and

grotesque, sublime and whimsical. If not an artist, he is  frequently a

misunderstood genius, a great man “gone wrong,” a sort of wise simpleton,

a figure for “psychological” novels.

[662] Although the intuitive type has little inclination to make a moral

problem of perception, since a strengthening of  the judging functions is

required for this, only a slight differentiation of judgment is sufficient to

shift intuitive perception from the purely aesthetic into the moral sphere. A

variety of this type is thus produced which differs essentially  from the

aesthetic, although it is none the less characteristic of the  introverted

intuitive. The moral problem arises when the intuitive tries to relate himself

to his vision, when he is no longer satisfied with mere perception and its

aesthetic configuration and evaluation, when he confronts the questions:

What does this mean for me or the world? What emerges from this vision

in the way of a duty or a task, for me or the world? The pure intuitive whorepresses his judgment, or whose judgment is held in thrall by his perceptive

faculties, never faces this question squarely, since his only problem is the

“know-how” of perception. He finds the moral problem unintelligible or

even absurd, and as far as possible forbids his thoughts to dwell on the

disconcerting vision. It is different with the morally oriented intuitive. He

reflects on  the meaning of his vision, and is less concerned with

developing its aesthetic possibilities than with the moral  effects which

emerge from its intrinsic significance. His judgment allows him to discern,

though often only darkly, that he, as a man and a whole human being, is

somehow involved in his vision, that it is not just an object to be perceived,

but wants to participate in the life of the subject. Through this realization

he feels bound to transform his vision into his own  life. But since he tends

to rely  most predominantly on his vision, his moral efforts become one-

sided; he makes himself and his life symbolic—adapted, it is true, to the

inner and eternal meaning of events, but unadapted to present-day reality.

He thus deprives himself of  any influence upon it because he remains

uncomprehended.

His language is not the one currently spoken—it has become too subjective.

His arguments lack the convincing power of reason. He can only profess or

proclaim. His is “the voice of one crying in the wilderness.”

[663] What the introverted intuitive represses most of all is the sensation of

the object, and this colours his whole  unconscious. It gives rise to a

compensatory extraverted sensation function of an archaic character. The

unconscious personality can best be described as an extraverted sensation

type of a rather low and primitive order. Instinctuality and intemperance

are the hallmarks of this sensation, combined  with an extraordinary

dependence on sense-impressions. This compensates the rarefied air of the

intuitive’s conscious attitude, giving it a certain weight, so that complete

“sublimation” is prevented. But if,

through a forced exaggeration of the conscious attitude, there should be a

complete subordination to inner perceptions, the unconscious goes over to

the opposition, giving rise to  compulsive sensations whose excessive

dependence on the object directly contradicts the conscious attitude. The

form of neurosis is a compulsion neurosis with hypochondriacal symptoms,

hypersensitivity of the sense organs, and  compulsive ties to particular

persons or objects.
Summary of the Introverted Irrational Types[664] The two types just described are almost inaccessible  to judgment

from outside. Being introverted, and having in consequence little capacity

or desire for expression, they offer but a frail handle in this respect. As

their main activity is directed inwards, nothing is outwardly visible but

reserve,

secretiveness, lack of sympathy, uncertainty, and an apparently groundless

embarrassment. When anything does come to the surface, it is generally an

indirect manifestation of the inferior and relatively unconscious functions.

Such manifestations naturally arouse all the current prejudices against this

type. Accordingly they are mostly  underestimated, or at least

misunderstood. To the extent that they do not understand themselves—

because they very  largely lack judgment—they are also powerless to

understand why they are so constantly underestimated by the public. They

cannot see that their efforts to be forthcoming are, as a matter of fact, of an

inferior character. Their vision is enthralled by the richness of subjective

events. What is going  on inside them is so captivating, and of such

inexhaustible charm, that they simply do not notice that the little they do

manage to communicate contains hardly anything of what  they

themselves have experienced. The fragmentary and episodic character of

their communications makes too great a demand on the understanding and

good will of those around them; also, their communications are without

the personal warmth that alone carries the power of conviction. On the

contrary, these types have very often a harsh, repelling manner, though of

this they are quite unaware and did not intend it. We shall form a fairer

judgment of such people, and show them greater forbearance, when we begin

to realize how  hard it is to translate into intelligible language what is

perceived within. Yet this forbearance must not go so far as to exempt them

altogether from the  need  to communicate. This would only do them the

greatest harm. Fate itself prepares for them, perhaps even more than for

other men, overwhelming external difficulties which have a very sobering

effect on those intoxicated by the inner vision.

Often it is only an intense personal need that can wring from them a human

confession.

[665] From an extraverted and rationalistic standpoint,  these types are

indeed the most useless of men. But, viewed from a higher standpoint, they

are living evidence that this rich and varied world with its overflowing and

intoxicating life is not purely external, but also exists within. These types areadmittedly one-sided specimens of nature, but they are an object-lesson for

the man who refuses to be blinded by the intellectual fashion of the day.

In their own way, they are educators and promoters of culture. Their life

teaches more than their words. From their lives, and not least from their

greatest fault—their inability to communicate—we may understand one of

the greatest errors of our civilization, that  is, the superstitious belief in

verbal statements, the boundless overestimation of instruction by means of

words and methods. A child certainly allows himself to be impressed by the

grand talk of his parents, but do they really imagine he is educated by it?

Actually it is the parents’ lives that educate the child—what they add by

word and gesture at best serves only to confuse him. The same holds good

for the teacher. But we have such a belief in method that, if only the method

be good, the practice of it seems to sanctify the teacher. An inferior man is

never a good teacher. But he can conceal his pernicious inferiority, which

secretly poisons the pupil, behind an excellent method or an equally brilliant

gift of gab. Naturally the pupil of riper years desires nothing better than the

knowledge of useful methods, because he is already defeated by the general

attitude, which believes in the all-conquering method. He has learned that

the emptiest head, correctly parroting a method, is the best pupil. His

whole environment is an optical demonstration that all success and

all happiness are outside, and that only the right method is needed to

attain the haven of one’s desires. Or does,  perchance, the life of his

religious instructor demonstrate the  happiness which radiates from the

treasure of the inner vision?

The irrational introverted types are certainly no teachers of a more perfect

humanity; they lack reason and the ethics of reason. But their lives teach

the other possibility, the interior life which is so painfully wanting in our

civilization.          THE PRINCIPAL AND AUXILIARY

                                  FUNCTIONS

[666] In the foregoing descriptions I have no desire to give my readers the

impression that these types occur at all frequently in such pure form in

actual life. They are, as it were, only Galtonesque family portraits, which

single out the  common and therefore typical features, stressing them

disproportionately, while the individual features are just as

disproportionately effaced. Closer investigation shows with great regularity

that, besides the most differentiated function,  another, less differentiated

function of secondary importance is invariably present in consciousness

and exerts a co-determining influence.

[667] To recapitulate for the sake of clarity: the products of all functions can

be conscious, but we speak of the “consciousness” of a function only when

its use is under the control of the will and, at the same time, its governing

principle is the decisive one for the orientation of consciousness. This is

true when, for instance, thinking is not a mere afterthought, or rumination,

and when its conclusions possess an absolute validity, so that the logical

result holds

good both as a motive and as a guarantee of practical action without the

backing of any further evidence. This absolute sovereignty always belongs,

empirically, to one function alone, and can belong only to one function,

because the equally independent intervention of another function would

necessarily produce a different orientation which, partially at least, would

contradict the first. But since it is a vital  condition for the conscious

process of adaptation always to have clear and unambiguous aims, the

presence of a second function of equal power is naturally ruled out. This

other function, therefore, can have only a secondary importance, as has been

found to be the case in practice. Its secondary importance is due to the fact

that it is not, like the primary  function, valid in its own right as an

absolutely reliable and decisive factor, but comes into play more as an

auxiliary or complementary function. Naturally only those functions can

appear as auxiliary whose nature is not opposed to the dominant function.

For instance, feeling can never act as the second  function alongside

thinking, because it is by its very nature too strongly opposed to thinking.

Thinking, if it is to be real thinking and true to its own principle, must

rigorously exclude feeling. This, of course, does not do away with the factthat there are individuals whose thinking and feeling are on the same level,

both being of equal motive power for consciousness. But in these cases

there is also no question of a differentiated type, but merely of relatively

undeveloped thinking and feeling. The uniformly conscious or uniformly

unconscious state of the functions is, therefore, the mark of a  primitive

mentality.

[668] Experience shows that the secondary function is always one whose

nature is different from, though not antagonistic to, the primary function.

Thus, thinking as the primary function can readily pair with intuition as

the  auxiliary, or indeed equally well with sensation, but, as  already

observed, never with feeling. Neither intuition nor  sensation is

antagonistic to thinking; they need not be absolutely excluded, for they are

not of a nature equal and opposite to thinking, as feeling is—which, as a

judging function, successfully competes with thinking—but are functions of

perception, affording welcome assistance to thought. But as soon as they

reached the same level of  differentiation as thinking, they would bring

about a change of attitude which would contradict the whole trend of

thinking. They would change the judging attitude into a perceiving one;

whereupon the principle of rationality indispensable to thought would be

suppressed in favour of the irrationality of perception. Hence the auxiliary

function is possible and useful only in so far as it serves the dominant

function, without making any claim to the autonomy of its own principle.

[669] For all the types met with in practice, the rule holds  good that

besides the conscious, primary function there is a relatively unconscious,

auxiliary function which is in every respect different from the nature of the

primary function. The resulting combinations present the familiar picture of,

for instance, practical thinking allied with sensation, speculative thinking

forging ahead with intuition, artistic intuition selecting and presenting its

images with the help of feeling-values, philosophical intuition systematizing

its vision into comprehensible thought by means of a powerful intellect, and

so on.

[670] The unconscious functions likewise group  themselves in patterns

correlated with the conscious ones.  Thus, the correlative of conscious,

practical thinking may be  an unconscious, intuitive-feeling attitude, with

feeling under a stronger inhibition than intuition. These peculiarities are of

interest only for one who is concerned with the practical treatment of such

cases, but it is important that he should  know about them. I havefrequently observed how an analyst, confronted with a terrific thinking type,

for instance, will do his utmost to develop the feeling function directly out

of the unconscious. Such an attempt is foredoomed to failure, because it

involves too great a violation of the conscious  standpoint. Should the

violation nevertheless be successful, a really compulsive dependence of the

patient on the analyst ensues, a transference that can only be brutally

terminated, because, having been left without a standpoint, the patient has

made his standpoint the analyst. But the approach to the unconscious and to

the most repressed function is disclosed, as it were, of its own accord, and

with adequate protection of  the conscious standpoint, when the way of

development proceeds via the auxiliary function—in the case of a rational

type via one of the irrational functions. This gives the patient a broader view

of what is happening, and of what is possible, so that his consciousness is

sufficiently protected against the inroads of the unconscious. Conversely, in

order to cushion the impact of the unconscious, an irrational type needs a

stronger development of the rational auxiliary function  present in

consciousness.

[671] The unconscious functions exist in an archaic, animal state. Hence

their symbolic appearance in dreams and fantasies is usually represented as

the battle or encounter between two animals or monsters.                                          XI                                DEFINITIONS

[672] It may perhaps seem superfluous that I should add to  my text a

chapter dealing solely with definitions. But ample experience has taught

me that, in psychological works  particularly, one cannot proceed too

cautiously in regard to the concepts and terms one uses: for nowhere do

such wide divergences of meaning occur as in the domain of psychology,

creating only too frequently the most obstinate  misunderstandings. This

drawback is due not only to the fact that the science of psychology is still in

its infancy; there is the further difficulty that the empirical material, the

object of scientific investigation, cannot be displayed in concrete form, as it

were, before the eyes of the reader. The psychological  investigator is

always finding himself obliged to make extensive use of an indirect method

of description in order to present the reality he has observed. Only in so far

as elementary facts are communicated which are amenable to quantitative

measurement can there be any question of a direct presentation. But how

much of the actual psychology of man can be experienced and observed as

quantitatively measurable facts? Such facts do exist, and I believe I have

shown in my association studies

1 that extremely complicated psychological facts are  accessible to

  quantitative measurement. But anyone who has probed more deeply into

the nature of psychology, demanding something more of it as a science

than that it should confine itself within the narrow limits of the scientific

  method, will also have realized that an experimental method will never

  succeed in doing justice to the nature of the human psyche, nor will it

ever  project anything like  a true picture of the more  complex psychic

  phenomena.

[673] But once we leave the domain of measurable facts we are dependent on

concepts, which have now to take over the role of measure and number.

The precision which measure and number lend to the observed fact can be

replaced only by the precision of the concept. Unfortunately, as every

investigator  and worker in this field knows only too well, current

psychological concepts are so imprecise and so ambiguous that mutual

understanding is practically impossible. One has only to take the concept

“feeling,” for instance, and try to  visualize everything this concept

comprises, to get some sort of notion of the variability and ambiguity of

psychological  concepts in general. And yet the concept of feeling doesexpress something characteristic that, though not susceptible of quantitative

measurement, nevertheless palpably exists.  One simply cannot resign

oneself, as Wundt does in his physiological psychology, to a mere denial of

such essential and fundamental phenomena, and seek to replace them by

elementary facts or to resolve them into such. In this way an essential part of

psychology is thrown overboard.

[674] In order to escape the ill consequences of this overvaluation of the

scientific method, one is obliged to have recourse to well-defined concepts.

But in order to arrive at such concepts, the collaboration of many workers

would be needed, a sort of consensus gentium. Since this is not within the

bounds of possibility at present, the individual investigator must at least try

to give his concepts some fixity and precision, and this can best be done

by discussing the meaning of the concepts he employs so that everyone is

in a position to see what in fact he means by them.

[675] To meet this need I now propose to discuss my  principal

psychological concepts in alphabetical order, and I would like the reader to

refer to these explanations in case of doubt. It goes without saying that

these definitions and explanations are merely intended to establish the

sense in which I myself use the concepts; far be it from me to affirm that

this use is in all circumstances the only possible one or the absolutely right

one.

[676] 1. ABSTRACTION, as the word itself indicates, is the drawing out

or singling out of a content (a meaning, a general characteristic, etc.) from

a context made up of other elements whose combination into a whole is

something unique or individual and therefore cannot be compared with

anything else.

Singularity, uniqueness, and incomparability are obstacles to  cognition;

hence the other elements associated with a content that is felt to be the

essential one are bound to appear irrelevant.

[677] Abstraction, therefore, is a form of mental activity that frees this

content from its association with the irrelevant elements by distinguishing it

from them or, in other words, differentiating it (v. Differentiation). In its

wider sense, everything is abstract that is separated from its association

with elements that are felt to have no relevance to its meaning.

[678] Abstraction is an activity pertaining to the  psychological functions

(q.v.) in general. There is an abstract thinking, just as there is abstract

feeling, sensation, and intuition (qq. v.). Abstract thinking singles out therational, logical qualities of a given content from its intellectually irrelevant

components. Abstract feeling does the same with a content characterized by

its feeling-values; similarly with sensation and intuition. Hence, not only

are there abstract thoughts but also abstract feelings, the latter being defined

by Sully as intellectual, aesthetic, and moral.

2 To these Nahlowsky adds all religious feelings.

3 Abstract feelings would, in my view, correspond to the  “higher” or

  “ideal” feelings of Nahlowsky. I put abstract feelings on the same level as

  abstract thoughts. Abstract sensation would be aesthetic as opposed to

  sensuous sensation (q.v.), and abstract intuition would be symbolic as

opposed to fantastic intuition (v. Fantasy and Intuition).

[679] In this work I also associate abstraction with the awareness of the

psycho-energic process it involves. When I take an abstract attitude to an

object, I do not allow the object to affect me in its totality; I focus my

attention on one part of it by excluding all the irrelevant parts. My aim is

to disembarrass myself of the object as a singular and unique whole and to

abstract only a portion of this whole. No doubt I am aware of the whole, but

I do not immerse myself in this awareness; my interest  does not flow into

the whole, but draws back from it, pulling the abstracted portion into myself,

into my conceptual world, which is already prepared or constellated for the

purpose of abstracting a part of the object. (It is only because of a subjective

constellation of concepts that I am able to  abstract from the object.)

“Interest” I conceive as the energy

or libido (q.v.) which I bestow on the object as a value, or which the

object draws from me, maybe even against my will or unknown to myself. I

visualize the process of abstraction as a withdrawal of libido from the

object, as a backflow of value from the object into a subjective, abstract

content. For me, therefore, abstraction amounts to an energic devaluation of

the object. In other words, abstraction is an introverting  movement of

libido (v. Introversion).

[680] I call an attitude (q.v.) abstractive when it is both introverting and

at the same time assimilates (q.v.) a portion  of the object, felt to be

essential, to abstract contents already constellated in the subject. The more

abstract a content is, the more it is irrepresentable. I subscribe to Kant’s

view that a concept gets more abstract “the more the differences of things are

left out of it,”

4 in the sense that abstraction at its highest level detaches itself absolutelyfrom the object, thereby attaining the extreme limit of irrepresentability. It

is this pure “abstract” which I term an idea (q.v.). Conversely, an abstract

that still possesses some degree of representability or plasticity is a

concrete concept (v. Concretism).

[681] 2. AFFECT. By the term affect I mean a state of  feeling

characterized by marked physical innervation on the  one hand and a

peculiar disturbance of the ideational process on the other.

5 I use emotion as synonymous with affect. I distinguish—in contrast to

  Bleuler (v. Affectivity)—feeling (q.v.) from affect, in spite of the fact that

the dividing line is fluid, since every feeling, after attaining a certain

  strength, releases physical  innervations, thus becoming an affect. For

practical reasons, however, it is advisable to distinguish affect from

  feeling,

since feeling can be a voluntarily disposable function, whereas affect is

usually not. Similarly, affect is clearly distinguished from feeling by quite

perceptible physical innervations, while feeling for the most part lacks

them, or else their intensity is so slight that they can be demonstrated only

by the most delicate instruments, as in the case of  psychogalvanic

phenomena.

6

Affect becomes cumulative through the sensation of the  physical

innervations released by it. This observation gave rise to the James-Lange

theory of affect, which derives affect causally from physical innervations.

As against this extreme view, I regard affect on the one hand as a psychic

feeling-state and on the other as a physiological innervation-state, each of

which has a cumulative, reciprocal effect on the other. That is to say, a

component of sensation allies itself with the intensified feeling, so that the

affect is approximated more to sensation (q.v.) and essentially differentiated

from the feeling-state. Pronounced affects, i.e.,  affects accompanied by

violent physical innervations, I do not assign to the province of feeling but

to that of the sensation function.

[682] 3. AFFECTIVITY is a term coined by Bleuler. It designates and

comprises “not only the affects proper, but also the slight feelings or

feeling-tones of pain and pleasure.” 7 Bleuler distinguishes affectivity from

the sense-perceptions and physical sensations as well as from “feelings” that

may be regarded as inner perception processes (e.g., the “feeling” of

certainty, of probability, etc.) or vague thoughts or discernments.8

4. ANIMA / ANIMUS, V. SOUL; SOUL-IMAGE.

[683] 5. APPERCEPTION is a psychic process by which a new content is

articulated with similar, already existing contents in such a way that it

becomes understood, apprehended, or “clear.”

9 We distinguish active from passive apperception. The first is a process by

which the subject, of his own accord and from  his own motives,

  consciously apprehends a new content with attention and assimilates it to

other contents already constellated; the second is a process by which a

new content forces itself upon consciousness either from without (through

the senses) or from within (from the unconscious) and, as it were,

compels attention and enforces apprehension. In the first case the activity

lies with the ego (q.v.); in the second, with the self-enforcing new content.

[684] 6. ARCHAISM is a term by which I designate the “oldness” of

psychic contents or functions (q.v.). By this I do not mean qualities that are

“archaistic” in the sense of being  pseudo-antique or copied, as in later

Roman sculpture or nineteenth-century Gothic, but qualities that have the

character of relics. We may describe as archaic all psychological traits that

exhibit the qualities of the primitive mentality. It is clear that archaism

attaches primarily to the fantasies (q.v.) of the unconscious, i.e., to the

products of unconscious fantasy activity which reach consciousness. An

image (q.v.) has an archaic quality when it possesses  unmistakable

mythological parallels.

10 Archaic, too, are the associations-by-analogy of unconscious fantasy,

  and so is their symbolism (v. Symbol). The relation of identity (q.v.)

  with an object, or participation

mystique (q.v.), is likewise archaic. Concretism (q.v.) of thought and feeling

is archaic; also compulsion and inability  to control oneself (ecstatic or

trance states, possession, etc.). Fusion of the psychological functions (v.

Differentiation), of thinking with feeling, feeling with sensation, feeling with

intuition, and so on, is archaic, as is also the fusion of part of a function

with its counterpart, e.g., positive with negative feeling, or what Bleuler

calls ambitendency and ambivalence, and such phenomena as colour hearing.

6a. ARCHETYPE,

11 v. IMAGE, primordial: also IDEA.

[685] 7. ASSIMILATION is the approximation of a new  content of

consciousness to already constellated subjective material,12 the similarity of the new content to this material being  especially

  accentuated in the process, often to the detriment of  its independent

  qualities.

13 Fundamentally, assimilation is a process of apperception

(q.v.), but is distinguished from apperception

by this element of approximation to the subjective material. It is in this sense

that Wundt says:

14

This way of building up ideas [i.e., by assimilation] is most conspicuous

when the assimilating elements arise through  reproduction, and the

assimilated ones through an immediate  sense impression. For then the

elements of memory-images are projected, as it were, into the external

object, so that, particularly when the object and the reproduced elements

differ substantially from one another, the finished sense

impression appears as an illusion, deceiving us as to the real  nature of

things.

[686] I use the term assimilation in a somewhat broader sense, as the

approximation of object to subject in general,  and with it I contrast

dissimilation, as the approximation of subject to object, and a consequent

alienation of the subject from himself in favour of the object, whether it be

an external object or a “psychological” object, for instance an idea.

[687] 8. ATTITUDE. This concept is a relatively recent addition to  

psychology. It  originated with  Müller and Schumann.

15 Whereas Külpe

16 defines attitude as a predisposition of the sensory or motor centres to

  react to a particular stimulus or constant impulse, Ebbinghaus

17 conceives it in a wider sense as an effect of training which introduces the

  factor of habit into individual acts that deviate from the habitual. Our use

  of the concept derives from Ebbinghaus’s. For us, attitude is a readiness

  of the psyche to act or react in a certain way. The concept is of

  particular importance for the psychology of complex psychic processes

  because it expresses the peculiar fact that certain stimuli have too strong

  an effect on some occasions, and little or no effect on others. To have an

  attitude means to be ready for something definite, even though this

    something is unconscious; for having an attitude is synonymous with an

  a priori orientation to a definite thing, no matter whether this be    represented in consciousness or not. The state of readiness, which I

  conceive attitude to be, consists in the presence of a certain subjective

    constellation, a definite combination of psychic factors or contents, which

  will either determine action

in this or that definite direction, or react to an external stimulus in a definite

way. Active apperception (q.v.) is  impossible without an attitude. An

attitude always has a point of reference; this can be either conscious or

unconscious, for in the act of apperceiving a new content an already

constellated combination of contents will inevitably  accentuate  those

qualities or elements that appear to belong to the subjective content. Hence a

selection or judgment takes place which excludes anything irrelevant. As to

what is or is  not relevant, this is decided by the already constellated

combination of contents. Whether the point of reference is conscious or

unconscious does not affect the selectivity of the attitude, since the selection

is implicit in the attitude and takes place automatically. It is useful, however,

to distinguish between the two, because the presence of two attitudes is

extremely frequent, one conscious and the other unconscious. This means

that consciousness has a constellation of contents different from that of the

unconscious, a duality particularly evident in neurosis.

[688] The concept of attitude has some affinity with Wundt’s concept of

apperception, with the difference that apperception includes the process of

relating the already  constellated contents to the new content to be

apperceived, whereas attitude relates exclusively to  the subjectively

constellated content. Apperception is, as it were, the bridge which connects

the already existing, constellated contents  with the new one, whereas

attitude would be the support or abutment of the bridge on the one bank,

and the new content  the abutment on the other bank. Attitude signifies

expectation, and expectation always operates selectively and with a sense of

direction. The presence of a strongly feeling-toned content in  the  conscious

field of vision forms  (maybe  with other

contents) a particular constellation that is equivalent to a definite attitude,

because such a content promotes the  perception and apperception of

everything similar to itself and  blacks out the dissimilar. It creates an

attitude that corresponds to it. This automatic phenomenon is an essential

cause of the one-sidedness of conscious orientation (q.v.). It would lead to a

complete loss of equilibrium if there were no self-regulating, compensatory

(v. Compensation) functionin the psyche to correct the conscious attitude. In this sense, therefore, the

duality of attitude is a normal phenomenon, and it plays a disturbing role

only when the one-sidedness is excessive.

[689] Attitude in the sense of ordinary attention can be a  relatively

unimportant subsidiary phenomenon, but it can also be a general principle

governing the whole psyche. Depending on environmental influences and

on the  individual’s education, general experience of life, and  personal

convictions, a subjective constellation of contents  may be habitually

present, continually moulding a certain  attitude that may affect the

minutest details of his life. Every man who is particularly aware of the

seamy side of existence, for instance, will naturally have an attitude that is

constantly  on the look-out for something unpleasant. This conscious

imbalance is compensated by an unconscious expectation of  pleasure.

Again, an oppressed person has a conscious attitude that always anticipates

oppression; he selects this factor from the general run of experience and

scents it out everywhere.  His unconscious attitude, therefore, aims at

power and superiority.

[690] The whole psychology of an individual even in its  most

fundamental features is oriented in accordance with his

habitual attitude. Although the general psychological laws  operate in

every individual, they cannot be said to be characteristic of a particular

individual, since the way they  operate varies in accordance with his

habitual attitude. The  habitual attitude is always a resultant of all the

factors that  exert a decisive influence on the psyche, such as innate

disposition, environmental influences, experience of life,  insights and

convictions gained through differentiation (q.v.), collective (q.v.) views, etc.

Were it not for the absolutely fundamental importance of attitude, the

existence of an individual psychology would be out of the question. But the

habitual attitude brings  about such great displacements of energy, and so

modifies the relations between the individual functions (q.v.), that effects

are produced which often cast  doubt on the validity of general

psychological laws. In spite of the fact, for instance, that some measure of

sexual activity is held to be indispensable on physiological and psychological

grounds, there are individuals who, without loss to themselves, i.e., without

pathological effects or

any demonstrable restriction of their powers, can, to a very great extent,

dispense with it, while in other cases quite insignificant disturbances in thisarea can have far-reaching consequences. How enormous the individual

differences are can be seen most clearly, perhaps, in the question of likes and

dislikes. Here practically all rules go by the board. What is there, in the

last resort, that has not at some time given man pleasure, and what is there

that has not caused him pain?  Every instinct, every function can be

subordinated to another. The ego instinct or power instinct can make

sexuality its  servant, or sexuality can exploit the ego. Thinking may

overrun everything else, or feeling swallow up thinking and sensation, all

depending on the attitude.

[691] At bottom, attitude is an individual phenomenon that eludes scientific

investigation. In actual experience, however, certain typical attitudes can be

distinguished in so far as certain psychic functions can be distinguished.

When a function habitually predominates, a typical attitude is  produced.

According to the nature of the differentiated  function, there will be

constellations of contents that create a corresponding attitude. There is thus

a typical thinking, feeling, sensation, and intuitive attitude. Besides these

purely  psychological attitudes, whose number might very well be

increased, there are also social attitudes, namely, those on  which a

collective idea has set its stamp. They are characterized by the various “-

isms.” These collective attitudes are very important, in some cases even

outweighing the importance of the individual attitude.

[692] 9. COLLECTIVE. I term collective all psychic contents that belong

not to one individual but to many, i.e., to a society, a people, or to mankind

in general. Such contents are what Lévy-Bruhl

18 calls the représentations collectives of primitives, as well  as  general

  concepts of justice, the state,  religion, science, etc.,  current among

  civilized man. It is not only concepts and ways  of looking at things,

  however, that must be termed collective,  but also feelings. Among

  primitives, the représentations  collectives are at the same time

    collective feelings, as Lévy-Bruhl has shown. Because of this collective

    feeling-value he calls the représentations collectives “mystical,” since

  they are not merely intellectual but emotional.

19 Among civilized peoples, too, certain collective ideas—God, justice,

  fatherland, etc.—are bound up with collective feelings. This collective

  quality adheres not only to

particular psychic elements or contents but to whole functions (q.v.). Thus the

thinking function as a whole can have a collective quality, when it possessesgeneral validity and accords with the laws of logic. Similarly, the feeling

function as a whole can be collective, when it is identical with the general

feeling and accords with general expectations, the  general moral

consciousness, etc. In the same way, sensation and intuition are collective

when they are at the same time characteristic of a large group of men. The

antithesis of collective is individual (q.v.).

[693] 10. COMPENSATION means balancing, adjusting,

supplementing. The concept was introduced into the psychology

of the neuroses by Adler.

20 He understands by it the functional balancing of the feeling of  

    inferiority by  a  compensatory psychological system, comparable to the

    compensatory development of organs in organ inferiority.

21 He says:

With the breaking away from the maternal organism the struggle with the

outer world begins for these inferior organs and organ systems, a struggle

which must necessarily break out and declare itself with greater violence

than in a normally developed apparatus. … Nevertheless, the foetal character

supplies at the same time the heightened possibility of compensation and

overcompensation, increases the capacity for adaptation to usual and unusual

resistance, and ensures the development of new and higher forms, of new

and higher achievements.

22

The neurotic’s feeling of inferiority, which according to Adler corresponds

aetiologically to an organ inferiority, gives rise to an “auxiliary device,”

23 that is, a compensation, which consists in the setting up of a “guiding

  fiction” to balance the inferiority. The “guiding  fiction” is a

  psychological system that endeavours to turn an  inferiority into a

    superiority. The significant

thing about this conception is the undeniable and empirically demonstrable 

existence of  a compensating  function in the  sphere of psychological

processes. It corresponds to a similar function in the physiological sphere,

namely, the self-regulation of the living organism.

[694] Whereas Adler restricts his concept of compensation to the balancing

of inferiority feelings, I conceive it as functional adjustment in general, an

inherent self-regulation of the psychic apparatus.

24 In this sense, I regard the activity of the unconscious (q.v.) as a balancing  of the one-sidedness of the general attitude (q.v.) produced by the

  function of consciousness (q.v.).  Psychologists often compare

    consciousness to the eye: we speak of a visual field and a focal point of

    consciousness. The nature of consciousness is aptly characterized by this

  simile: only a limited number of contents can be held in the conscious

  field at the same time, and of these only a few can attain the highest

  grade of consciousness. The activity of  consciousness is selective.

    Selection demands direction. But  direction requires the exclusion of

    everything irrelevant. This is bound to make the conscious orientation

  (q.v.) one-sided. The contents that are excluded and inhibited by the

  chosen  direction sink into the unconscious, where they form a

    counterweight  to  the conscious orientation.  The strengthening  of this

    counterposition keeps pace with the increase of conscious one-sidedness

  until finally a noticeable tension is produced. This tension inhibits the

  activity of consciousness to a certain extent, and though at first the

    inhibition can be broken down by increased conscious effort, in the

  end the  tension becomes so acute that the repressed unconscious

  contents break through in the form of dreams and spontaneous images

  (q.v.). The more one-sided the conscious attitude, the more antagonistic

  are the contents arising from the unconscious, so that we may speak of

  a real opposition between the two. In this case the compensation appears

  in the form of a counter-function, but this case is extreme. As a rule, the

  unconscious compensation does not run counter to consciousness, but

  is rather a balancing or supplementing of the conscious orientation. In

  dreams, for instance, the unconscious supplies all those contents that are

constellated by the conscious situation but are inhibited by  conscious

selection, although a knowledge of them would be  indispensable for

complete adaptation.

[695] Normally, compensation is an unconscious process,  i.e., an

unconscious regulation of conscious activity. In neurosis the unconscious

appears in such stark contrast to the conscious state that compensation is

disturbed. The aim of  analytical therapy, therefore, is a realization of

unconscious contents in order that compensation may be re-established.

[696] 11. CONCRETISM. By this I mean a peculiarity of thinking and

feeling which is the antithesis of abstraction (q.v.). The actual meaning of

concrete is “grown together.” A concretely thought concept is one that has

grown together or coalesced with other concepts. Such a concept is notabstract, not segregated, not thought “in itself,” but is always alloyed and

related to something else. It is not a differentiated

concept, but is still embedded in the material transmitted by  sense-

perception. Concretistic thinking (q.v.) operates exclusively with concrete

concepts and percepts, and is  constantly related to sensation (q.v.).

Similarly, concretistic feeling (q.v.) is never segregated from its sensuous

context.

[697] Primitive thinking and feeling are entirely  concretistic; they are

always related to sensation. The thought of the primitive has no detached

independence but clings to material phenomena. It rises at most to the level

of analogy. Primitive feeling is equally bound to material phenomena.

Both of them depend on sensation and are only slightly differentiated from

it. Concretism, therefore, is an archaism (q.v.). The magical influence of

the fetish is not experienced as a subjective state of feeling, but sensed as a

magical effect. That is concretistic feeling. The primitive does not experience

the idea of divinity as a subjective content; for him the sacred tree is the

abode of the god, or even the god himself. That is concretistic thinking. In

civilized man, concretistic thinking consists in the inability to conceive of

anything except immediately obvious facts transmitted by the senses, or in

the  inability to discriminate between subjective feeling and the  sensed

object.

[698] Concretism is a concept which falls under the more general concept

of participation mystique (q.v.). Just as the latter

represents a fusion of the individual with external objects,  concretism

represents a fusion of thinking and feeling with  sensation, so that the

object of one is at the same time the  object of the other. This fusion

prevents any differentiation of  thinking  and feeling  and keeps  them  both

within the sphere of sensation; they remain its servants and can never be

developed into pure functions. The result is a predominance  of the

sensation  factor  in psychological orientation (q.v.).  (Concerning the

importance of this factor, v. Sensation.)

[699] The disadvantage of concretism is the subjection of the functions to

sensation. Because sensation is the perception  of physiological stimuli,

concretism either rivets the function to the sensory sphere or constantly

leads back to it. This results in a bondage of the psychological functions

to the senses, favouring the influence of sensuous facts at the expense of

the psychic independence of the individual. So far as the recognition offacts is concerned this orientation is naturally of value, but not as regards

the interpretation of facts and their relation to the individual. Concretism

sets too  high a value on the importance of facts and suppresses the

freedom of the individual for the sake of objective data. But  since the

individual is conditioned not merely by physiological stimuli but by factors

which may even be opposed to external realities, concretism results in a

projection (q.v.) of these inner factors into the objective data and produces

an almost superstitious veneration of mere facts, as is precisely the case with

the primitive. A good example of concretistic feeling is seen in the excessive

importance which Nietzsche attached to  diet, and  in  the  materialism of 

Moleschott (“Man is what he eats”). An example of the  superstitious

overvaluation of facts would be the hypostatizing of the concept of energy

in Ostwald’s monism.

[700] 12. CONSCIOUSNESS. By consciousness I understand the relation

of psychic contents to the ego (q.v.), in so far as this relation is perceived as

such by the ego.25 Relations to the ego that are not perceived as such are

unconscious (q.v.). Consciousness is the function or activity

26 which maintains the

relation of psychic contents to the ego. Consciousness is not identical with

the psyche (v. Soul), because the psyche  represents the totality of all

psychic contents, and these are not necessarily all directly connected with

the ego, i.e., related to it in such a way that they take on the quality of

consciousness. A great many psychic complexes exist which  are not all

necessarily connected with the ego.

27

[701] 13. CONSTRUCTIVE. This concept is used by me in an equivalent

sense to synthetic, almost in fact as an  illustration of it. Constructive

means  “building up.” I use constructive and synthetic to designate a

method that is the antithesis of the reductive (q.v.).

28 The  constructive method is concerned with  the elaboration  of the

  products of the unconscious (dreams, fantasies, etc.; v. Fantasy). It takes

  the unconscious product as a symbolic expression (v. Symbol) which

  anticipates a coming phase of psychological development.

29 Maeder actually speaks of a prospective function of the

  unconscious (q.v.), which half playfully anticipates future

    developments.

30 Adler, too, recognizes an anticipatory function of the unconscious.

31 It is certain that the product of the unconscious cannot be regarded as a

  finished thing, as a sort of end-product, for that would be to deny it any

  purposive significance.  Freud  himself  allows the dream a teleological

  role at least as the “guardian of sleep,”

32 though for him its prospective function is essentially  restricted  to

  “wishing.” The purposive character of unconscious tendencies cannot be

  contested a priori if we are

to accept their analogy with other psychological or physiological functions.

We conceive the product of the unconscious, therefore, as an expression

oriented to a goal or purpose, but characterizing its objective in symbolic

language.

33

[702] In accordance with this conception, the constructive  method of

interpretation is not so much concerned with the primary sources of theunconscious product, with its raw materials, so to speak, as with bringing

its symbolism to a  general and comprehensible expression. The “free

associations” of the subject are considered with respect to their aim and

not with respect to their derivation. They are viewed from the angle of

future action or inaction; at the same time, their relation to the conscious

situation is carefully taken into account, for, according to the compensation

(q.v.)  theory, the activity of the unconscious has an essentially

complementary significance for the conscious situation. Since it is a question

of an anticipatory orientation (q.v.), the actual relation to the object does not

loom so large as in the reductive procedure, which is concerned with actual

relations to the object in the past. It is more a question of the subjective

attitude (q.v.), the object being little more than a signpost pointing to  the  

tendencies of the  subject.  The  aim  of the constructive method, therefore,

is to elicit from the unconscious product a meaning that relates to the

subject’s future attitude. Since, as a rule, the unconscious can create only

symbolic expressions, the constructive method seeks to  elucidate the

symbolically expressed meaning in such a way  as to indicate how the

conscious orientation may be corrected, and how the subject may act in

harmony with the unconscious.

[703] Thus, just as no psychological method of  interpretation relies

exclusively on the associative material  supplied by the analysand, the

constructive method also makes use of comparative material. And just as

reductive interpretation employs parallels drawn from biology, physiology,

folklore, literature, and other sources, the  constructive treatment of an

intellectual problem will make  use of philosophical parallels, while the

treatment of an  intuitive problem will depend more on parallels from

mythology and the history of religion.

[704] The constructive method is necessarily individualistic, since a future

collective attitude can develop only through the individual. The reductive

method, on the contrary, is collective (q.v.), since it leads back from the

individual to basic collective attitudes or facts. The constructive method

can also be directly applied by the subject to his own material, in which

case it is an intuitive method, employed to elucidate the general meaning of

an unconscious product. This elucidation is the result of an associative (as

distinct from actively apperceptive, q.v.) addition of further material, which

so enriches the, symbolic product (e.g., a dream) that it eventually attains

a degree of clarity sufficient for conscious comprehension. It  becomesinterwoven with more general associations and is thereby assimilated.

[705] 14. DIFFERENTIATION means the development of differences, the

separation of parts from a whole. In this work  I employ the concept of

differentiation chiefly with respect to the psychological functions (q.v.). So

long as a function is still so fused with one or more other functions—

thinking with feeling, feeling with sensation, etc.—that it is unable to

operate on its own, it is in an archaic (q.v.) condition, i.e., not differentiated,

not separated from the whole as a special part  and existing by itself.

Undifferentiated thinking is incapable of thinking apart from other functions;

it is continually mixed  up with sensations, feelings, intuitions, just as

undifferentiated feeling is mixed up with sensations and fantasies, as for

instance in the sexualization (Freud) of feeling and thinking in neurosis. As

a rule, the undifferentiated function is also characterized by ambivalence and

ambitendency,

34 i.e., every position entails its own negation, and this leads  to

    characteristic inhibitions in the use of the undifferentiated  function.

  Another feature is the fusing together of its separate components; thus,

    undifferentiated sensation  is vitiated by the  coalescence of different

  sensory spheres (colour-hearing), and  undifferentiated feeling by

    confounding hate with love. To the extent that a function is largely or

  wholly unconscious, it is also undifferentiated; it is not only fused

  together in its  parts but also merged with other functions.

    Differentiation  consists in the separation of the function from other

  functions, and in the separation of its individual parts from each other.

  Without differentiation direction is impossible, since the direction of a

  function towards a

goal depends on the elimination of anything irrelevant. Fusion  with the

irrelevant precludes direction; only a differentiated function is capable of

being directed.

15. DISSIMILATION, V. ASSIMILATION.

[706] 16. EGO. By ego I understand a complex of ideas which constitutes

the centre of my field of consciousness and appears to possess a high degree

of continuity and identity. Hence I also speak of an ego-complex.

35 The ego-complex is as much a content as a condition of consciousness

  (q.v.), for a psychic element is conscious to me only in so far as it is

  related to my ego-complex. But inasmuch as the ego is only the centre

  of my field of consciousness, it is not identical with the totality of my  psyche, being merely one complex among other complexes. I therefore

    distinguish between the ego and the self (q.v.), since the ego is only the

  subject of my consciousness, while the self is the subject of my total

  psyche, which also includes the unconscious. In this sense the self

  would be an ideal entity  which embraces the ego. In unconscious

  fantasies (q.v.) the  self often appears as supraordinate or ideal

  personality, having somewhat the relationship of Faust to Goethe or

    Zarathustra to Nietzsche. For the sake of idealization the archaic features

  of the self are represented as being separate from the “higher” self, as for

  instance Mephistopheles in  Goethe, Epimetheus in Spitteler, and in

  Christian psychology the devil or Antichrist. In Nietzsche, Zarathustra

  discovered his shadow in the “Ugliest Man.”

16a. EMOTION, V. AFFECT. [707] 17. EMPATHY

36 is an introjection (q.v.) of the object. For a fuller

description of the concept of empathy, see Chapter VII; also

projection.

[708] 18. ENANTIODROMIA means a “running counter  to.” In the

philosophy of Heraclitus

37 it is used to designate the play of

opposites in the course of events—the view that everything  that exists

turns into its opposite. “From the living comes death and from the dead

life, from the young old age and

from the old youth; from waking, sleep, and from sleep, waking; the stream

of generation and decay never stands still.”

38 “Construction and destruction, destruction and construction—this is the

  principle which governs all the cycles of natural life, from the smallest to

  the greatest. Just as the cosmos itself arose from the primal fire, so must

  it return  once more into the same—a dual process running its

  measured course through vast periods of time, a drama  eternally re-

    enacted.”

39 Such is the enantiodromia of Heraclitus in the words of  qualified

    interpreters. He himself says:

It is the opposite which is good for us.

Men do not know how what is at variance agrees with itself.  It is an

attunement of opposite tensions, like that of the bow and the lyre.

The bow is called life , but its work is death.Mortals are immortals and immortals are mortals, the one  living the

others’ death and dying the others’ life.

For souls it is death to become water, for water death to become earth.

But from earth comes water, and from water, soul.

All things are an exchange for fire, and fire for all things, like goods for gold

and gold for goods.

The way up and the way down are the same.

40

[709] I use the term enantiodromia for the emergence of the unconscious

opposite in the course of time. This characteristic phenomenon practically

always occurs when an extreme, onesided tendency dominates conscious

life; in time an equally powerful counterposition is built up, which first

inhibits the conscious performance and subsequently breaks through the

conscious control. Good examples of enantiodromia are: the conversion of

St. Paul and of Raymund Lully,

41 the self-identification

of the sick Nietzsche with Christ, and his deification and  subsequent

hatred of Wagner, the transformation of  Swedenborg from an erudite

scholar into a seer, and so on.

[710] 19. EXTRAVERSION is an outward-turning of libido (q.v.). I use

this concept to denote a manifest relation of subject to object, a positive

movement of subjective interest  towards the object. Everyone in the

extraverted state thinks,  feels, and acts in relation to the object, and

moreover in a direct and clearly observable fashion, so that no doubt can

remain about his positive dependence on the object. In  a  sense, therefore,

extraversion is a transfer of interest from  subject to object. If it is an

extraversion of thinking, the subject thinks himself into the object; if an

extraversion of feeling, he feels himself into it. In extraversion there is a

strong, if not exclusive, determination by the object. Extraversion is active

when it is intentional, and passive when the object compels it, i.e., when the

object attracts the subject’s interest of its own accord, even against his

will. When extraversion is habitual, we speak of the extraverted type (q.v.).

[711] 20. FANTASY.

42 By fantasy I understand two different things: 1. a fantasm,  and 2.

  imaginative activity. In the present work the context  always shows

  which of these meanings is intended. By fantasy in the sense of fantasm

  I mean  a complex of ideas that  is distinguished from other such  complexes by the fact that it has no objective referent. Although it may

    originally be based on memory-images of actual experiences, its content

  refers to no external reality; it is merely the output of creative psychic

  activity, a manifestation or product of a combination of  energized

  psychic elements. In so far as psychic energy can  be voluntarily

    directed, a fantasy can be consciously and intentionally produced, either

  as a whole or at least in part. In the former case it is nothing but a

    combination of conscious elements, an artificial experiment of  purely

    theoretical interest. In actual everyday psychological experience, fantasy

  is either set in motion by an intuitive attitude of expectation, or it is an

  irruption of unconscious contents into consciousness.

[712] We can distinguish between active and passive fantasy. Active

fantasies are the product of intuition (q.v.), i.e., they are evoked by an

attitude (q.v.) directed to the perception of unconscious contents, as a result

of which the libido (q.v.) immediately invests all the elements emerging

from the unconscious and, by association with parallel material, brings

them into clear focus in visual form. Passive fantasies appear in visual form

at the outset, neither preceded nor accompanied by intuitive expectation, the

attitude of the subject being wholly passive. Such fantasies belong to the

category of psychic automatisms (Janet). Naturally, they can appear only as

a result of a relative  dissociation  of the psyche,  since they presuppose a

withdrawal of energy from conscious

control and a corresponding activation of unconscious  material. Thus the

vision of St. Paul

43 presupposes that unconsciously he was already a Christian, though this

  fact had escaped his conscious insight.

[713] It is probable that passive fantasies always have their origin in an

unconscious process that is antithetical to consciousness, but invested with

approximately the same amount of energy as the conscious attitude, and

therefore  capable of breaking through the latter’s resistance. Active

fantasies, on the other hand, owe their existence not so much  to this

unconscious process as to a conscious propensity to assimilate hints or

fragments of lightly-toned unconscious complexes and, by associating them

with parallel elements, to elaborate them in clearly visual form. It is not

necessarily a question of a dissociated psychic state, but rather of a positive

participation of consciousness.

[714] Whereas passive fantasy not infrequently bears a morbid stamp or atleast shows some trace of abnormality, active fantasy is one of the highest

forms of psychic activity.  For here the conscious and the unconscious

personality of the subject flow together into a common product in which

both are united. Such a fantasy can be the highest expression of the unity of a

man’s individuality (q.v.), and it may even create  that individuality by

giving perfect expression to its unity. As a general rule, passive fantasy is

never the expression of a unified individuality

since, as already observed, it presupposes a considerable  degree of

dissociation based in turn on a marked conscious/ unconscious opposition.

Hence the fantasy that irrupts into consciousness from  such  a  state  can 

never  be  the  perfect expression of a unified individuality, but will represent

mainly the standpoint of the unconscious personality. The life of St. Paul

affords a good example of this: his conversion to Christianity signified an

acceptance of the hitherto unconscious standpoint and a repression of the

hitherto  anti-Christian one, which then made itself felt in his hysterical

attacks. Passive fantasy, therefore, is always in need of conscious criticism,

lest it merely reinforce the standpoint of the unconscious opposite. Whereas

active fantasy, as the product of a conscious attitude not opposed to the

unconscious, and of unconscious processes not opposed but  merely

compensatory to consciousness, does not require  criticism so much as

understanding.

[715] In fantasies as in dreams (which are nothing but passive fantasies), a

manifest and a latent meaning must be  distinguished. The manifest

meaning is found in the actual “look” of the fantasy image, in the direct

statement made by the underlying complex of ideas. Frequently, however,

the manifest meaning hardly deserves its name, although it is always far

more developed in fantasies than in dreams, probably because the dream-

fantasy usually requires very little energy to overcome the feeble resistance

of the sleeping consciousness, with the result that tendencies which are only

slightly antagonistic and slightly compensatory can also reach the threshold

of perception.  Waking fantasy, on the other  hand, must muster

considerable energy to overcome the inhibition imposed by the conscious

attitude. For this to take place, the unconscious opposite must be a very

important one in order to break through into consciousness. If it consisted

merely of vague, elusive hints it would  never be able to  direct  attention

(conscious libido) to itself so effectively as to interrupt the continuity of

the conscious contents. The unconscious opposite, therefore, has to dependon a very

strong  inner cohesion, and this  expresses itself in an  emphatic  manifest

meaning.

[716] The manifest meaning always has the character of a  visual and

concrete process which, because of its objective unreality, can  never  

satisfy the  conscious demand for understanding.

Hence another meaning of the fantasy, in other words its interpretation or

latent meaning, has to be sought. Although  the existence of a latent

meaning is by no means certain, and although the very possibility of it may

be contested, the demand for understanding is a sufficient motive for a

thorough-going investigation. This investigation of the latent meaning may

be purely causal, inquiring into the psychological origins of the fantasy. It

leads on the one hand to the remoter causes of the fantasy in the distant past,

and on the other to ferreting out the instinctual forces which, from the

energic standpoint, must be responsible for the fantasy activity. As we

know, Freud has made intensive use of this method. It is a method of

interpretation which I call reductive (q.v.). The justification of a reductive

view is immediately apparent, and it is equally obvious that this method of

interpreting psychological facts suffices for people of a  certain

temperament, so that no demand for a deeper understanding is made. If

somebody shouts for help, this is sufficiently and satisfactorily explained

when it is shown that the man is in immediate danger of his life. If a man

dreams of a sumptuous feast, and it is shown that he went to bed hungry, this

is a sufficient explanation of his dream. Or if a man who  represses his

sexuality has sexual fantasies like a medieval hermit, this is satisfactorily

explained by a reduction to sexual repression.

[717] But if we were to explain Peter’s vision

44 by reducing it to the fact that, being “very hungry,” he had received an

  invitation from the unconscious to eat animals that were “unclean,” or

  that the eating of unclean beasts merely signified the fulfilment of a

    forbidden wish, such an  explanation would send us away empty. It

  would be equally unsatisfactory to reduce Paul’s vision to his repressed

  envy of the role Christ played among his fellow countrymen, which

  prompted him to identify himself with Christ. Both explanations may

  contain some glimmering of truth, but they are in no way related to the

  real psychology of the two apostles, conditioned as this was by the

  times they lived in. The explanation is too facile. One cannot discuss    historical events as though they were problems of physiology or a purely

  personal chronique scandaleuse. That

would be altogether too limited a point of view. We are therefore compelled

to broaden very considerably our  conception of the latent meaning of

fantasy, first of all in its causal aspect. The psychology of an individual can

never be exhaustively explained from himself alone: a clear recognition is

needed of the way it is also conditioned by historical and environmental

circumstances. His individual  psychology is not merely a physiological,

biological, or moral problem, it is also a contemporary problem. Again, no

psychological fact can ever be exhaustively explained in terms of causality

alone; as a living phenomenon, it is always indissolubly bound up with the

continuity of the vital process, so that it is not only something evolved but

also continually evolving and creative.

[718] Anything psychic is Janus-faced—it looks both  backwards and

forwards. Because it is evolving, it is also preparing the future. Were this

not so, intentions, aims, plans,

calculations, predictions and premonitions would be  psychological

impossibilities. If, when a man expresses an opinion, we simply relate it

to an opinion previously expressed by someone else, this explanation is

quite futile, for we wish to know not merely what prompted him to do so, but

what he means by it, what his aims and intentions are, and what he hopes

to achieve. And when we know that, we are usually satisfied. In everyday

life we instinctively, without thinking, introduce a final standpoint into an

explanation; indeed, very often we take the final standpoint as the decisive

one and completely disregard the strictly causal factor,  instinctively

recognizing the creative element in everything psychic. If we do this in

everyday life, then a scientific psychology must take this fact into account,

and not rely exclusively on the strictly causal standpoint originally taken

over from natural science, for it has also to consider the purposive nature of

the psyche.

[719] If, then, everyday experience establishes beyond  doubt the final

orientation of conscious contents, we have  absolutely no grounds for

assuming, in the absence of experience to the contrary, that this is not the

case with the  contents of the unconscious. My experience gives me no

reason at all to dispute this; on the contrary, cases where the introduction of

the final standpoint alone provides a  satisfactory explanation are in the

majority. If we now look at Paul’s vision again, but this time fromthe angle of his future mission, and come to the conclusion  that Paul,

though consciously a persecutor of Christians, had unconsciously adopted

the Christian standpoint, and that he was finally brought to avow it by an

irruption of the  unconscious, because his unconscious personality was

constantly striving toward this goal—this seems to me a more

adequate explanation of the real significance of the event than a reduction to

personal motives, even though these doubtless played their part in some

form or other, since the “all-too-human” is never lacking. Similarly, the

clear indication given in Acts 10:28 of a purposive interpretation of Peter’s

vision is far more satisfying than a merely  physiological and personal

conjecture.

[720] To sum up, we might say that a fantasy needs to be understood both

causally and purposively. Causally interpreted, it seems like a symptom of

a physiological or  personal state, the outcome of antecedent events.

Purposively interpreted, it seems like a symbol, seeking to characterize a

definite goal with the help of the material at hand, or trace out a line of

future psychological development. Because active fantasy is the chief mark

of the artistic mentality, the artist is not just a reproducer of appearances

but a creator and educator, for his works have the value of symbols that

adumbrate lines of future development. Whether the symbols will have a

limited or a general social validity depends on the viability of the creative

individual. The more abnormal, i.e., the less viable he is, the more limited

will be the social validity of the symbols he produces, though their value

may be absolute for the individual himself.

[721] One can dispute the existence of the latent meaning of fantasy only if

one is of the opinion that natural processes in general are devoid of meaning.

Science, however, has extracted the meaning of natural processes in the

form of natural laws. These, admittedly, are human hypotheses advanced

in explanation of such processes. But, in so far as we have ascertained that

the proposed law actually coincides with the objective process, we are also

justified in speaking of

the meaning of natural occurrences. We are equally justified in speaking of

the meaning of fantasies when it can be shown that they conform to law.

But the meaning we discover is satisfying, or to put it another way, the

demonstrated law deserves its name,

only when it adequately reflects the nature of fantasy. Natural processes both

conform to law and demonstrate that law. It is a law that one dreams whenone sleeps, but that is not a law which demonstrates anything about the

nature of the dream;  it  is a mere condition of the dream. The

demonstration of a  physiological source of fantasy is likewise a mere

condition of its existence, not a law of its nature. The law of fantasy as a

psychological phenomenon can only be a psychological law.

[722] This brings us to the second connotation of fantasy,  namely

imaginative activity. Imagination is the reproductive or creative activity of

the mind in general. It is not a special faculty, since it can come into play

in all the basic forms of  psychic activity, whether thinking, feeling,

sensation, or intuition (qq.v.). Fantasy as imaginative activity is, in my

view, simply the direct expression of psychic life,

45 of psychic energy which cannot appear in consciousness except in the

  form of images or contents, just as physical energy cannot manifest

  itself except as a definite physical state stimulating the sense organs in

  physical ways. For as  every physical state, from the energic

    standpoint, is a dynamic system, so from the same standpoint a psychic

  content is  a  dynamic system manifesting itself in  consciousness. We

  could therefore say that fantasy in the sense of a fantasm is a definite

  sum of libido that cannot appear in consciousness in any other way than

  in the form of  an image. A fantasm is an idée-force. Fantasy as

  imaginative activity is identical with the flow of psychic energy.

[723] 21. FEELING.

46 I count feeling among the four basic psychological functions (q.v.). I am

  unable to support the psychological school that considers feeling a

    secondary phenomenon dependent on “representations” or sensations, but

  in company with Höffding, Wundt, Lehmann, Külpe, Baldwin, and others,

  I regard it as an independent function sui generis.”

47

[724] Feeling is primarily a process that takes place between the ego

(q.v.) and a given content, a process, moreover, that imparts to the content

a definite value in the  sense of acceptance or rejection (“like” or

“dislike”). The process can also appear isolated, as it were, in the form of a

“mood,” regardless of the momentary contents of  consciousness or

momentary sensations. The mood may be  causally related to earlier

conscious contents, though not necessarily so, since, as psychopathology

amply proves, it may equally well arise from unconscious contents. But even

a mood, whether it be a general or only a partial feeling, implies a valuation;not of one definite, individual conscious content, but of the whole conscious

situation at the moment, and, once again, with special reference to the

question of acceptance or rejection.

[725] Feeling, therefore, is an entirely subjective process, which may be in

every respect independent of external stimuli, though it allies itself with

every sensation.48 Even an “indifferent” sensation possesses a feeling-tone, namely that of

    indifference, which again expresses some sort  of valuation. Hence

  feeling is a kind of judgment, differing from intellectual judgment in

  that its aim is not to establish conceptual relations but to set up a

    subjective criterion of

acceptance or rejection. Valuation by feeling extends to every content of

consciousness, of whatever kind it may be. When the intensity of feeling

increases, it turns into an affect (q.v.), i.e., a feeling-state accompanied by

marked physical innervations. Feeling is distinguished from affect by the

fact that it produces no perceptible physical innervations, i.e., neither more

nor less than an ordinary thinking process.

[726] Ordinary, “simple” feeling is concrete (q.v.), that is, it is mixed up

with other functional elements, more particularly with sensations. In this

case we can call it affective or, as I have done in this book, feeling-

sensation, by which I mean an almost inseparable amalgam of feeling and

sensation elements. This characteristic  amalgamation is found  wherever

feeling is still an undifferentiated function, and is  most evident in the

psyche of a neurotic with differentiated thinking. Although feeling is, in

itself, an independent function, it can easily become dependent on another

function—thinking, for instance; it is then a mere concomitant of thinking,

and is not repressed only in so far as it accommodates itself to the thinking

processes.

[727] It is important to distinguish abstract feeling from ordinary concrete

feeling. Just as the abstract concept (v. Thinking) abolishes the differences

between things it apprehends, abstract feeling rises above the differences of

the individual contents it evaluates, and produces a “mood” or feeling-state

which embraces the different individual valuations and thereby abolishes

them. In the same way that  thinking organizes the contents of

consciousness under  concepts, feeling arranges them according to their

value. The more concrete it is, the more subjective and personal is the

value conferred upon them; but the more abstract it is, the

more universal and  objective the  value will be.  Just as  a  completely

abstract concept no longer coincides with the singularity and discreteness of

things,  but  only with  their  universality and non-differentiation, so

completely abstract feeling no longer coincides with a particular content

and its feeling-value, but with the undifferentiated totality of all contents.

Feeling, like thinking, is a rational (q.v.) function, since values in generalare assigned according to the laws of reason, just as concepts in general are

formed according to these laws.

[728] Naturally the above definitions do not give the essence of feeling—

they only describe it from outside. The  intellect proves incapable of

formulating the real nature of feeling in conceptual terms, since thinking

belongs to a  category incommensurable with feeling; in fact, no basic

psychological function can ever be completely expressed by another. That

being so, it is impossible for an intellectual definition to reproduce

the specific character of feeling at all adequately. The mere classification of

feelings adds nothing to an understanding of their nature, because even the

most exact classification will be able to indicate only the content of feeling

which the intellect can apprehend, without grasping its specific nature. Only

as many classes of feelings can be discriminated as there are classes of

contents that can be intellectually apprehended, but feeling per se can never

be exhaustively classified because, beyond every possible class of contents

accessible to the intellect, there still exist feelings which resist intellectual

classification. The very notion of classification is intellectual and therefore

incompatible with the nature of feeling. We must therefore be content to

indicate the limits of the concept.

[729] The nature of valuation by feeling may be compared with intellectual

apperception (q.v.) as an apperception of value. We can distinguish active

and passive apperception by  feeling. Passive feeling allows itself to be

attracted or excited by a particular content, which then forces the feelings of

the subject to participate. Active feeling is a transfer of value from the

subject; it is an intentional valuation of the content in accordance with

feeling and not in accordance with the intellect. Hence active feeling is a

directed function, an act of the will (q.v.), as for instance loving as opposed

to being in love. The latter would be undirected, passive feeling, as these

expressions themselves show: the one is an activity, the other a passive state.

Undirected feeling is feeling-intuition.  Strictly  speaking, therefore, only

active, directed feeling should be termed rational, whereas passive feeling

is irrational (q.v.) in so far as it confers values without the participation or

even against the intentions of the subject. When the subject’s attitude as a

whole is oriented by the feeling function, we speak of a feeling type (v.

Type).

[730] 21a. FEELING, A (or FEELINGS). A feeling is the specific content

or material of the feeling function, discriminated by empathy (q.v.).[731] 22. FUNCTION (v. also INFERIOR FUNCTION).

By a psychological function I mean a particular form of psychic activity that

remains the same in principle under varying conditions. From the energic

standpoint a function is a manifestation of

libido (q.v.), which likewise remains constant in principle, in much the same

way as a physical force can be considered a specific form or manifestation

of physical energy. I distinguish four basic functions in all, two rational

and two

irrational (qq.v.): thinking and feeling, sensation and intuition (qq.v.). I can

give no a priori reason for selecting these four as basic functions, and can

only point out that this conception has shaped itself out of many years’

experience. I distinguish  these functions from one another because they

cannot be related or reduced to one another. The principle of thinking, for

instance, is absolutely different from the principle of feeling, and so forth. I

make a cardinal distinction between these functions and fantasies (q.v.),

because fantasy is a characteristic form of activity that can manifest itself

in all  four functions. Volition or will (q.v.) seems to me an entirely

secondary phenomenon, and so does attention.

[732] 23. IDEA. In this work the concept “idea” is sometimes used to

designate a certain psychological element which is closely connected with

what I term image (q.v.). The image may be either personal or impersonal in

origin. In the latter case it is collective (q.v.) and is also distinguished by

mythological qualities. I then term it a primordial image. When, on the

other hand, it has no mythological character, i.e., is lacking in visual

qualities and merely collective, I speak of an idea. Accordingly, I use the

term idea to express the meaning of a primordial image, a meaning that has

been abstracted from the concretism (q.v.) of the image. In so far as an idea is

an abstraction (q.v.), it has the appearance of  something derived, or

developed, from elementary factors, a product of thought. This is the sense

in which it is conceived by Wundt

49 and many others.

[733] In so far, however, as an idea is the formulated  meaning of a

primordial image by which it was represented symbolically (v. Symbol), its

essence is not just something

derived or developed, but, psychologically speaking, exists a priori, as a

given possibility for thought-combinations in general. Hence, in accordance

with its essence (but not with its formulation), the idea is a psychologicaldeterminant having an a priori

existence. In this sense Plato sees the idea as a prototype of things, while

Kant defines it as the “archetype [Urbild] of all practical employment of

reason,” a transcendental concept which as such exceeds the bounds of the

experienceable,

50 “a rational concept whose object is not to be found in experience.”

51 He says:

Although we must say of the transcendental concepts of reason that they are

only ideas, this is not by any means to be taken as signifying that they are

superfluous and void. For even if they cannot determine any object, they

may yet, in a fundamental and unobserved fashion, be of service to the

understanding as a canon for its extended and consistent employment. The

understanding does not thereby obtain more knowledge of any object than it

would have by means of its own concepts, but for the acquiring of such

knowledge it receives better and more extensive guidance. Further—what

we need here no more than mention—concepts of reason may perhaps make

a possible transition from the concepts of nature to the practical concepts,

and in that way may give support to the moral ideas themselves.

52

[734] Schopenhauer says:

By Idea, then, I understand every definite and well-established stage in the

objectivation of the Will, so far

as the Will is a thing-in-itself and therefore without  multiplicity, which

stages are related to individual things as their eternal forms or prototypes.

53

For Schopenhauer the idea is a visual thing, for he conceives it entirely in

the way I conceive the primordial image.  Nevertheless, it remains

uncognizable by the individual, revealing itself only to the “pure subject of

cognition,” which “is beyond all willing and all individuality.”

54

[735] Hegel hypostatizes the idea completely and attributes to it alone real

being. It is the “concept, the reality of the concept, and the union of both.”

55 It is “eternal generation.”

56 Lasswitz

regards the idea as the “law showing the direction in which our experience

should develop.” It is the “most certain and supreme reality.”57 For Cohen, it is the “concept’s awareness of itself,” the “foundation” of

  being.

58

[736] I do not want to pile up evidence for the primary nature of the

idea. These quotations should suffice to show that it can be conceived as a

fundamental, a priori factor. It derives this quality from its precursor—the

primordial, symbolic image. Its secondary nature as something abstract and

derived is a result of the rational elaboration to which the primordial image

is subjected to fit it for rational use. The  primordial image is an

autochthonous psychological factor constantly repeating itself at all times

and places, and the

same might be said of the idea, although, on account of its rational nature,

it is much more subject to modification by  rational elaboration and

formulations corresponding to local conditions and the spirit of the time.

Since it is derived from the primordial image, a few philosophers ascribe a

transcendent quality to it; this does not really belong to the  idea as I

conceive it, but rather to the primordial image, about  which a timeless

quality clings, being an integral component of the human mind everywhere

from time immemorial. Its autonomous character is also derived from the

primordial  image, which is never “made” but is continually present,

appearing in perception so spontaneously that it seems to strive for its

own realization, being sensed by the mind as an active determinant. Such a

view, however, is not general, and is presumably a question of attitude (q.v.,

also Ch. VII).

[737] The idea is a psychological factor that not only determines thinking

but, as a practical idea, also conditions feeling. As a general rule, I use

the term idea only when speaking of the determination of thought in a

thinking type, or of feeling in a feeling type. On the other hand, it would

be terminologically correct to speak of an a priori determination  by the

primordial image in the case of an undifferentiated function. The dual

nature of the idea as something both primary and derived is responsible for

the fact that I sometimes use it promiscuously with primordial image. For

the introverted attitude the idea is the prime mover; for the extraverted, a

product.

[738] 24. IDENTIFICATION. By this I mean a

psychological process in which the personality is partially or  totally

dissimilated (v. Assimilation). Identification is an alienation of the subjectfrom himself for the sake of the

object, in which he is, so to speak, disguised. For example, identification

with the father means, in practice, adopting all  the father’s ways of

behaving, as though the son were the same as the father and not a separate

individuality.  Identification differs from imitation in that it is an

unconscious imitation, whereas imitation is a conscious copying. Imitation

is an indispensable aid in developing the  youthful personality. It is

beneficial so long as it does not serve as a mere convenience and hinder

the development of ways and means suited to the individual. Similarly,

identification can be beneficial so long as the individual cannot go his own

way. But when a better possibility presents itself, identification shows its

morbid character by becoming  just as great a hindrance as it was an

unconscious help and  support before. It now has a dissociative effect,

splitting the individual into two mutually estranged personalities.

[739] Identification does not always apply to persons but also to things

(e.g., a movement of some kind, a business, etc.) and to psychological

functions. The latter kind is, in fact, particularly important.

59 Identification then leads to the formation of a secondary character, the

    individual identifying with his best developed function to such an extent

  that he alienates himself very largely or even entirely from his original

  character, with the result that his true individuality (q.v.) falls into the

    unconscious. This is nearly always the rule with people who have one

  highly differentiated function. It is, in fact, a necessary transitional stage

  on the way to individuation (q.v.).

[740] Identification with parents or the closest members of the family is a

normal phenomenon in so far as it coincides  with the a priori family

identity. In this case it is better not to

speak of identification but of identity (q.v.), a term that expresses the actual

situation. Identification with members of the family differs from identity in

that it is not an a priori but a secondary phenomenon arising in the following

way. As the individual emerges from the original family identity, the process

of adaptation and development brings him up against obstacles that

cannot easily be mastered. A damming up of libido (q.v.) ensues, which

seeks a regressive outlet. The regression  reactivates the earlier states,

among them the state of family identity. Identification with members of

the family corresponds to this regressive revival of an identity that had

almost been overcome. All identifications with persons come about in thisway. Identification always has a purpose, namely, to obtain an advantage,

to push aside an obstacle, or to solve a task in the way another individual

would.

[741] 25. IDENTITY. I use the term identity to denote a psychological

conformity. It is always an unconscious  phenomenon since a conscious

conformity would necessarily involve a consciousness of two dissimilar

things, and, consequently, a separation of subject and object, in which

case the identity would already have been abolished. Psychological identity

presupposes that it is unconscious. It is a characteristic of the primitive

mentality and the real foundation of participation mystique (q.v.), which is

nothing but a relic of the original non-differentiation of subject and object,

and hence of the primordial unconscious state. It is also a characteristic of

the mental state of early infancy, and, finally, of the unconscious of the

civilized adult, which, in so  far as it has not become a content of

consciousness, remains in a permanent state of identity with objects. Identity

with the parents provides the basis for subsequent identification (q.v.)

with them; on it also depends the possibility of projection

(q.v.) and introjection (q.v.).

[742] Identity is primarily an unconscious conformity with objects. It is not

an equation, but an a priori likeness which  was never the object of

consciousness. Identity is responsible  for the naïve assumption that the

psychology of one man is like that of another, that the same motives occur

everywhere, that what is agreeable to me must obviously be pleasurable for

others, that what I find immoral must also be immoral for them, and so on. It

is also responsible for the almost universal desire to correct in others what

most needs correcting in oneself. Identity, too, forms the basis of suggestion

and psychic infection. Identity is particularly evident in pathological cases,

for instance in paranoic ideas of reference, where one’s own

subjective contents are taken for granted in others. But identity also makes

possible a consciously collective (q.v.), social attitude (q.v.), which found its

highest expression in the Christian ideal of brotherly love.

[743] 26. IMAGE. When I speak of “image” in this book, I do not mean the

psychic reflection of an external object, but a concept derived from poetic

usage, namely, a figure of fancy or fantasy-image, which is related only

indirectly to the  perception of an external object. This image depends

much more on unconscious fantasy activity, and as the product of such

activity it appears more or less abruptly in consciousness, somewhat inthe manner of a vision or hallucination, but without possessing the morbid

traits that are found in a clinical picture. The image has the psychological

character of a fantasy idea and never the quasi-real character  of  an

hallucination, i.e., it never takes the place of reality, and

can always be distinguished from sensuous reality by the fact that it is an

“inner” image. As a rule, it is not a projection in  space, although in

exceptional cases it can appear in  exteriorized form. This mode of

manifestation must be termed archaic (q.v.) when it is not primarily

pathological, though that would not by any means do away with its archaic

character. On the primitive level, however, the inner image can easily be

projected in space as a vision or an auditory hallucination without being a

pathological phenomenon.

[744] Although, as a rule, no reality-value attaches to the image, this can

at times actually increase its importance for psychic life, since it then has a

greater psychological value, representing an inner reality which often far

outweighs the importance of external reality. In this case the orientation

(q.v.) of the individual is concerned less with adaptation to reality than

with adaptation to inner demands.

[745] The inner image is a complex structure made up of the most varied

material from the most varied sources. It is no conglomerate, however, but a

homogeneous product with a meaning of its own. The image is a condensed

expression of the psychic situation as a whole, and not merely, nor even

predominately, of unconscious contents pure and simple. It undoubtedly

does express unconscious contents, but not the whole of

them, only those that are momentarily constellated. This constellation is the

result of the spontaneous activity of the unconscious on the one hand and of

the momentary conscious situation on the other, which always stimulates the

activity of relevant subliminal material and at the same time inhibits the

irrelevant. Accordingly the image is an expression of the unconscious as well

as the conscious situation of the moment.

The interpretation of its meaning, therefore, can start neither  from the

conscious alone nor from the unconscious alone, but  only from their

reciprocal relationship.

[746] I call the image primordial when it possesses an

archaic (q.v.) character.

60 I speak of its archaic character when the image is in striking accord with

  familiar mythological motifs. It then  expresses material primarily  derived from the collective unconscious (q.v.), and indicates at the

  same time that the factors influencing the conscious situation of the

  moment are collective (q.v.) rather than personal. A personal image has

  neither an archaic character nor a collective significance, but expresses

  contents of the personal unconscious (q.v.) and a personally conditioned

  conscious situation.

[747] The primordial image, elsewhere also termed

archetype,61 is always collective, i.e., it is at least common to entire peoples or

  epochs. In all probability the most important mythological motifs are

  common to all times and races; I  have, in fact, been able to

    demonstrate a whole series of motifs from Greek mythology in the

  dreams and fantasies of  pure-bred Negroes suffering from mental

  disorders.

62

[748] From

63 the scientific, causal standpoint the primordial image can be conceived as

a mnemic deposit, an imprint or

engram (Semon), which has arisen through the condensation of countless

processes of a similar kind. In this respect it is a precipitate and, therefore, a

typical basic form, of  certain  ever-recurring psychic experiences. As a

mythological motif,

it is a continually effective and recurrent expression that reawakens certain

psychic experiences or else formulates them in an appropriate way. From

this standpoint it is a  psychic expression of the physiological and

anatomical disposition. If one holds the view that a particular anatomical

structure is a product of environmental conditions, working  on living

matter, then the primordial image, in its constant  and universal

distribution, would be the product of equally  constant and universal

influences from without, which must, therefore, act like a natural law. One

could in this way relate myths to nature, as for instance solar myths to the

daily rising and setting of the sun, or to the equally obvious change of the

seasons, and this has in fact been done by many mythologists, and still is.

But that leaves the question unanswered why the  sun and its apparent

motions do not appear direct and undisguised as a content of the myths. The

fact that the sun or the moon or the meteorological processes appear, at the

very least, in allegorized form points to an independent collaboration of

the psyche, which in that case cannot be merely a product or stereotype

of environmental conditions. For whence would it draw the capacity to

adopt a standpoint outside sense perception? How, for that matter, could it

be at  all capable of any performance more or other than the mere

corroboration of the evidence of the senses? In view of such  questions

Semon’s naturalistic and causalistic engram theory no longer suffices. We

are forced to assume that the given structure of the brain does not owe its

peculiar nature merely to the influence of surrounding conditions, but alsoand just as much to the peculiar and autonomous quality of living matter, i.e.,

to a law inherent in life itself. The given constitution of  the organism,

therefore, is on the one hand a product of external conditions, while on the

other it is determined by the intrinsic nature of living matter. Accordingly,

the primordial

image is related just as much to certain palpable, self-perpetuating, and

continually operative natural processes as it is to certain inner determinants

of psychic life and of life in general. The organism confronts light with a

new structure, the eye, and the psyche confronts the natural process with a

symbolic image, which apprehends it in the same way as the eye catches

the light. And just as the eye bears witness to the peculiar and spontaneous

creative activity of living matter, the primordial image expresses the unique

and unconditioned creative power of the psyche.

[749] The primordial image is thus a condensation of the living process. It

gives a co-ordinating and coherent meaning both to sensuous and to inner

perceptions, which at first appear without order or connection, and in this

way frees  psychic energy from its bondage to sheer uncomprehended

perception. At the same time, it links the energies released by the perception

of stimuli to a definite meaning, which then guides action along paths

corresponding to this meaning. It releases unavailable, dammed-up energy

by leading the mind back to nature and canalizing sheer instinct into mental

forms.

[750] The primordial image is the precursor of the idea (q.v.), and its

matrix. By detaching it from the concretism (q.v.) peculiar and necessary

to the primordial image, reason develops it into a concept—i.e.,  an idea

which differs from all other concepts in that it is not a datum of experience

but is actually the underlying principle of all experience. The idea derives

this quality from the primordial image, which, as an  expression of the

specific structure of the brain, gives every experience a definite form.

[751] The degree of psychological efficacy of the primordial image is

determined by the attitude (q.v.) of the  individual. If the attitude is

introverted, the natural consequence of the withdrawal of libido (q.v.) from

the external object is the heightened significance of the internal object, i.e.,

thought. This leads to a particularly intense development of thought along

the lines unconsciously laid down by the primordial image. In this way

the primordial  image comes to the surface indirectly. The further

development of thought leads to the idea, which is nothing other than theprimordial image intellectually formulated. Only the development of the

counter-function can take the idea further—that is to say, once the idea has

been grasped intellectually, it strives to become effective in life. It therefore

calls upon feeling (q.v.), which in this case is much less differentiated and

more concretistic than thinking.

Feeling is impure and, because undifferentiated, still fused  with the

unconscious. Hence the individual is unable to unite  the contaminated

feeling with the idea. At this juncture the primordial image appears in the

inner field of vision as a symbol (q.v.), and, by virtue of its concrete

nature, embraces the undifferentiated, concretized feeling, but also, by virtue

of its intrinsic significance, embraces the idea, of which it is indeed the

matrix, and so unites the two. In this way the primordial image acts as a

mediator, once again proving its redeeming power, a power it has always

possessed in the various religions. What Schopenhauer says of the idea,

therefore, I would apply rather to the primordial image, since, as I have

already explained, the idea is not something absolutely a priori, but must

also be regarded as secondary and derived (v. Idea).

[752] In the following passage from Schopenhauer, I would ask the reader to

replace the word “idea” by “primordial image,” and he will then be able to

understand my meaning.

It [the idea] is never cognized by the individual as such, but only by him

who has raised himself beyond all willing and all individuality to the pure

subject of cognition. Thus it is attainable only by the genius, or by the man

who, inspired by works of genius, has succeeded in elevating his powers

of  pure cognition into a temper akin to genius. It is, therefore,  not

absolutely but only conditionally communicable, since the idea conceived

and reproduced in a work of art, for instance, appeals to each man only

according to the measure of his own intellectual worth.

The idea is the unity that falls into multiplicity on account of the temporal

and spatial form of our intuitive apprehension.

The concept is like an inert receptacle, in which the things one puts into it

lie side by side, but from which no more can be taken out than was put in.

The idea, on the other hand, develops, in him who has comprehended it,

notions which are new in relation to the concept of the same name: it is like

a  living, self-developing organism endowed with generative  power,

constantly bringing forth something that was not put into it.

64[753] Schopenhauer clearly discerned that the “idea,” or the  primordial

image as I define it, cannot be produced in the same

way that a concept or an “idea” in the ordinary sense can (Kant defines an

“idea” as a concept “formed from notions”).

65 There clings to it an element beyond rational formulation, rather like

    Schopenhauer’s “temper akin to genius,” which simply means a state of

  feeling. One can get to the primordial image from the idea only because

  the path that led to the idea  passes over the summit into the

    counterfunction, feeling.

[754] The primordial image has one great advantage over the clarity of the

idea, and that is its vitality. It is a self-activating organism, “endowed with

generative power.” The primordial image is an inherited organization of

psychic energy, an ingrained system, which not only gives expression to the

energic process but facilitates its operation. It shows  how the energic

process has run its unvarying course from  time immemorial, while

simultaneously allowing a perpetual  repetition of it by means of an

apprehension or psychic grasp of situations so that life can continue into the

future. It is thus the necessary counterpart of instinct (q.v.), which is a

purposive mode of action presupposing an equally purposive  and

meaningful grasp of the momentary situation. This  apprehension is

guaranteed by the pre-existent primordial image. It represents the practical

formula without which the  apprehension of a new situation would be

impossible.

26a. IMAGO V. SUBJECTIVE LEVEL.

[755] 27. INDIVIDUAL. The psychological individual is characterized by

a peculiar and in some respects unique psychology. The peculiar nature of

the individual psyche  appears less in its elements than in its complex

formations. The psychological individual, or his individuality (q.v.), has an

a  priori unconscious existence, but  exists consciously only  so far as a

consciousness of his peculiar nature is present, i.e., so far as there exists a

conscious distinction from other

individuals. The psychic individuality is given a priori as a correlate of the

physical individuality, although, as observed, it is at first unconscious. A

conscious process of differentiation (q.v.), or individuation (q.v.), is needed

to bring the individuality to consciousness,

i.e., to raise it out of the state of identity (q.v.) with the object. The identity of

the individuality with the object is synonymous with its unconsciousness. Ifthe individuality is unconscious, there is no psychological individual but

merely  a collective psychology of consciousness. The unconscious

individuality is then projected on the object, and the object, in consequence,

possesses too great a value and acts as too powerful a determinant.

[756] 28. INDIVIDUALITY. By individuality I mean the peculiarity and

singularity of the individual in every psychological respect. Everything that

is not collective (q.v.) is individual, everything in fact that pertains only to

one individual and not to a larger group of individuals. Individuality can  

hardly  be  said  to pertain  to  the  psychic elements themselves, but only to

their peculiar and unique grouping and combination (v. Individual).

[757] 29. INDIVIDUATION. The concept of individuation plays a large

role in our psychology. In general, it is the process by which individual

beings are formed and differentiated; in particular, it is the development of

the psychological individual (q.v.) as a being distinct from the general,

collective psychology. Individuation, therefore, is a  process of

differentiation (q.v.), having for its goal the development of the individual

personality.

[758] Individuation is a natural necessity inasmuch as its prevention by a

levelling down to collective standards is injurious to the vital activity of

the individual. Since individuality (q.v.) is a prior psychological and

physiological datum, it also expresses itself in psychological ways. Any

serious check to individuality, therefore, is an artificial  stunting. It is

obvious that a social group consisting of stunted individuals cannot be a

healthy and viable institution; only a society that can preserve its internal

cohesion and collective  values, while at the same time granting the

individual the  greatest possible freedom, has any prospect of enduring

vitality. As the individual is not just a single, separate being, but by his

very existence presupposes a collective  relationship, it follows that the

process of individuation must lead to more intense and broader collective

relationships and not to isolation.

[759] Individuation is closely connected with the transcendent function (v.

Symbol, par. 828), since this  function creates individual lines of

development which could  never be reached by keeping to the path

prescribed by collective norms.

[760] Under  no  circumstances can individuation be the sole  aim of

psychological education. Before it can be taken as a goal, the educational

aim of adaptation to the necessary minimum of collective norms must first