frightened.  He  could  not  speak  any  more."  (These  words  in  her  usual

conversational tone.) Pause. "He will certainly think about it," S. W. now

speaks again in the same tone, in a strange idiom which sounds like French or

Italian, now recalling the former, now the latter. She speaks fluently, rapidly,

and with charm. It is possible to understand a few words but not to remember

the whole, because the language is so strange. From time to time certain

words recur, as wena, wenes, wenai, wene, etc. The absolute naturalness of

the proceedings is bewildering. From time to time she pauses as if some one

were answering her. Suddenly she speaks in German, "Is time already up?"

(In a troubled voice.) "Must I go already? Goodbye, goodbye." With the last

words  there  passes  over  her  face  an  indescribable  expression  of  ecstatic

blessedness. She raises her arms, opens her eyes,—hitherto closed,—looks

radiantly upwards. She remains a moment thus, then her arms sink slackly,

her eyes shut, the expression of her face is tired and exhausted. After a short

cataleptic stage she awakes with a sigh. She looks around astonished: "I've

slept again, haven't I?" She is told she has been talking during the sleep,

whereupon she becomes much annoyed, and this increases when she learns

she has spoken in a foreign tongue. "But didn't I tell the spirits I don't want it?

It mustn't be. It exhausts me too much." Begins to cry. "Oh, God! Oh, God!

must then everything, everything, come back again like last time? Is nothing

spared me?" The next day at the same time there was another attack. When S.

W. has fallen asleep Ulrich von Gerbenstein suddenly announces himself. He

is  an  entertaining  chatterer,  speaks  very  fluently  in  high  German  with  a

North-German  accent.  Asked  what  S.  W.  is  now  doing,  after  much

circumlocution he explains that she is far away, and he is meanwhile here to

look after her body, the circulation of the blood, the respiration, etc. He must

take care that meanwhile no black person takes possession of her and harms

her. Upon urgent questioning he relates that S. W. has gone with the others to

Japan,  to  appear  to  a  distant  relative  and  to  restrain  him  from  a  stupid

marriage.  He  then  announces  in  a  whisper  the  exact  moment  when  the

manifestation takes place. Forbidden any conversation for a few minutes, he

points to the sudden pallor occurring in S. W., remarking that materialisation

at such a great distance is at the cost of correspondingly great force. He then

orders  cold  bandages  to  the  head  to  alleviate  the  severe  headache  which

would occur afterwards. As the colour of the face gradually becomes more

natural  the  conversation  grows  livelier.  All  kinds  of  childish  jokes  and

trivialities are uttered; suddenly U. von G. says, "I see them coming, but theyare still very far off; I see them there like a star." S. W. points to the North.

We are naturally astonished, and ask why they do not come from the East,

whereto U. von G. laughingly retorts: "Oh, but they come the direct way over

the North Pole. I am going now; farewell." Immediately after S. W. sighs,

wakes up, is ill-tempered, complains of extremely bad headache. She saw U.

von G. standing by her body; what had he told us? She gets angry about the

"silly chatter" from which he cannot refrain.

VI.  Begins  in  the  usual  way.  Extreme  pallor;  lies  stretched  out,  scarcely

breathing. Speaks suddenly, with loud, solemn voice: "Yes, be frightened; I

am; I warn you against N.'s teaching. See, in hope is everything that belongs

to  faith.  You  would  like  to  know  who  I  am.  God  gives  where  one  least

expects it. Do you not know me?" Then unintelligible whispering; after a few

minutes she awakes.

VII. S. W. soon falls asleep; lies stretched out on the sofa. Is very pale. Says

nothing, sighs deeply from time to time. Casts up her eyes, rises, sits on the

sofa, bends forward, speaks softly: "You have sinned grievously, have fallen

far." Bends forward still, as if speaking to some one who kneels before her.

She stands up, turns to the right, stretches out her hands, and points to the

spot over which she has been bending. "Will you forgive her?" she asks,

loudly. "Do not forgive men, but their spirits. Not she, but her human body

has sinned." Then she kneels down, remains quite still for about ten minutes

in the attitude of prayer. Then she gets up suddenly, looks to heaven with

ecstatic expression, and then throws herself again on her knees, with her face

bowed on her hands, whispering incomprehensible words. She remains rigid

in this position several minutes. Then she gets up, looks again upwards with a

radiant countenance, and lies down on the sofa; soon after she wakes.                    DEVELOPMENT OF THE


      SOMNAMBULIC PERSONALITIES.

At the beginning of many séances the glass was allowed to move by itself,

when occasionally the advice followed in stereotyped fashion: "You must

ask."

Since  convinced  spiritualists  took  part  in  the  séances,  all  kinds  of

spiritualistic  wonders  were  of  course  demanded,  and  especially  the

"protecting spirits." In reply, sometimes names of well-known dead people

were  produced,  sometimes  unknown  names, e.g.  Berthe  de  Valours,

Elizabeth von Thierfelsenburg, Ulrich von Gerbenstein, etc. The controlling

spirit  was  almost  without  exception  the  medium's  grandfather,  who  once

explained: "he loved her more than any one in this world because he had

protected her from childhood up, and knew all her thoughts." This personality

produced a flood of Biblical maxims, edifying observations, and song-book

verses; the following is a specimen:—

In true believing,

To faith in God cling ever nigh,

Thy heavenly comfort never leaving,

Which having, man can never die.

Refuge in God is peace for ever,

When earthly cares oppress the mind;

Who from the heart can pray is never

Bowed down by fate, howe'er unkind.

Numerous  similar  elaborations  betrayed  by  their  banal,  unctuous  contents

their origin in some tract or other. When S. W. had to speak in ecstasy, lively

dialogues  developed  between  the  circle-members  and  the  somnambulic

personality. The content of the answers received is essentially just the same

commonplace edifying stuff as that of the psychographic communications.

The  character  of  this  personality  is  distinguished  by  its  dry  and  tedious

solemnity,  rigorous  conventionality  and  pietistic  virtue  (which  is  not

consistent with the historic reality). The grandfather is the medium's guide

and  protector.  During  the  ecstatic  state  he  gives  all  kinds  of  advice,

prophesies later attacks and the visions she will see on waking, etc. He orders

cold bandages, gives directions concerning the medium's lying down or the

date of the séances. His relationship to the medium is an extremely tenderone.  In  liveliest  contrast  to  this  heavy  dream-person  stands  a  personality,

appearing first sporadically, in the psychographic communications of the first

séance. It soon disclosed itself as the dead brother of a Mr. R., who was then

taking  part  in  the  séance.  This  dead  brother,  Mr.  P.  R.,  was  full  of

commonplaces about brotherly love towards his living brother. He evaded

particular  questions  in  all  manner  of  ways.  But  he  developed  a  quite

astonishing  eloquence  towards  the  ladies  of  the  circle  and  in  particular

offered his allegiance to one whom Mr. P. R. had never known when alive.

He affirmed that he had already cared very much for her in his lifetime, had

often  met  her  in  the  street  without  knowing  who  she  was,  and  was  now

uncommonly  delighted  to  become  acquainted  with  her  in  this  unusual

manner.  With  such  insipid  compliments,  scornful  remarks  to  the  men,

harmless childish jokes, etc., he took up a large part of the séance. Several of

the  members  found  fault  with  the  frivolity  and  banality  of  this  "spirit,"

whereupon he disappeared for one or two séances, but soon reappeared, at

first well-behaved, often indeed uttering Christian maxims, but soon dropping

back into the old tone. Besides these two sharply differentiated personalities,

others appeared who varied but little from the grandfather's type; they were

mostly dead relatives of the medium. The general atmosphere of the first two

months' séances was accordingly solemnly edifying, disturbed only from time

to time by Mr. P. R.'s trivial chatter. Some weeks after the beginning of the

séances, Mr. R. left our circle, whereupon a remarkable change took place in

Mr. P. R.'s conversation. He became monosyllabic, came less often, and after

a  few  séances  vanished  altogether,  later  on  he  reappeared  but  with  great

infrequency, and for the most part only when the medium was alone with the

particular lady mentioned. Then a new personality forced himself into the

foreground; in contrast to Mr. P. R., who always spoke the Swiss dialect, this

gentleman adopted an affected North-German way of speaking. In all else he

was an exact copy of Mr. P. R. His eloquence was somewhat remarkable,

since S. W. had only a very scanty knowledge of high German, whilst this

new personality, who called himself Ulrich von Gerbenstein, spoke an almost

faultless German, rich in charming phrases and compliments.

Ulrich von Gerbenstein was a witty chatterer, full of repartee, an idler, a great

admirer of the ladies, frivolous, and most superficial.

During the winter of 1899-1900 he gradually came to dominate the situation

more and more, and took over one by one all the above-mentioned functions

of the grandfather, so that under his influence the serious character of theséances disappeared.

All suggestions to the contrary proved unavailing, and at last the séances had

on this account to be suspended for longer and longer intervals. There is a

peculiarity common to all these somnambulic personalities which must be

noted. They have access to the medium's memory, even to the unconscious

portion,  they  are  also au  courant  with  the  visions  which  she  has  in  the

ecstatic  state,  but  they  have  only the  most  superficial  knowledge  of  her

phantasies during the ecstasy. Of the somnambulic dreams they know only

what they occasionally pick up from the members of the circle. On doubtful

points they can give no information, or only such as contradicts the medium's

explanations.  The  stereotyped  answer  to  these  questions  runs:  "Ask

Ivenes."  "Ivenes  knows."  From  the  examples  given  of  different  ecstatic

moments it is clear that the medium's consciousness is by no means idle

during the trance, but develops a striking and multiplex phantastic activity.

For  the  reconstruction  of  S.  W.'s  somnambulic  self  we  have  to  depend

altogether upon her several statements; for in the first place her spontaneous

utterances connecting her with the waking self are few, and often irrelevant,

and in the second very many of these ecstatic states go by without gesture,

and without speech, so that no conclusions as to the inner happenings can

afterwards be drawn from the external appearances. S. W. is almost totally

amnesic for the automatic phenomena during ecstasy as far as they come

within  the  territory  of  the  new  personalities  of  her  ego.  Of  all  the  other

phenomena, such as loud talking, babbling, etc., which are directly connected

with her own ego she usually has a clear remembrance. But in every case

there  is  complete  amnesia  only  during  the  first  few  minutes  after  the

ecstasy. Within the first half-hour, during which there usually prevails a kind

of  semi-somnambulism  with  a  dreamlike  manner,  hallucinations,  etc.,  the

amnesia gradually disappears, whilst fragmentary memories emerge of what

has occurred, but in a quite irregular and arbitrary fashion.

The later séances were usually begun by our hands being joined and laid on

the  table,  whereon  the  table  at  once  began  to  move.  Meanwhile  S.  W.

gradually became somnambulic, took her hands from the table, lay back on

the  sofa,  and  fell  into  the  ecstatic  sleep.  She  sometimes  related  her

experiences to us afterwards, but showed herself very reticent if strangers

were  present.  After  the  very  first  ecstasy  she  indicated  that  she  played  a

distinguished rôle among the spirits. She had a special name, as had each of

the spirits; hers was Ivenes; her grandfather looked after her with particularcare. In the ecstasy with the flower-vision we learnt her special secret, hidden

till then beneath the deepest silence. During the séances in which her spirit

spoke she made long journeys, mostly to relatives, to whom she said she

appeared, or she found herself on the Other Side, in "That space between the

stars which people think is empty, but in which there are really very many

spirit-worlds." In the semi-somnambulic state which frequently followed her

attacks, she once described, in peculiar poetic fashion, a landscape on the

Other  Side,  "a  wondrous,  moon-lit  valley,  set  aside  for  the  races  not  yet

born."  She  represented  her  somnambulic  ego  as  being  almost  completely

released from the body. It is a fully-grown but small, black-haired woman, of

pronounced Jewish type, clothed in white garments, her head covered with a

turban. She understands and speaks the language of the spirits, "for spirits

still, from old human custom, do speak to one another, although they do not

really need to, since they mutually understand one another's thoughts." She

"does not really always talk with the spirits, but just looks at them, and so

understands their thoughts." She travels in the company of four or five spirits,

dead relatives, and visits her living relatives and acquaintances in order to

investigate their life and their way of thinking; she further visits all places

which  lie  within  the  radius  of  these  spectral  inhabitants.  From  her

acquaintanceship with Kerner's book, she discovered and improved upon the

ideas of the black spirits who are kept enchanted in certain places, or exist

partly beneath the earth's surface (compare the "Seherin von Prevorst"). This

activity  caused  her  much  trouble  and  pain;  in  and  after  the  ecstasy  she

complained  of  suffocating  feelings,  violent  headache,  etc.  But  every

fortnight, on Wednesdays, she could pass the whole night in the garden on

the  Other  Side  in  the  company  of  holy  spirits.  There  she  was  taught

everything  concerning  the  forces  of  the  world,  the  endless  complicated

relationships and affinities of human beings, and all besides about the laws of

reincarnation, the inhabitants of the stars, etc. Unfortunately only the system

of  the  world-forces  and  reincarnation  achieved  any  expression.  As  to  the

other matters she only let fall disconnected observations. For example, once

she returned from a railway journey in an extremely disturbed state. It was

thought  at  first  something  unpleasant  had  happened,  till  she  managed  to

compose herself, and said, "A star-inhabitant had sat opposite to her in the

train." From the description which she gave of this being, I recognised a well-

known elderly merchant I happened to know, who has a rather unsympathetic

face. In connection with this experience she related all kinds of peculiaritiesof these star-dwellers; they have no god-like souls, as men have, they pursue

no science, no philosophy, but in technical arts they are far more advanced

than men. Thus on Mars a flying-machine has long been in existence; the

whole of Mars is covered with canals, these canals are cleverly excavated

lakes and serve for irrigation. The canals are quite superficial; the water in

them  is  very  shallow.  The  excavating  caused  the  inhabitants  of  Mars  no

particular trouble, for the soil there is lighter than the earth's. The canals are

nowhere bridged, but that does not prevent communication, for everything

travels  by  flying-machine.  Wars  no  longer  occur  on  the  stars,  for  no

differences of opinion exist. The star-dwellers have not human bodies, but the

most  laughable  ones  possible,  such  as  one  would  never  imagine.  Human

spirits who are allowed to travel on the Other Side may not set foot on the

stars. Equally, wandering star-dwellers may not come to the earth, but must

remain at a distance of twenty-five metres above the earth's surface. Should

they  transgress  they  remain  in  the  power  of  the  earth,  and  must  assume

human bodies, and are only set free again after their natural death. As men,

they  are  cold,  hard-hearted,  cruel.  S.  W.  recognises  them  by  a  singular

expression  in  which  the  "Spiritual"  is  lacking,  and  by  their  hairless,

eyebrowless, sharply-cut faces. Napoleon was a star-dweller.

In her journeys she does not see the places through which she hastens. She

has a feeling of floating, and the spirits tell her when she is at the right spot.

Then, as a rule, she only sees the face and upper part of the person to whom

she is supposed to appear, or whom she wishes to see. She can seldom say in

what kind of surroundings she sees this person. Occasionally she saw me, but

only my head without any surroundings. She occupied herself much with the

enchanting of spirits, and for this purpose she wrote oracular sayings in a

foreign tongue, on slips of paper which she concealed in all sorts of queer

places. An Italian murderer, presumably living in my house, and whom she

called Conventi, was specially displeasing to her. She tried several times to

cast a spell upon him, and without my knowledge hid several papers about,

on which messages were written; these were later found by chance. One such,

written in red ink, was as follows:

Conventi

Marche. 4 govi

Ivenes.

Conventi, go

orden, Astafvent.

Gen palus, vent allis

ton prost afta ben genallis.
 

Unfortunately, I never obtained any interpretation of this. S. W. was quite

inaccessible  in  this  matter.  Occasionally  the  somnambulic  Ivenes  speaks

directly to the public. She does so in dignified fashion, rather precociously,

but she is not wearisomely unctuous and impossibly twaddling as are her two

guides; she is a serious, mature person, devout and pious, full of womanly

tenderness and great modesty, always yielding to the judgments of others.

This expression of plaintive emotion and melancholy resignation is peculiar

to her. She looks beyond this world, and unwillingly returns to reality; she

bemoans her hard lot, and her unsympathetic family surroundings. Associated

with this there is something elevated about her; she commands her spirits,

despises the twaddling chatter of Gerbenstein, consoles others, directs those

in distress, warns and protects them from dangers to body and soul. She is the

intermediary for the entire intellectual output of all manifestations, but she

herself ascribes it to the direction of the spirits. It is Ivenes who entirely

controls S. W.'s semi-somnambulic state.

In semi-somnambulism S. W. gave some of those taking part in the séances

the opportunity to compare her with the "Seherin von Prevorst" (Prophetess

of Prevorst). This suggestion was not without results. S. W. gave hints of

earlier existences which she had already lived through, and after a few weeks

she suddenly disclosed a whole system of reincarnations, although she had

never before mentioned anything of the kind. Ivenes is a spiritual being who

is something more than the spirits of other human beings. Every human spirit

must incorporate himself twice in the course of the centuries. But Ivenes must

incorporate herself at least once every two hundred years; besides herself

only two other persons have participated in this fate, namely, Swedenborg

and Miss Florence Cook (Crookes's famous medium). S. W. calls these two

personages her brother and sister. She gave no information about their pre-

existences.  In  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century  Ivenes  was  Frau

Hauffe, the Prophetess of Prevorst; at the end of the eighteenth century, a

clergyman's wife in central Germany (locality unknown). As the latter she

was seduced by Goethe and bore him a child. In the fifteenth century she was

a Saxon countess, and had the poetic name of Thierfelsenburg. Ulrich von

Gerbenstein is a relative from that line. The interval of 300 years, and heradventure with Goethe, must be atoned for by the sorrows of the Prophetess

of Prevorst. In the thirteenth century she was a noblewoman of Southern

France, called de Valours, and was burnt as a witch. From the thirteenth

century  to  the  Christian  persecution  under  Nero  there  were  numerous

reincarnations of which S. W. could give no detailed account. In the Christian

persecution under Nero she played a martyr's part. Then comes a period of

obscurity till the time of David, when Ivenes was an ordinary Jewess. After

her death she received from Astaf, an angel from a high heaven, the mandate

for her future wonderful career. In all her pre-existences she was a medium

and an intermediary in the intercourse between this side and the other. Her

brothers and sisters are equally old and have the like vocation. In her various

pre-existences she was sometimes married, and in this way gradually founded

a  whole  system  of  relationships  with  whose  endless  complicated  inter-

relations she occupied herself in many ecstasies. Thus, for example, about the

eighth century she was the mother of her earthly father and, moreover, of her

grandfather,  and  mine.  Hence  the  striking  friendship  of  these  two  old

gentlemen, otherwise strangers. As Mme. de Valours she was the present

writer's mother. When she was burnt as a witch the writer took it much to

heart, and went into a cloister at Rouen, wore a grey habit, became Prior,

wrote a work on Botany and died at over eighty years of age. In the refectory

of the cloister there hung a picture of Mme. de Valours, in which she was

depicted in a half-reclining position. (S. W. in the semi-somnambulic state

often took this position on the sofa. It corresponds exactly to that of Mme.

Recamier in David's well-known picture.) A gentleman who often took part

in the séances, who had some slight resemblance to the writer, was also one

of her sons from that period. Around this core of relationship there grouped

themselves, more or less intimately connected, all the persons in any way

related or known to her. One came from the fifteenth century, another—a

cousin—from the eighteenth century, and so on.

From the three great family stocks grew by far the greater part of the present

European  peoples.  She  and  her  brothers  and  sisters  are  descended  from

Adam, who arose by materialisation; the other then-existing families, from

whom Cain took his wife, were descended from apes. S. W. produced from

this circle of relationship an extensive family-gossip, a very flood of romantic

stories, piquant adventures, etc. Sometimes the target of her romances was a

lady acquaintance of the writer's who for some undiscoverable reason was

peculiarly antipathetic to her. She declared that this lady was an incarnationof a celebrated Parisian poisoner, who had achieved great notoriety in the

eighteenth  century.  She  maintained  that  this  lady  still  continued  her

dangerous work, but in a much more ingenious way than formerly; through

the inspiration of the wicked spirits who accompany her she had discovered a

liquid which when merely exposed to the air attracted tubercle bacilli and

formed a splendid developing medium for them. By means of this liquid,

which she was wont to mix with the food, the lady had brought about the

death of her husband (who had indeed died of tuberculosis); also one of her

lovers, and of her own brother, for the sake of his inheritance. Her eldest son

was an illegitimate child by her lover. As a widow she had secretly borne to

another  lover  an  illegitimate  child,  and  finally  she  had  had  an  unnatural

relationship with her own brother (who was later on poisoned). In this way S.

W.  spun  innumerable  stories,  in  which  she  believed  quite  implicitly.  The

persons of these stories appeared in the drama of her visions, as did the lady

before referred to, going through the pantomime of making confession and

receiving  absolution  of  sins.  Everything  interesting  occurring  in  her

surroundings  was  incorporated  in  this  system  of  romances,  and  given  an

order in the network of relationships with a more or less exact statement as to

their pre-existences and the spirits influencing them. It fared thus with all

who  made  S.  W.'s  acquaintance:  they  were  valued  at  a  second  or  first

incarnation, according as they possessed a marked or indefinite character.

They were generally described as relatives, and always exactly in the same

definite way. Only subsequently, often several weeks later, after an ecstasy,

there  would  make  its  appearance  a  new  complicated  romance  which

explained  the  striking  relationship  through  pre-existences  or  through

illegitimate relations. Persons sympathetic to S. W. were usually very near

relatives. Most of these family romances were very carefully made up, so that

to contradict them was impossible. They were always worked out with a quite

bewildering certainty, and surprised one by an extremely clever evaluation of

certain details which she had noticed or taken from somewhere. For the most

part the romances had a ghastly character, murder by poison and dagger,

seduction and divorce, forgery of wills, played the chief rôle.


Mystic  Science.—In  reference  to  scientific  questions  S.  W.  put  forward

numerous suggestions. Generally towards the end of the séances there was

talk and debate about various subjects of scientific and spiritistic nature. S.

W. never took part in the discussion, but generally sat dreamily in a corner ina semi-somnambulic state. She listened to one and another, taking hold of the

talk in a half-dream, but she could never relate anything connectedly; if asked

about it only partial explanations were given. In the course of the winter hints

emerged in various séances: "The spirits taught her about the world-forces

and  the  strange  revelations  from  the  other  side,  yet  she  would  not  tell

anything now." Once she tried to give a description, but only said: "On one

side was the light, on the other the power of attraction." Finally, in March

1900, when for some time nothing had been heard of the teachings at the

séances,  she  announced  suddenly  with  a  joyful  face  that  she  had  now

received everything from the spirits. She drew out a long narrow strip of

paper upon which were numerous names. Although I asked for it she would

not let it leave her hands, but dictated the following scheme to me.






















FIG. 1.

I can remember clearly that in the course of the winter of 1895 we spoke

several times in S. W.'s presence of the forces of attraction and repulsion in

connection with Kant's "Natural History of the Heavens"; we spoke also of

the "Law of the Conservation of Energy," of the different forces of energy,

and  of  the  question  whether  the  force  of  gravity  was  perhaps  a  form  of

movement. From this talk S. W. had plainly created the foundation of her

mystic system. She gave the following explanation: The natural forces arearranged  in  seven  circles.  Outside  these  circles  are  three  more,  in  which

unknown forces intermediate between energy and matter are found. Matter is

found in seven circles which surround ten inner ones. In the centre stands the

primary force, which is the original cause of creation and is a spiritual force.

The first circle which surrounds the primary force is matter which is not

really a force and does not arise from the primary force, but it unites with the

primary  force  and  from  this  union  the  first  descendants  are  the  spiritual

forces; on the one hand the Good or Light Powers, on the other the Dark

Powers.  The  Power  Magnesor  consists  most  of  primary  force;  the  Power

Connesor, in which the dark might of matter is greatest, contains the least.

The further outwards the primary force streams forth, the weaker it becomes,

but  weaker  too  becomes  the  power  of  matter,  since  its  power  is  greatest

where the collision with the primary power is most violent, i.e. in the Power

Connesor.  Within  the  circles  there  are  fresh  analogous  forces  of  equal

strength  but  making  in  the  opposite  direction.  The  system  can  also  be

described in a single series beginning with primary force, Magnesor, Cafor,

etc., proceeding from left to right on the scheme and ascending with Tusa,

Endos, ending with Connesor; only then the survey of the grade of intensity

is made more difficult. Every force in the outer circle is combined from the

nearest adjacent forces of the inner circle.

1. The Magnesor Group.—The so-called powers of Light descend in direct

line from Magnesor, but slightly influenced by the dark side. The powers

Magnesor  and  Cafor  form  together  the  so-called  Life  Force,  which  is  no

single  power  but  is  differently  combined  in  animals  and  plants.  Between

Magnesor and Cafor there exists the Life Force of Man. Morally good men

and those mediums who bring about interviews of good spirits on the earth

have most Magnesor. Somewhere about the middle there stand the life forces

of animals, and in Cafor that of plants. Nothing is known about Hefa, or

rather S. W. can give no information. Persus is the fundamental power which

comes  to  light  in  the  phenomenon  of  the  forces  of  locomotion.  Its

recognisable  forces  are  Warmth,  Light,  Electricity,  Magnetism,  and  two

unknown forces, one of which only exists in comets. Of the powers of the

seventh circle S. W. could only point out north and south magnetism and

positive  and  negative  electricity. Deka  is  unknown. Smar  is  of  peculiar

significance, to be indicated below; it leads to—

2. Hypnos Group.—Hypnos and Hyfonismus are powers which only dwell

within  certain  beings,  in  those  who  are  in  a  position  to  exert  a  magneticinfluence upon others. Athialowi is the sexual instinct. Chemical affinity is

directly derived from it. In the ninth circle under it arises indolence (that is

the  line  of  Smar). Svens  and Kara  are  of  unknown

significance. Pusa corresponds to Smar in the opposite sense.

3. The Connesor Group.—Connesor is the opposite pole of Magnesor. It is

the dark and wicked power equal in intensity to the good power of light.

While the good power creates, this one turns into the opposite. Endos is an

elemental power of minerals. From these (significance unknown) gravitation

proceeds, which on its side is designated as the elemental force of the forces

of  resistance  that  occur  in  phenomena  (gravity,  capillarity,  adhesion  and

cohesion). Nakus is the secret power of a rare stone which controls the effect

of snake poison. The two powers Smar and Pusa have a special importance.

According to S. W., Smar develops in the bodies of morally good men at the

moment of death. This power enables the soul to rise to the powers of light.

Pusa behaves in the opposite way, for it is the power which conducts morally

bad people to the dark side in the state of Connesor.

In  the  sixth  circle  the  visible  world  begins,  which  only  appears  to  be  so

sharply divided from the other side in consequence of the fickleness of our

organs of sense. In reality the transition is a very gradual one, and there are

people who live on a higher stage of knowledge because their perceptions

and sensations are more delicate than those of others. Great seers are enabled

to see manifestations of force where ordinary people can perceive nothing. S.

W. sees Magnesor as a white or bluish vapour, which chiefly develops when

good  spirits  are  near.  Connesor  is  a  dark  vapour-like  fluid,  which,  like

Magnesor, develops on the appearance of "black" spirits. For instance, the

night before the beginning of great visions the shiny vapour of Magnesor

spreads in thick layers, out of which, the good spirits grow to visible white

forces.  It  is  just  the  same  with  Connesor.  But  these  powers  have  their

different mediums. S. W. is a Magnesor medium, as were the Prophetess of

Prevorst and Swedenborg. The materialisation mediums of the spiritualists

are  mostly  Connesor  mediums,  because  materialisation  takes  place  much

more easily through Connesor on account of its close connection with the

properties of matter. In the summer of 1900 S. W. tried several times to

produce the circles of matter, but she never arrived at other than vague and

incomprehensible hints and afterwards spoke no more about this.

Conclusion.—The  really  interesting  and  valuable  séances  came  to  an  end

with the production of the system of powers. Before this a gradual decline inthe vividness of the ecstasies was noticeable. Ulrich von Gerbenstein came

increasingly to the front, and filled up the séances with his childish chatter.

The visions which S. W. had in the meantime likewise seem to have lost

vividness and plasticity of formation, for S. W. was afterwards only able to

feel pleasant sensations in the presence of good spirits, and disagreeableness

in that of bad spirits. Nothing new was produced. There was something of

uncertainty in the trance talks, as if feeling and seeking for the impression

which  she  was  making  upon  the  audience,  together  with  an  increasing

staleness in the content. In the outward behaviour of S. W. there arose also a

marked shyness and uncertainty, so that the impression of wilful deception

became ever stronger. The writer therefore soon withdrew from the séances.

S.  W.  experimented  afterwards  in  other  circles,  and  six  months  after  my

leaving was caught cheating in flagranti delicto. She wanted to arouse again

by spiritualistic experiments the lost belief in her supernatural powers; she

concealed small objects in her dress, throwing them up in the air during the

dark séance. With this her part was played out. Since then, eighteen months

have  passed  during  which  I  have  not  seen  S.  W.  I  have  learnt  from  an

observer who knew her in the earlier days, that she has now and again strange

states of short duration during which she is very pale and silent, and has a

fixed glittering look. I did not hear any more of visions. She is said not to

take part any longer in spiritualistic séances. S. W. is now in a large business,

and according to all accounts is an industrious and responsible person who

does her work eagerly and cleverly, giving entire satisfaction. According to

the account of trustworthy persons, her character has much improved; she has

become quieter, more regular and sympathetic. No other abnormalities have

appeared in her. This case, in spite of its incompleteness, contains a mass of

psychological problems whose exposition goes far beyond the limits of this

little work. We must therefore be satisfied with a mere sketch of the various

striking  manifestations.  For  the  sake  of  a  more  lucid  exposition  it  seems

better to review the various states separately.

1. The Waking State.—Here the patient shows various peculiarities. As we

have seen, at school she was often distracted, lost herself in a peculiar way,

was moody; her behaviour changes inconsequently, now quiet, shy, reserved,

now lively, noisy and talkative. She cannot be called unintelligent, but she

strikes  one  sometimes  as  narrow-minded,  sometimes  as  having  isolated

intelligent moments. Her memory is good on the whole, but owing to her

distraction it is much impaired. Thus, despite much discussion and reading ofKerner's  "Seherin  von  Prevorst,"  for  many  weeks,  she  does  not  know,  if

directly asked, whether the author's name is Koerner or Kerner, nor the name

of  the  Prophetess.  All  the  same,  when  it  occasionally  comes  up,  the

name Kerner is correctly written in the automatic communications. In general

it  may  be  said  that  her  character  has  something  extremely  impulsive,

incomprehensible, protean. Deducting the want of balance due to puberty,

there remains a pathological residue which expresses itself in reactions which

follow no rule and a bizarre unaccountable character. This character may be

called déséquilibré,  or  unstable.  Its  specific  mould  is  derived  from  traits

which can certainly be regarded as hysterical. This is decidedly so in the

conditions  of  distraction.  As  Janet  maintains,  the  foundation  of  hysterical

anæsthesia is the loss of attention. He was able to prove in youthful hysterics

"a striking indifference and distracted attention in the whole region of the

emotional life." Misreading is a notable instance, which beautifully illustrates

hysterical  dispersion  of  attention.  The  psychology  of  this  process  may

perhaps  be  viewed  as  follows:  during  reading  aloud  attention  becomes

paralysed for this act and is directed towards some other object. Meanwhile

the reading is continued mechanically, the sense impressions are received as

before, but in consequence of the dispersion the excitability of the perceptive

centre is lowered, so that the strength of the sense impression is no longer

adequate  to  fix  the  attention  in  such  a  way  that  perception  as  such  is

conducted along the motor speech route; thus all the inflowing associations

which at once unite with any new sense impression are repressed. The further

psychological mechanism permits of only two possible explanations: (1) The

admission of the sense impression is received unconsciously (because of the

increase  of  threshold  stimulus),  in  the  perceptive  centre  just  below  the

threshold  of  consciousness,  and  consequently  is  not  incorporated  in  the

attention  and  conducted  back  to  the  speech  route.  It  only  reaches  verbal

expression through the intervention of the nearest associations, in our case

through the dialect expression for the object. (2) The sense impression is

perceived consciously, but at the moment of its entrance into the speech route

it reaches a territory whose excitability is diminished by the dispersion of

attention. At this place the dialect word is substituted by association for the

motor speech image, and it is uttered as such. In either case it is certain that it

is the acoustic dispersed attention which fails to correct the error. Which of

the two explanations is correct cannot be proved in this case; probably both

approach the truth, for the dispersion of attention seems to be general, and ineach case concerns more than one of the centres engaged in the act of reading

aloud. In our case this phenomenon has a special value, for we have here a

quite elementary automatic phenomenon. It may be called hysterical in so far

as in this concrete case a state of exhaustion and intoxication, with its parallel

manifestations, can be excluded. A healthy person only exceptionally allows

himself to be so engaged by an object that he fails to correct the errors of a

dispersed  attention—those  of  the  kind  described.  The  frequency  of  these

occurrences in the patient point to a considerable limitation of the field of

consciousness,  in  so  far  as  she  can  only  master  a  relative  minimum  of

elementary sensations flowing in at the same time. If we wish to describe

more exactly the psychological state of the "psychic shady side," we might

call it either a sleeping or a dream-state, according as passivity or activity

predominated.  There  is,  at  all  events,  a  pathological  dream-state  of  very

rudimentary extension and intensity and its genesis is spontaneous; dream-

states  arising  spontaneously,  with  the  production  of  automatisms,  are

generally regarded as hysterical on the whole. It must be pointed out that

these instances of misreading occurred frequently in our subject, and that the

term hysterical is employed in this sense; so far as we know, it is only on a

foundation of hysterical constitution that spontaneous states of partial sleep

or dreams occur frequently.

Binet has studied experimentally the automatic substitution of some adjacent

association in his hysterics. If he pricked the anæsthetic hand of the patient

without his noticing the prick, he thought of "points"; if the anæsthetic finger

was moved, he thought of "sticks" or "columns." When the anæsthetic hand,

concealed from the patient's sight by a screen, writes "Salpêtrière," she sees

in front of her the word "Salpêtrière" in white writing on a black ground. This

recalls the experiments above referred to of Guinon and Sophie Waltke.

We thus find in our subject, at a time when there was nothing to indicate the

later  phenomena,  rudimentary  automatisms,  fragments  of  dream

manifestations, which imply in themselves the possibility that some day more

than one association would creep in between the perception of the dispersed

attention and consciousness. The misreading shows us, moreover, a certain

automatic independence of the psychical elements. This occasionally expands

to a more or less fleeting dispersion of attention, although with very slight

results which are never in any way striking or suspicious; this dispersedness

approximates to that of the physiological dream. The misreading can be thus

conceived  as  a  prodromal  symptom  of  the  later  events;  especially  as  itspsychology is prototypical for the mechanism of somnambulic dreams, which

are indeed nothing but a many-sided multiplication and manifold variation of

the elementary processes reviewed above. I never succeeded in demonstrating

during my observations similar rudimentary automatisms. It would seem that

in course of time the states of dispersed attention, to a certain extent beneath

the surface of consciousness, at first of low degree have grown into these

remarkable somnambulic attacks; hence they disappeared during the waking

state, which was free from attacks. So far as concerns the development of the

patient's  character,  beyond  a  certain  not  very  extensive  ripening,  no

remarkable  change  could  be  demonstrated  during  the  observations  lasting

nearly two years. More remarkable is the fact that in the two years since the

cessation (complete?) of the somnambulic attacks, a considerable change in

character has taken place. We shall have occasion later on to speak of the

importance of this observation.

Semi-Somnambulism.—In S. W.'s case the following condition was indicated

by the term semi-somnambulism. For some time after and before the actual

somnambulic attack the patient finds herself in a state whose most salient

feature can best be described as "preoccupation." She only lends half an ear

to the conversation around her, answers at random, often gets absorbed in all

manner of hallucinations; her face is solemn, her look ecstatic, visionary,

ardent.  Closer  observation  discloses  a  far-reaching  alteration  of  the  entire

character.  She  is  now  serious,  dignified;  when  she  speaks  her  subject  is

always an extremely serious one. In this condition she can talk so seriously,

forcibly and convincingly, that one is tempted to ask oneself if this is really a

girl  of  fifteen  and  a  half.  One  has  the  impression  of  a  mature  woman

possessed of considerable dramatic talent. The reason for this seriousness,

this solemnity of behaviour, is given in her explanation that at these times she

stands at the frontier of this world and the other, and associates just as truly

with  the  spirits  of  the  dead  as  with  living  people.  And,  indeed,  her

conversation is usually divided between answers to real objective questions

and  hallucinatory  ones.  I  call  this  state  semi-somnambulism  because  it

coincides  with  Richet's  own  definition.  He  says:  "La  conscience  de  cet

individu persiste dans son intégrité apparente, toutefois des opérations très

compliquées vont s'accomplir en dehors de la conscience sans que le moi

volontaire et conscient paraisse ressentir une modification quelconque. Une

autre personne sera en lui qui agira, pensera, voudra, sans que la conscience,

c'est à dire le moi réfléchi conscient, aît la moindre notion."Binet  says  of  this  term:  "Le  terme  indique  la  parenté  de  cet  état  avec  le

somnambulisme  véritable,  et  en  suite  il  laisse  comprendre  que  la  vie

somnambulique qui se manifeste durant la veille est réduite, déprimée, par la

conscience normale qui la recouvre."                            AUTOMATISMS.

Semi-somnambulism is characterised by the continuity of consciousness with

that of the waking state and by the appearance of various automatisms which

give evidence of an activity of the subconscious self, independent of that of

consciousness.

Our case shows the following automatic phenomena:

(1) Automatic movements of the table.

(2) Automatic writing.

(3) Hallucinations.
 

1. Automatic Movements of the Table.—Before the patient came under my

observation she had been influenced by the suggestion of "table-turning,"

which she had first come across as a game. As soon as she entered the circle

there appeared communications from members of her family which showed

her to be a medium. I could only find out that, as soon as ever her hand was

placed  on  the  table,  the  typical  movements  began.  The  resulting

communications have no interest for us. But the automatic character of the

act itself deserves some discussion, for we may, without more ado, set aside

the  imputation  that  there  was  any  question  of  intentional  and  voluntary

pushing or pulling on the part of the patient.

As we know from the investigations of Chevreul, Gley, Lehmann and others,

unconscious motor phenomena are not only of frequent occurrence among

hysterical persons, and those pathologically inclined in other directions, but

they are also relatively easily produced in normal persons who show no other

spontaneous automatisms. I have made many experiments on these lines, and

can confirm this observation. In the great majority of instances all that is

required is enough patience to put up with an hour of quiet waiting. In most

subjects, motor automatisms will be obtained in a more or less high degree if

contra-suggestions  do  not  intervene  as  obstacles.  In  a  relatively  small

percentage  the  phenomena  arise  spontaneously, i.e.  directly  under  the

influence  of  verbal  suggestion  or  of  some  earlier  auto-suggestion.  In  this

instance  the  case  is  powerfully  affected  by  suggestion.  In  general,  the

particular predisposition is subject to all those laws which also hold good for

normal hypnosis. Nevertheless, certain special circumstances are to be taken

into account, conditioned by the peculiarity of the case. It is not a question of

a total hypnosis, but of a partial one, limited entirely to the motor area of thearm, like the cerebral anæsthesia produced by "magnetic passes" for a painful

spot in the body. We touch the spot in question employing verbal suggestion

or making use of some existing auto-suggestion, using the tactile stimulus

which we know acts suggestively, to bring about the desired partial hypnosis.

In accordance with this procedure, refractory subjects can be brought easily

enough to an exhibition of automatism. The experimenter intentionally gives

the table a slight push, or, better, a series of rhythmic but very slight taps.

After a short time he notices that the oscillations become stronger, that they

continue although he has interrupted his own intentional movements. The

experiment  has  succeeded,  the  subject  has  unsuspectingly  taken  up  the

suggestion.  By  this  procedure  much  more  is  obtained  than  by  verbal

suggestion. In very receptive persons and in all those cases where movement

seems  to  arise  spontaneously,  the  purposeful  tremulous  movements,  not

perceptible by the subject, assume the rôle of agent provocateur.

In  this  way  persons  who,  by  themselves,  have  never  obtained  automatic

movements of a coarse calibre, sometimes assume the unconscious guidance

of the table-movements, provided that the tremors are strong and that the

medium understands their meaning. In this case the medium takes control of

the slight oscillations and returns them considerably strengthened, but rarely

at  exactly  the  same  instant,  generally  a  few  seconds  later,  in  this  way

revealing the agent's conscious or unconscious thought. By means of this

simple  mechanism  there  may  arise  those  cases  of  thought-reading  so

bewildering at first sight. A very simple experiment, that succeeds in many

cases  even  with  unpractised  persons,  will  serve  to  illustrate  this.  The

experimenter  thinks,  say,  of  the  number four,  and  then  waits,  his  hands

quietly  resting  on  the  table,  until  he  feels  that  the  table  makes  the

first inclination to announce the number thought of. He lifts his hands off the

table  immediately,  and  the  number four  will  be  correctly  tilted  out.  It  is

advisable in this experiment to place the table upon a soft thick carpet. By

close attention the experimenter will occasionally notice a movement of the

table which is thus represented.FIG. 2.

(1) Purposeful tremors too slight to be perceived by the subject.

(2) Several very small but perceptible oscillations of the table which indicate

that the subject is responding to them.

(3) The big movements (tilts) of the table, giving the number four that was

thought of.

(ab) Denotes the moment when the operator's hands are removed.

This experiment succeeds excellently with well-disposed but inexperienced

subjects.  After  a  little  practice  the  phenomenon  indicated  is  wont  to

disappear, since by practice the number is read and reproduced directly from

the purposeful movements.

In a responsive medium these purposeful tremors of the experimenter act just

as  the  intentional  taps  in  the  experiment  cited  above;  they  are  received,

strengthened  and  reproduced,  although  slightly  wavering.  Still  they  are

perceptible and hence act suggestively as slight tactile stimuli, and by the

increase of partial hypnosis give rise to great automatic movements. This

experiment illustrates in the clearest way the increase step by step of auto-

suggestion.  Along  the  path  of  this  auto-suggestion  are  developed  all  the

automatic  phenomena  of  a  motor  nature.  How  the  intellectual  content

gradually mingles in with the purely motor need scarcely be elucidated after

this discussion. There is no need of a special suggestion for the evoking of

intellectual phenomena. From the outset it is a question of word-presentation,

at  least  from  the  side  of  the  experimenter.  After  the  first  aimless  motor

irrelevancies of the unpractised subject, some word-products or the intentionsof the experimenter are soon reproduced. Objectively the occurrence of an

intellectual content must be understood as follows:—

By  the  gradual  increase  of  auto-suggestion  the  motor-range  of  the  arm

becomes isolated from consciousness, that is to say, the perception of the

slight movement-impulse is concealed from consciousness.

By the knowledge gained from consciousness that some intellectual content

is  possible,  there  results  a  collateral  excitation  in  the  speech-area  as  the

means immediately at hand for intellectual notification. The motor part of

word-presentation  is  necessarily  chiefly  concerned  with  this  aiming  at

notification.  In  this  way  we  understand  the  unconscious  flowing  over  of

speech-impulse to the motor-area and conversely the gradual penetration of

partial hypnosis into the speech-area.

In numerous experiments with beginners, as a rule I have observed at the

beginning of intellectual phenomena a relatively large number of completely

meaningless words, also often a series of meaningless single letters. Later on,

all kinds of absurdities are produced, e.g. words or entire sentences with the

letters irregularly misplaced or with the order of the letters all reversed—a

kind of mirror-writing. The appearance of the letter or word indicates a new

suggestion; some sort of association is involuntarily joined to it, which is then

realised.  Remarkably  enough,  these  are  not  generally  the  conscious

associations,  but  quite  unexpected  ones,  a  circumstance  showing  that  a

considerable  part  of  the  speech-area  is  already  hypnotically  isolated.  The

recognition  of  this  automatism  again  forms  a  fruitful  suggestion,  since

invariably at this moment the feeling of strangeness arises, if it is not already

present in the pure motor-automatism. The question, "Who is doing this?"

"Who is speaking?", is the suggestion for the synthesis of the unconscious

personality which as a rule does not like being kept waiting too long. Any

name is introduced, generally one charged with emotion, and the automatic

splitting  of  the  personality  is  accomplished.  How  accidental  and  how

vacillating this synthesis is at its beginning, the following reports from the

literature show. Myers communicates the following interesting observation

on  a  Mr.  A.,  a  member  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  who  was

making experiments on himself in automatic writing.                                THIRD DAY.

Question: What is man?

Answer: TEFI H HASL ESBLE LIES.

Is that an anagram? Yes.

How many words does it contain? Five.

What is the first word? SEE.
 

What is the second word? SEEEE.

See? Shall I interpret it myself? Try to.

Mr. A. found this solution: "Life is less able." He was astonished at this

intellectual information, which seemed to him to prove the existence of an

intelligence independent of his own. Therefore he went on to ask:

Who are you? Clelia.

Are you a woman? Yes.

Have you ever lived upon the earth? No.

Will you come to life? Yes.

When? In six years.

Why are you conversing with me? E if Clelia el.

Mr. A. interpreted this answer as: I Clelia feel.                              FOURTH DAY.

Question: Am I the one who asks the questions? Yes.

Is Clelia there? No.

Who is here then? Nobody.

Does Clelia exist at all? No.

With whom then was I speaking yesterday? With no one.


Janet  conducted  the  following  conversation  with  the  subconsciousness  of

Lucie, who, meanwhile, was engaged in conversation with another observer.

"M'entendez-vous?" asks Janet. Lucie answers by automatic writing, "Non."

"Mais pour répondre il faut entendre?" "Oui, absolument." "Alors comment

faites-vous?" "Je ne sais." "Il faut bien qu'il y ait quelqu'un qui m'entend?"

"Oui." "Qui cela! Autre que Lucie. Eh bien! Une autre personne. Voulez-

vous que nous lui donnions un nom?" "Non." "Si, ce sera plus commode,"

"Eh bien, Adrienne!" "Alors, Adrienne, m'entendez-vous?" "Oui."

From  these  quotations  it  will  be  seen  in  what  way  the  subconscious

personality is constructed. It owes its origin purely to suggestive questions

meeting a certain disposition of the medium. The explanation is the result of

the disintegration of the psychical complex; the feeling of the strangeness of

such automatisms then comes in to help, as soon as conscious attention is

directed to the automatic act. Binet remarks on this experiment of Janet's: "Il

faut bien remarquer que si la personnalité d'Adrienne a pu se créer, c'est

qu'elle a rencontré une possibilité psychologique; en d'autres termes, il y avait

là des phénomènes désagrégés vivant séparés de la conscience normale du

sujet."  The  individualisation  of  the  subconsciousness  always  denotes  a

considerable  further  step  of  great  suggestive  influence  upon  the  further

formation  of  automatisms.  So,  too,  we  must  regard  the  origin  of  the

unconscious personalities in our case.

The objection that there is simulation in automatic table-turning may well be

given up, when one considers the phenomenon of thought-reading from the

purposeful  tremors  which  the  patient  offered  in  such  plenitude.  Rapid,

conscious thought-reading demands at the least an extraordinary degree of

practice, which it has been shown the patient did not possess. By means of

the purposeful tremors whole conversations can be carried on, as in our case.

In  the  same  way  the  suggestibility  of  the  subconscious  can  be  provedobjectively  if,  for  instance,  the  experimenter  with  his  hand  on  the  table

desires that the hand of the medium should no longer be able to move the

table or the glass; contrary to all expectation and to the liveliest astonishment

of the subject, the table will immediately remain immovable. Naturally any

other desired suggestions can be realised, provided they do not overstep by

their innervations the region of partial hypnosis; this proves at the same time

the limited nature of the hypnosis. Suggestions for the legs and the other arm

will  thus  not  be  obeyed.  Table-turning  was  not  an  automatism  which

belonged exclusively to the patient's semi-somnambulism: on the contrary,

it occurred in the most pronounced form in the waking state, and in most

cases then passed over into semi-somnambulism, the appearance of this being

generally announced by hallucinations, as it was at the first sitting.

2. Automatic Writing.—A second automatic phenomenon, which at the outset

corresponds to a higher degree of partial hypnosis, is automatic writing. It is,

according to my experience, much rarer and more difficult to produce than

table-turning. As in table-turning, it is again a matter of a primary suggestion,

to the conscious when sensibility is retained, to the unconscious when it is

obliterated. The suggestion is, however, not a simple one, for it already bears

in itself an intellectual element. "To write" means "to write something." This

special element of the suggestion, which extends beyond the merely motor,

often conditions a certain perplexity on the part of the subject, giving rise to

slight contrary suggestions which hinder the appearance of the automatisms. I

have  observed  in  a  few  cases  that  the  suggestion  is  realised,  despite  its

relative  venturesomeness  (e.g.  one  directed  towards  the  waking

consciousness of a so-called normal person). However, it takes place in a

peculiar way; it first displaces the purely motor part of the central system

concerned  in  hypnosis,  and  the  deeper  hypnosis  is  then  reached  by  auto-

suggestion from the motor phenomenon, analogous to the procedure in table-

turning  described  above.  The  subject,  who  has  a  pencil  in  his  hand,  is

purposely engaged in conversation whilst his attention is diverted from the

writing. The hand begins to make movements, beginning with many upward

strokes and zigzag lines, or a simple line is made. Occasionally it happens

that  the  pencil  does  not  touch  the  paper,  but  writes  in  the  air.  These

movements  must  be  conceived  as  purely  motor  phenomena,  which

correspond to the expression of the motor element in the presentation "write."

This phenomenon is somewhat rare; generally single letters are first written,

and what was said above of table-turning holds true of their combinationinto  words  and  sentences.  True  mirror-writing  is  also  observed  here  and

there. In the majority of cases, and perhaps in all experiments with beginners

who are not under some very special suggestion, the automatic writing is that

of the subject. Occasionally its character may be greatly changed, but this is

secondary,  and  is  always  to  be  regarded  as  a  symptom  of  the  intruding

synthesis of a subconscious personality.









FIG. 3.

As  stated,  the  patient's  automatic  writing  never  came  to  any  very  great

development.  In  these  experiments,  generally  carried  out  in  darkness,  she

passed over into semi-somnambulism, or into ecstasy. The automatic writing

had thus the same effect as the preliminary table-turning.

3. The Hallucinations.—The nature of the passing into somnambulism in the

second  séance  is  of  psychological  importance.  As  stated,  the  automatic

phenomena were progressing favourably when darkness came on. The most

interesting event of this séance, so far, was the brusque interruption of the

communication from the grandfather, which was the starting-point of various

debates  amongst  the  members  of  the  circle.  These  two  momentous

occurrences,  the  darkness  and  the  striking  event,  seem  to  have  been  the

foundation for a rapid deepening of hypnosis, in consequence of which the

hallucinations  could  be  developed.  The  psychological  mechanism  of  this

process  seems  to  be  as  follows.  The  influence  of  darkness  upon  the

suggestibility of the sense-organs is well known. Binet states that it has a

special influence on hysterics, producing a state of sleepiness. As is clear

from the foregoing, the patient was in a state of partial hypnosis and had

constituted  herself  one  with  the  unconscious  personality  in  closest

relationship to her in the domain of speech. The automatic expression of this

personality  is  interrupted  most  unexpectedly  by  a  new  person,  of  whose

existence no one had any suspicion. Whence came this cleavage? Obviously

the eager expectation of this first séance had very much occupied the patient.

Her reminiscences of me and my family had probably grouped themselvesaround this expectation; hence these suddenly come to light at the climax of

the automatic expression. That it was just my grandfather and no one else—

not, e.g., my deceased father, who, as she knew, was much closer to me than

the grandfather whom I had never known—perhaps suggests where the origin

of  this  new  person  is  to  be  sought.  It  is  probably  a  dissociation  of  the

personality already present which seized upon the material next at hand for its

expression, namely, upon the associations concerning myself. How far this is

parallel to the experiences revealed by dream investigation (Freud's) must

remain  undecided,  for  we  have  no  means  of  judging  how  far  the  effect

mentioned  can  be  considered  a  "repressed"  one.  From  the  brusque

interruption of the new personality, we may conclude that the presentations

concerned were very vivid, with corresponding intensity of expectation. This

perhaps  was  an  attempt  to  overcome  a  certain  maidenly  shyness  and

embarrassment. This event reminds us vividly of the manner in which the

dream presents to consciousness, by a more or less transparent symbolism,

things one has never said to oneself clearly and openly. We do not know

when this dissociation of the new personality occurred, whether it had been

slowly prepared in the unconscious, or whether it first occurred in the séance.

In any case, this event meant a considerable increase in the extension of the

unconscious sphere rendered accessible through the hypnosis. At the same

time this event must be regarded as powerfully suggestive in regard to the

impression which it made upon the waking consciousness of the patient. For

the  perception  of  this  unexpected  intervention  of  a  new  power  must

inevitably excite a feeling of the strangeness of the automatisms, and would

easily suggest the thought that an independent spirit is here making itself

known. Hence the intelligible association that she would finally be able to see

this spirit. The situation that ensued at the second séance is to be explained by

the  coincidence  of  this  energising  suggestion  with  the  heightened

suggestibility  conditioned  by  the  darkness.  The  hypnosis,  and  with  it  the

series of dissociated presentations, break through to the visual area, and the

expression  of  the  unconscious,  hitherto  purely  motor,  is  made  objective,

according to the measure of the specific energy of the new system, in the

shape of visual images with the character of hallucinations; not as a mere

accompanying  phenomenon  of  the  word-automatism,  but  as  a  substituted

function. The explanation of the situation that arose in the first séance, at that

time unexpected and inexplicable, is no longer presented in words, but as a

descriptive allegorical vision. The sentence "they do not hate one another, butare friends," is expressed in a picture. We often encounter events of this kind

in somnambulism. The thinking of somnambulists is given in plastic images

which constantly break into this or that sense-sphere and are made objective

in hallucinations. The process of reflection sinks into the subconscious; only

its end-results arise to consciousness either as presentations vividly tinged by

the senses, or directly as hallucinations. In our case the same thing occurred

as in the patient whose anæsthetic hand Binet pricked nine times, making her

think of the figure 9; or as in Flournoy's Helen Smith, who, when asked

during business-hours about certain patterns, suddenly saw the number of

days (18) for which they had been lent, at a length of 20 mm. in front of her.

The further question arises, why does the automatism appear in the visual and

not in the acoustic sphere? There are several grounds for this choice of the

visual sphere.

(1) The patient is not gifted acoustically; she is, for instance, very unmusical.

(2) There was no stillness corresponding to the darkness which might have

favoured the appearance of sounds; there was a lively conversation.

(3)  The  increased  conviction  of  the  near  presence  of  spirits,  because  the

automatism felt so strange, could easily have aroused the idea that a spirit

might be seen, thus causing a slight excitation of the visual sphere.

(4)  The  entoptic  phenomena  in  darkness  favoured  the  occurrence  of

hallucinations.

The reasons (3) and (4)—the entoptic phenomena in the darkness and the

probable excitation of the visual sphere—are of decisive importance for the

appearance of hallucinations. The entoptic phenomena in this case play the

same rôle in the auto-suggestion, the production of the automatism, as the

slight  tactile  stimuli  in  hypnosis  of  the  motor  centre.  As  stated,  flashes

preceded  the  first  hallucinatory  twilight-state.  Obviously  attention  was

already at a high pitch, and directed to visual perceptions, so that the retina's

own light, usually very weak, was seen with great intensity. The part played

by  entoptic  perceptions  of  light  in  the  origin  of  hallucinations  deserves

further consideration. Schüle says: "The swarming of light and colour which

stimulates and animates the field of vision, although in the dark, supplies the

material for phantastic figures in the air before falling asleep. As we know,

absolute darkness is never seen; a few particles of the dark field of vision are

always illumined; flecks of light move here and there, and combine into all

kinds of figures; it only needs a moderately active imagination to create out

of them, as one does out of clouds, certain known figures. The power ofreasoning, fading as one falls asleep, leaves phantasy free play to construct

very  vivid  figures.  In  the  place  of  the  light  spots,  haziness  and  changing

colours of the dark visual field, there arise definite outlines of objects."

In this way hypnagogic hallucinations arise. The chief rôle naturally belongs

to  the  imagination,  hence  imaginative  people  in  particular  are  subject  to

hypnagogic  hallucinations.  The  hypnopompic  hallucinations  described  by

Myers arise in the same way.

It is highly probable that hypnagogic pictures are identical with the dream-

pictures of normal sleep—forming their visual foundation. Maury has proved

from  self-observation  that  the  pictures  which  hovered  around  him

hypnagogically  were  also  the  objects  of  the  dreams  that  followed.  G.

Trumbull  Ladd  has  shown  this  even  more  convincingly.  By  practice  he

succeeded  in  waking  himself  suddenly  two  to  five  minutes  after  falling

asleep. He then observed that the figures dancing before the retina at times

represented the same contours as the pictures just dreamed of. He even states

that nearly every visual dream is shaped by the retina's own light-figures. In

our  case  the  fantastic  rendering  of  these  pictures  was  favoured  by  the

situation. We must not underrate the influence of the over-excited expectation

which allowed the dull retina-light to appear with increased intensity. The

further formation of the retinal appearances follows in accordance with the

predominating presentations. That hallucinations appear in this way has been

also observed in other visionaries. Jeanne d'Arc first saw a cloud of light, and

only after some time there stepped forth St. Michael, St. Catherine and St.

Margaret. For a whole hour Swedenborg saw nothing but illuminated spheres

and fiery flames. He felt a mighty change in the brain, which seemed to him

"release of light." After the space of one hour he suddenly saw red figures

which  he  regarded  as  angels  and  spirits.  The  sun  visions  of  Benvenuto

Cellini  in  Engelsburg  are  probably  of  the  same  nature.  A  student  who

frequently saw apparitions stated: "When these apparitions come, at first I

only see single masses of light and at the same time am conscious of a dull

noise in the ears. Gradually these contours become clear figures."

The  appearance  of  hallucinations  occurred  in  a  quite  classical  way  in

Flournoy's Helen Smith. I quote the cases in question from his article.

"18 Mars. Tentative d'expérience dans l'obscurité. Mlle. Smith voit un ballon

tantôt luminieux, tantôt s'obscurcissant.

"25 Mars. Mlle. Smith commence à distinguer de vagues lueurs, de longs

rubans blancs, s'agitant du plancher au plafond, puis enfin une magnifiqueétoile qui dans l'obscurité s'est montrée à elle seule pendant toute la séance.

"1 Avril. Mlle. Smith se sent très agitée, elle a des frissons, est partiellement

glacée. Elle est très inquiète et voit tout à coup se balançant au-dessus de la

table une figure grimaçante et très laide avec de longs cheveux rouges. Elle

voit alors un magnifique bouquet de roses de nuances diverses; tout à coup

elle  voit  sortir  de  dessous  le  bouquet  un  petit  serpent,  qui,  rampant

doucement, vient sentir les fleurs, les regarde," etc.
 

Helen Smith says in regard to the origin of her vision of March:

"La lueur rouge persista autour de moi et je me suis trouvée entourée de

fleurs extraordinaires."

At  all  times  the  complex  hallucinations  of  visionaries  have  occupied  a

peculiar place in scientific criticism. Macario early separated these so-called

intuition-hallucinations  from  others,  since  he  maintains  that  they  occur  in

persons of an eager mind, deep understanding and high nervous excitability.

Hecker expresses himself similarly but more enthusiastically.

His view is that their condition is "the congenital high development of the

spiritual organ which calls into active, free and mobile play the life of the

imagination,  bringing  it  spontaneous  activity."  These  hallucinations  are

"precursors or signs of mighty spiritual power." The vision is "an increased

excitation  which  is  harmoniously  adapted  to  the  most  complete  health  of

mind and body." The complex hallucinations do not belong to the waking

state, but prefer as a rule a partial waking state. The visionary is buried in his

vision even to complete annihilation. Flournoy was also always able to prove

in the visions of H.S. "un certain degré d'obnubilation." In our case the vision

is complicated by a state of sleep whose peculiarities we shall review later.          THE CHANGE IN CHARACTER.

The most striking characteristic of the second stage in our case is the change

in character. We meet many cases in the literature which have offered the

symptom  of  spontaneous  character-change.  The  first  case  in  a  scientific

publication is Weir-Mitchell's case of Mary Reynolds.
 

This was the case of a young woman living in Pennsylvania in 1811. After a

deep sleep of about twenty hours she had totally forgotten her entire past and

everything she had learnt; even the words she spoke had lost their meaning.

She no longer knew her relatives. Slowly she re-learnt to read and write, but

her writing was from right to left. More striking still was the change in her

character. Instead of being melancholy, she was now cheerful in the extreme.

Instead of being reserved, she was buoyant and sociable. Formerly taciturn

and  retiring,  she  was  now  merry  and  jocose.  Her  disposition  was  totally

changed.

In  this  state  she  renounced  her  former  retired  life  and  liked  to  undertake

adventurous excursions unarmed, through wood and mountain, on foot and

horseback. In one of these excursions she encountered a large black bear,

which  she  took  for  a  pig.  The  bear  raised  himself  on  his  hind  legs  and

gnashed his teeth at her. As she could not drive her horse on any further, she

took an ordinary stick and hit the bear until it took to flight. Five weeks later,

after  a  deep  sleep,  she  returned  to  her  earlier  state  with  amnesia  for  the

interval. These states alternated for about sixteen years. But her last twenty-

five years Mary Reynolds passed exclusively in her second state.

Schroeder von der Kalk reports on the following case: The patient became ill

at the age of sixteen with periodic amnesia, after a previous tedious illness of

three years. Sometimes in the morning after waking she passed through a

peculiar choreic state, during which she made rhythmical movements with

her arms. Throughout the whole day she would then exhibit a childish, silly

behaviour and lost all her educated capabilities. (When normal she is very

intelligent, well-read, speaks French well.) In the second state she begins to

speak faulty French. On the second day she is again at times normal. The two

states are completely separated by amnesia.

Hoefelt reports on a case of spontaneous somnambulism in a girl who, in her

normal  state,  was  submissive  and  modest,  but  in  somnambulism  was

impertinent,  rude  and  violent.  Azam's  Felida  was,  in  her  normal  state,depressed,  inhibited,  timid;  and  in  the  second  state  lively,  confident,

enterprising to recklessness. The  second  state  gradually  became  the  chief

one, and finally so far suppressed the first state that the patient called her

normal states, lasting now but a short time, "crises." The amnesic attacks had

begun at 14½. In time the second state became milder and there was a certain

approximation  between  the  character  of  the  two  states.  A  very  striking

example  of  change  in  character  is  that  worked  out  by  Camuset,  Ribot,

Legrand du Saulle, Richer, Voisin, and put together by Bourru and Burot. It

is that of Louis V., a severe male hysteric with amnesic alternating character.

In  the  first  stage  he  is  rude,  cheeky,  querulous,  greedy,  thievish,

inconsiderate. In the second state he is an agreeable, sympathetic character,

industrious, docile and obedient. This amnesic change of character has been

used by Paul Lindau in his drama "Der Andere" (The Other One).

Rieger  reports  on  a  case  parallel  to  Lindau's  criminal  lawyer.  The

unconscious personalities of Janet's Lucie and Léonie (Janet, l.c.) and Morton

Prince's may also be regarded as parallel with our case. There are, however,

therapeutic artificial products whose importance lies in the domain of the

dissociation of consciousness and of memory.

In the above cases, the second state is always separated from the first by an

amnesic dissociation, and the change in character is, at times, accompanied

by a break in the continuity of consciousness. In our case there is no amnesic

disturbance;  the  passage  from  the  first  to  the  second  stage  follows  quite

gradually and the continuity of consciousness remains. The patient carries out

in her waking state everything, otherwise unknown to her, from the field of

the unconscious that she has experienced during hallucinations in the second

stage.

Periodic changes in personality without amnesic dissociation are found in the

region of folie circulaire, but are rarely seen in hysterics, as Renaudin's case

shows. A young man, whose behaviour had always been excellent, suddenly

began to display the worst tendencies. There were no symptoms of insanity,

but, on the other hand, the whole surface of the body was anæsthetic. This

state showed periodic intervals, and in the same way the patient's character

was subject to vacillations. As soon as the anæsthesia disappeared he was

manageable and friendly. When the anæsthesia returned he was overcome by

the worst instincts, which, it was observed, even included the wish to murder.

Remembering that our patient's age at the beginning of the disturbances was

14-1/2, that is, the age of puberty had just been reached, one must supposethat  there  was  some  connection  between  the  disturbances  and  the

physiological  character-changes  at  puberty.  "There  appears  in  the

consciousness of the individual during this period of life a new group of

sensations,  together  with  the  feelings  and  ideas  arising  therefrom;  this

continuous pressure of unaccustomed mental states makes itself constantly

felt because the cause is always at work; the states are co-ordinated because

they arise from one and the same source, and must little by little bring about

deep-seated changes in the ego." Vacillating moods are easily recognisable;

the confused new, strong feelings, the inclination towards idealism, to exalted

religiosity and mysticism, side by side with the falling back into childishness,

all this gives to adolescence its prevailing character. At this epoch the human

being first makes clumsy attempts at independence in every direction; for the

first  time  uses  for  his  own  purposes  all  that  family  and  school  have

contributed hitherto; he conceives ideals, constructs far-reaching plans for the

future, lives in dreams whose content is ambitious and egotistic. This is all

physiological.  The  puberty  of  a  psychopathic  is  a  crisis  of  more  serious

import. Not only do the psychophysical changes run a stormy course, but

features of a hereditary degenerate character become fixed. In the child these

do not appear at all, or but sporadically. For the explanation of our case we

are bound to consider a specific disturbance of puberty. The reasons for this

view will appear from a further study of the second personality. (For the sake

of brevity we shall call the second personality Ivenes—as the patient baptised

her higher ego).

Ivenes is the exact continuation of the everyday ego. She includes the whole

of her conscious content. In the semi-somnambulic state her intercourse with

the real external world is analogous to that of the waking state, that is, she is

influenced by recurrent hallucinations, but no more than persons who are

subject to non-confusional psychotic hallucinations. The continuity of Ivenes

obviously extends to the hysterical attack with its dramatic scenes, visionary

events, etc. During the attack itself she is generally isolated from the external

world; she does not notice what is going on around her, does not know that

she is talking loudly, etc. But she has no amnesia for the dream-content of her

attack.  Amnesia  for  her  motor  expressions  and  for  the  changes  in  her

surroundings is not always present. That this is dependent upon the degree of

intensity  of  her  somnambulic  state  and  that  there  is  sometimes  partial

paralysis of individual sense organs is proved by the occasion when she did

not  notice  me;  her  eyes  were  then  open,  and  most  probably  she  saw  theothers, although she only perceived me when I spoke to her. This is a case of

so-called systematised  anæsthesia  (negative  hallucination)  which  is  often

observed in hysterics.
 

Flournoy, for instance, reports of Helen Smith that during the séances she

suddenly ceased to see those taking part, although she still heard their voices

and felt their touch; sometimes she no longer heard, although she saw the

movements of the lips of the speakers, etc.

Ivenes is just the continuation of the waking self. She contains the entire

consciousness  of  S.  W.'s  waking  state.  Her  remarkable  behaviour  tells

decidedly  against  any  analogy  with  cases  of double  consciousness.  The

characteristics of Ivenes contrast favourably with the patient's ordinary self.

She  is  a  calmer,  more  composed  personality;  her  pleasing  modesty  and

accuracy,  her  uniform  intelligence,  her  confident  way  of  talking  must  be

regarded as an improvement of the whole being; thus far there is analogy

with Janet's Léonie. But this is the extent of the similarity. Apart from the

amnesia, they are divided by a deep psychological difference. Léonie II. is

the healthier, the more normal; she has regained her natural capabilities, she

shows  remarkable  improvement  upon  her  chronic  condition  of  hysteria.

Ivenes  rather  gives  the  impression  of  a  more  artificial  product;  there  is

something thought out; despite all her excellences she gives the impression of

playing a part excellently; her world-sorrow, her yearning for the other side

of things, are not merely piety but the attributes of saintliness. Ivenes is no

mere  human,  but  a  mystic  being  who  only  partly  belongs  to  reality.  The

mournful features, the attachment to sorrow, her mysterious fate, lead us to

the historic prototype of Ivenes—Justinus Kerner's "Prophetess of Prevorst."

Kerner's book must be taken as known, and therefore I omit any references to

these common traits. But Ivenes is no copy of the prophetess; she lacks the

resignation and the saintly piety of the latter. The prophetess is merely used

by her as a study for her own original conception. The patient pours her own

soul into the rôle of the prophetess, thus seeking to create an ideal of virtue

and perfection. She anticipates her future. She incarnates in Ivenes what she

wishes to be in twenty years—the assured, influential, wise, gracious, pious

lady. It is in the construction of the second person that there lies the far-

reaching difference between Léonie II. and Ivenes. Both are psychogenic. But

Léonie I. receives in Léonie II. what really belongs to her, while S. W. builds

up a person beyond herself. It cannot be said "she deceives herself" into, butthat "she dreams herself" into the higher ideal state.

The  realisation  of  this  dream  recalls  vividly  the  psychology  of  the

pathological  cheat.  Delbruck  and  Forel  have  indicated  the  importance  of

auto-suggestion  in  the  formation  of  pathological  cheating  and  reverie.

Pick regards intense auto-suggestibility as the first symptom of the hysterical

dreamer, making possible the realisation of the "day-dream." One of Pick's

patients dreamt that she was in a morally dangerous situation, and finally

carried out an attempt at rape on herself; she lay on the floor naked and

fastened  herself  to  a  table  and  chairs.  Or  some  dramatic  person  will  be

created with whom the patient enters into correspondence by letter, as in

Bohn's case. The patient dreamt herself into an engagement with a totally

imaginary lawyer in Nice, from whom she received letters which she had

herself written in disguised handwriting. This pathological dreaming, with

auto-suggestive  deceptions  of  memory  amounting  to  real  delusions  and

hallucinations, is pre-eminently to be found in the lives of many saints.

It is only a step from the dreamlike images strongly stamped by the senses to

the true complex hallucinations. In Pick's case, for instance, one sees that the

patient, who persuades herself that she is the Empress Elizabeth, gradually

loses  herself  in  her  dreams  to  such  an  extent  that  her  condition  must  be

regarded  as  a  true  "twilight"  state.  Later  it  passes  over  into  hysterical

delirium,  when  her  dream-phantasies  become  typical  hallucinations.  The

pathological  liar,  who  becomes  involved  through  his  phantasies,  behaves

exactly like a child who loses himself in his play, or like the actor who loses

himself  in  his  part.  There  is  here  no  fundamental  distinction  from

somnambulic  dissociation  of  personality,  but  only  a  difference  of  degree,

which  rests  upon  the  intensity  of  the  primary  auto-suggestibility  or

disintegration  of  the  psychic  elements. The  more  consciousness  becomes

dissociated, the greater becomes the plasticity of the dream situation, the less

becomes the amount of conscious lying and of consciousness in general. This

being carried away by interest in the object is what Freud calls hysterical

identification. For instance, to Erler's acutely hysterical patient there appeared

hypnagogically little riders made of paper, who so took possession of her

imagination that she had the feeling of being herself one of them. Similar

phenomena normally occur to us in dreams in general, in which we think like

"hysterics."

The  complete  abandonment  to  the  interesting  image  explains  also  the

wonderful  naturalness  of  pseudological  or  somnambulic  representation—adegree  unattainable  in  conscious  acting.  The  less  waking  consciousness

intervenes  by  reflection  and  reasoning,  the  more  certain  and  convincing

becomes  the  objectivation  of  the  dream,  e.g.  the  roof-climbing  of

somnambulists.

Our case has another analogy with pseudologia phantastica: The development

of the phantasies during the attacks. Many cases are known in the literature

where  the  pathological  lying  comes  on  in  attacks  and  during  serious

hysterical trouble.

Our patient develops her systems exclusively in the attack. In her normal

state she is quite incapable of giving any new ideas or explanations; she must

either  transpose  herself  into  somnambulism  or  await  its  spontaneous

appearance.  This  exhausts  the  affinity  to pseudologia  phantastica  and  to

pathological dream-states.

Our patient's state is even differentiated from pathological dreaming, since it

could never be proved that her dream-weavings had at any time previously

been the objects of her interest during the day. Her dreams occur explosively,

break  forth  with  bewildering  completeness  from  the  darkness  of  the

unconscious. Exactly the same was the case in Flournoy's Helen Smith. In

many cases (see below), however, links with the perceptions of the normal

states can be demonstrated: it seems therefore probable that the roots of every

dream  were  originally  images  with  an  emotional  accentuation,  which,

however, only occupied waking consciousness for a short time. We must

allow that in the origin of such dreams hysterical forgetfulness plays a part

not to be underestimated.

Many images are buried which would be sufficient to put the consciousness

on guard; associated classes of ideas are lost and go on spinning their web in

the unconscious, thanks to the psychic dissociation; this is a process which

we meet again in the genesis of our dreams.

"Our conscious reflection teaches us that when exercising attention we pursue

a definite course. But if that course leads us to an idea which does not meet

with our approval, we discontinue and cease to apply our attention. Now,

apparently,  the  chain  of  thought  thus  started  and  abandoned,  may  go  on

without  regaining  attention  unless  it  reaches  a  spot  of  especially  marked

intensity,  which  compels  renewed  attention.  An  initial  rejection,  perhaps

consciously brought about by the judgment on the ground of incorrectness or

unfitness for the actual purpose of the mental act, may therefore account for

the fact that a mental process continues unnoticed by consciousness until theonset of sleep."

In this way we may explain the apparently sudden and direct appearance of

dream-states. The entire carrying over of the conscious personality into the

dream-rôle  involves  indirectly  the  development  of  simultaneous

automatisms. "Une seconde condition peut amener la division de conscience;

ce n'est pas une altération de la sensibilité, c'est une attitude particulière de

l'esprit, la concentration de l'attention pour un point unique; il résulte de cet

état de concentration que l'esprit devient distrait pour la reste et en quelque

sorte insensible, ce qui ouvre la carrière aux actions automatiques, et ces

actions peuvent prendre un caractère psychique et constituer des intelligences

parasites, vivant côte à côte avec la personnalité normale qui ne les connaît

pas."

Our subject's romances throw a most significant light on the subjective roots

of  her  dreams.  They  swarm  with  secret  and  open  love-affairs,  with

illegitimate births and other sexual insinuations. The central point of all these

ambiguous stories is a lady whom she dislikes, who is gradually made to

assume  the  form  of  her  polar  opposite,  and  whilst  Ivenes  becomes  the

pinnacle  of  virtue,  this  lady  is  a  sink  of  iniquity. But  her  reincarnation

doctrines, in which she appears as the mother of countless thousands, arises

in its naïve nakedness from an exuberant phantasy which is, of course, very

characteristic of the period of puberty. It is the woman's premonition of the

sexual feeling, the dream of fruitfulness, which the patient has turned into

these monstrous ideas. We shall not go wrong if we seek for the curious form

of the disease in the teeming sexuality of this too-rich soil. Viewed from this

standpoint,  the  whole  creation  of  Ivenes,  with  her  enormous  family,  is

nothing but a dream of sexual wish-fulfilment, differentiated from the dream

of a night only in that it persists for months and years.        RELATION TO THE HYSTERICAL


                                  ATTACK.

So far one point in S. W.'s history has remained unexplained, and that is her

attack. In the second séance she was suddenly seized with a sort of fainting

fit,  from  which  she  awoke  with  a  recollection  of  various  hallucinations.

According  to  her  own  statement,  she  had  not  lost  consciousness  for  a

moment. Judging from the external symptoms and the course of the attack,

one is inclined to regard it as a narcolepsy, or rather a lethargy; such, for

example, as Loewenfeld has described, and the more readily as we know that

previously one member of her family (her grandmother) has had an attack of

lethargy. It is possible to imagine that the lethargic disposition (Loewenfeld)

had descended to our subject. In spiritualistic séances it is not usual to see

hysterical convulsions. Our subject showed no sort of convulsive symptoms,

but in their place, perhaps, the peculiar sleeping-states. Ætiologically, at the

outset, two moments must be taken into consideration:

1. The irruption of hypnosis.

2. The psychic stimulation.

1. Irruption  of  Partial  Hypnosis.—Janet  observes  that  the  subconscious

automatisms  have  a  hypnotic  influence  and  can  bring  about  complete

somnambulism.

He  made  the  following  experiment:  While  the  patient,  who  was  in  the

completely waking state, was engaged in conversation by a second observer,

Janet stationed himself behind her and by means of whispered suggestions

made her unconsciously move her hand and by written signs give an answer

to questions. Suddenly the patient broke off the conversation, turned round

and  with  her  supraliminal  consciousness  continued  the  previously

subconscious talk with Janet. She had fallen into hypnotic somnambulism.

There is here a state of affairs similar to our patient's. But it must be noted

that,  for  certain  reasons  discussed  later,  the  sleeping  state  is  not  to  be

regarded as hypnotic. We therefore come to the question of—

2. The Psychic Stimulation.—It is told of Bettina Brentano that the first time

she met Goethe she suddenly fell asleep on his knee.

This ecstatic sleep in the midst of extremest torture, the so-called "witch-

sleep," is well known in the history of trials for witchcraft.

With  susceptible  subjects  relatively  insignificant  stimuli  suffice  to  bringabout the somnambulic state. Thus a sensitive lady had to have a splinter cut

out  of  her  finger.  Without  any  kind  of  bodily  change  she  suddenly  saw

herself sitting by the side of a brook in a beautiful meadow, plucking flowers.

This condition lasted as long as the slight operation and then disappeared

spontaneously.
 

Loewenfeld  has  noticed  unintentional  inducement  of  hysterical  lethargy

through hypnosis.

Our  case  has  certain  resemblances  to  hysterical  lethargy  as  described  by

Loewenfeld,  viz.  the  shallow  breathing,  the  diminution  of  the  pulse,  the

corpse-like pallor of the face, and further the peculiar feeling of dying and the

thoughts of death.

The retention of one sense is not inconsistent with lethargy: thus in certain

cases of trance the sense of hearing remains.

In Bonamaison's case not only was the sense of touch retained, but the senses

of hearing and smell were quickened. The hallucinatory content and loud

speaking is also met with in persons with hallucinations in lethargy. Usually

there prevails total amnesia for the lethargic interval. Loewenfeld's case D.

had,  however,  a  fleeting  recollection;  in  Bonamaison's  case  there  was  no

amnesia.  Lethargic  patients  do  not  prove  susceptible  to  the  usual  waking

stimuli, but Loewenfeld succeeded with his patient St. in turning the lethargy

into hypnosis by means of mesmeric passes, thus combining it with the rest

of consciousness during the attack. Our patient showed herself absolutely

insusceptible in the beginning of the lethargy, but later on she began to speak

spontaneously, was incapable of giving any attention when her somnambulic

ego  was  speaking,  but  could  attend  when  it  was  one  of  her  automatic

personalities. In this last case it is probable that the hypnotic effect of the

automatisms succeeded in achieving a partial transformation of the lethargy

into hypnosis. When we consider that, according to Loewenfeld's view, the

lethargic  disposition  must  not  be  "too  readily  identified  with  the  peculiar

condition  of  the  nervous  apparatus  in  hysteria,"  then  the  idea  of  the

family heredity of this disposition in our case becomes not a little probable.

The disease is much complicated by these attacks.

So far we have seen that the patient's consciousness of her ego is identical in

all the states. We have discussed two secondary complexes of consciousness

and have followed them into the somnambulic attack, where they appear as

the patient's vision when she had lost her motor activity during the attack.During the next attacks she was impervious to any external incidents, but on

the  other  hand  developed,  within  the  twilight  state,  all  the  more  intense

activity, in the form of visions. It seems that many secondary series of ideas

must have split off quite early from the primary unconscious personality, for

already,  after  the  first  two  séances,  "spirits"  appeared  by  the  dozen.  The

names  were  inexhaustible  in  variety,  but  the  differences  between  the

personalities were soon exhausted and it became apparent that they could all

be subsumed under two types, the serio-religious type and the gay-hilarious.

So far it was really only a matter of two different unconscious personalities,

which appeared under different names but had no essential differences. The

older  type,  the  grandfather,  who  had  initiated  the  automatisms,  also  first

began  to  make  use  of  the  twilight  state.  I  am  not  able  to  remember  any

suggestion which might have given rise to the automatic speaking. According

to the preceding view, the attack in such circumstances might be regarded as

a partial auto-hypnosis. The ego-consciousness which remains and, as a result

of  its  isolation  from  the  external  world,  occupies  itself  entirely  with  its

hallucinations, is what is left over of the waking consciousness. Thus the

automatism  has  a  wide  field  for  its  activity.  The  independence  of  the

individual  central  spheres  which  we  have  proved  at  the  beginning  to  be

present in the patient, makes the automatic act of speaking appear intelligible.

Just as the dreamer on occasion speaks in his sleep, so, too, a man in his

waking  hours  may  accompany  intensive  thought  with  an  unconscious

whisper. The peculiar movements of the speech-musculature are to be noted.

They have also been observed in other somnambulists.

These clumsy attempts must be directly paralleled with the unintelligent and

clumsy movements of the table or glass, and most probably correspond to

the preliminary activity of the motor portion of the presentation; that is to

say, a stimulus limited to the motor-centre which has not previously been

subordinated to any higher system. Whether the like occurs in persons who

talk in their dreams, I do not know. But it has been observed in hypnotised

persons.

Since  the  convenient  medium  of  speech  was  used  as  the  means  of

communication, the study of the subconscious personalities was considerably

lightened.  Their  intellectual  compass  is  a  relatively  mediocre  one.  Their

knowledge is greater than that of the waking patient, including also a few

occasional details, such as the birthdays of dead strangers and the like. The

source  of  these  is  more  or  less  obscure,  since  the  patient  does  not  knowwhence in the ordinary way she could have procured the knowledge of these

facts. These are cases of so-called cryptomnesia, which are too unimportant

to deserve more extended notice. The intelligence of the two subconscious

persons is very slight; they produce banalities almost exclusively, but their

relation to the conscious ego of the patient when in the somnambulic state is

interesting. They are invariably aware of everything that takes place during

ecstasy and occasionally they render an exact report from minute to minute.

The  subconscious  persons  only  know  the  patient's  phantastic  changes  of

thought very superficially; they do not understand these and cannot answer a

single  question  concerning  the  situation.  Their  stereotyped  reference  to

Ivenes is: "Ask Ivenes." This observation reveals a dualism in the character

of the subconscious personalities difficult to explain; for the grandfather, who

gives information by automatic speech, also appears to Ivenes and, according

to her account, teaches her about the objects in question. How is it that, when

the grandfather speaks through the patient's mouth, he knows nothing of the

very things which he himself teaches her in the ecstasies?

We  must  again  return  to  the  discussion  of  the  first  appearance  of  the

hallucinations. We picture the vision, then, as an irruption of hypnosis into

the visual sphere. That irruption does not lead to a "normal" hypnosis, but to

a  "hystero-hypnosis,"  that  is,  the  simple  hypnosis  is  complicated  by  a

hysterical attack.

It is not a rare occurrence in the domain of hypnotism for normal hypnosis to

be  disturbed,  or  rather  to  be  replaced  by  the  unexpected  appearance  of

hysterical  somnambulism;  the  hypnotist  in  many  cases  then  loses  rapport

with the patient. In our case the automatism arising in the motor area plays

the part of hypnotist; the suggestions proceeding from it (called objective

auto-suggestions)  hypnotise  the  neighbouring  areas  in  which  a  certain

susceptibility has arisen. At the moment when the hypnotism flows over into

the visual sphere, the hysterical attack occurs which, as remarked, effects a

very deep-reaching change in a large portion of the psychical region. We

must now suppose that the automatism stands in the same relationship to the

attack  as  the  hypnotist  to  a  pathological  hypnosis;  its  influence  upon  the

further structure of the situation is lost. The hallucinatory appearance of the

hypnotised personality, or rather of the suggested idea, may be regarded as

the  last  effect  upon  the  somnambulic  personality.  Thenceforward  the

hypnotist becomes only a figure with whom the somnambulic personality

occupies itself independently: he can only state what is going on and is nolonger the conditio sine qua non of the content of the somnambulic attack.

The  independent  ego-complex  of  the  attack,  in  our  case  Ivenes,  has  now

the upper hand. She groups her own mental products around the personality

of the hypnotiser, that is, of the grandfather, now degraded to a mere image.

In this way we are enabled to understand the dualism in the character of the

grandfather. The grandfather I. who speaks directly to those present, is a

totally different person and a mere spectator of his double, grandfather II.,

who appears as Ivenes' teacher. Grandfather I. maintains energetically that

both are one and the same person, and that I. has all the knowledge which II.

possesses, and is only prevented from giving information by the difficulties

of speech. (The dissociation was of course not realized by the patient, who

took both to be one person.) Grandfather I., if closely examined, however, is

not altogether wrong, judging from one fact which seems to make for the

identity of I. and II., viz. that they are never both present together. When I.

speaks  automatically,  II.  is  not  present;  Ivenes  remarks  on  his  absence.

Similarly, during the ecstasy, when she is with II., she cannot say where I. is,

or  she  may  learn  only  on  returning  from  an  imaginary  journey  that

meanwhile I. has been guarding her body. Conversely I. never says that he is

going  on  a  journey  with  Ivenes  and  never  explains  anything  to  her.  This

behaviour should be noted, for if I. is really separate from II., there seems no

reason  why  he  should  not  speak  automatically  at  the  same  time  that  II.

appears, and be present with II. in the ecstasy. Although this might have been

supposed possible, as a matter of fact it was never observed. How is this

dilemma to be resolved? At all events there exists an identity of I. and II., but

it does not lie in the region of the personality under discussion; it lies in the

basis  common  to  both;  that  is,  in  the  personality  of  the  subject  which  in

deepest essence is one and indivisible. Here we come across the characteristic

of all hysterical dissociations of consciousness. They are disturbances which

only belong to the superficial, and none reaches so deep as to attack the

strong-knit foundation of the ego-complex.

In  many  such  cases  we  can  find  the  bridge  which,  although  often  well-

concealed,  spans  the  apparently  impassable  abyss.  For  instance,  by

suggestion, one of four cards is made invisible to a hypnotised person; he

thereupon names the other three. A pencil is placed in his hand with the

instruction  to  write  down  all  the  cards  lying  there;  he  correctly  adds  the

fourth one.

In the aura of his hystero-epileptic attacks a patient of Janet's invariably had avision of a conflagration, and whenever he saw an open fire he had an attack;

indeed, the sight of a lighted match was sufficient to bring about an attack.

The patient's visual field on the left side was limited to 30°, the right eye was

shut. The left eye was fixed in the middle of a perimeter whilst a lighted

match was held at 80°. The hystero-epileptic attack took place immediately.

Despite the extensive amnesia in many cases of double consciousness, the

patients' behaviour does not correspond to the degree of their ignorance, but it

seems rather as if a deeper instinct guided their actions in accordance with

their former knowledge. Not only this relatively slight amnesic dissociation,

but  the  severe  amnesia  of  the  epileptic  twilight-state,  formerly  regarded

as irreparabile damnum, does not suffice to cut the inmost threads which

bind the ego-complex in the twilight-state to the normal ego. In one case the

content of the twilight-state could be grafted on to the waking ego-complex.

Making  use  of  these  experiments  for  our  case,  we  obtain  the  helpful

hypothesis  that  those  layers  of  the  unconscious  beyond  reach  of  the

dissociation endeavour to present the unity of automatic personality. This

endeavour is shattered in the deeper-seated and more elemental disturbance

of the hysterical attack, which prevents a more complete synthesis by the

tacking on of associations which are to a certain extent the most original

individual property of supraliminal personality. As the Ivenes dream emerged

it  was  fitted  on  to  the  figures  accidentally  in  the  field  of  vision,  and

henceforth remains associated with them.
                     RELATIONSHIP TO THE


          UNCONSCIOUS PERSONALITY.

As  we  have  seen,  the  numerous  personalities  become  grouped  round  two

types,  the  grandfather  and  Ulrich  von  Gerbenstein.  The  first  produces

exclusively sanctimonious religiosity and gives edifying moral precepts. The

latter is, in one word, a "flapper," in whom there is nothing male except the

name. We must here add from the anamnesis that at fifteen the patient was

confirmed by a very bigoted clergyman, and at home she is occasionally the

recipient of sanctimonious moral talks. The grandfather represents this side of

her past, Gerbenstein the other half; hence the curious contrast. Here we have

personified  the  chief  characteristics  of  her  past.  On  the  one  hand  the

sanctimonious  person  with  a  narrow  education,  on  the  other  the

boisterousness of a lively girl of fifteen who often overshoots the mark. We

find both sets of traits mixed in the patient in sharp contrast. At times she is

anxious, shy, and extremely reserved; at others boisterous to a degree. She is

herself often most painfully aware of these contradictions. This circumstance

gives  us  the  key  to  the  source  of  the  two  unconscious  personalities.  The

patient is obviously seeking a middle path between the two extremes; she

endeavours  to  repress  them  and  strains  after  some  ideal  condition.  These

strainings bring her to the puberty dream of the ideal Ivenes, beside whose

figure  the  unacknowledged  trends  of  her  character  recede  into  the

background. They are not lost, however, but as repressed ideas, analogous to

the Ivenes idea, begin an independent existence as automatic personalities.

S. W.'s behaviour recalls vividly Freud's investigations into dreams which

disclose  the  independent  growth  of  repressed  thoughts.  We  can  now

comprehend  why  the  hallucinatory  persons  are  separated  from  those  who

write and speak automatically. The former teach Ivenes the secrets of the

Other Side, they relate all those phantastic tales about the extraordinariness of

her personality, they create scenes where Ivenes can appear dramatically with

the attributes of power, wisdom and virtue. These are nothing but dramatic

dissociations of her dream-self. The latter, the automatic persons, are the ones

to be overcome, they must have no part in Ivenes. With the spirit-companions

of  Ivenes  they  have  only  the  name  in  common. A priori,  it  is  not  to  be

expected  that  in  a  case  like  ours,  where  these  divisions  are  never  clearly

defined, that two such characteristic individualities should disappear entirelyfrom a somnambulic ego-complex having so close a relation with the waking

consciousness.  And  in  fact,  we  do  meet  them  in  part  in  those  ecstatic

penitential scenes and in part in the romances crammed with more or less

banal, mischievous gossip.                                    COURSE.

It only remains to say a few words about the course of this strange affection.

The process reached its maximum in four to eight weeks. The descriptions

given of Ivenes and of the unconscious personalities belong generally to this

period.  Thenceforth  a  gradual  decline  was  noticeable;  the  ecstasies  grew

meaningless and the influence of Gerbenstein became more powerful. The

phenomena gradually lost their distinctive features, the characters which were

at  first  well  demarcated  became  by  degrees  inextricably  mixed.  The

psychological contribution grew smaller and smaller until finally the whole

story  assumed  a  marked  effect  of  fabrication.  Ivenes  herself  was  much

concerned  about  this  decline;  she  became  painfully  uncertain,  spoke

cautiously, feeling her way, and allowed her character to appear undisguised.

The somnambulic attacks decreased in frequency and intensity. All degrees

from somnambulism to conscious lying were observable. Thus the curtain

fell. The patient has since gone abroad. We should not underestimate the

importance of the fact that her character has become pleasanter and more

stable. Here we may recall the cases cited in which the second state gradually

replaced the first state. Perhaps this is a similar phenomenon.

It  is  well  known  that  somnambulic  manifestations  sometimes  begin  at

puberty. The attacks of somnambulism in Dyce's case began immediately

before puberty and lasted just till its termination. The somnambulism of H.

Smith is likewise closely connected with puberty.

Schroeder von der Kalk's patient was 16 years old at the time of her illness;

Felida 14-1/2, etc. We know also that at this period the future character is

formed and fixed. In the case of Felida and of Mary Reynolds we saw that the

character in state II. replaced that of state I. It is not therefore unthinkable

that these phenomena of double consciousness are nothing but character-

formations  for  the  future  personality,  or  their  attempts  to  burst  forth.  In

consequence  of  special  difficulties  (unfavourable  external  conditions,

psychopathic disposition of the nervous system, etc.), these new formations,

or  attempts  thereat,  become  bound  up  with  peculiar  disturbances  of

consciousness. Occasionally the somnambulism, in view of the difficulties

that oppose the future character, takes on a marked teleological meaning, for

it  gives  the  individual,  who  might  otherwise  be  defeated,  the  means  of

victory. Here I am thinking first of all of Jeanne d'Arc, whose extraordinarycourage recalls the deeds of Mary Reynolds' II. This is perhaps the place to

point out the similar function of the "hallucination téléologique" of which the

public  reads  occasionally,  although  it  has  not  yet  been  submitted  to  a

scientific study.      THE UNCONSCIOUS ADDITIONAL


                        CREATIVE WORK.

We have now discussed all the essential manifestations offered by our case

which  are  of  significance  for  its  inner  structure.  Certain  accompanying

manifestations  may  be  briefly  considered: the  unconscious  additional

creative  work.  Here  we  shall  encounter  a  not  altogether  unjustifiable

scepticism on the part of the representative of science. Dessoir's conception

of  a  second  ego  met  with  much  opposition,  and  was  rejected,  as  too

impossible in many directions. As is known, occultism has proclaimed a pre-

eminent  right  to  this  field  and  has  drawn  premature  conclusions  from

doubtful observations. We are indeed very far from being in a position to

state  anything  conclusive,  since  we  have  at  present  only  most  inadequate

material. Therefore if we touch on the field of the unconscious additional

creative work, it is only that we may do justice to all sides of our case. By

unconscious  addition  we  understand  that  automatic  process  whose  result

does not penetrate to the conscious psychic activity of the individual. To this

region above all belongs thought-reading through table movements. I do not

know whether there are people who can divine a whole long train of thought

by  means  of  inductions  from  the  intentional  tremulous  movements.  It  is,

however, certain that, assuming this to be possible, such persons must be

availing themselves of a routine achieved after endless practice. But in our

case long practice can be excluded without more ado, and there is nothing left

but to accept a primary susceptibility of the unconscious, far exceeding that

of the conscious.

This supposition is supported by numerous observations on somnambulists. I

will mention only Binet's experiments, where little letters or some such thing,

or little complicated figures in relief were laid on the anæsthetic skin of the

back of the hand or the neck, and the unconscious perceptions were then

recorded by means of signs. On the basis of these experiments he came to the

following  conclusion:  "D'après  les  calculs  que  j'ai  pu  faire,  la  sensibilité

inconsciente d'une hystérique est à certains moments cinquante fois plus fine

que  celle  d'une  personne  normale."  A  second  additional  creation  coming

under consideration in our case and in numerous other somnambulists, is that

condition which French investigators call "cryptomnesia." By this term is

meant  the  becoming  conscious  of  a  memory-picture  which  cannot  beregarded  as  in  itself  primary,  but  at  most  is  secondary,  by  means  of

subsequent recalling or abstract reasoning. It is characteristic of cryptomnesia

that  the  picture  which  emerges  does  not  bear  the  obvious  mark  of  the

memory-picture, is not, that is to say, bound up with the idiosyncratic super-

conscious ego-complex.

Three  ways  may  be  distinguished  in  which  the  cryptomnesic  picture  is

brought to consciousness.

1. The picture enters consciousness without any intervention of the sense-

spheres (intra-psychically). It is an inrushing idea whose causal sequence is

hidden within the individual. In so far cryptomnesia is quite an everyday

occurrence, concerned with the deepest normal psychic events. How often it

misleads the investigator, the author or the composer into believing his ideas

original, whilst the critic quite well recognises their source! Generally the

individuality of the representation protects the author from the accusation of

plagiarism and proves his good faith; still, cases do occur of unconscious

verbal reproduction. Should the passage in question contain some remarkable

idea, the accusation of plagiarism, more or less conscious, is justified. After

all, a valuable idea is linked by numerous associations with the ego-complex;

at different times, in different situations, it has already been meditated upon

and thus leads by innumerable links in all directions. It can therefore never so

disappear from consciousness that its continuity could be entirely lost from

the sphere of conscious memory. We have, however, a criterion by which we

can  always  recognise  objectively  intra-psychic  cryptomnesia.  The

cryptomnesic presentation is linked to the ego-complex by the minimum of

associations. The reason for this lies in the relation of the individual to the

particular object, in the disproportion of interest to object. Two possibilities

occur:  (1)  The  object  is  worthy  of  interest  but  the  interest  is  slight  in

consequence of dispersion or want of understanding; (2) The object is not

worthy  of  interest,  consequently  the  interest  is  slight.  In  both  cases  an

extremely labile connection with consciousness arises which leads to a rapid

forgetting. The slight bridge is soon destroyed and the acquired presentation

sinks into the unconscious, where it is no longer accessible to consciousness.

Should  it  enter  consciousness  by  means  of  cryptomnesia,  the  feeling  of

strangeness, of its being an original creation, will cling to it because the path

by  which  it  entered  the  subconscious  has  become  undiscoverable.

Strangeness and original creation are, moreover, closely allied to one another

if one recalls the numerous witnesses in belles-lettres to the nature of genius("possession" by genius).

Apart from certain striking cases of this kind, where it is doubtful whether it

is a cryptomnesia or an original creation, there are some cases in which a

passage of no essential content is reproduced, and that almost verbally, as in

the following example:—

About that time when Zarathustra lived on the blissful islands, it came to pass

that  a  ship  cast  anchor  at  that  island  on  which  the  smoking  mountain

standeth; and the sailors of that ship went ashore in order to shoot rabbits!

But about the hour of noon, when the captain and his men had mustered

again, they suddenly saw a man come through the air unto them, and a voice

said distinctly: "It is time! It is high time!" But when that person was nighest

unto them (he passed by them flying quickly like a shadow, in the direction in

which the volcano was situated) they recognised with the greatest confusion

that it was Zarathustra. For all of them, except the captain, had seen him

before, and they loved him, as the folk love, blending love and awe in equal

parts. "Lo! there," said the old steersman, "Zarathustra goeth unto hell!"

An extract of awe-inspiring import from the log of the ship "Sphinx" in the

year 1686, in the Mediterranean.

Just. Kerner, "Blätter aus Prevorst," vol. IV., p, 57.

The four captains and a merchant, Mr. Bell, went ashore on the island of

Mount  Stromboli  to  shoot  rabbits.  At  three  o'clock  they  called  the  crew

together to go aboard, when, to their inexpressible astonishment, they saw

two men flying rapidly over them through the air. One was dressed in black,

the other in grey. They approached them very closely, in the greatest haste; to

their greatest dismay they descended amid the burning flames into the crater

of  the  terrible  volcano,  Mount  Stromboli.  They  recognised  the  pair  as

acquaintances from London.
 

Frau E. Förster-Nietzsche, the poet's sister, told me, in reply to my inquiry,

that Nietzsche took up Just. Kerner between the age of twelve and fifteen,

when stopping with his grandfather, Pastor Oehler, in Pobler, but certainly

never afterwards. It could never have been the poet's intention to commit a

plagiarism from a ship's log; if this had been the case, he would certainly

have omitted the very prosaic "to shoot rabbits," which was, moreover, quite

unessential to the situation. In the poetical sketch of Zarathustra's journey

into Hell there was obviously interpolated, half or wholly unconsciously, that

forgotten impression from his youth.This is an instance which shows all the peculiarities of cryptomnesia. A quite

unessential  detail,  which  deserves  nothing  but  speedy  forgetting,  is

reproduced with almost verbal fidelity, whilst the chief part of the narrative

is, one cannot say altered, but recreated quite distinctively. To the distinctive

core, the idea of the journey to Hell, there is added a detail, the old, forgotten

impression of a similar situation. The original is so absurd that the youth,

who read everything, probably skipped through it, and certainly had no deep

interest in it. Here we get the required minimum of associated links, for we

cannot easily conceive a greater jump, than from that old, absurd story to

Nietzsche's  consciousness  in  the  year  1883.  If  we  picture  to  ourselves

Nietzsche's mood at the time when "Zarathustra" was composed, and think of

the ecstasy that at more than one point approached the pathological, we shall

comprehend the abnormal reminiscence. The second of the two possibilities

mentioned, the acceptance of some object, not itself uninteresting, in a state

of dispersion or half interest from lack of understanding, and its cryptomnesic

reproduction we find chiefly in somnambulists; it is also found in the literary

chronicles dealing with dying celebrities.

Amid the exhaustive selection of these phenomena we are chiefly concerned

with talking in a foreign tongue, the so-called glossolalia. This phenomenon

is mentioned everywhere when it is a question of similar ecstatic conditions.

In the New Testament, in the Acta Sanctorum, in the Witchcraft Trials, more

recently in the Prophetess of Prevorst, in Judge Edmond's daughter Laura, in

Flournoy's  Helen  Smith.  The  last  is  unique  from  the  point  of  view  of

investigation;  it  is  found  also  in  Bresler's  case,  which  is  probably

identical with Blumhardt's Gottlieben Dittus. As Flournoy shows, glossolalia

is, so far as it really is independent speech, a cryptomnesic phenomenon,

[Greek: Kat' exochên]. The reader should consult Flournoy's most interesting

exposition.

In  our  case  glossolalia  was  only  once  observed,  when  the  only

understandable words were the scattered variations on the word "vena." The

source of this word is clear. A few days previously the patient had dipped

into an anatomical atlas for the study of the veins of the face, which were

given in Latin. She had used the word "vena" in her dreams, as happens

occasionally  to  normal  persons.  The  remaining  words  and  sentences  in  a

foreign language betray, at the first glance, their derivation from French, in

which the patient was somewhat fluent. Unfortunately I am without the more

accurate translations of the various sentences, because the patient would notgive  them;  but  we  may  hold  that  it  was  a  phenomenon  similar  to  Helen

Smith's  Martian  language.  Flournoy  found  that  the  Martian  language  was

nothing but a childish translation from French; the words were changed but

the syntax remained the same. Even more probable is the view that the patient

simply  ranged  next  to  each  other  meaningless  words  that  rang  strangely,

without any true word-formation; she borrowed certain characteristic sounds

from French and Italian and combined them into a kind of language, just as

Helen Smith completed the lacunæ in the real Sanscrit words by products of

her own resembling that language. The curious names of the mystical system

can be reduced, for the most part, to known roots. The writer vividly recalls

the botanical schemes found in every school atlas; the internal resemblance of

the relationship of the planets to the sun is also pretty clear; we shall not be

going astray if we see in the names reminiscences from popular astronomy.

Thus can be explained the names Persus, Fenus, Nenus, Sirum, Surus, Fixus,

and Pix, as the childlike distortions of Perseus, Venus, Sirius and Fixed Star,

analogous  to  the  Vena  variations.  Magnesor  vividly  recalls  Magnetism,

whose mystic significance the patient knew from the Prophetess of Prevorst.

In  Connesor,  the  contrary  to  Magnesor,  the  prefix  "con"  is  probably  the

French  "contre."  Hypnos  and  Hyfonismus  recall  hypnosis  and  hypnotism

(German hypnotismus), about which there are the most superstitious ideas

circulating in lay circles. The most used suffixes in "us" and "os" are the

signs by which as a rule people decide the difference between Latin and

Greek. The other names probably spring from similar accidents to which we

have no clues. The rudimentary glossolalia of our case has not any title to be

a classical instance of cryptomnesia, for it only consisted in the unconscious

use of various impressions, partly optical, party acoustic, and all very close at

hand.

2. The cryptomnesic image arrives at consciousness through the senses (as a

hallucination). Helen Smith is the classic example of this kind. I refer to the

case mentioned on the date "18 Mars."

3. The image arrives at consciousness by motor automatism. H. Smith had

lost her valuable brooch, which she was anxiously looking for everywhere.

Ten days later her guide Leopold informed her by means of the table where

the brooch was. Thus informed, she found it at night-time in the open field,

covered  by  sand.  Strictly  speaking,  in  cryptomnesia  there  is  not  any

additional creation in the true sense of the word, since the conscious memory

experiences no increase of its function, but only an enrichment of its content.By  the  automatism  certain  regions  are  merely  made  accessible  to

consciousness in an indirect way, which were formerly sealed against it. But

the unconscious does not thereby accomplish any creation which exceeds the

capacity  of  consciousness  qualitatively  or  quantitatively.  Cryptomnesia  is

only  an  apparent  additional  creation,  in  contrast  to  hypermnesia,  which

actually represents an increase of function.
 

We have spoken above of a receptivity of the unconscious greater than that of

the consciousness, chiefly in regard to the simple attempts at thought-reading

of numbers. As mentioned, not only our somnambulist but a relatively large

number  of  normal  persons  are  able  to  guess  from  the  tremors  lengthy

thought-sequences, if they are not too complicated. These experiments are, so

to speak, the prototype of those rarer and incomparably more astonishing

cases of intuitive knowledge displayed at times by

somnambulists.  Zschokke  in  his  "Introspection"  has  shown  us  that  these

phenomena do not belong only to the domain of somnambulism, but occur

among non-somnambulic persons. The formation of such knowledge seems

to be arrived at in various ways: first and foremost there is the fineness,

already  noted,  of  unconscious  perceptions;  then  must  be  emphasised  the

importance  of  the  enormous  suggestibility  of  somnambulists. The

somnambulist not only incorporates every suggestive idea to some extent, but

actually lives in the suggestion, in the person of his doctor or observer, with

that abandonment characteristic of the suggestible hysteric. The relation of

Frau Hauffe to Kerner is a striking example of this. That in such cases there

is a high degree of association-concordance can cause no astonishment; a

condition which Richet might have taken more account of in his experiments

in thought-transference. Finally there are cases of somnambulic additional

creative work which are not to be explained solely by hyperæsthesia of the

unconscious  activity  of  the  senses  and  association-concordance,  but

presuppose a highly developed intellectual activity of the unconscious. The

deciphering of the purposive tremors demand an extreme sensitiveness and

delicacy  of  feeling,  both  psychological  and  physiological,  to  combine  the

individual  perceptions  into  a  complete  unity  of  thought,  if  it  is  at  all

permissible to make an analogy between the processes of cognition in the

realm of the unconscious and the conscious. The possibility must always be

considered  that in  the  unconscious,  feeling  and  concept  are  not  clearly

separated,  perhaps  even  are  one.  The  intellectual  elevation  which  certainsomnambulists display in ecstasy, though a rare thing, is none the less one

that has sometimes been observed. I would designate the scheme composed

by our patient as just one of those pieces of creative work that exceed the

normal intelligence. We have already seen whence one portion of this scheme

probably came. A second source is no doubt the life-crisis of Frau Hauffe,

portrayed in Kerner's book. The external form seems to be determined by

these adventitious facts. As already observed in the presentation of the case,

the idea of dualism arises from the conversations picked up piecemeal by the

patient during those dreamy states occurring after her ecstasies. This exhausts

my knowledge of the sources of S. W.'s creations. Whence arose the root-idea

the  patient  is  unable  to  say.  I  naturally  examined  occultistic  literature

pertinent to the subject, and discovered a store of parallels with her gnostic

system from different centuries scattered through all kinds of work mostly

quite inaccessible to the patient. Moreover, at her youthful age, and with her

surroundings, the possibility of any such study is quite excluded. A brief

survey of the system in the light of her own explanations shows how much

intelligence was used in its construction. How highly the intellectual work is

to be estimated is a matter of opinion. In any case, considering her youth, her

mentality must be regarded as quite extraordinary.


                                   CHAPTER II                THE ASSOCIATION METHOD

Lecture I

When you honoured me with an invitation to lecture at Clark University, a

wish  was  expressed  that  I  should  speak  about  my  methods  of  work,  and

especially about the psychology of childhood. I hope to accomplish this task

in the following manner:—

In  my  first  lecture  I  will  give  to  you  the  view  points  of  my  association

methods;  in  my  second  I  will  discuss  the  significance  of  the  familiar

constellations;  while  in  my  third  lecture  I  shall  enter  more  fully  into  the

psychology of the child.

I might confine myself exclusively to my theoretical views, but I believe it

will be better to illustrate my lectures with as many practical examples as

possible. We will therefore occupy ourselves first with the association test

which has been of great value to me both practically and theoretically. The

history  of  the  association  method  in  vogue  in  psychology,  as  well  as  the

method itself, is, of course, so familiar to you that there is no need to enlarge

upon it. For practical purposes I make use of the following formula:—
 

          1. head

          2. green

          3. water

          4. to sing

          5. dead

          6. long

          7. ship

          8. to pay

          9. window

            10. friendly

            11. to cook

            12. to ask

            13. cold

            14. stem

            15. to dance

            16. village

            17. lake

            18. sick

            19. pride            20. to cook

            21. ink

            22. angry

            23. needle

            24. to swim

            25. voyage

            26. blue

            27. lamp

            28. to sin

            29. bread

            30. rich

            31. tree

            32. to prick

            33. pity

            34. yellow

            35. mountain

            36. to die

            37. salt

            38. new

            39. custom

            40. to pray

            41. money

            42. foolish

            43. pamphlet

            44. despise

            45. finger

            46. expensive

            47. bird

            48. to fall

            49. book

            50. unjust

            51. frog

            52. to part

            53. hunger

            54. white

            55. child

            56. to take care            57. lead pencil

            58. sad

            59. plum

            60. to marry

            61. house

            62. dear

            63. glass

            64. to quarrel

            65. fur

            66. big

            67. carrot

            68. to paint

            69. part

            70. old

            71. flower

            72. to beat

            73. box

            74. wild

            75. family

            76. to wash

            77. cow

            78. friend

            79. luck

            80. lie

            81. deportment

            82. narrow

            83. brother

            84. to fear

            85. stork

            86. false

            87. anxiety

            88. to kiss

            89. bride

            90. pure

            91. door

            92. to choose

            93. hay            94. contented

            95. ridicule

            96. to sleep

            97. month

            98. nice

            99. woman

            100. to abuse

This formula has been constructed after many years of experience. The words

are chosen and partially arranged in such a manner as to strike easily almost

all complexes which occur in practice. As shown above, there is a regulated

mixing of the grammatical qualities of the words. For this there are definite

reasons.

Before  the  experiment  begins  the  test  person  receives  the  following

instruction: "Answer as quickly as possible with the first word that occurs to

your mind." This instruction is so simple that it can easily be followed. The

work itself, moreover, appears extremely easy, so that it might be expected

any one could accomplish it with the greatest facility and promptitude. But,

contrary to expectation, the behaviour is quite otherwise.
 I.—AN EXAMPLE OF A NORMAL REACTION

                                        TYPE.                                    STIMULUS                                      WORD.                            REACTION TIME.                        UNIT 0·2 SECOND.                              REACTION.          REPRODUCTION.

                                                                        part  of  the
head9foot
                                                                        body


green11blouse 


  water14clearlight


to sing6children 


                                                        do not
dead11 
                                                        like


long6shortI, tall


ship7forth 


to pay9bills 


window9room 


friendly10children 


  table9chairroom


to ask10all kinds 


cold7warm 


stem6flower 


to dance    9I . .like


lake8Zürich 


sick8sister pride6people 


to cook7woman 


ink5black 


  angry10childrenpeople


needle9to prick 


to swim10healthy 


voyage9England 


  blue10prettylike


lamp6light 


to sin8muchpeople


  bread10goodlike, necessary


rich9nice 


tree6green 


to prick9need 


       II.—AN EXAMPLE OF AN HYSTERICAL

                            REACTION TYPE.                                    STIMULUS                                      WORD.                            REACTION TIME.                        UNIT 0·2 SECOND.                                REACTION.      REPRODUCTION.


needle7to sew 


to swim9watership 


    


                                                        to ride, motion,
voyage35 
                                                        voyager


blue10colour 


lamp7to burn 


    


                                                        this  idea  is
to sin22 
                                                        totally


                                                        strange to me, I
   
                                                        do not


  recognize it 


bread10to eat 


                                                        money,  I  don't
rich50possession
                                                        know


  brown6naturegreen


to prick9needle 


pity12feeling 


yellow9colour   mountain8high 


to die8to perish 


                                                        salty (laughs) I
salt15 
                                                        don't


  knowNaCl


                                                                            as an
new15old
                                                                              opposite


  custom10goodbarbaric


to pray12Deity 


money10wealth 


                                                        narrow 

  foolish12minded,  

                                                        restricted   


  pamphlet10paper 


                                                        that is a

  despise30complicated, 

                                                        too


  foolish 


                                                        hand,  not  only
finger8 
                                                        hand, but


                                                        also  foot,  a
   
                                                        joint,


  member, 
                                                        extremitydear14to pay (laughs) 


bird8to fly 


                                                        _tomber_, I
to fall30 
                                                        will say no


                                                        more,  what  do
   
                                                        you


  mean by fall? 


book6to read 


unjust8just 


frog11quack 


                                                        what  does  that
to part30 
                                                        mean?


hunger10to eat 


                                                        colour,
white12 
                                                        everything


  possible, light 


                                                        little, I did not
child10 
                                                        hear


  well, _bébé_ 


to take care  14attention 


lead pencil8to draw, 
                                                        everything  possible can be 

                                                        drawn


                                                        to weep, that is
sad9to be
                                                        not


  always the case 


                                                        to  eat  a  plum,
plum16fruit
                                                        pluck what


                                                        do  you  mean
   
                                                        by it? Is


  that symbolic? 


                                                        how  can  you?union,
to marry27
                                                        reunion, unionalliance


 

The  following  diagrams  illustrate  the  reaction  times  in  an  association

experiment in four normal test-persons. The height of each column denotes

the length of the reaction time.










FIG. 4.FIG. 5.








FIG. 6.















FIG. 7.

The succeeding diagram shows the course of the reaction time in hysterical

individuals.  The  light  cross-hatched  columns  denote  the  places  where  the

test-person was unable to react (so-called failures to react).
 FIG. 8.



















FIG. 9.FIG. 10.

The first thing that strikes us is the fact that many test-persons show a marked

prolongation  of  the  reaction  time.  This  would  seem  to  be  suggestive  of

intellectual  difficulties,—wrongly  however,  for  we  are  often  dealing  with

very intelligent persons of fluent speech. The explanation lies rather in the

emotions. In order to understand the matter, comprehensively, we must bear

in mind that the association experiments cannot deal with a separated psychic

function, for any psychic occurrence is never a thing in itself, but is always

the resultant of the entire psychological past. The association experiment, too,

is not merely a method for the reproduction of separated word couplets, but it

is a kind of pastime, a conversation between experimenter and test-person. In

a certain sense it is still more than that. Words really represent condensed

actions,  situations,  and  things.  When  I  give  a  stimulus  word  to  the  test-

person, which denotes an action, it is as if I represented to him the action

itself, and asked him, "How do you behave towards it? What do you think ofit? What would you do in this situation?" If I were a magician, I should cause

the situation corresponding to the stimulus word to appear in reality, and

placing  the  test-person  in  its  midst,  I  should  then  study  his  manner  of

reaction. The result of my stimulus words would thus undoubtedly approach

infinitely  nearer  perfection.  But  as  we  are  not  magicians,  we  must  be

contented with the linguistic substitutes for reality; at the same time we must

not forget that the stimulus word will almost without exception conjure up its

corresponding situation. All depends on how the test-person reacts to this

situation. The word "bride" or "bridegroom" will not evoke a simple reaction

in a young lady; but the reaction will be deeply influenced by the strong

feeling  tones  evoked,  the  more  so  if  the  experimenter  be  a  man.  It  thus

happens that the test-person is often unable to react quickly and smoothly to

all stimulus words. There are certain stimulus words which denote actions,

situations, or things, about which the test-person cannot think quickly and

surely,  and  this  fact  is  demonstrated  in  the  association  experiments.  The

examples which I have just given show an abundance of long reaction times

and other disturbances. In this case the reaction to the stimulus word is in

some way impeded, that is, the adaptation to the stimulus word is disturbed.

The stimulus words therefore act upon us just as reality acts; indeed, a person

who shows such great disturbances to the stimulus words, is in a certain sense

but imperfectly adapted to reality. Disease itself is an imperfect adaptation;

hence in this case we are dealing with something morbid in the psyche,—

with something which is either temporarily or persistently pathological in

character, that is, we are dealing with a psychoneurosis, with a functional

disturbance of the mind. This rule, however, as we shall see later, is not

without its exceptions.

Let us, in the first place, continue the discussion concerning the prolonged

reaction time. It often happens that the test-person actually does not know

what to answer to the stimulus word. He waives any reaction, and for the

moment he totally fails to obey the original instructions, and shows himself

incapable of adapting himself to the experimenter. If this phenomenon occurs

frequently  in  an  experiment,  it  signifies  a  high  degree  of  disturbance  in

adjustment. I would call attention to the fact that it is quite indifferent what

reason the test-person gives for the refusal. Some find that too many ideas

suddenly occur to them; others, that they suffer from a deficiency of ideas. In

most cases, however, the difficulties first perceived are so deterrent that they

actually give up the whole reaction. The following example shows a case ofhysteria with many failures of reaction:—
 

                    REACTION

  STIMULUSTIME.
                                            REACTION.REPRODUCTION.
WORD.UNIT 0·2

                    SECOND.

to sing9nice   +


dead15awful   ?


                                        the  time,  the
long40   ?
                                          journey


ship          +


to pay11money   


window10bighigh


friendly50a manhuman


to cook10soup   +


ink9black or blue   +


angry      bad


needle9to sew   +


lamp14light   +


to sin         


bread15to eat   +


                                          good,
rich40   +
                                          convenient  yellow18papercolour


  mountain10high   +


to die15awful   +


salt25salty   +


new  good, nice


custom         


to pray         


                                        to  buy,  one  is
money35   +
                                        able


pamphlet16to write   +


to despise22people   +


finger         


dear12thing   +


bird12sings or flies   +

In example II. we find a characteristic phenomenon. The test-person is not

content with the requirements of the instruction, that is, she is not satisfied

with one word, but reacts with many words. She apparently does more and

better than the instruction requires, but in so doing she does not fulfil the

requirements of the instruction. Thus she reacts:—custom—good—barbaric;

foolish—narrow  minded—restricted;  family—big—small—everything

possible.

These  examples  show  in  the  first  place  that  many  other  words  connect

themselves with the reaction word. The test person is unable to suppress the

ideas which subsequently occur to her. She also pursues a certain tendency

which perhaps is more exactly expressed in the following reaction: new—old

—as  an  opposite.  The  addition  of  "as  an  opposite"  denotes  that  the  test-person has the desire to add something explanatory or supplementary. This

tendency is also shown in the following reaction: finger—not only hand, also

foot—a limb—member—extremity.

Here we have a whole series of supplements. It seems as if the reaction were

not sufficient for the test-person, something else must always be added, as if

what has already been said were incorrect or in some way imperfect. This

feeling is what Janet designates the "sentiment d'incomplétude," but this by

no means explains everything. I go somewhat deeply into this phenomenon

because it is very frequently met with in neurotic individuals. It is not merely

a  small  and  unimportant  subsidiary  manifestation  demonstrable  in  an

insignificant experiment, but rather an elemental and universal manifestation

which plays a rôle in other ways in the psychic life of neurotics.

By his desire to supplement, the test-person betrays a tendency to give the

experimenter more than he wants, he actually makes great efforts to find

further  mental  occurrences  in  order  finally  to  discover  something  quite

satisfactory. If we translate this observation into the psychology of everyday

life, it signifies that the test-person has a constant tendency to give to others

more feeling than is required and expected. According to Freud, this is a sign

of a reinforced object-libido, that is, it is a compensation for an inner want of

satisfaction and voidness of feeling. This elementary observation therefore

displays one of the characteristics of hysterics, namely, the tendency to allow

themselves  to  be  carried  away  by  everything,  to  attach  themselves

enthusiastically to everything, and always to promise too much and hence

perform too little. Patients with this symptom are, in my experience, always

hard  to  deal  with;  at  first  they  are  enthusiastically  enamoured  of  the

physician, for a time going so far as to accept everything he says blindly; but

they soon merge into an equally blind resistance against him, thus rendering

any educative influence absolutely impossible.

We see therefore in this type of reaction an expression of a tendency to give

more than is asked or expected. This tendency betrays itself also in other

failures to follow the instruction:—

to quarrel—angry—different things—I always quarrel at home;

to marry—how can you marry?—reunion—union;

plum—to eat—to pluck—what do you mean by it?—is it symbolic?

to sin—this idea is quite strange to me, I do not recognise it.

These  reactions  show  that  the  test-person  gets  away  altogether  from  the

situation of the experiment. For the instruction was, that he should answeronly  with  the  first  word  which  occurs  to  him.  But  here  we  note  that  the

stimulus words act with excessive strength, that they are taken as if they were

direct personal questions. The test-person entirely forgets that we deal with

mere words which stand in print before us, but finds a personal meaning in

them; he tries to divine their intention and defend himself against them, thus

altogether forgetting the original instructions.

This  elementary  observation  discloses  another  common  peculiarity  of

hysterics, namely, that of taking everything personally, of never being able to

remain  objective,  and  of  allowing  themselves  to  be  carried  away  by

momentary impressions; this again shows the characteristics of the enhanced

object-libido.

Yet another sign of impeded adaptation is the often occurring repetition of

the stimulus words. The test-persons repeat the stimulus word as if they had

not  heard  or  understood  it  distinctly.  They  repeat  it  just  as  we  repeat  a

difficult  question  in  order  to  grasp  it  better  before  answering.  This  same

tendency is shown in the experiment. The questions are repeated because the

stimulus  words  act  on  hysterical  individuals  in  much  the  same  way  as

difficult personal questions. In principle it is the same phenomenon as the

subsequent completion of the reaction.

In many experiments we observe that the same reaction constantly reappears

to the most varied stimulus words. These words seem to possess a special

reproduction tendency, and it is very interesting to examine their relationship

to the test-person. For example, I have observed a case in which the patient

repeated the word "short" a great many times and often in places where it had

no  meaning.  The  test-person  could  not  directly  state  the  reason  for  the

repetition of the word "short." From experience I knew that such predicates

always relate either to the test-person himself or to the person nearest to him.

I assumed that in this word "short" he designated himself, and that in this way

he helped to express something very painful to him. The test-person is of

very small stature. He is the youngest of four brothers, who, in contrast to

himself,  are  all  tall.  He  was  always  the  "child"  in  the  family;  he  was

nicknamed "Short" and was treated by all as the "little one." This resulted in a

total loss of self-confidence. Although he was intelligent, and despite long

study,  he  could  not  decide  to  present  himself  for  examination;  he  finally

became impotent, and merged into a psychosis in which, whenever he was

alone, he took delight in walking about in his room on his toes in order to

appear taller. The word "short," therefore, stood to him for a great manypainful experiences. This is usually the case with the perseverated words;

they always contain something of importance for the individual psychology

of the test-person.

The signs thus far discussed are not found spread about in an arbitrary way

through the whole experiment, but are seen in very definite places, namely,

where the stimulus words strike against emotionally accentuated complexes.

This  observation  is  the  foundation  of  the  so-called  "diagnosis  of  facts"

(Tatbestandsdiagnostik). This method is employed to discover, by means of

an association experiment, which is the culprit among a number of persons

suspected of a crime. That this is possible I will demonstrate by the brief

recital of a concrete case.

On the 6th of February, 1908, our supervisor reported to me that a nurse

complained to her of having been robbed during the forenoon of the previous

day. The facts were as follows: The nurse kept her money, amounting to 70

francs, in a pocket-book which she had placed in her cupboard where she also

kept her clothes. The cupboard contained two compartments, of which one

belonged to the nurse who was robbed, and the other to the head nurse. These

two nurses and a third one, who was an intimate friend of the head nurse,

slept in the room where the cupboard was. This room was in a section which

was occupied in common by six nurses who had at all times free access to the

room. Given such a state of affairs it is not to be wondered that the supervisor

shrugged her shoulders when I asked her whom she most suspected.

Further  investigation  showed  that  on  the  day  of  the  theft,  the  above-

mentioned friend of the head nurse was slightly indisposed and remained the

whole morning in the room in bed. Hence, unless she herself was the thief,

the theft could have taken place only in the afternoon. Of four other nurses

upon  whom  suspicion  could  possibly  fall,  there  was  one  who  attended

regularly to the cleaning of the room in question, while the remaining three

had nothing to do in it, nor was it shown that any of them had spent any time

there on the previous day.

It was therefore natural that the last three nurses should be regarded for the

time being as less implicated, so I began by subjecting the first three to the

experiment.

From the information I had obtained of the case, I knew that the cupboard

was locked but that the key was kept near by in a very conspicuous place,

that on opening the cupboard the first thing which would strike the eye was a

fur boa, and, moreover, that the pocket-book was between some linen in aninconspicuous  place.  The  pocket-book  was  of  dark  reddish  leather,  and

contained the following objects: a 50-franc banknote, a 20-franc piece, some

centimes, a small silver watch-chain, a stencil used in the lunatic asylum to

mark the kitchen utensils, and a small receipt from Dosenbach's shoeshop in

Zürich.

Besides the plaintiff, only the head nurse knew the exact particulars of the

deed, for as soon as the former missed her money she immediately asked the

head nurse to help her find it, thus the head nurse had been able to learn the

smallest details, which naturally rendered the experiment still more difficult,

for  she  was  precisely  the  one  most  suspected.  The  conditions  for  the

experiment were better for the others, since they knew nothing concerning

the  particulars  of  the  deed,  and  some  not  even  that  a  theft  had  been

committed.  As  critical  stimulus  words  I  selected  the  name  of  the  robbed

nurse,  plus  the  following  words:  cupboard,  door,  open,  key,  yesterday,

banknote, gold, 70, 50, 20, money, watch, pocket-book, chain, silver, to hide,

fur, dark reddish, leather, centimes, stencil, receipt, Dosenbach. Besides these

words which referred directly to the deed, I took also the following, which

had a special effective value: theft, to take, to steal, suspicion, blame, court,

police, to lie, to fear, to discover, to arrest, innocent.

The  objection  is  often  made  to  the  last  species  of  words  that  they  may

produce a strong affective resentment even in innocent persons, and for that

reason one cannot attribute to them any comparative value. Nevertheless, it

may always be questioned whether the affective resentment of an innocent

person will have the same effect on the association as that of a guilty one, and

that question can only be authoritatively answered by experience. Until the

contrary is demonstrated, I maintain that words of the above-mentioned type

may profitably be used.

I distributed these critical words among twice as many indifferent stimulus

words  in  such  a  manner  that  each  critical  word  was  followed  by  two

indifferent  ones.  As  a  rule  it  is  well  to  follow  up  the  critical  words  by

indifferent  words  in  order  that  the  action  of  the  first  may  be  clearly

distinguished.  But  one  may  also  follow  up  one  critical  word  by  another,

especially if one wishes to bring into relief the action of the second. Thus I

placed together "darkish red" and "leather," and "chain" and "silver."

After this preparatory work I undertook the experiment with the three above-

mentioned nurses. Following the order of the experiment, I shall denote the

friend of the head nurse by the letter A, the head nurse by B, and the nursewho attended to the cleaning of the room by C. As examinations of this kind

can be rendered into a foreign tongue only with the greatest difficulty, I will

content  myself  with  presenting  the  general  results,  and  with  giving  some

examples.  I  first  undertook  the  experiment  with  A,  and  judging  by  the

circumstances she appeared only slightly moved. B was next examined; she

showed marked excitement, her pulse being 120 per minute immediately after

the experiment. The last to be examined was C. She was the most tranquil of

the three; she displayed but little embarrassment, and only in the course of

the experiment did it occur to her that she was suspected of stealing, a fact

which manifestly disturbed her towards the end of the experiment.

The general impression from the examination spoke strongly against the head

nurse B. It seemed to me that she evinced a very "suspicious," or I might

almost say, "impudent" countenance. With the definite idea of finding in her

the guilty one I set about adding up the results. You will see that I was wrong

in my surmise and that the test proved my error.

One can make use of many special methods of computing, but they are not all

equally good and equally exact. (One must always resort to calculation, as

appearances  are  enormously  deceptive.)  The  method  which  is  most  to  be

recommended is that of the probable average of the reaction time. It shows at

a glance the difficulties which the person in the experiment had to overcome

in the reaction.

The technique of this calculation is very simple. The probable average is the

middle  number  of  the  various  reaction  times  arranged  in  a  series.  The

reaction times are, for example, placed in the following manner: 5, 5, 5, 7, 7,

7, 7, 8, 9, 9, 9, 12, 13, 14. The number found in the middle (8) is the probable

average of this series.

The probable averages of the reaction are:

                                  ABC


                                  10·012·013·5.

No conclusions can be drawn from this result. But the average reaction times

calculated  separately  for  the  indifferent  reactions,  for  the  critical,  and  for

those immediately following the critical (post-critical) are more interesting.

From this example we see that whereas A has the shortest reaction time for

the indifferent reactions, she shows in comparison to the other two persons of

the experiment, the longest time for the critical reactions.THE PROBABLE AVERAGE OF THE REACTION TIME.

                  FORABC


                  Indifferent reactions10·011·012·0


                  Critical reactions16·013·015·0


                  Post-critical reactions    10·011·013·0

The difference between the reaction times, let us say between the indifferent

and the critical, is 6 for A, 2 for B, and 3 for C, that is, it is more than double

for A when compared with the other two persons.

In the same way we can calculate how many complex indicators there are on

an average for the indifferent, critical, etc., reactions.

THE AVERAGE COMPLEX-INDICATORS FOR EACH

REACTION.


                    FORABC


                    Indifferent reactions0·60·90·8


                    Critical reactions1·30·91·2


                    Post-critical reactions    0·61·00·8

The difference between the indifferent and critical reactions for A = 0·7, for

B = 0, for C = 0·4. A is again the highest.

Another question to consider is, the proportion of imperfect reactions in each

case.

The result for A = 34%, for B = 28%, and for C = 30%.

Here, too, A reaches the highest value, and in this, I believe, we see the

characteristic moment of the guilt-complex in A. I am, however, unable to

explain here circumstantially the reasons why I maintain that memory errors

are related to an emotional complex, as this would lead me beyond the limits

of  the  present  work.  I  therefore  refer  the  reader  to  my  work  "Ueber  die

  Reproductionsstörrungen  im  Associationsexperiment"  (IX  Beitrag  der

Diagnost. Associat. Studien).

As it often happens that an association of strong feeling tone produces in the

experiment  a  perseveration,  with  the  result  that  not  only  the  criticalassociation,  but  also  two  or  three  successive  associations  are  imperfectly

reproduced,  it  will  be  very  interesting  to  see  how  many  imperfect

reproductions  are  so  arranged  in  the  series  in  our  cases.  The  result  of

computation shows that the imperfect reproductions thus arranged in series

are for A 64·7%, for B 55·5%, and for C 30·0%.

Again  we  find  that  A  has  the  greatest  percentage.  To  be  sure,  this  may

partially depend on the fact that A also possesses the greatest number of

imperfect reproductions. Given a small number of reactions, it is usual that

the greater the total number of the same, the more the imperfect reactions will

occur in groups. But this cannot account for the high proportion in our case,

where,  on  the  other  hand,  B  and  C  have  not  a  much  smaller  number  of

imperfect reactions when compared to A. It is significant that C with her

slight  emotions  during  the  experiment  shows  the  minimum  of  imperfect

reproductions arranged in series.

As imperfect reproductions are also complex indicators, it is necessary to see

how  they  distribute  themselves  in  respect  to  the  indifferent,  critical,  etc.,

reactions.

It is hardly necessary to bring into prominence the differences between the

indifferent and the critical reactions of the various subjects as shown by the

resulting numbers of the table. In this respect, too, A occupies first place.

IMPERFECT REPRODUCTIONS WHICH OCCUR.

                      INABC


                      Indifferent reactions101211


                      Critical reactions19912


                      Post-critical reactions    577

Naturally, here, too, there is a probability that the greater the number of the

imperfect reproductions the greater is their number in the critical reactions. If

we  suppose  that  the  imperfect  reproductions  are  distributed  regularly  and

without choice, among all the reactions, there will be a greater number of

them for A (in comparison with B and C) even as reactions to critical words,

since A has the greater number of imperfect reproductions. Admitting such a

uniform distribution of the imperfect reproductions, it is easy to calculate

how many we ought to expect to belong to each individual kind of reaction.From this calculation it appears that the disturbances of reproductions which

concern the critical reactions for A greatly surpass the number expected, for

C they are 0·9 higher, while for B they are lower.

IMPERFECT REPRODUCTIONS.

WHICH MAY BE EXPECTEDWHICH REALLY OCCUR


                                                          POST-
              INDIFFERENTCRITICALINDIFFERENT
  FORCRITICAL
              REACTIONS.REACTIONS.REACTIONS.
                                                            REACTIONS.


  A11·212·510·210


B9·210·38·412


C9·911·19·011

All this points to the fact that in the subject A the critical stimulus words

acted with the greatest intensity, and hence the greatest suspicion falls on A.

Practically relying on the test one may assume the probability of this person's

guilt. The same evening A made a complete confession of the theft, and thus

the success of the experiment was confirmed.

Such  a  result  is  undoubtedly  of  scientific  interest  and  worthy  of  serious

consideration. There is much in experimental psychology which is of less use

than  the  material  exemplified  in  this  test.  Putting  the  theoretical  interest

altogether aside, we have here something that is not to be despised from a

practical point of view, to wit, a culprit has been brought to light in a much

easier and shorter way than is customary. What has been possible once or

twice ought to be possible again, and it is well worth while to investigate

some means of rendering the method increasingly capable of rapid and sure

results.

This  application  of  the  experiment  shows  that  it  is  possible  to  strike  a

concealed, indeed an unconscious complex by means of a stimulus word; and

conversely we may assume with great certainty that behind a reaction which

shows a complex indicator there is a hidden complex, even though the test-

person strongly denies it. One must get rid of the idea that educated and

intelligent test-persons are able to see and admit their own complexes. Every

human mind contains much that is unacknowledged and hence unconsciousas such; and no one can boast that he stands completely above his complexes.

Those  who  persist  in  maintaining  that  they  can,  are  not  aware  of  the

spectacles upon their noses.


It  has  long  been  thought  that  the  association  experiment  enables  one  to

distinguish certain intellectual types. That is not the case. The experiment

does not give us any particular insight into the purely intellectual, but rather

into  the  emotional  processes.  To  be  sure  we  can  erect  certain  types  of

reaction; they are not, however, based on intellectual peculiarities, but depend

entirely on the proportionate emotional states. Educated test-persons usually

show  superficial  and  linguistically  deep-rooted  associations,  whereas  the

uneducated  form  more  valuable  associations  and  often  of  ingenious

significance. This behaviour would be paradoxical from an intellectual view-

point.  The  meaningful  associations  of  the  uneducated  are  not  really  the

product  of  intellectual  thinking,  but  are  simply  the  results  of  a  special

emotional state. The whole thing is more important to the uneducated, his

emotion  is  greater,  and  for  that  reason  he  pays  more  attention  to  the

experiment than the educated person, and his associations are therefore more

significant. Apart from those determined by education, we have to consider

three principal individual types:

1. An objective type with undisturbed reactions.

2.  A  so-called  complex-type  with  many  disturbances  in  the  experiment

occasioned by the constellation of a complex.

3. A so-called definition-type. The peculiarity of this type consists in the fact

that the reaction always gives an explanation or a definition of the content of

the stimulus word; e.g.:

apple,—a tree-fruit;

table,—a piece of household furniture;

to promenade,—an activity;

father,—chief of the family.

This type is chiefly found in stupid persons, and it is therefore quite usual in

imbecility. But it can also be found in persons who are not really stupid, but

who do not wish to be taken as stupid. Thus a young student from whom

associations  were  taken  by  an  older  intelligent  woman  student  reacted

altogether with definitions. The test-person was of the opinion that it was an

examination in intelligence, and therefore directed most of his attention to the

significance of the stimulus words; his associations, therefore, looked likethose of an idiot. All idiots, however, do not react with definitions; probably

only those react in this way who would like to appear smarter than they are,

that  is,  those  to  whom  their  stupidity  is  painful.  I  call  this  widespread

complex the "intelligence-complex." A normal test-person reacts in a most

overdrawn manner as follows:

anxiety—heart anguish;

to kiss—love's unfolding;

to kiss—perception of friendship.

This  type  gives  a  constrained  and  unnatural  impression.  The  test-persons

wish to be more than they are, they wish to exert more influence than they

really  have.  Hence  we  see  that  persons  with  an  intelligence-complex  are

usually unnatural and constrained; that they are always somewhat stilted, or

flowery;  they  show  a  predilection  for  complicated  foreign  words,  high-

sounding quotations, and other intellectual ornaments. In this way they wish

to  influence  their  fellow-beings,  they  wish  to  impress  others  with  their

apparent education and intelligence, and thus to compensate for their painful

feeling of stupidity. The definition-type is closely related to the predicate-

type,  or,  to  express  it  more  precisely,  to  the  predicate-type  expressing

personal judgment (Wertprädikattypus). For example:

flower—pretty;

money—convenient;

animal—ugly;

knife—dangerous;

death—ghastly.

In the definition type the intellectual significance of the stimulus word is

rendered  prominent,  but  in  the  predicate  type  its emotional  significance.

There  are  predicate-types  which  show  great  exaggeration  where  reactions

such as the following appear:

piano—horrible;

to sing—heavenly;

mother—ardently loved;

father—something good, nice, holy.

In  the  definition-type  an  absolutely intellectual  make-up  is  manifested  or

rather  simulated,  but  here  there  is  a  very emotional  one.  Yet,  just  as  the

definition-type  really  conceals  a  lack  of  intelligence,  so  the

excessive emotional expression conceals or overcompensates an emotional

deficiency. This conclusion is very interestingly illustrated by the followingdiscovery:—On  investigating  the  influence  of  the  familiar  milieus  on  the

association-type it was found that young people seldom possess a predicate-

type, but that, on the other hand, the predicate-type increases in frequency

with advancing age. In women the increase of the predicate-type begins a

little after the 40th year, and in men after the 60th. That is the precise time

when, owing to the deficiency of sexuality, there actually occurs considerable

emotional  loss.  If  a  test-person  evinces  a  distinct  predicate-type,  it  may

always be inferred that a marked internal emotional deficiency is thereby

compensated.  Still,  one  cannot  reason  conversely,  namely,  that  an  inner

emotional deficiency must produce a predicate-type, no more than that idiocy

directly produces a definition-type. A predicate-type can also betray itself

through  the  external  behaviour,  as,  for  example,  through  a  particular

affectation,  enthusiastic  exclamations,  an  embellished  behaviour,  and  the

constrained sounding language so often observed in society.

The complex-type shows no particular tendency except the concealment of a

complex,  whereas  the  definition  and  predicate  types  betray  a  positive

tendency to exert in some way a definite influence on the experimenter. But

whereas  the  definition-type  tends  to  bring  to  light  its  intelligence,  the

predicate-type displays its emotion. I need hardly add of what importance

such determinations are for the diagnosis of character.

After finishing an association experiment I usually add another of a different

kind,  the  so-called reproduction  experiment.  I  repeat  the  same  stimulus

words  and  ask  the  test-persons  whether  they  still  remember  their  former

reactions.  In  many  instances  the  memory  fails,  and  as  experience  shows,

these locations are stimulus words which touched an emotionally accentuated

complex, or stimulus words immediately following such critical words.

This  phenomenon  has  been  designated  as  paradoxical  and  contrary  to  all

experience. For it is known that emotionally accentuated things are better

retained in memory than indifferent things. This is quite true, but it does not

hold for the linguistic expression of an emotionally accentuated content. On

the contrary, one very easily forgets what he has said under emotion, one is

even  apt  to  contradict  himself  about  it.  Indeed,  the  efficacy  of  cross-

examinations  in  court  depends  on  this  fact.  The  reproduction  method

therefore  serves  to  render  still  more  prominent  the  complex  stimulus.  In

normal  persons  we  usually  find  a  limited  number  of  false  reproductions,

seldom more than 19-20 per cent., while in abnormal persons, especially in

hysterics,  we  often  find  from  20-40  per  cent.  of  false  reproductions.  Thereproduction  certainty  is  therefore  in  certain  cases  a  measure  for  the

emotivity of the test-person.


By far the larger number of neurotics show a pronounced tendency to cover

up their intimate affairs in impenetrable darkness, even from the doctor, so

that  he  finds  it  very  difficult  to  form  a  proper  picture  of  the  patient's

psychology.  In  such  cases  I  am  greatly  assisted  by  the  association

experiment. When the experiment is finished, I first look over the general

course of the reaction times. I see a great many very prolonged intervals; this

means  that  the  patient  can  only  adjust  himself  with  difficulty,  that  his

psychological  functions  proceed  with  marked  internal  frictions

with resistances. The greater number of neurotics react only under great and

very  definite  resistances;  there  are,  however,  others  in  whom  the  average

reaction times are as short as in the normal, and in whom the other complex

indicators  are  lacking,  but,  despite  that  fact,  they  undoubtedly  present

neurotic  symptoms.  These  rare  cases  are  especially  found  among  very

intelligent and educated persons, chronic patients who, after many years of

practice,  have  learned  to  control  their  outward  behaviour  and  therefore

outwardly display very little if any trace of their neuroses. The superficial

observer  would  take  them  for  normal,  yet  in  some  places  they  show

disturbances which betray the repressed complex.

After examining the reaction times I turn my attention to the type of the

association to ascertain with what type I am dealing. If it is a predicate-type I

draw the conclusions which I have detailed above; if it is a complex type I try

to ascertain the nature of the complex. With the necessary experience one can

readily  emancipate  one's  judgment  from  the  test-person's  statements  and

almost  without  any  previous  knowledge  of  the  test-persons  it  is  possible

under certain circumstances to read the most intimate complexes from the

results of the experiment. I look at first for the reproduction words and put

them together, and then I look for the stimulus words which show the greatest

disturbances. In many cases merely assorting these words suffices to unearth

the complex. In some cases it is necessary to put a question here and there.

The matter is well illustrated by the following concrete example:

It  concerns  an  educated  woman  of  30  years  of  age,  married  three  years

previously. Since her marriage she has suffered from episodic excitement in

which she is violently jealous of her husband. The marriage is a happy one in

every other respect, and it should be noted that the husband gives no causefor the jealousy. The patient is sure that she loves him and that her excited

states  are  groundless.  She  cannot  imagine  whence  these  excited  states

originate, and feels quite perplexed over them. It is to be noted that she is a

catholic  and  has  been  brought  up  religiously,  while  her  husband  is  a

protestant. This difference of religion did not admittedly play any part. A

more thorough anamnesis showed the existence of an extreme prudishness.

Thus, for example, no one was allowed to talk in the patient's presence about

her sister's childbirth, because the sexual moment suggested therein caused

her the greatest excitement. She always undressed in the adjoining room and

never in her husband's presence, etc. At the age of 27 she was supposed to

have had no idea how children were born. The associations gave the results

shown in the accompanying chart.

The stimulus words characterised by marked disturbances are the following:

yellow, to pray, to separate, to marry, to quarrel, old, family, happiness, false,

fear, to kiss, bride, to choose, contented. The strongest disturbances are found

in the following stimulus words: to pray, to marry, happiness, false, fear,

and contented. These words, therefore, more than any others, seem to strike

the complex. The conclusions that can be drawn from this is that she is not

indifferent to the fact that her husband is a protestant, that she again thinks of

praying, believes there is something wrong with marriage, that she is false,

entertains fancies of faithlessness, is afraid (of the husband? of the future?),

she is not contented with her choice (to choose) and she thinks of separation.

The patient therefore has a separation complex, for she is very discontented

with her married life. When I told her this result she was affected and at first

attempted  to  deny  it,  then  to  mince  over  it,  but  finally  she  admitted

everything I said and added more. She reproduced a large number of fancies

of faithlessness, reproaches against her husband, etc. Her prudishness and

jealousy  were  merely  a  projection  of  her  own  sexual  wishes  on  her

husband. Because she was faithless in her fancies and did not admit it to

herself she was jealous of her husband.For the stimulus words corresponding to the numbers, see the list on

pages 94 and 95.

THE BLUE COLUMNS REPRESENT FAILURES OF

REPRODUCTIONS, THE GREEN ONES REPRESENT

REPETITIONS OF STIMULUS WORDS, AND THE YELLOW

COLUMNS SHOW THOSE ASSOCIATIONS IN WHICH THE

PATIENT EITHER LAUGHED OR MADE MISTAKES, USING

MANY WORDS INSTEAD OF ONE. THE HEIGHT OF THE

COLUMNS REPRESENT THE LENGTH OF THE REACTION

TIME.

[To face p. 118.

It is impossible in a lecture to give a review of all the manifold uses of the

association experiment. I must content myself with having demonstrated to

you a few of its chief uses.                                  LECTURE II

                  THE FAMILIAL CONSTELLATIONS

Ladies and Gentlemen: As you have seen, there are manifold ways in which

the  association  experiment  may  be  employed  in  practical  psychology.  I

should like to speak to you to-day about another use of this experiment which

is primarily of theoretical significance. My pupil, Miss Fürst, M.D., made the

following researches: she applied the association experiment to 24 families,

consisting altogether of 100 test-persons; the resulting material amounted to

22,200 associations. This material was elaborated in the following manner:

Fifteen separate groups were formed according to logical-linguistic standards,

and the associations were arranged as follows:
   
          HUSBANDWIFE DIFFERENCE

 


  I.Co-ordination6·50·56


II.Sub and supraordination7—7


  III.Contrast———


          Predicate  expressing  a
IV.8·595·086·5
          personal judgment


V.Simple predicate21·03·517·5


          Relations of the verb to the
VI.15·50·515·0
          subject or complement


  VII.Designation of time, etc.11·0—11·0


  VIII.Definition11·0—11·0


  IX.Coexistence1·5—1·5


  X.Identity0·50·5—


XI.Motor-speech combination12·0—12·0


XII.Composition of words———


XIII.Completion of words———


XIV.Clang associations———


XV.Defective reactions———


 Total——173·5  173·5  


 Average difference——= 11·5 


  15  

As can be seen from this example, I utilise the difference to demonstrate the

degree of the analogy. In order to find a basis for the sum of the resemblance

I  have  calculated  the  differences  among  all  Dr.  Fürst's  test-persons,  not

related among themselves, by comparing every female test-person with all

the other unrelated females; the same has been done for the male test-persons.

The  most  marked  difference  is  found  in  those  cases  where  the  two  test-

persons compared have no associative quality in common. All the groups are

calculated  in  percentages,  the  greatest  difference  possible  being  200/15  =

13·3 per cent.


I. The average difference of male unrelated test-persons is 5·9 per cent., and

that of females of the same group is 6 per cent.

II. The average difference between male related test-persons is 4·1 per cent.,

and that between female related tests-persons is 3·8 per cent. From these

numbers we see that relatives show a tendency to agreement in the reaction

type.

III. Difference between fathers and children = 4·2.

"        "    mothers  "    "    = 3·5.

The reaction types of children come nearer to the type of the mother than to

the father.
 

        IV. Difference between fathers and theirsons= 3·1.


        "           "              "        "    "daughters = 4·9.


        "           "        mothers   "    "sons = 4·7.


        "           "              "        "    "daughters = 3·0.FIG. 11.

TRACING A. —— FATHER; ..... MOTHER; ++++ DAUGHTER.

I. ASSOC. BY CO-ORDINATION; II. SUB AND

SUPRAORDINATION; III. CONTRAST, ETC. (SEE PREVIOUS

PAGE).

V. Difference between brothers = 4·7.

" " sisters  = 5·1.

If the married sisters are omitted from the comparison we get the following

result:

Difference of unmarried sisters = 3·8. These observations show distinctly that

marriage  destroys  more  or  less  the  original  agreement,  as  the  husband

belongs to a different type.

Difference between unmarried brothers = 4·8.

Marriage  seems  to  exert  no  influence  on  the  association  forms  in  men.Nevertheless, the material which we have at our disposal is not as yet enough

to allow us to draw definite conclusions.

VI. Difference between husband and wife = 4·7.





















FIG. 12.

TRACING B. —— HUSBAND; ..... WIFE.

This number sums up inadequately the different and very unequal values; that

is to say, there are some cases which show extreme difference and some

which show marked concordance.

The different results are shown in the tracings (Figs. 11-15).

In the tracings I have marked the number of associations of each quality

perpendicularly  in  percentages.  The  Roman  letters  written  horizontally

represent the forms of association indicated in the above tables.

Tracing A. The father (black line) shows an objective type, while the mother

and  daughter  show  the  pure  predicate  type  with  a  pronounced  subjective

tendency.

Tracing B. The husband and wife agree well in the predicate objective type,

the predicate subjective being somewhat more numerous in the wife.

Tracing C. A very nice agreement between a father and his two daughters.FIG. 13.

TRACING C. —— FATHER; ..... 1ST DAUGHTER; ++++ 2ND

DAUGHTER.

Tracing D. Two sisters living together. The dotted line represents the married

sister.



















FIG. 14.

TRACING D. —— SINGLE SISTER; ..... MARRIED SISTER.

Tracing E. Husband and wife. The wife is a sister of the two women of

tracing  D.  She  approaches  very  closely  to  the  type  of  her  husband.  Hertracing is the direct opposite of that of her sisters.















FIG. 15.

TRACING E. —— HUSBAND; ..... WIFE.

The similarity of the associations is often very extraordinary. I will reproduce

here the associations of a mother and daughter.

      STIMULUS WORD.MOTHER.DAUGHTER.


      to pay attentiondiligent pupilpupil


      lawcommand of GodMoses


        dearchildfather and mother


        greatGodfather


      potatobulbous rootbulbous root


      familymany persons5 persons


        strangetravellertraveller


      brotherdear to medear


      to kissmothermother


      burngreat painpainful      doorwidebig


      haydrydry


      monthmany days31 days


        aircoolmoist


      coalsootyblack


      fruitsweetsweet


      merryhappy childchild

One might indeed think that in this experiment, where full scope is given to

chance, individuality would become a factor of the utmost importance, and

that  therefore  one  might  expect  a  very  great  diversity  and  lawlessness  of

associations. But as we see the opposite is the case. Thus the daughter lives

contentedly in the same circle of ideas as her mother, not only in her thought

but in her form of expression; indeed, she even uses the same words. What

could  be  regarded  as  more  inconsequent,  inconstant,  and  lawless  than  a

fancy, a rapidly passing thought? It is not lawless, however, neither is it free,

but closely determined within the limits of the milieu. If, therefore, even the

superficial and manifestly most inconsequent formations of the intellect are

altogether subject to the milieu-constellation, what must we not expect for the

more important conditions of the mind, for the emotions, wishes, hopes, and

intentions? Let us consider a concrete example, illustrated by tracing A.

The mother is 45 years old and the daughter 16 years. Both have a very

distinct  predicate-type  expressing  personal  judgment,  both  differ  from  the

father  in  the  most  striking  manner.  The  father  is  a  drunkard  and  a

demoralised  creature.  We  can  thus  readily  understand  that  his  wife

experiences  an  emotional  voidness  which  she  naturally  betrays  by  her

enhanced predicate-type. The same causes cannot, however, operate in the

case of the daughter, for, in the first place, she is not married to a drunkard,

and, in the second, life with all its hopes and promises still lies before her. It

is distinctly unnatural for the daughter to show an extreme predicate-type

expressing personal judgment. She responds to the stimuli of the environment

just like her mother. But whereas in the mother the type is in a way a naturalconsequence  of  her  unhappy  condition  of  life,  this  condition  is  entirely

lacking in the daughter. The daughter simply imitates the mother; she merely

appears like the mother. Let us consider what this can signify for a young

girl. If a young girl reacts to the world like an old woman, disappointed in

life,  this  at  once  shows  unnaturalness  and  constraint.  But  more  serious

consequences are possible. As you know the predicate-type is a manifestation

of intensive emotions; the emotions are always involved. Thus we cannot

prevent  ourselves  from  responding  inwardly,  at  least,  to  the  feelings  and

passions of our immediate environment; we allow ourselves to be infected

and  carried  away  by  it.  Originally  the  effects  and  their  physical

manifestations  had  a  biological  significance; i.e.  they  were  a  protective

mechanism for the individual and the whole herd. If we manifest emotions,

we can with certainty expect to receive emotions in return. That is the feeling

of the predicate-type. What the 45-year-old woman lacks in emotions, i.e. in

love in her marriage relations she seeks to obtain in the outside world, and for

that reason she is an ardent participant in the Christian Science movement. If

the daughter imitates this situation she copies her mother, she seeks to obtain

emotions from the outside. But for a girl of sixteen such an emotional state is,

to  say  the  least,  quite  dangerous;  like  her  mother,  she  reacts  to  her

environment as a sufferer soliciting sympathy. Such an emotional state is no

longer dangerous in the mother, but for obvious reasons it is quite dangerous

in the daughter. Once freed from her father and mother she will be like her

mother, i.e. she will be a suffering woman craving for inner gratification. She

will thus be exposed to the great danger of falling a victim to brutality and of

marrying a brute and inebriate like her father.

This  conception  is  of  importance  in  the  consideration  of  the  influence  of

environment and education. The example shows what passes over from the

mother to the child. It is not the good and pious precepts, nor is it any other

inculcation  of  pedagogic  truths  that  have  a  moulding  influence  upon  the

character  of  the  developing  child,  but  what  most  influences  him  is  the

peculiarly  affective  state  which  is  totally  unknown  to  his  parents  and

educators. The concealed discord between the parents, the secret worry, the

repressed hidden wishes, all these produce in the individual a certain affective

state with its objective signs which slowly but surely, though unconsciously,

works its way into the child's mind, producing therein the same conditions

and hence the same reactions to external stimuli. We know the depressing

effect  mournful  and  melancholic  persons  have  upon  us.  A  restless  andnervous individual infects his surroundings with unrest and dissatisfaction, a

grumbler with his discontent, etc. Since grown-up persons are so sensitive to

surrounding  influences,  we  should  certainly  expect  this  to  be  even  more

noticeable among children, whose minds are as soft and plastic as wax. The

father  and  mother  impress  deeply  into  the  child's  mind  the  seal  of  their

personality;  the  more  sensitive  and  mouldable  the  child  the  deeper  is  the

impression. Thus things that are never even spoken about are reflected in the

child. The child imitates the gesture, and just as the gesture of the parent is

the expression of an emotional state, so in turn the gesture gradually produces

in the child a similar feeling, as it feels itself, so to speak, into the gesture.

Just as the parents adapt themselves to the world, so does the child. At the

age of puberty when it begins to free itself from the spell of the family, it

enters into life with, so to say, a surface adaptation entirely in keeping with

that of the father and mother. The frequent and often very deep depressions

of puberty emanate from this; they are symptoms which are rooted in the

difficulty of new adjustment. The youthful person at first tries to separate

himself as much as possible from his family; he may even estrange himself

from it, but inwardly this only ties him the more firmly to the parental image.

I cite the case of a young neurotic who ran away from his parents; he was

estranged from, and almost hostile to them, but he admitted to me that he

possessed a special sanctum; it was a strong box containing his old childhood

books, old dried flowers, stones, and even small bottles of water from the

well at his home and from a river along which he walked with his parents,

etc.

The  first  attempts  to  assume  friendship  and  love  are  constellated  in  the

strongest manner possible by the relation to parents, and here one can usually

observe how powerful are the influences of the familiar constellations. It is

not  rare,  for  instance,  for  a  healthy  man  whose  mother  was  hysterical  to

marry a hysteric, or for the daughter of an alcoholic to choose an alcoholic

for her husband. I was once consulted by an intelligent and educated young

woman of twenty-six who suffered from a peculiar symptom. She thought

that her eyes now and then took on a strange expression which exerted a

disagreeable influence on men. If she then looked at a man he became self-

conscious, turned away and said something rapidly to his neighbour, at which

both were either embarrassed or inclined to laugh. The patient was convinced

that  her  look  excited  indecent  thoughts  in  the  men.  It  was  impossible  to

convince  her  of  the  falsity  of  her  conviction.  This  symptom  immediatelyaroused in me the suspicion that I dealt with a case of paranoia rather than

with a neurosis. But as was shown only three days later by the further course

of the treatment, I was mistaken, for the symptom promptly disappeared after

it had been explained by analysis. It originated in the following manner: The

lady had a lover who deserted her in a very marked manner. She felt utterly

forsaken; she withdrew from all society and pleasure, and entertained suicidal

ideas. In her seclusion there accumulated unadmitted and repressed erotic

wishes which she unconsciously projected on men whenever she was in their

company. This gave rise to the conviction that her look excited erotic wishes

in men. Further investigation showed that her deserting lover was a lunatic,

which  she  had  not  apparently  observed.  I  expressed  my  surprise  at  her

unsuitable choice, and added that she must have had a certain predilection for

loving mentally abnormal persons. This she denied, stating that she had once

before been engaged to be married to a normal man. He, too, deserted her;

and on further investigation it was found that he, too, had been in an insane

asylum shortly before,—another lunatic! This seemed to me to confirm with

sufficient certainty my belief that she had an unconscious tendency to choose

insane  persons.  Whence  originated  this  strange  taste?  Her  father  was  an

eccentric character, and in later years entirely estranged from his family. Her

whole love had therefore been turned away from her father to a brother eight

years her senior; him she loved and honoured as a father, and this brother

became hopelessly insane at the age of fourteen. That was apparently the

model from which the patient could never free herself, after which she chose

her  lovers,  and  through  which  she  had  to  become  unhappy.  Her  neurosis

which gave the impression of insanity, probably originated from this infantile

model. We must take into consideration that we are dealing in this case with a

highly educated and intelligent lady, who did not pass carelessly over her

mental  experiences,  who  indeed  reflected  much  over  her  unhappiness,

without, however, having any idea whence her misfortune originated.

There are things which unconsciously appear to us as a matter of course, and

it is for this reason that we do not see them truly, but attribute everything to

the so-called congenital character. I could cite any number of examples of

this  kind.  Every  patient  furnishes  contributions  to  this  subject  of  the

determination of destiny through the influence of the familiar milieu. In every

neurotic we see how the constellation of the infantile milieu influences not

only the character of the neurosis, but also life's destiny, even in its minute

details. The unhappy choice of a profession, and innumerable matrimonialfailures can be traced to this constellation. There are, however, cases where

the  profession  has  been  well  chosen,  where  the  husband  or  wife  leaves

nothing to be desired, and where still the person does not feel well but works

and lives under constant difficulties. Such cases often appear under the guise

of chronic neurasthenia. Here the difficulty is due to the fact that the mind is

unconsciously  split  into  two  parts  of  divergent  tendencies  which  are

impeding each other; one part lives with the husband or with the profession,

while the other lives unconsciously in the past with the father or mother. I

have treated a lady who, after suffering many years from a severe neurosis,

merged  into  a  dementia  præcox.  The  neurotic  affection  began  with  her

marriage. This lady's husband was kind, educated, well to do, and in every

respect suitable for her; his character showed nothing that would in any way

interfere with a happy marriage. The marriage was nevertheless unhappy, all

congenial companionship being excluded because the wife was neurotic.

The important heuristic axiom of every psychoanalysis reads as follows: If a

person  develops  a  neurosis  this  neurosis  contains  the  counter-argument

against the relation of the patient to the individual with whom he is most

intimately connected. A neurosis in the husband loudly proclaims that he has

intensive resistances and contrary tendencies against his wife; if the wife has

a neurosis she has a tendency which diverges from her husband. If the person

is unmarried the neurosis is then directed against the lover or the sweetheart

or against the parents. Every neurotic naturally strives against this relentless

formulation of the content of his neurosis, and he often refuses to recognise it

at any cost, but still it is always justified. To be sure, the conflict is not on the

surface, but must generally be revealed through a painstaking psychoanalysis.

The history of our patient reads as follows:

The father had a powerful personality. She was his favourite daughter, and

entertained for him a boundless veneration. At the age of seventeen she for

the first time fell in love with a young man. At that time she twice dreamt the

same dream, the impression of which never left her in all her later years; she

even imputed a mystic significance to it, and often recalled it with religious

dread. In the dream she saw a tall, masculine figure with a very beautiful

white beard; at this sight she was permeated with a feeling of awe and delight

as if she experienced the presence of God Himself. This dream made the

deepest impression on her, and she was constrained to think of it again and

again. The love affair of that period proved to be one of little warmth, and

was soon given up. Later the patient married her present husband. Thoughshe  loved  her  husband  she  was  led  continually  to  compare  him  with  her

deceased father; this comparison always proved unfavourable to her husband.

Whatever the husband said, intended, or did, was subjected to this standard

and always with the same result: "My father would have done all this better

and differently." Our patient's life with her husband was not happy, she could

neither respect nor love him sufficiently; she was inwardly dissatisfied. She

gradually developed a fervent piety, and at the same time violent hysterical

symptoms supervened. She began by going into raptures now over this and

now over that clergyman; she was looking everywhere for a spiritual friend,

and estranged herself more and more from her husband. The mental trouble

manifested itself about ten years after marriage. In her diseased state she

refused to have anything to do with her husband and child; she imagined

herself pregnant by another man. In brief, the resistances against her husband,

which hitherto had been laboriously repressed, came out quite openly, and

among  other  things  manifested  themselves  in  insults  of  the  gravest  kind

directed against him.

In this case we see how a neurosis appeared, as it were, at the moment of

marriage, i.e.  this  neurosis  expresses  the  counter-argument  against  the

husband. What is the counter-argument? The counter-argument is the father

of the patient, for she verified her belief daily that her husband was not the

equal of her father. When the patient first fell in love there had appeared a

symptom in the form of an extremely impressive dream or vision. She saw

the man with the very beautiful white beard. Who was this man? On directing

her  attention  to  the  beautiful  white  beard  she  immediately  recognised  the

phantom. It was of course her father. Thus every time the patient merged into

a love affair the picture of her father inopportunely appeared and prevented

her from adjusting herself psychologically to her husband.

I purposely chose this case as an illustration because it is simple, obvious,

and quite typical of many marriages which are crippled through the neurosis

of the wife. The cause of the unhappiness always lies in a too firm attachment

to the parents. The infantile relationship has not been given up. We find here

one of the most important tasks of pedagogy, namely, the solution of the

problem  how  to  free  the  growing  individual  from  his  unconscious

attachments to the influences of the infantile milieu, in such a manner that he

may  retain  whatever  there  is  in  it  that  is  suitable  and  reject  whatever  is

unsuitable. To solve this difficult question on the part of the child seems to

me  impossible  at  present.  We  know  as  yet  too  little  about  the  child'semotional processes. The first and only real contribution to the literature on

this subject has in fact appeared during the present year. It is the analysis of a

five-year-old boy published by Freud.

The  difficulties  on  the  part  of  the  child  are  very  great.  They  should  not,

however, be so great on the part of the parents. In many ways the parents

could  manage  the  love  of  children  more  carefully,  more  indulgently,  and

more  intelligently.  The  sins  committed  against  favourite  children  by  the

undue  love  of  the  parents  could  perhaps  be  avoided  through  a  wider

knowledge of the child's mind. For many reasons I find it impossible to say

anything of general validity concerning the bringing up of children as it is

affected by this problem. We are as yet very far from general prescriptions

and rules; indeed we are still in the realm of casuistry. Unfortunately, our

knowledge of the finer mental processes in the child is so meagre that we are

not yet in any position to say where the greatest trouble lies, whether in the

parents, in the child, or in the conception of the milieu. Only psychoanalyses

of the kind that Professor Freud has published in the Jahrbuch, 1909, will

help us out of this difficulty. Such comprehensive and profound observations

should act as a strong inducement to all teachers to occupy themselves with

Freud's  psychology.  This  psychology  offers  more  values  for  practical

pedagogy than the physiological psychology of the present.                                LECTURE III

    EXPERIENCES CONCERNING THE PSYCHIC LIFE OF THE

                                        CHILD

Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  In  our  last  lecture  we  saw  how  important  the

emotional processes of childhood are for later life. In to-day's lecture I should

like to give you some insight into the psychic life of the child through the

analysis of a four-year-old girl. It is much to be regretted that there are few

among you who have had the opportunity of reading the analysis of "Little

Hans" (Kleiner Hans),  which  was  published  by  Freud  during  the  current

year. I ought to begin by giving you the content of that analysis, so that you

might be in a position to compare Freud's results with those obtained by me,

and observe the marked, and astonishing similarity between the unconscious

creations  of  the  two  children.  Without  a  knowledge  of  the  fundamental

analysis  of  Freud,  much  in  the  report  of  the  following  case  will  appear

strange,  incomprehensible,  and  perhaps  unacceptable  to  you.  I  beg  you,

however, to defer your final judgment and to enter upon the consideration of

these new subjects with a kindly disposition, for such pioneer work in virgin

soil requires not only the greatest patience on the part of the investigator, but

also  the  unprejudiced  attention  of  his  audience.  Because  the  Freudian

investigations apparently involve a discussion of the most intimate secrets of

sexuality many people have had a feeling of repulsion against them, and have

therefore rejected everything as a matter of course without any real disproof.

This, unfortunately, has almost always been the fate of Freud's doctrines up

to the present. One must not come to the consideration of these matters with

the firm conviction that they do not exist, for it may easily happen that for the

prejudiced they really do not exist. One should perhaps assume the author's

point of view for the moment and investigate these phenomena under his

guidance.  Only  in  this  way  can  the  correctness  or  otherwise  of  our

observations  be  affirmed.  We  may  err,  as  all  human  beings  err.  But  the

continual holding up to us of our mistakes—perhaps they are worse than

mistakes—does not help us to see things more distinctly. We should prefer to

see wherein we err. That should be demonstrated to us in our own sphere of

experience. Thus far, however, no one has succeeded in meeting us on our

own ground, nor in giving us a different conception of the things which we

ourselves see. We still have to complain that our critics persist in maintainingcomplete ignorance about the matters in question. The only reason for this is

that they have never taken the trouble to become thoroughly acquainted with

our method; had they done this they would have understood us.

The little girl to whose sagacity and intellectual vivacity we are indebted for

the  following  observations  is  a  healthy,  lively  child  of  emotional

temperament. She has never been seriously ill, and never, even in the realm

of  the  nervous  system,  had  there  been  observed  any  symptoms  prior  to

this investigation. In the report which follows we shall have to waive any

connected  description,  for  it  is  made  up  of  anecdotes  which  treat  of  one

experience out of a whole cycle of similar ones, and which cannot, therefore,

be arranged scientifically and systematically, but must rather be described

somewhat in the form of a story. We cannot as yet dispense with this manner

of description in our analytical psychology, for we are still far from being

able in all cases to separate with unerring certainty what is curious from what

is typical.


When the little daughter, whom we will call Anna, was about three years old,

she once had the following conversation with her grandmother:

Anna: "Grandma, why are your eyes so dim?"

Grandma: "Because I am old."

A.: "But you will become young again."

G.: "No, do you know, I shall become older and older, and then I shall die."

A.: "Well, and then?"

G.: "Then I shall be an angel."

A.: "And then will you be a little baby again?"

The child found here a welcome opportunity for the provisional solution of a

problem. For some time before she had been in the habit of asking her mother

whether she would ever have a living doll, a little child, a little brother. This

naturally included the question as to the origin of children. As such questions

appeared  only  spontaneously  and  indirectly,  the  parents  attached  no

significance to them, but responded to them as lightly and in appearance as

carelessly as the child seemed to ask them. Thus she once received from her

father  the  pretty  story  that  children  are  brought  by  the  stork.  Anna  had

already heard somewhere a more serious version, namely, that children, are

little angels living in heaven, and are brought from heaven by the stork. This

theory seems to have become the starting point for the investigating activity

of the little one. From the conversation with the grandmother it could be seenthat this theory was capable of wide application, namely, it not only solved in

a comforting manner the painful idea of parting and dying, but at the same

time also the riddle of the origin of children. Such solutions which kill at least

two birds with one stone were formerly tenaciously adhered to in science, and

cannot be removed from the mind of the child without a certain amount of

shock.

Just as the birth of a little sister was the turning point in the history of "Little

Hans," so in this case it was the birth of a brother, which happened when

Anna  had  reached  the  age  of  four  years.  The  pregnancy  of  the  mother

apparently remained unnoticed; i.e. the child never expressed herself on this

subject. On the evening before the birth, when labour pains were beginning,

the child was in her father's room. He took her on his knee and said, "Tell me,

what would you say if you should get a little brother to-night?" "I would kill

him" was the prompt answer. The expression "to kill" looks very serious, but

in reality it is quite harmless, for "to kill" and "to die" in child language

signify only to remove, either in the active or in the passive sense, as has

already been pointed out a number of times by Freud. "To kill" as used by the

child is a harmless word, especially so when we know that the child uses the

word  "kill"  quite  promiscuously  for  all  possible  kinds  of  destruction,

removal, demolition, etc. It is, nevertheless, worth while to note this tendency

(see the analysis of Kleiner Hans, p. 5).

The birth occurred early in the morning, and later the father entered the room

where Anna slept. She awoke as he came in. He imparted to her the news of

the advent of a little brother, which she took with surprise and strained facial

expression. The father took her in his arms and carried her into the lying-in

room. She first threw a rapid glance at her somewhat pale mother and then

displayed  something  like  a  mixture  of  embarrassment  and  suspicion  as  if

thinking, "Now what else is going to happen?" (Father's impression.) She

displayed hardly any pleasure at the sight of the new arrival, so that the cool

reception she gave it caused general disappointment. During the forenoon she

kept very noticeably away from her mother; this was the more striking as she

was usually much attached to her. But once when her mother was alone she

ran into the room, embraced her and said, "Well, aren't you going to die

now?" Now a part of the conflict in the child's psyche is revealed to us.

Though the stork theory was never really taken seriously, she accepted the

fruitful re-birth hypothesis, according to which a person by dying helps a

child into life. Accordingly the mother, too, must die; why, then, should thenewborn child, against whom she already felt childish jealousy, cause her

pleasure? It was for this reason that she had to seek a favourable opportunity

of  reassuring  herself  as  to  whether  the  mother  was  to  die,  or  rather  was

moved to express the hope that she would not die.

With this happy issue, however, the re-birth theory sustained a severe shock.

How was it possible now to explain the birth of her little brother and the

origin of children in general? There still remained the stork theory which,

though  never  expressly  rejected,  had  been  implicitly  waived  through  the

assumption  of  the  re-birth  theory.  The  explanations  next  attempted

unfortunately remained hidden from the parents as the child went to stay with

her grandmother for a few weeks. From the latter's report the stork theory

was often discussed, and was naturally reinforced by the concurrence of those

about her.

When  Anna  returned  to  her  parents,  she  again,  on  meeting  her  mother,

evinced the same mixture of embarrassment and suspicion which she had

displayed  after  the  birth.  The  impression,  though  inexplicable,  was  quite

unmistakable to both parents. Her behaviour towards the baby was very nice.

During her absence a nurse had come into the house who, on account of her

uniform, made a deep impression on Anna; to be sure, the impression at first

was  quite  unfavourable  as  she  evinced  the  greatest  hostility  to  her.  Thus

nothing could induce her to allow herself to be undressed and put to sleep by

this nurse. Whence this resistance originated was soon shown in an angry

scene near the cradle of the little brother in which Anna shouted at the nurse,

"This is not your little brother, he is mine!" Gradually, however, she became

reconciled to the nurse, and began to play nurse herself; she had to have her

white cap and apron, and "nursed" now her little brother, and now her doll.

In  contrast  to  her  former  mood  she  became  unmistakably  mournful  and

dreamy. She often sat for a long time under the table singing stories and

making  rhymes,  which  were  partially  incomprehensible  but  sometimes

contained the "nurse" theme ("I am a nurse of the green cross"). Some of the

stories, however, distinctly showed a painful feeling striving for expression.

Here we meet with a new and important feature in the little one's life: that is,

we  meet  with  reveries,  even  a  tendency  towards  poetic  fancies  and

melancholic attacks. All of them things which we are wont first to encounter

at a later period of life, at a time when the youth or maiden is preparing to

sever the family tie and to enter independently upon life, but is still held back

by an inward, painful feeling of homesickness for the warmth of the parentalhearth. At such a time the youth begins to replace what is lacking with poetic

fancies  in  order  to  compensate  for  the  deficiency.  To  approximate  the

psychology of a four-year-old child to that of the youth approaching puberty

will at first sight seem paradoxical; the relationship lies, however, not in the

age but rather in the mechanism. The elegiac reveries express the fact that a

part  of  that  love  which  formerly  belonged,  and  should  belong,  to  a  real

object, is now introverted, that is, it is turned inward into the subject and

there  produces  an  increased  imaginative  activity.  What  is  the  origin  of

this introversion? Is it a psychological manifestation peculiar to this age, or

does it owe its origin to a conflict?

This is explained in the following occurrence. It often happened that Anna

was disobedient to her mother, she was insolent, saying, "I am going back to

grandma."

Mother: "But I shall be sad when you leave me."

Anna: "Oh, but you have my little brother."

This reaction towards the mother shows what the little one was really aiming

at with her threats to go away again; she apparently wished to hear what her

mother would say to her proposal, that is, to see what attitude her mother

would actually assume to her, whether her little brother had not ousted her

altogether from her mother's regard. One must, however, give no credence to

this little trickster. For the child could readily see and feel that, despite the

existence of the little brother, there was nothing essentially lacking to her in

her mother's love. The reproach to which she subjects her mother is therefore

unjustified, and to the trained ear this is betrayed by a slightly affected tone.

Such an unmistakable tone does not expect to be taken seriously and hence it

obtrudes  itself  more  vehemently.  The  reproach  as  such  cannot  be  taken

seriously by the mother, for it was only the forerunner of other and this time

more serious resistances. Not long after the conversation narrated above, the

following scene took place:

Mother: "Come, we are going into the garden now!"

Anna: "You are telling lies, take care if you are not telling the truth."

M.: "What are you thinking of? I am telling the truth."

A.: "No, you are not telling the truth."

M.: "You will soon see that I am telling the truth: we are going into the

garden now."

A.: "Indeed, is that true? Is that really true? Are you not lying?"

Scenes of this kind were repeated a number of times. This time the tone wasmore rude and more vehement, and at the same time the accent on the word

"lie"  betrayed  something  special  which  the  parents  did  not  understand;

indeed,  at  first  they  attributed  too  little  significance  to  the  spontaneous

utterances of the child. In this they merely did what education usually does in

general, ex officio. We usually pay little heed to children in every stage of

life; in all essential matters, they are treated as not responsible, and in all

unessential ma tters, they are trained with an automatic precision.

Under resistances there always lies a question, a conflict, of which we hear

later and on other occasions. But usually one forgets to connect the thing

heard with the resistances. Thus, on another occasion, Anna put to her mother

the following questions:—

Anna: "I should like to become a nurse when I grow big—why did you not

become a nurse?"

Mother: "Why, as I have become a mother I have children to nurse anyway."

A. (Reflecting): "Indeed, shall I be a lady like you, and shall I talk to you

then?"

The  mother's  answer  again  shows  whither  the  child's  question  was  really

directed. Apparently Anna, too, would like to have a child to "nurse" just as

the nurse has. Where the nurse got the little child is quite clear. Anna, too,

could get a child in the same way if she were big. Why did not the mother

become such a nurse, that is to say, how did she get a child if not in the same

way as the nurse? Like the nurse, Anna, too, could get a child, but how that

fact might be changed in the future or how she might come to resemble her

mother in the matter of getting children is not clear to her. From this resulted

the thoughtful question, "Indeed, shall I be a lady like you? Shall I be quite

different?" The stork theory evidently had come to naught, the dying theory

met a similar fate; hence she now thinks one may get a child in the same way,

as, for example, the nurse got hers. She, too, could get one in this natural

way,  but  how  about  the  mother  who  is  no  nurse  and  still  has  children?

Looking at the matter from this point of view, Anna asks: "Why did you not

become a nurse?" namely, "why have you not got your child in the natural

way?" This peculiar indirect manner of questioning is typical, and evidently

corresponds with the child's hazy grasp of the problem, unless we assume a

certain  diplomatic  uncertainty  prompted  by  a  desire  to  evade  direct

questioning. We shall later find an illustration of this possibility. Anna is

evidently confronted with the question "Where does the child come from?"

The stork did not bring it; mother did not die; nor did mother get it in thesame way as the nurse. She has, however, asked this question before and

received the information from her father that the stork brings children; this is

positively untrue, she can never be deceived on this point. Accordingly, papa

and mama and all the others lie. This readily explains her suspicion at the

childbirth and her discrediting of her mother. But it also explains another

point,  namely,  the  elegiac  reveries  which  we  have  attributed  to  a  partial

introversion. We know now what was the real object from which love was

removed  and  uselessly  introverted,  namely,  it  had  to  be  taken from  the

parents who deceived her and refused to tell her the truth. (What can this be

which  must  not  be  uttered?  What  is  going  on  here?)  Such  were  the

parenthetic questions of the child, and the answer was: Evidently this must be

something to be concealed, perhaps something dangerous. Attempts to make

her talk and to draw out the truth by means of artful questions were futile,

so resistance is placed against resistance, and the introversion of love begins.

It is evident that the capacity for sublimation in a four-year-old child is still

too slightly developed to be capable of performing more than symptomatic

services. The mind, therefore, depends on another compensation, namely, it

resorts to one of the relinquished infantile devices for securing love by force,

preferably  that  of  crying  and  calling  the  mother  at  night.  This  had  been

diligently practised and exhausted during her first year. It now returns, and

corresponding to the period of life has become well determined and equipped

with recent impressions. It was just after the earthquakes in Messina, and this

event  was  discussed  at  the  table.  Anna  was  extremely  interested  in

everything, she repeatedly asked her grandmother to tell her how the earth

shook, how the houses fell in and many people lost their lives. After this she

had nocturnal fears, she could not be alone, her mother had to go to her and

stay with her; otherwise she feared that an earthquake would happen, that the

house would fall and kill her. During the day, too, she was much occupied

with such thoughts. While walking with her mother she annoyed her with

such questions as, "Will the house be standing when we return home? Are

you sure there is no earthquake at home? Will papa still be living?" About

every stone lying in the road she asked whether it was from an earthquake.

A building in course of erection was a house destroyed by the earthquake,

etc. Finally, she began to cry out frequently at night that the earthquake was

coming and that she heard the thunder. Each evening she had to be solemnly

assured that there was no earthquake coming.

Many means of calming her were tried, thus she was told, for example, thatearthquakes only occur where there are volcanoes. But then she had to be

satisfied that the mountains surrounding the city were not volcanoes. This

reasoning led the child by degrees to a desire for learning, as strong as it was

unnatural at her age, which showed itself in a demand that all the geological

atlases and text-books should be brought to her from her father's library. For

hours she rummaged through these works looking for pictures of volcanoes

and earthquakes, and asking questions continually. Here we are confronted

by  an  energetic  effort  to  sublimate  the  fear  into  an  eager  desire  for

knowledge, which at this age made a decidedly premature exaction. But how

many a gifted child suffering in exactly the same way with such problems, is

"cosseted" through this untimely sublimation, by no means to its advantage.

For,  by  favouring  sublimation  at  this  age  one  is  merely  strengthening

manifestation of neurosis. The root of the eager desire for knowledge is fear,

and fear is the expression of converted libido; that is, it is the expression

of an introversion which has become neurotic, which at this age is neither

necessary nor favourable for the development of the child.

Whither this eager desire for knowledge was ultimately directed is explained

by a series of questions which arose almost daily. "Why is Sophie (a younger

sister) younger than I?" "Where was Freddie (the little brother) before? Was

he in heaven? What was he doing there? Why did he come down just now,

why not before?"

This state of affairs led the father to decide that the mother should tell the

child  when  occasion  offered the  truth  concerning  the  origin  of  the  little

brother. This having been done, Anna soon thereafter asked about the stork.

Her mother told her that the story of the stork was not true, but that Freddie

grew inside his mother like the flowers in a plant. At first he was very little,

and then he became bigger and bigger as a plant does. She listened attentively

without the slightest surprise, and then asked, "But did he come out all by

himself?"

Mother: "Yes."

Anna: "But he cannot walk!"

Sophie: "Then he crawled out."

Anna, overhearing her little sister's answer: "Is there a hole here? (pointing to

the breast) or did he come out of the mouth? Who came out of the nurse?"

She then interrupted herself and exclaimed, "No, no, the stork brought baby

brother down from heaven." She soon left the subject and again wished to see

pictures of volcanoes. During the evening following this conversation shewas calm. The sudden explanation produced in the child a whole series of

ideas,  which  manifested  themselves  in  certain  questions.  New  unexpected

perspectives were opened; she rapidly approached the main problem, namely,

the question, "Where did the baby come out?" Was it from a hole in the

breast or from the mouth? Both suppositions are entirely qualified to form

acceptable theories. We even meet with recently married women who still

entertain the theory of the hole in the abdominal wall or of the Cæsarean

section; this is supposed to betray a very unusual degree of innocence. But as

a matter of fact it is not innocence; we are always dealing in such cases with

infantile  sexual  activities,  which  in  later  life  have  brought  the vias

naturales into ill repute.

It may be asked where the child got the absurd idea that there is a hole in the

breast, or that the birth takes place through the mouth. Why did she not select

one of the natural openings existing in the pelvis from which things come out

daily?  The  explanation  is  simple.  Very  shortly  before,  our  little  one  had

invoked some educational criticism from her mother by a heightened interest

in both openings with their remarkable excretions,—an interest not always in

accord with the requirements of cleanliness and decorum. Then for the first

time she became acquainted with the exceptional laws relating to these bodily

regions  and,  being  a  sensitive  child,  she  soon  learned  that  there  was

something here to be tabooed. This region, therefore, must not be referred to.

Anna had simply shown herself docile and had so adjusted herself to the

cultural demands that she thought (at least spoke) of the simplest things last.

The incorrect theories substituted for correct laws sometimes persist for years

until brusque explanations come from without. It is, therefore, no wonder that

such theories, the forming of and adherence to which are favoured even by

parents and educationalists should later become determinants for important

symptoms in a neurosis, or of delusions in a psychosis, just as I have shown

that  in  dementia  præcox  what  has  existed  in  the  mind  for  years  always

remains  somewhere,  though  it  may  be  hidden  under  compensations  of  a

seemingly different kind.

But even before this question was settled as to where the child really comes

out a new problem obtruded itself, viz. the children came out of the mother,

but  how  is  it  with  the  nurse?  Did  some  one  come  out  of  her  too?  This

question was followed by the remark, "No, no, the stork brought down baby

brother from heaven." What is there peculiar about the fact that nobody came

out of the nurse? We recall that Anna identified herself with the nurse, andplanned to become a nurse later, for she, too, would like to have a child, and

she could have one as well as the nurse. But now when it is known that the

little brother grew in mama, how is it now?

This  disquieting  question  is  averted  by  a  quick  return  to  the  stork-angel

theory which has never been really believed and which after a few trials is at

last definitely abandoned. Two questions, however, remain in the air. The

first  reads  as  follows:  Where  does  the  child  come  out?  The  second,  a

considerably more difficult one, reads: How does it happen that mama has

children while the nurse and the servants do not? All these questions did not

at first manifest themselves.

On the day following the explanation, while at dinner, Anna spontaneously

remarked: "My brother is in Italy, and has a house of cloth and glass, but it

does not tumble down."

In this case, as in the others, it was impossible to ask for an explanation; the

resistances were too great and Anna could not be drawn into conversation.

This former officious and pretty explanation is very significant. For some

three  months  the  two  sisters  had  been  building  a  stereotyped  fanciful

conception of a "big brother." This brother knows everything, he can do and

has everything, he has been and is in every place where the children are not;

he is owner of great cows, oxen, horses, dogs; everything is his, etc. Every

one has such a "big brother." We must not look far for the origin of this

fancy;  the  model  for  it  is  the father  who  seems  to  correspond  to  this

conception; he seems to be like a brother to mama. The children, too, have

their similar powerful "brother." This brother is very brave; he is at present in

dangerous  Italy  and  inhabits  an  impossible  fragile  house,  and it does not

tumble down. For the child this realises an important wish: the earthquake is

no longer to be dangerous; in consequence the child's fear disappeared and

did not return. The fear of earthquakes now entirely vanished. Instead of

calling her father to her bed to conjure away the fear, she now became very

affectionate and begged him every night to kiss her.

In  order  to  test  this  new  state  of  affairs  the  father  showed  her  pictures

illustrating  volcanoes  and  earthquake  devastations.  Anna  remained

unaffected, she examined the pictures with indifference, remarking, "These

people  are  dead;  I  have  already  seen  that  quite  often."  The  picture  of  a

volcanic eruption no longer had any attraction for her. Thus all her scientific

interest  collapsed  and  vanished  as  suddenly  as  it  came.  During  the  days

following the explanation Anna had quite important matters to occupy herselfwith; she disseminated her newly acquired knowledge among those about her

in the following manner: She began by again circumstantially affirming what

had been told her, viz. that Freddy, her younger sister, and herself had grown

in  her  mother,  that  papa  and  mama  grew  in  their  mothers,  and  that  the

servants likewise grew in their respective mothers. By frequent questions she

tested the true basis of her knowledge, for her suspicion was aroused in no

small  measure,  so  that  it  needed  many  confirmations  to  remove  all  her

uncertainties.

On one occasion the trustworthiness of the theory threatened to go to pieces.

About a week after the explanation, the father was taken ill with influenza

and had to remain in bed during the forenoon. The children knew nothing

about this, and Anna, coming into the parents' bedroom, saw what was quite

unusual, namely, that her father was remaining in bed. She again took on a

peculiar surprised expression; she remained at a distance from the bed and

would not come nearer; she was apparently again reserved and suspicious.

But suddenly she burst out with the question, "Why are you in bed; have you

a plant in your inside too?"

The father naturally had to laugh. He calmed her, however, by assuring her

that children never grow in the father, that only women can have children,

and  not  men;  thereupon  the  child  again  became  friendly.  But  though  the

surface was calm the problems continued to work in the dark. A few days

later, while at dinner, Anna related the following dream: "I dreamed last night

of Noah's ark." The father then asked her what she had dreamed about it, but

Anna's answer was sheer nonsense. In such cases it is necessary only to wait

and pay attention. A few minutes later she said to her mother, "I dreamed last

night about Noah's ark, and there were a lot of little animals in it." Another

pause. She then began her story for the third time. "I dreamed last night

about Noah's ark, and there were a lot of baby animals in it, and underneath

there was a lid and that opened and all the baby animals fell out."

The children really had a Noah's ark, but its opening, a lid, was on the roof

and not underneath. In this way she delicately intimated that the story of the

birth from mouth or breast is incorrect, and that she had some inkling where

the children came out.

A  few  weeks  then  passed  without  any  noteworthy  occurrences.  On  one

occasion she related the following dream: "I dreamed about papa and mama;

they had been sitting late in the study, and we children were there too." On

the face of this we find a wish of the children to be allowed to sit up as longas the parents. This wish is here realised, or rather it is utilised to express a

more important wish, namely, to be present in the evening when the parents

are alone; of course, quite innocently, it was in the study where she has seen

all  the  interesting  books,  and  where  she  has  satiated  her  thirst  for

knowledge; i.e. she was really seeking an answer to the burning question,

whence the little brother came. If the children were there they would find

out. A few days later Anna had a terrifying dream from which she awoke

crying,  "The  earthquake  is  coming,  the  house  has  begun  to  shake."  Her

mother went to her and calmed her by saying that the earthquake was not

coming,  that  everything  was  quiet,  and  that  everybody  was  asleep.

Whereupon Anna said: "I would like to see the spring, when all the little

flowers are coming out and the whole lawn is full of flowers; I would like to

see Freddy, he has such a dear little face. What is papa doing? What is he

saying?" The mother said, "He is asleep, and isn't saying anything now."

Little Anna then remarked with a sarcastic smile: "He will surely be sick

again to-morrow."

This  text  should  be  read  backwards.  The  last  sentence  was  not  meant

seriously, as it was uttered in a mocking tone. When the father was sick the

last time, Anna suspected that he had a "plant in his inside." The sarcasm

signifies: "To-morrow papa is surely going to have a child." But this also is

not  meant  seriously.  Papa  is  not  going  to  have  a  child;  mama  alone  has

children; perhaps she will have another child to-morrow; but where from?

"What does papa do?" The formulation of the difficult problem seems here to

come to the surface. It reads: What does papa really do if he does not bear

children?  The  little  one  is  very  anxious  to  have  a  solution  for  all  these

problems;  she  would  like  to  know  how  Freddy  came  into  the  world,  she

would like to see how the little flowers come out of the earth in the spring,

and these wishes are hidden behind the fear of earthquakes.

After this intermezzo Anna slept quietly until morning. In the morning her

mother asked her what she had dreamed. She did not at first recall anything,

and then said: "I dreamed that I could make the summer, and then some one

threw a Punch down into the closet."

This peculiar dream apparently has two different scenes which are separated

by "then." The second part draws its material from the recent wish to possess

a Punch, that is, to have a boy doll just as mama has a little boy. Some one

threw Punch down into the closet; one often lets other things fall down into

the water closet. It is just like this that the children, too, come out. We havehere  an  analogy  to  the  "Lumpf-theory"  of  little  Hans.  Whenever  several

scenes are found in one dream, each scene ordinarily represents a particular

variation of the complex elaboration. Here accordingly the first part is only a

variation of the theme found in the second part. The meaning of "to see the

spring" or "to see the little flowers come out" we have already remarked.

Anna now dreams that she can make the summer, that is she can bring it

about that the little flowers shall come out. She herself can make a little child,

and the second part of the dream represents this just as one makes a motion in

the  w.c.  Here  we  find  the  egoistic  wish  which  is  behind  the  seemingly

objective interest of the previous night's conversation.

A few days later the mother was visited by a lady who expected soon to

become a mother. The children seemed to take no interest in the matter, but

the next day they amused themselves with the following play which was

directed by the elder girl; they took all the newspapers they could find in their

father's  paper-basket  and  stuffed  them  under  their  clothes,  so  that  the

imitation was unmistakable. During the night little Anna had another dream:

"I dreamed about a woman in the city; she had a very big stomach." The

chief actor in a dream is always the dreamer himself under some definite

aspect; thus the childish play of the day before is fully solved.

Not long after, Anna surprised her mother with the following performance:

She  stuck  her  doll  under  her  clothes,  then  pulled  it  out  slowly  head

downwards, and at the same time remarked, "Look, the baby is coming out,

now it is all out." By this means Anna tells her mother, "You see, thus I

apprehend the problem of birth. What do you think of it? Is that right?" The

play is really meant to be a question, for, as we shall see later, this idea had to

be officially confirmed. That rumination on this problem by no means ended

here, is shown by the occasional ideas conceived during the following weeks.

Thus she repeated the same play a few days later with her Teddy Bear, who

stands in the relation of an especially beloved doll. One day, looking at a

rose, she said to her grandmother, "See, the rose is getting a baby." As her

grandmother did not quite understand her, she pointed to the enlarged calyx

and said, "Don't you see it is quite fat here?"

Anna  once  quarrelled  with  her  younger  sister,  and  the  latter  exclaimed

angrily, "I will kill you." Whereupon Anna answered, "When I am dead you

will be all alone; then you will have to pray to God for a live baby." But the

scene soon changed: Anna was the angel, and the younger sister was forced

to kneel before her and pray to her that she should present to her a livingchild. In this way Anna became the child-dispensing mother.

Oranges were once served at table. Anna impatiently asked for one and said,

"I am going to take an orange and swallow it all down into my stomach, and

then I shall get a baby." Who does not think here of fairy tales in which

childless  women  become  pregnant  by  swallowing  fruit,  fish,  and  similar

things?  In  this  way  Anna  sought  to  solve  the  problem how  the  children

actually  come  into  the  mother.  She  thus  enters  into  a  formulation  which

hitherto had not been defined with so much clearness. The solution follows in

the form of an analogy, which is quite characteristic of the archaic thinking of

the child. (In the adult, too, there is a kind of thinking by metaphor which

belongs to the stratum lying immediately below consciousness; dreams bring

the analogies to the surface; the same may be observed also in dementia

præcox.) In German as well as in numerous foreign fairy tales one frequently

finds  such  characteristic  childish  comparisons.  Fairy  tales  seem  to  be  the

myths of the child, and therefore contain among other things the mythology

which the child weaves concerning the sexual processes. The spell of the

fairy tale poetry, which is felt even by the adult, is explained by the fact that

some  of  the  old  theories  are  still  alive  in  our  unconscious  minds.  We

experience a strange, peculiar and familiar feeling when a conception of our

remotest youth is again stimulated. Without becoming conscious it merely

sends into consciousness a feeble copy of its original emotional strength.

The problem how the child gets into the mother was difficult to solve. As the

only  way  of  taking  things  into  the  body  is  through  the  mouth,  it  could

evidently be assumed that the mother ate something like a fruit, which then

grows  inside  her.  But  then  comes  another  difficulty,  namely,  it  is  clear

enough what the mother produces, but it is not yet clear what the father is

good for.

What does the father do? Anna now occupied herself exclusively with this

question. One morning she ran into the parents' bedroom while they were

dressing, she jumped into her father's bed, lay face downwards, kicked with

her legs and called at the same time, "Look! does papa do that?" The analogy

to the horse of "little Hans" which raised such disturbance with its legs, is

very surprising.

With this last performance the problem seemed to be at rest entirely, at least

the parents found no opportunity to make any pertinent observations. That the

problem should come to a standstill just here is not at all surprising, for this is

really its most difficult part. Moreover, we know from experience that notmany children go beyond these limits during the period of childhood. The

problem is almost too difficult for the childish mind, which still lacks much

knowledge necessary to its solution.

This standstill lasted about five months, during which no phobias or other

signs  of  complex-elaboration  appeared.  After  this  lapse  of  time  there

appeared premonitory signs of some new incidents. Anna's family lived at

that time in the country near a lake where the mother and children could

bathe. As Anna was afraid to wade farther into the water than knee-deep, her

father once put her into the water, which led to an outburst of crying. In the

evening while going to bed Anna asked her mother, "Do you not believe that

father wanted to drown me?" A few days later there was another outburst of

crying. She continued to stand in the gardener's way until he finally placed

her in a newly dug hole. Anna cried bitterly, and afterwards maintained that

the gardener wished to bury her. Finally she awoke during the night with

fearful crying. Her mother went to her in the adjoining room and quieted her.

She had dreamed that "a train passed and then fell in a heap."

This tallies with the "stage coach" of "little Hans." These incidents showed

clearly enough that fear was again in the air, i.e. that a resistance had again

arisen preventing transference to the parents, and that therefore a great part of

her love was converted into fear. This time suspicion was not directed against

the mother, but against the father, who she was sure must know the secret,

but would never let anything out. What could the father be doing or keeping

secret? To the child this secret appeared as something dangerous, so that she

felt the worst might be expected from the father. (This feeling of childish

anxiety  with  the  father  as  object  we  see  again  most  distinctly  in  adults,

especially in dementia præcox, which lifts the veil of obscurity from many

unconscious  processes,  as  though  it  were  following  psychoanalytic

principles.) It was for this reason that Anna came to the apparently absurd

conclusion that her father wanted to drown her. At the same time her fear

contained the thought that the object of the father had some relation to a

dangerous action. This stream of thought is no arbitrary interpretation. Anna

meanwhile grew a little older and her interest in her father took on a special

colouring which is hard to describe. Language has no words to describe the

quite unique kind of tender curiosity which shone in the child's eyes.

Anna once took marked delight in assisting the gardener while he was sowing

grass, without apparently divulging the profound significance of her play.

About a fortnight later she began to observe with great pleasure the younggrass  sprouting.  On  one  of  these  occasions  she  asked  her  mother  the

following question: "Tell me, how did the eyes grow into the head?" The

mother  told  her  that  she  did  not  know.  Anna,  however,  continued  to  ask

whether God or her papa could tell this? The mother then referred her to her

father, who might tell her how the eyes grew into the head. A few days later

there was a family reunion at tea. When the guests had departed, the father

remained at the table reading the paper and Anna also remained. Suddenly

approaching her father she said, "Tell me, how did the eyes grow into the

head?"

Father: "They did not grow into the head; they were there from the beginning

and grew with the head."

A.: "Were not the eyes planted?"

F.: "No, they grew in the head like the nose."

A.: "Did the mouth and the ears grow in the same way? and the hair, too?"

F.: "Yes, they all grew in the same way."

A.: "And the hair, too? But the mousies came into the world naked. Where

was the hair before? Aren't there little seeds for it?"

F.: "No; you see, the hair really came out of little grains which are like seeds,

but these were already in the skin long before and nobody sowed them." The

father was now getting concerned; he knew whither the little one's thoughts

were directed, but he did not wish to overthrow, for the sake of a former false

application,  the  opportunely  established  seed-theory  which  she  had  most

fortunately  gathered  from  nature;  but  the  child  spoke  with  an  unwonted

seriousness which demanded consideration.

Anna (evidently disappointed, and in a distressed tone): "But how did Freddy

get into mama? Who stuck him in? and who stuck you into your mama?

Where did he come out from?"

From this sudden storm of questions the father chose the last for his first

answer.  "Just  think,  you  know  well  enough  that  Freddy  is  a  boy;  boys

become men and girls women. Only women and not men can have children;

now just think, where could Freddy come out from?"

A. (Laughs joyfully and points to her genitals): "Did he come out here?"

Father: "Yes, of course, you certainly must have thought of this before?"

A. (Overlooking the question): "But how did Freddy get into mama? Did

anybody plant him? Was the seed planted?"

This  very  precise  question  could  no  longer  be  evaded  by  the  father.  He

explained  to  the  child,  who  listened  with  the  greatest  attention,  that  themother is like the soil and the father like the gardener; that the father provides

the seed which grows in the mother, and thus gives origin to a baby. This

answer gave extraordinary satisfaction; she immediately ran to her mother

and said, "Papa has told me everything, now I know it all." She did not,

however, tell what she knew.

The new knowledge was, however, put into play the following day. Anna

went to her mother and said, "Think, mama, papa told me how Freddy was a

little  angel  and  was  brought  from  heaven  by  a  stork."  The  mother  was

naturally surprised and said, "No, you are mistaken, papa surely never told

you such a thing!" whereupon the little one laughed and ran away.

This was apparently a mode of revenge. Her mother did not wish or was not

able to tell her how the eyes grew into the head, hence she did not know how

Freddy got into her. It was for this reason that she again tried her with the old

story.


I  wish  to  impress  firmly  upon  parents  and  educationists  this  instructive

example of child psychology. In the learned psychological discussions on the

child's psyche we hear nothing about those parts which are so important for

the health and naturalness of our children, nor do we hear more about the

child's emotions and conflicts; and yet they play a most important rôle.

It very often happens that children are erroneously treated as quite imprudent

and irrational beings. Thus on indulgently remarking to an intelligent father,

whose four-year-old daughter masturbated excessively, that care should be

exercised in the presence of the child who slept in the same room as the

parents, I received the indignant reply, "I can absolutely assure you that the

child knows nothing about sexual matters." This recalls that distinguished old

neurologist who wished to deny the attribute "sexual" to a childbirth phantasy

which was represented in a dreamy state.

On the other hand, a child evincing neurotic talent exaggerated by neurosis

may be urged on by solicitous parents. How easy and tempting it would have

been, e.g. in the present case, to admire, excite, and develop prematurely the

child's eager desire for learning, and thereby develop an unnatural blasé state

and a precociousness masking a neurosis! In such cases the parents must look

after their own complexes and complex tendencies and not make capital out

of them at the expense of the child. The idea should be dismissed once for all

that children are to be held in bondage by their parents or that they are their

toys. They are characteristic and new beings. In the matter of enlightenmenton sexual things it can be affirmed that they suffer from the preconceived

opinion that the truth is harmful. Many neurologists are of opinion that even

in grown-ups enlightenment on their own psychosexual processes is harmful

and even immoral. Would not the same persons perhaps refuse to admit the

existence of the genitals themselves?

One should not, however, go from this extreme of prudishness to the opposite

one, namely that of enlightenment à tout prix, which may turn out as foolish

as it is disagreeable. In this matter I believe much discretion is advisable; still

if children come upon an idea, they should be deceived no more than adults.

I  hope,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  that  I  have  shown  you  what  complicated

psychic processes psychoanalytic investigation reveals in the child, and how

great is the significance of these processes for the mental health as well as for

the general psychic development of the child. What I have been unable to

show is the universal validity of these observations. Unfortunately, I am not

in a position to demonstrate this, for I do not know myself how much of it is

universally  valid.  Only  by  accumulation  of  such  observations  and  further

penetration into the problems broached shall we gain a complete insight into

the laws of psychical development. It is to be regretted that we are at present

still far from this goal. But I confidently hope that educators and practical

psychologists, whether physicians or deep-thinking parents, will not leave us

too long unassisted in this immensely important and interesting field.                                LITERATURE.

1. Freud. "Die Traumdeutung," II Auflage. Deuticke, Wien, 1909.

2. —— ——. "Sammlung kleiner Schriften zur Neurosenlehre," Band I & II.

Deuticke, Wien.

3. —— ——. "Analyse der Phobie eines 5 jahrigen Knaben," Jahrbuch für

Psychoanalytische u. Psychopathologische Forschungen, Band I. Deuticke,

Wien, 1908.

4.  Freud.  "Der  Inhalt  der  Psychose," Freud's  Shriften  zur  angewandten

Seelenkunde. Deuticke, 1908.

5. Jung. "Diagnostische Associationsstudien," Band I. Barth, Leipzig, 1906.

6.  ——  ——.  "Die  Psychologische  Diagnose  des  Thatbestandes."  Carl

Marhold, Halle, 1906.

7.  Jung.  "Die  Bedeutung  des  Vaters  für  das  Schicksal  des  Einzelnen."

Deuticke, Wien, 1908.

8. Jung. "The Psychology of Dementia Præcox," translated by Peterson and

Brill, Journal of Mental and Nervous Diseases, Monograph Series, No. 2.

9.  Fürst.  "Statistische  Untersuchungen  über  Wortassoziationen  und  über

familiäre Übereinstimmung im Reactionstypus bei Ungebildeten," X. Beitrag

der Diagnost. Assoc. Studien, vol. II.

10. Brill. "Psychological Factors in Dementia Præcox," Journal of Abnormal

Psychology, vol. III., No. 4.

11. —— ——. "A case of Schizophrenia," American Journal of Insanity, vol.

LXVI., No. 1.

12.  "Le  Nuove  Vedute  della  Psicologia  Criminale," Rivista  de Psicologia

Applicata, 1908, No. 4.

13. "L'Analyse des Rêves," Année Psychologique, 1909, Tome XV.

14. "Associations d'idées Familiales," Archives de Psychologie, T. VII., No.

26.                                CHAPTER III

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE FATHER IN THE DESTINY OF THE

                                      INDIVIDUAL

Ducunt volentem fata, nolentem trahunt.

Freud has pointed out in many places with unmistakable clearness that the

psychosexual  relationship  of  the  child  towards  his  parents,  particularly

towards the father, possesses an overwhelming importance in the content of

any  later  neurosis.  This  relationship  is  in  fact  the  infantile  channel par

excellence in which the libido flows back when it encounters any obstacles in

later years, thus revivifying long-forgotten dreams of childhood. It is ever so

in life when we draw back before too great an obstacle—the menace of some

severe  disappointment  or  the  risk  of  some  too  far-reaching  decision—the

energy stored up for the solution of the task flows back impotent; the by-

streams  once  relinquished  as  inadequate  are  again  filled  up.  He  who  has

missed the happiness of woman's love falls back, as a substitute, upon some

gushing  friendship,  upon  masturbation,  upon  religiosity;  should  he  be  a

neurotic he plunges still further back into the conditions of childhood which

have never been quite forsaken, to which even the normal is fettered by more

than  one  link—he  returns  to  the  relationship  to  father  and  mother.  Every

psychoanalysis carried out at all thoroughly shows this regression more or

less  plainly.  One  peculiarity  which  stands  out  in  the  works  and  views  of

Freud is that the relationship to the father is seen to possess an overwhelming

importance.  This  importance  of  the  father  in  the  moulding  of  the

child's psycho-sexuality may also be discovered in a quite other and remote

field,  in  the  investigation  of  the  family.  The  most  recent  thorough

investigations demonstrate the predominating influence of the father often

lasting for centuries. The mother seems of less importance in the family. If

this  is  true  for  heredity  on  the  physical  side  how  much  more  should  we

expect from the psychological influences emanating from the father? These

experiences, and those gained more particularly in an analysis carried out

conjointly with Dr. Otto Gross, have impressed upon me the soundness of

this view. The problem has been considerably advanced and deepened by the

investigations of my pupil, Dr. Emma Fürst, into familial resemblances in the

reaction-type. Fürst made association experiments on one hundred persons

belonging to twenty-four families. Of this extensive material, only the resultsin nine families and thirty-seven persons (all uneducated) have been worked

out and published. But the painstaking calculations do already permit some

valuable  conclusions.  The  associations  are  classified  on  the  Kræpelin-

aschaffenburg scheme as simplified and modified by myself; the difference is

then calculated between each group of qualities of the subjects experimented

upon and the corresponding group of every other subject experimented upon.

Thus  we  finally  get  the  differentiation  of  the  mean  in  reaction-type.  The

following is the result:—

Non-related men differ among themselves by 5·9.

Non-related women differ among themselves by 6·0.

Related men differ among themselves by 4·1.

Related women differ among themselves by 3·8.

Relatives,  and  especially  related  women,  have  therefore,  on  the  average,

resemblance  in  reaction-type.  This  fact  means  that  the  psychological

adaptation of relatives differs but slightly.

An investigation into the various relationships gave the following:—

The mean difference of the husband and wife amounts to 4·7. The mean

deviation of this mean is, however, 3·7, a very high figure, which signifies

that the mean figure 4·7 is composed of very heterogeneous figures; there are

married couples in whom the reaction type is very close and others in whom

it is very slight. On the whole, however, father and son, mother and daughter

stand remarkably close.

The difference between father and son amounts to 3·1.

The difference between mother and daughter amounts to 3·0.

With the exception of a few cases of married couples (where the difference

fell to 1·4) these are the lowest differences. In Fürst's work there was a case

where the difference between the forty-five year old mother and her sixteen

year old daughter was only 0·5. But it was just in this case that the mother

and daughter differed from the father's type by 11·8. The father is a coarse,

stupid  man,  an  alcoholic;  the  mother  goes  in  for  Christian  Science.  This

corresponds with the fact that mother and daughter exhibit an extreme word-

predicate type, which is, in my experience, important semeiotically for the

diagnosis  of  insufficiency  in  the  sexual  object.  The  word-predicate  type

transparently applies an excessive amount of emotion externally and displays

emotions  with  the  unconscious,  but  nevertheless  obvious,  endeavour  to

awaken echoing emotions in the experimenter. This view closely corresponds

with the fact that in Fürst's material the number of word-predicates increaseswith the age of the subjects experimented upon.

The fact of the extreme similarity between the reaction-type of the offspring

and the parents is matter for thought. The association experiment is nothing

but a small section from the psychological life of a man. At bottom daily life

is  nothing  but  an  extensive  and  many-varied  association  experiment;  in

essence we react in life just as we do in the experiments. Although this truth

is evident, still it requires a certain consideration and limitation. Let us take

as an instance the case of the unhappy mother of forty-five years and her

unmarried  daughter  of  sixteen.  The  extreme  word-predicate  type  of  the

mother is, without doubt, the precipitate of a whole life of disappointed hopes

and wishes. One is not in the least surprised at the word-predicate type here.

But the daughter of sixteen has really not yet lived at all; her real sexual

object has not yet been found, and yet she reacts as if she were her mother

with endless disillusions behind her. She has the mother's adaptation, and in

so far she is identified with the mother. There is ample evidence that the

mother's adaptation must be attributed to her relationship to the father. But

the daughter is not married to the father and therefore does not need this

adaptation. She has taken it over from the influence of her milieu, and later

on will try to adapt herself to the world with this familial disharmony. In so

far as an ill-assorted marriage is unsuitable, the adaptation resulting from it is

unsuitable.

Clearly such a fate has many possibilities. To adapt herself to life, this girl

either will have to surmount the obstacles of her familial milieu, or, unable to

free  herself  from  them,  she will  succumb  to  the  fate  to  which  such  an

adaptation predisposes her. Deep within, unnoticed by any one, there may go

on  a  glossing  over  of  the  infantile  disharmony,  or  a  development  of  the

negative of the parents' character, accompanied by hindrances and conflicts to

which she herself has no clue. Or, growing up, she will come into painful

conflict with that world of actualities to which she is so ill-adapted till one

stroke of fate after another gradually opens her eyes to the fact that it is

herself,  infantile  and  maladjusted,  that  is  amiss.  The  source  of  infantile

adaptation to the parents is naturally the affective condition on both sides; the

psycho-sexuality of the parents on one side and that of the child on the other.

It is a kind of psychical infection; we know that it is not logical truth, but

affects and their psychical expressions which are here the effective forces. It

is these that, with the power of the herd-instinct, press into the mind of the

child, there fashioning and moulding it. In the plastic years between one andfive there have to be worked out all the essential formative lines which fit

exactly into the parental mould. Psychoanalytic experience teaches us that, as

a rule, the first signs of the later conflict between the parental constellation

and individual independence, of the struggle between repression and libido

(Freud), occur before the fifth year.

The  few  following  histories  will  show  how  this  parental  constellation

obstructs the adaptation of the offspring. It must suffice to present only the

chief events of these, that is the events of sexuality.

Case 1.—A well-preserved woman of 55; dressed poorly but carefully in

black with a certain elegance, the hair carefully dressed; a polite, obviously

affected manner, precise in speech, a devotee. The patient might be the wife

of a minor official or shopkeeper. She informs me, blushing and dropping her

eyes, that she is the divorced wife of a common peasant. She has come to the

hospital on account of depression, night terrors, palpitations, slight nervous

twitchings  in  the  arms,  thus  presenting  the  typical  features  of  a  slight

climacteric neurosis. To complete the picture, she adds that she suffers from

severe anxiety-dreams; in her dreams some man seems to be pursuing her,

wild animals attack her, and so on.

Her anamnesis begins with the family history. (So far as possible I give her

own words.) Her father was a fine, stately, rather corpulent man of imposing

appearance.  He  was  very  happy  in  his  marriage,  for  her

mother worshipped him. He was a clever man, a master-mechanic, and held a

dignified and honourable position. There were only two children, the patient

and an elder sister. The sister was the mother's, and the patient her father's

favourite. When the patient was five years old the father died suddenly from

a stroke, at the age of forty-two. The patient felt herself very isolated and was

from that time treated by the mother and the elder sister as the Cinderella.

She noticed clearly enough that her mother preferred her sister to herself. Her

mother remained a widow, her respect for her husband being too great to

allow her to marry a second time. She preserved his memory "like a religious

cult" and brought up her children in this way.

Later on the sister married, relatively young; the patient did not marry till

twenty-four. She never cared for young men, they all seemed insipid; her

mind turned always to more mature men. When about twenty she became

acquainted with a stately gentleman rather over forty, to whom she was much

drawn. For various reasons the friendship was broken off. At twenty-four she

became acquainted with a widower who had two children. He was a fine,stately, somewhat corpulent man, and had an imposing presence, like her

father; he was forty-four. She married him and respected him enormously.

The marriage was childless; the children by the first marriage died from an

infectious disease. After four years of married life her husband also died. For

eighteen years she remained his faithful widow. But at forty-six (just before

the  menopause)  she  experienced  a  great  need  of  love.  As  she  had  no

acquaintances she went to a matrimonial agency and married the first comer,

a  peasant  of  some  sixty  years  who  had  been  already  twice  divorced  on

account of brutality and perverseness; the patient knew this before marriage.

She  remained  five  unbearable  years  with  him,  when  she  also  obtained  a

divorce. The neurosis set in a little later.

No  further  discussion  will  be  required  for  those  with  psychoanalytic

experience; the case is too obvious. For those unversed in psychoanalysis let

me point out that up to her forty-sixth year the patient did but reproduce

most  faithfully  the  milieu  of  her  earliest  youth.  The  sexuality  which

announced  itself  so  late  and  so  drastically,  even  here  only  led  to  a

deteriorated edition of the father-surrogate; to this she is brought by this late-

blossoming  sexuality.  Despite  repression,  the  neurosis  betrays  the  ever-

fluctuating  eroticism  of  the  aging  woman  who  still  wants  to  please

(affectation) but dares not acknowledge her sexuality.

Case 2.—A man of thirty-four of small build and with a sensible, kindly

expression. He is easily embarrassed, blushes often. He came for treatment

on account of "nervousness." He says he is very irritable, readily fatigued,

has nervous indigestion, is often deeply depressed so that he has thought of

suicide.

Before  coming  to  me  for  treatment  he  sent  me  a  circumstantial

autobiography, or rather a history of his illness, in order to prepare me for his

visit. His story began: "My father was a very big and strong man." This

sentence awakened my curiosity; I turned over a page and there read: "When

I was fifteen a big lad of nineteen took me into the wood and indecently

assaulted me."

The numerous gaps in the patient's story induced me to obtain a more exact

anamnesis from him, which produced the following remarkable facts.

The patient is the youngest of three brothers. His father, a big, red-haired

man, was formerly a soldier in the Papal Swiss Guard, and then became a

policeman. He was a strict, gruff old soldier, who brought up his sons with

military  precision;  he  commanded  them,  did  not  call  them  by  name,  butwhistled  to  them.  He  had  spent  his  youth  in  Rome,  where  he  acquired

syphilis, from the consequences of which he still suffered in old age. He was

fond of talking about his adventures in early life. His eldest son (considerably

older  than  the  patient)  was  exactly  like  him,  he  was  big,  strong  and  had

reddish hair. The mother was a feeble woman, prematurely aged; exhausted

and tired of life, she died at forty when the patient was eight years old. He

preserved a tender and beautiful memory of his mother.

When he went to school he was always the whipping-boy and always the

object of his schoolfellows' mockery. The patient considers that his peculiar

dialect was to blame for this. Later he was apprenticed to a severe and unkind

master, under most trying conditions, from which all the other apprentices

had run away, finding them intolerable. Here he held out for over two years.

At fifteen the assault already mentioned took place, in addition to some other

slighter  homosexual  experiences.  Then  fate  sent  him  to  France.  There  he

made the acquaintance of a man from the South of France, a great boaster and

Don Juan. He dragged the patient into a brothel; he went unwilling and out of

fear. He was impotent there. Later he went to Paris, where his brother, a

master-mason, the replica of his father, was leading a dissolute life. There the

patient remained a long time, badly paid and helping his sister-in-law out of

pity. The brother often took him along to a brothel, where the patient was

always  impotent.  Here  the  brother  asked  him  to  make  over  to  him  his

inheritance, 6000 francs. He first consulted his second brother, who was also

in Paris, who urgently tried to dissuade him from giving the money to his

brother, because it would only be squandered. Nevertheless the patient gave

his all to his brother, who indeed soon squandered it. And the second brother,

who  would  have  dissuaded  him,  was  also  let  in  for  500  francs.  To  my

astonished question why he had so light-heartedly given the money to his

brother without any guarantee, he replied: he had asked for it, he was not a bit

sorry about the money; he would give him another 6000 francs if he had it.

The eldest brother came to grief altogether and his wife divorced him. The

patient  returned  to  Switzerland  and  remained  for  a  year  without  regular

employment,  often  suffering  from  hunger.  During  this  time  he  made  the

acquaintance of a family where he became a frequent visitor. The husband

belonged to some peculiar sect; he was a hypocrite and neglected his family.

The wife was elderly, ill and weak, and moreover pregnant. There were six

children and great poverty. The patient developed warm affection for this

woman and divided with her the little he possessed. She brought him hertroubles, and said she felt sure she would die in childbed. Then he promised

her (he who possessed nothing) to take charge of the children himself and

bring them up. The wife did die in childbed. The orphanage-board interfered,

however, and allowed him only one child. So he had a child but no family,

and naturally could not bring it up by himself. He thus came to think of

marrying. But as he had never been in love with any woman he was in great

perplexity. It then occurred to him that his elder brother was divorced from

his wife, and he resolved to marry her. He wrote his intention to her in Paris.

She was seventeen years older than he, but not disinclined to the plan. She

invited him to come to Paris to talk matters over. On the eve of this journey

fate, however, willed that he should run a big iron nail into his foot so that he

could not travel. After a little while, when the wound was healed, he went to

Paris, and found that he had imagined his sister-in-law, and now his fiancée,

to be younger and prettier than she really was. The wedding took place, and

three months later the first coitus, at his wife's initiative. He himself had no

desire for it. They brought up the child together, he in the Swiss and she in

the French way, for she was a French woman. At the age of nine the child

was run over and killed by a cyclist. The patient then felt very lonely and

dismal at home. He proposed to his wife that she should adopt a young girl,

whereupon she broke out into a fury of jealousy. Then for the first time he

fell in love with a young girl, whilst at the same time the neurosis started,

with deep depression and nervous exhaustion, for meanwhile his life at home

had become a hell.

My proposition to separate from his wife was refused out of hand, because he

could not take upon himself to make the old woman unhappy on his account.

He clearly prefers to be tormented still further; for it would seem that the

recollection of his youth is more precious to him than any present joys.

In this case also the whole movement of a life takes place in the magic circle

of the familial constellation. The relation to the father is the strongest and

most  momentous  issue;  its  masochistic  homosexual  colouring  stands  out

clearly everywhere. Even the unhappy marriage is determined in every way

through the father, for the patient marries the divorced wife of his eldest

brother,  which is  as  if  he  married  his  mother.  His  wife  is  also  the

representative of the mother-surrogate, of the friend who died in childbed.

The neurosis started at the moment when the libido had obviously withdrawn

from this relationship of infantile constellation, and approached, for the first

time, the sexual end determined by the individual. In this, as in the previouscase, the familial constellation proves to be by far the stronger; the narrow

field  vouchsafed  by  a  neurosis  is  all  that  remains  for  the  display  of

individuality.

Case  3.—A  thirty-six  year  old  peasant  woman,  of  average  intelligence,

healthy  appearance  and  robust  build,  mother  of  three  healthy  children.

Comfortable  family  circumstances.  Patient  comes  to  the  hospital  for

treatment for the following reasons: for some weeks she has been terribly

wretched and anxious, has been sleeping badly, has terrifying dreams, and

suffers also during the day from anxiety and depression. All these things are

admittedly  without  foundation,  she  herself  is  surprised  at  them,  and  must

admit her husband is perfectly right when he insists they are all "stuff and

nonsense." All the same she cannot get away from them. Strange ideas come

to her too; she is going to die and is going to hell. She gets on very well with

her husband.

The  psychoanalytic  examination  of  the  case  immediately  brought  the

following: some weeks before, she happened to take up some religious tracts

which  had  long  lain  about  the  house  unread.  There  she  read

that swearers would go to hell. She took this very much to heart, and has

since thought it incumbent on her to prevent people swearing or she herself

will go to hell. About a fortnight before she read these tracts, her father, who

lived with her, suddenly died from a stroke. She was not actually present at

his death, but arrived when he was already dead. Her terror and grief were

very great.

In the days following the death she thought much about it all, wondering why

her father had to meet his end so abruptly. In the midst of such meditations it

suddenly occurred to her that the last words she had heard her father say

were: "I also am one of those who have fallen from the cart into the devil's

clutches." The remembrance filled her with grief, and she recalled how often

her father had sworn savagely. She wondered then whether there really were

a life after death, and whether her father were in heaven or hell. During these

musings she came across the tracts and began to read them, getting to the

place where it said that swearers go to hell. Then came upon her great fear

and  terror;  she  overwhelmed  herself  with  reproaches,  she  ought  to  have

stopped  her  father's  swearing,  deserved  punishment  for  her  neglect.  She

would  die  and  would  be  condemned  to  hell.  Henceforth  she  was  full  of

sorrow,  moody,  tormented  her  husband  with  this  obsessive  idea,  and

renounced all joy and happiness.The patient's life-history (reproduced partly in her own words) is as follows:

—

She is the youngest of five brothers and sisters and was always her father's

favourite. The father gave her everything she wanted if he possibly could. For

instance, if she wanted a new dress and her mother refused it, she could be

sure her father would bring her one next time he went to town. The mother

died  rather  early.  At  twenty-four  the  patient  married  the  man  of  her

choice, against her father's wishes.  The  father  simply  disapproved  of  her

choice although he had nothing particular against the man. After the wedding

she  made  her  father  come  and  live  with  them.  That  seemed  a  matter  of

course, she said, since the other relations had never suggested having him

with them. The father was a quarrelsome swearer and drunkard. Husband and

father-in-law, as may easily be imagined, got on extremely badly together.

The  patient  would  always  meekly  fetch  her  father  spirits  from  the  inn,

although this gave rise perpetually to anger and altercations. But she finds her

husband "all right." He is a good, patient fellow with only one failing: he

does not obey her father enough; she finds that incomprehensible, and would

rather have her husband knuckle under to her father. All said and done, father

is still father. In the frequent quarrels she always took her father's part. But

she has nothing to say against her husband and he is usually right in his

protests, but one must help one's father.

Soon  it  began  to  seem  to  her  that  she  had  sinned  against  her  father  by

marrying  against  his  will,  and  she  often  felt,  after  one  of  these  incessant

wrangles, that her love for her husband had quite vanished. And since her

father's  death  it  is  impossible  to  love  her  husband  any  longer,  for  his

disobedience was the most frequent occasion of her father's fits of raging and

swearing. At one time the quarrelling became too painful for the husband,

and he induced his wife to find rooms for her father elsewhere, where he

lived  for  two  years.  During  this  time  husband  and  wife  lived  together

peaceably and happily. But by degrees the patient began to reproach herself

for letting her father live alone; in spite of everything he was her father. And

in  the  end,  despite  the  husband's  protests,  she  fetched  him  home  again

because, as she said, in truth she did love her father better than her husband.

Scarcely was the old man back in the house before strife was renewed. And

so it went on till the father's sudden death.

After this recital she broke out into a whole series of lamentations: she must

separate from her husband: she would have done it long ago if it were not forthe children. She had indeed done an ill-deed, committed a very great sin

when she married her husband against her father's wish. She ought to have

taken the man whom her father had wanted her to have. He certainly would

have obeyed her father and then everything would have been right. Oh, her

husband was not by a long way so kind as her father, she could do anything

with her father, but not with her husband. Her father had given her everything

she wanted. Now she would best of all like to die, so that she might be with

her father.

When this outburst was over, I inquired eagerly on what grounds she had

refused the husband her father had suggested to her.

The father, a small peasant on a lean little farm, had taken as a servant, just at

the time when his youngest daughter came into the world, a miserable little

boy, a foundling. The boy developed in most unpleasant fashion: he was so

stupid that he could not learn to read or write or even speak quite properly.

He was an absolute idiot. As he approached manhood there developed on his

neck a series of ulcers, some of which opened and continually discharged

pus, giving such a dirty, ugly creature a horrible appearance. His intelligence

did not grow with his years, so he stayed on as servant in the peasant's house

without any recognised wage.

To this youth the father wanted to marry his favourite daughter.

The girl, fortunately, had not been disposed to yield, but now she regretted it,

since this idiot would unquestionably have been more obedient to her father

than her good man had been.

Here, as in the foregoing case, it must be clearly understood that the patient is

not  at  all  weak-minded.  Both  possess  normal  intelligence,  which

unfortunately the blinkers of the infantile constellation prevent their using.

That appears with quite remarkable clearness in this patient's life-story. The

father's authority is never questioned! It makes not the least difference that he

is  a  quarrelsome  drunkard,  the  obvious  cause  of  all  the  quarrels  and

disturbances;  on  the  contrary,  the  lawful  husband  must  give  way  to  the

bogey, and at last our patient even comes to regret that her father did not

succeed in completely destroying her life's happiness. So now she sets about

doing that herself through her neurosis, which compels in her the wish to die,

that she may go to hell, whither, be it noted, the father has already betaken

himself.

If  we  are  ever  disposed  to  see  some  demonic  power  at  work  controlling

mortal destiny, surely we can see it here in these melancholy silent tragediesworking themselves out slowly, torturingly, in the sick souls of our neurotics.

Some, step by step, continually struggling against the unseen powers, do free

themselves  from  the  clutches  of  the  demon  who  forces  his  unsuspecting

victims from one savage mischance to another: others rise up and win to

freedom, only to be dragged back later to the old paths, caught in the noose of

the  neurosis.  You  cannot  even  maintain  that  these  unhappy  people  are

neurotic or "degenerates." If we normal people examine our lives from the

psychoanalytic standpoint, we too perceive how a mighty hand guides us

insensibly to our destiny and not always is this hand a kindly one. We often

call  it  the  hand  of  God  or  of  the  Devil,  for  the  power  of  the  infantile

constellation  has  become  mighty  during  the  course  of  the  centuries  in

affording support and proof to all the religions.

But all this does not go so far as to say that we must cast the blame of

inherited sins upon our parents. A sensitive child whose intuition is only too

quick in reflecting in his own soul all the excesses of his parents must lay the

blame for his fate on his own characteristics. But, as our last case shows, this

is not always so, for the parents can (and unfortunately only too often do)

fortify the evil in the child's soul, preying upon the child's ignorance to make

him the slave of their complexes. In our case this attempt on the part of the

father  is  quite  obvious.  It  is  perfectly  clear  why  he  wanted  to  marry  his

daughter to this brutish creature: he wanted to keep her and make her his

slave for ever. What he did is but a crass exaggeration of what is done by

thousands  of  so-called  respectable,  educated  people,  who  have  their  own

share in this educational dust-heap of enforced discipline. The fathers who

allow their children no independent possession of their own emotions, who

fondle their daughters with ill-concealed eroticism and tyrannical passion,

who keep their sons in leading-strings, force them into callings and finally

marry them off "suitably," and the mothers who even in the cradle excite their

children with unhealthy tenderness, later on make them into slavish puppets,

and  then  at  last,  out  of  jealousy,  destroy  their  children's  love-life

fundamentally, they all act not otherwise than this stupid and brutal boor.

It will be asked, wherein lies the parents' magic power to bind their children

to themselves, as with iron fetters, often for the whole of their lives? The

psychoanalyst knows that it is nothing but the sexuality on both sides.

We are always trying not to admit the child's sexuality. That view only comes

from wilful ignorance, which happens to be very prevalent again just now.

I have not given any real analysis of these cases. We therefore do not knowwhat happened within the hearts of these puppets of fate when they were

children. A profound insight into a child's mind as it grows and lives, hitherto

unattainable, is given in Freud's contribution to the first half-yearly volume

of Jahrbuch für Psychoanalytische u. Psychopathologische Forschungen. If I

venture,  after  Freud's  masterly  presentation,  to  offer  another  small

contribution to the study of the child-mind it is because the psychoanalytic

records of cases seem to me always valuable.

Case  4.—An  eight  year  old  boy,  intelligent,  rather  delicate-looking,  is

brought to me by his mother, on account of enuresis. During the consultation

the  child  always  hangs  on  to  his  mother,  a  pretty,  youthful  woman.  The

parents' marriage is a happy one, but the father is strict, and the boy (the

eldest child) is rather afraid of him. The mother compensates for the father's

strictness by corresponding tenderness, to which the boy responds so much

that he never gets away from his mother's apron-strings. He never plays with

his schoolfellows, never goes alone into the street unless he has to go to

school. He fears the boys' roughness and violence and plays thoughtful games

at home or helps his mother with housework. He is extremely jealous of his

father. He cannot bear it when the father shows tenderness to the mother.

I took the boy aside and asked him about his dreams.

He dreams very often of a black snake which wants to bite his face. Then he

cries out, and his mother has to come from the next room to his bedside.

In the evening he goes quietly to bed. But when he falls asleep it seems to

him that a wicked black man with a sabre or gun lies on his bed—a tall, thin

man who wants to kill him.

His parents sleep in the adjoining room. It often seems to him that something

dreadful is going on there, as if there are great black snakes or wicked men

who want to kill his Mamma. Then he has to cry out and his mother comes to

comfort him.

Every time he wets his bed he calls his mother, who has to settle him down

again in dry things.

The father is a tall thin man. Every morning he stands at the washstand naked

in full view of the child, to perform a thorough ablution. The child also tells

me that at night he is often suddenly waked from sleep by a strange sound in

the next room; then he is always horribly afraid as if something dreadful were

going on in there, some struggle—but his mother quiets him, says there's

nothing to be afraid of.

It is not difficult to see whence comes the black snake and who the wickedman  is,  and  what  is  happening  in  the  next  room.  It  is  equally  easy  to

understand the boy's aim when he calls out for his mother: he is jealous and

separates her from the father. This he does also in the daytime whenever he

sees his father caressing her. So far the boy is simply his father's rival for his

mother's love.

But now comes the circumstance that the snake and the bad man also threaten

him, there happens to him the same thing as to his mother in the next room.

Thus he identifies himself with his mother and proposes a similar relationship

for  himself  with  his  father.  That  is  owing  to  his  homosexual  component

which feels like a woman towards the father. What enuresis signifies in this

case  is,  from  the  Freudian  standpoint,  not  difficult  to  understand.  The

micturition dream throws light upon it. Let me refer to an analysis of the

same kind in my article: "L'analyse des rêves, Année psychologique" (1909).

Enuresis must be regarded as an infantile sex-surrogate; in the dream-life of

adults too it is easily used as a cloak for the urge of sexual desire.

This little example shows what goes on in the mind of an eight year old boy,

when he is in a position of too much dependence upon his parents, but the

blame is also partly due to the too strict father and the too indulgent mother.

The infantile attitude here, it is evident, is nothing but infantile sexuality. If

now we survey all the far-reaching possibilities of the infantile constellation,

we are forced to say that in essence our life's fate is identical with the fate of

our sexuality. If Freud and his school devote themselves first and foremost to

tracing  out  the  individual's  sexuality  it  is  certainly  not  in  order  to  excite

piquant sensations, but to gain a deeper insight into the driving forces that

determine that individual's fate. In this we are not saying too much, rather

understating the case. If we can strip off the veils shrouding the problems of

individual destiny, we can afterwards widen our view from the history of the

individual to the history of nations. And first of all we can look at the history

of  religions,  at  the  history  of  the  phantasy-systems  of  whole  peoples  and

epochs. The religion of the Old Testament elevated the paterfamilias to the

Jehovah of the Jews whom the people had to obey in fear and dread. The

Patriarchs are an intermediate stage towards the deity. The neurotic fear and

dread of the Jewish religion, the imperfect, not to say unsuccessful attempt at

the  sublimation  of  a  still  too  barbarous  people,  gave  rise  to  the

excessive  severity  of  the  Mosaic  Law,  the  ceremonial  constraint  of  the

neurotic.

Only the prophets succeeded in freeing themselves from this constraint; inthem the identification with Jehovah, the complete sublimation, is successful.

They became the fathers of the people. Christ, the fulfilment of prophecy, put

an end to this fear of God and taught mankind that the true relation to the

Godhead is "love." Thus he destroyed the ceremonial constraint of the Law

and gave the example of a personal loving relationship to God. The later

imperfect sublimation of the Christian Mass leads again to the ceremonial of

the Church from which occasionally the minds capable of sublimation among

the saints and reformers have been able to free themselves. Not without cause

therefore does modern theology speak of "inner" or "personal" experiences as

having great enfranchising power, for always the ardour of love transmutes

the dread and constraint into a higher, freer type of feeling.

What we see in the development of the world-process, the original source of

the changes in the Godhead, we see also in the individual. Parental power

guides the child like a higher controlling fate. But when he begins to grow

up, there begins also the conflict between the infantile constellation and the

individuality,  the  parental  influence  dating  from  the  prehistoric  (infantile)

period is repressed, sinks into the unconscious but is not thereby eliminated;

by invisible threads it directs the individual creations of the ripening mind as

they  appear.  Like  everything  that  has  passed  into  the  unconscious,  the

infantile constellation sends up into consciousness dim, foreboding feelings,

feelings of mysterious guidance and opposing influences. Here are the roots

of  the  first  religious  sublimations.  In  the  place  of  the  father,  with  his

constellating virtues and faults, there appears, on the one hand, an altogether

sublime  deity,  on  the  other  the  devil,  in  modern  times  for  the  most  part

largely whittled away by the perception of one's own moral responsibility.

Elevated love is attributed to the former, a lower sexuality to the latter. As

soon as we approach the territory of the neurosis, the antithesis is stretched to

the  utmost  limit.  God  becomes  the  symbol  of  the  most  complete  sexual

repression, the Devil the symbol of sexual lust. Thus it is that the conscious

expression  of  the  father-constellation,  like  every  expression  of  an

unconscious complex when it appears in consciousness, gets its Janus-face,

its positive and its negative components. A curious, beautiful example of this

crafty play of the unconscious is seen in the love-episode in the Book of

Tobias. Sarah, the daughter of Raguel in Ecbatana, desires to marry; but her

evil fate wills it that seven times, one after another, she chooses a husband

who dies on the marriage-night. The evil spirit Asmodi, by whom she is

persecuted, kills these husbands. She prays to Jehovah to let her die ratherthan  suffer  this  shame  again.  She  is  despised  even  by  her  father's  maid-

servants. The eighth bridegroom, Tobias, is sent to her by God. He too is led

into the bridal-chamber. Then the old Raguel, who has only pretended to go

to bed, gets up again and goes out and digs his son-in-law's grave beforehand,

and in the morning sends a maid to the bridal-chamber to make sure of the

expected death. But this time Asmodi's part is played out, Tobias is alive.

Unfortunately medical etiquette forbids me to give a case of hysteria which

fits  in  exactly  with  the  above  instance,  except  that  there  were  not  seven

husbands,  but  only  three,  ominously  chosen  under  all  the  signs  of  the

infantile constellation. Our first case too comes under this category and in our

third we see the old peasant at work preparing to dedicate his daughter to a

like fate.

As a pious and obedient daughter (compare her beautiful prayer in chapter

iii.) Sarah has brought about the usual sublimation and cleavage of the father-

complex and on the one side has elevated her childish love to the adoration of

God, on the other has turned the obsessive force of her father's attraction into

the persecuting demon Asmodi. The legend is so beautifully worked out that

it  displays  the  father  in  his  twofold  aspect,  on  the  one  hand  as

the inconsolable father of the bride, on the other as the secret digger of his

son-in-law's grave, whose fate he foresees. This beautiful fable has become a

cherished paradigm for my analysis, for by no means infrequent are such

cases where the father-demon has laid his hand upon his daughter, so that her

whole  life  long,  even  when  she  does  marry,  there  is  never  a  true  union,

because her husband's image never succeeds in obliterating the unconscious

and  eternally  operative  infantile  father-ideal.  This  is  valid  not  only  for

daughters, but equally for sons. A fine instance of such a father-constellation

is given in Dr. Brill's recently published: "Psychological factors in dementia

præcox. An analysis."

In my experience the father is usually the decisive and dangerous object of

the child's phantasy, and if ever it happens to be the mother, I have been able

to discover behind her a grandfather to whom she belonged in her heart.

I must leave this question open: my experience does not go far enough to

warrant a decision. It is to be hoped that the experience of the coming years

will sink deeper shafts into this still dark land which I have been able but

momentarily to light up, and will discover to us more of the secret workshop

of that fate-deciding demon of whom Horace says:

"Scit Genius natale comes qui temperat astrum,Naturæ deus humanæ, mortalis in unum,

Quodque caput, vultu mutabilis, albus et ater."                                CHAPTER IV

    A CONTRIBUTION TO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF RUMOUR

About a year ago the school authorities in N. asked me to give a professional

opinion as to the mental condition of Marie X., a thirteen year old schoolgirl.

Marie had been expelled from school because she had been instrumental in

originating an ugly rumour, spreading gossip about her class-teacher. The

punishment hit the child, and especially her parents, very hard, so that the

school  authorities  were  inclined  to  readmit  her  if  protected  by  a  medical

opinion. The facts were as follows:—

The  teacher  had  heard  indirectly  that  the  girls  were  attributing  some

equivocal sexual story to him. On investigation it was found that Marie X.

had one day related a dream to three girl-friends which ran somewhat as

follows:—

"The class was going to the swimming-baths. I had to go to the boys' because

there was no more room. Then we swam a long way out in the lake (asked

'who did so': 'Lina P., the teacher, and myself'). A steamer came along. The

teacher asked us if we wished to get into it. We came to K. A wedding was

just going on there (asked 'whose': 'a friend of the teacher's'). We were also to

take part in it. Then we went for a journey (who? 'I, Lina P., and the teacher').

It was like a honeymoon journey. We came to Andermatt, and there was no

more room in the hotel, so we were obliged to pass the night in a barn. The

woman got a child there, and the teacher became the godfather."

When I examined the child she told this dream. The teacher had likewise

related the dream in writing. In this earlier version the obvious blanks after

the word "steamer" in the above text were filled up as follows: "We got up.

Soon we felt cold. An old man gave us a blouse which the teacher put on."

On the other hand, there was an omission of the passage about finding no

room in the hotel and being obliged to pass the night in the barn.

The child told the dream immediately, not only to her three friends but also to

her mother. The mother repeated it to me with only trifling differences from

the  two  versions  given  above.  The  teacher,  in  his  further  investigations,

carried out with deepest misgivings, failed, like myself, to get indications of

any more dangerous material. There is therefore a strong probability that the

original recital could not have run very differently. (The passage about the

cold and the blouse seems to be an early interpolation, for it is an attempt tosupply a logical relationship. Coming out of the water one is wet, has on only

a bathing dress, and is therefore unable to take part in a wedding before

putting on some clothes.) At first, of course, the teacher would not allow that

the whole affair had arisen only out of a dream. He rather suspected it to be

an invention. He was, however, obliged to admit that the innocent telling of

the dream was apparently a fact, and that it was unnatural to regard the child

as  capable  of  such  guile  as  to  indicate  some  sexual  equivocation  in  this

disguised  form.  For  a  time  he  wavered  between  the  view  that  it  was  a

question of cunning invention, and the view that it was really a question of a

dream, innocent in itself, which had been understood by the other children in

a sexual way. When his first indignation wore off he concluded that Marie

X.'s guilt could not be so great, and that her phantasies and those of her

companions  had  contributed  to  the  rumour.  He  then  did  something  really

valuable. He placed Marie's companions under supervision, and made them

all write out what they had heard of the dream.

Before  turning  our  attention  to  this,  let  us  cast  a  glance  at  the  dream

analytically. In the first place, we must accept the facts and agree with the

teacher that we have to do with a dream and not with an invention; for the

latter the ambiguity is too great. Conscious invention tries to create unbroken

transitions; the dream takes no account of this, but sets to work regardless of

gaps, which, as we have seen, here give occasion for interpolations during the

conscious revision. The gaps are very significant. In the swimming-bath there

is no picture of undressing, being unclothed, nor any detailed description of

their being together in the water. The omission of being dressed on the ship is

compensated  for  by  the  above-mentioned  interpolation,  but  only  for  the

teacher, thus indicating that his nakedness was in most urgent need of cover.

The detailed description of the wedding is wanting, and the transition from

the steamer to the wedding is abrupt. The reason for stopping overnight in the

barn at Andermatt is not to be found at first. The parallel to this is, however,

the want of room in the swimming-bath, which made it necessary to go into

the men's department; in the hotel the want of room again emphasises the

separation of the sexes. The picture of the barn is most insufficiently filled

out. The birth suddenly follows and quite without sequence. The teacher as

godfather  is  extremely  equivocal.  Marie's  rôle  in  the  whole  story  is

throughout of secondary importance, indeed she is only a spectator.

All this has the appearance of a genuine dream, and those of my readers who

have  a  wide  experience  of  the  dreams  of  girls  of  this  age  will  assuredlyconfirm this view. Hence the meaning of the dream is so simple that we may

quietly leave its interpretation to her school-companions, whose declarations

are as follows:                        AURAL WITNESSES.

Witness I.—"M. dreamed that she and Lina P. had gone swimming with our

teacher. After they had swum out in the lake pretty far, M. said she could not

swim any further as her foot hurt her so much. The teacher said she might sit

on my back. M. got up and they swam out. After a time a steamer came along

and they got up on it. Our teacher seems to have had a rope by which he tied

M. and L. together and dragged them out into the lake. They travelled thus as

far  as  Z.,  where  they  stepped  out.  But  now  they  had  no  clothes  on.  The

teacher bought a jacket whilst M. and L. got a long, thick veil, and all three

walked up the street along the lake. This was when the wedding was going

on. Presently they met the party. The bride had on a blue silk dress but no

veil. She asked M. and L. if they would be kind enough to give her their veil.

M. and L. gave it, and in return they were allowed to go to the wedding. They

went  into  the  Sun  Inn.  Afterwards  they  went  a  honeymoon  journey  to

Andermatt; I do not know now whether they went to the Inn at A. or at Z.

There they got coffee, potatoes, honey, and butter."

"I must not say any more, only the teacher finally was made godfather."

Remarks.—The  roundabout  story  concerning  the  want  of  room  in  the

swimming-bath  is  absent;  Marie  goes  direct  with  her  teacher  to  the  bath.

Their persons are more closely bound together in the water by means of the

rope fastening the teacher and the two girls together. The ambiguity of the

"getting up" in the first story has other consequences here, for the part about

the steamer in the first story now occurs in two places; in the first the teacher

takes Marie on his back. The delightful little slip "she could sit on my back"

(instead of his), shows the real part taken by the narrator herself in this scene.

This makes it clear why the dream brings the steamer somewhat abruptly into

action, in order to give an innocent, harmless turn to the equivocal "getting

up" instead of another which is common, for instance, in music-hall songs.

The passage about the want of clothing, the uncertainty of which has been

already noticed, arouses the special interest of the narrator. The teacher buys

a jacket, the girls get a long veil (such as one only wears in case of death or at

weddings). That the latter is meant is shown by the remark that the bride had

none (it is the bride who wears the veil). The narrator, a girl-friend of Marie,

here helps the dreamer to dream further: the possession of the veil designates

the bride or the brides, Marie and Lina. Whatever is shocking or immoral in