KUCZYNSKI QUOTE LIBRARY: HEED MY WISDOM
Source: Heed My Wisdom (Complete Collection)
Total Quotes: 92

--- ECONOMICS & BUSINESS ---

1. At first, people are happy to get that upfront pay. But once they get used to it and no longer feel the stick of urgency, they need the carrot of bonuses keep on plugging away, especially if the work involves creativity or insight.

3. The line good between clients and dirty clients is utterly sharp. There are good clients who are annoying and may even be bad people in some contexts, but they pay and they are honest about what you have done for them. The dirty clients lie about what you done-and they show their true colors pretty much right away (after one or two meetings, sometimes one or two minutes).

4. If you have a legitimate business idea, then you have more answers than just about anyone you come across, and you should go for it. Yes, be cautious. But be cautious about how you execute your business plan, not about whether to do so.

5. Also, if you ask other people if your idea is good, they are likely to say 'no' if it is good and 'yes' if it is bad, because they are stuck at miserable jobs and want you to be stuck with them.

11. Macroeconomics is social psychology, in so far as the latter relates to commercial behavior.

12. Economics is good at providing operational definitions of for a number of psychological and epistemological concepts and at putting contentions involving those concepts to well-defined empirical tests.

26. The formal study of economics at any level is the very definition of a waste of time.

27. The behavior of people in institutional contexts was ultimately to be understood in economic terms (in terms of their needing a paycheck) and that their psychopathologies affected only the particular manner in which they acted out these economic forces.

48. There is actual economics—which is interesting but fluid. And then there is economics as it is taught in colleges—which is pretty much a series of P.O.W. camp torture experiments, which yield exactly zero point zero understanding of economic phenomena (or anything else, for that matter).

67. As Robert Kiyosaki points out, whereas power used to be about ownership of land and other physical assets, power is now about ownership of ideas.

77. None of it has anything to do with the realities of creating or actually running a business. It is a 100% academic degree-a piece of paper.

78. That piece of paper does prove that there are certain kinds of work that you can do. But the work that it proves that you can do is middle-management work at a large corporation. It proves that you're housebroken, in other words.

--- MATHEMATICS & LOGIC ---

2. Let S be a consistent statement set, and let s1 be an arbitrary statement not in S. If s1 is consistent with S, then the union of S and s1 is consistent; otherwise, the union of S and not s1 is consistent. Let S* be the union of the union of S with either si or not-si, depending on whether si is consistent with S. S* is consistent and maximal.

8. Short answer-no: since nothing proven is false. Long answer-there have turned out to be models of axioms that seem self-evidently false. And in some cases, those models are not just theoretical curiosities but are of deep practical significance.

9. There are models in which the parallel axiom (parallels don't intersect) is false, and one of those models describes actual space.

10. There are models in which there are infinitesimals (non-null quantities less than any given quantity), and those models are needed to explain actual occurrences (e.g. how it is that a coin can occupy a given place after landing, even though the chances of its doing so are one divided by the number of real numbers, this being smaller than any finite quantity).

15. What we refer to as 'mathematical talent' is about being able to operationalize mathematical intelligence outside of those contexts in which it is automatically operational.

16. The fascination that all people have for mathematics is the fascination that all people have for externalizations of hidden aspects of themselves.

28. The limit of (1/n), as n goes to infinity is zero, but (1/n) is not equal to zero when n goes to infinity, where is the fallacy or the philosophy? Cardinal zero vs. real zero. The real number zero is a limit, this being why an event with probability zero can occur. But the cardinal number zero is not a limit; it is the size of a set. So the fallacy is equating reals with cardinals.

37. The sum of infinitely many positive numbers may be finite (e.g. 1+½+¼+⅛ =2), and any finite number can be represented as such a sum.

45. Godel, by contrast, had cogent reasons, both mathematical and philosophical, for his realism about mathematical entities.

46. Logic, as it is taught in philosophy and even in math departments, is a heap of artifacts. Supposedly the discipline is meant to discover ways to automate thought, but the algorithms it produces to that end require more thought to use than they succeed in automating.

47. Apart from a few bleak results relating to a few quantifiers, the discipline of formal logic can be counted as one of man's greatest failures.

55. The class of real numbers is incomplete, since, as Cantor proved, you can always construct a real number that is not in a given recursively defined number-set. But we can recognize real numbers when we come across them-we just don't do so by applying recursions. In other words, we don't do so mechanically.

56. The class of arithmetical truths is non-recursive, since, as Godel proved, we can always construct an arithmetical truth that does not belong to a given recursively defined class of such truths. We are able to recognize such a truth for what it is-but we don't do so by applying recursions. In other words, we don't do so mechanically.

63. One must necessarily be a Platonist. There is no way to replace references to numbers, mathematical operations, or other mathematical structures with references to spatiotemporal entities.

64. As for the idea that infinite quantities and arithmetical operations and other distinctively mathematical structures can be 'abstracted' from observable phenomena—that is irrelevant, since it speaks only to our knowledge of those operations, not to their existence and therefore doesn't eliminate the corresponding need for a Platonic metaphysics.

72. Nothing, since contradictions between facts and logic means that the wrong logic is being used.

76. Modus ponens is basically to the effect that you can infer it if it follows. Without it, you are in dry dock, inference-wise.

84. Any given body of truths is necessarily internally consistent. Therefore mathematics, setting aside the odd screw-up, is consistent.

85. Being able to axiomatize a given body of truths is sufficient but not necessary for establishing its consistency.

86. The truth is that, in mathematics as in other domains, consistency is a consequence of truth, not vice versa.

92. In order for a given set C not to be a subset of another set, there must be at least one member of C that does not also belong to the other set. Since the empty set has no members, there is nothing in the empty set that does not also belong to any other given set, making the empty set a subset of any given set.

--- PSYCHOLOGY & MENTAL HEALTH ---

6. Species level fitness often opposite of individual level fitness (cows as a species highly successful, even though any given cow is heading to the slaughter house; genius members of homo sapiens very successful even though the genius subpopulation is proving not so good at keeping itself going)

30. What is the top paradox of being a genius? Your intellectual advantage is outweighed by your social disadvantage.

31. What is the difference between psychosis and dissociation? Psychosis involves a garbling or scrambling of one's mental representations of external reality... Dissociation does not necessarily involve such distortions; it involves a suppression of the emotional accompaniments of one's representations of the world, resulting in a state of 'disconnectedness' or 'dissociation', but does not necessarily involve a warping of those representations themselves.

80. A psychopath-free society would be a society of eunuchs.

81. The theme of 'Sexy Beast' is: 'you're soft; reality is hard. Get off your rear end and make it happen.'

--- EPISTEMOLOGY & KNOWLEDGE ---

22. Physical simplicity doesn't equate to conceptual simplicity.

23. Whether a given statement is to be regarded as complex, and how exactly it is to be regarded as complex, depends on the dialectical context.

24. Because these entities are known in a such a theory-mediated way, those truths are exceptionally complex. So even if there are 'atoms' (minimal building blocks) of nature, they are not building blocks in a logical sense—on the contrary, they are, in that respect, at the opposite extreme of the epistemological pyramid.

25. Any given truth is entailed by infinitely many others and itself entails infinitely many truths. And since a statement's entailment-relations (what it entails and what it entails it) reflect its structure, there are no 'ultimate', foundational truths.

29. Descartes once said, 'Now as far as ideas are concerned, provided they are considered solely in themselves and I do not refer them to anything else, they cannot strictly speaking be false.' Why not? Truth is a relationship between idea and external referent. Descartes is saying that he will discard the referent; and in the absence of said referent, it cannot be said whether or not the idea is true or false.

58. Knowledge of the past is based on knowledge of the present-along with knowledge of the past. How does one know what happened in the past? One knows (a) how things are now and one also knows (b) causal mechanisms that explain why things now are the way they are.

68. The problem is not always that one lacks information; sometimes it is that one has too much of it or doesn't have it in forms in which it is easily communicated or easily absorbed.

73. It yields insight but not knowledge.

74. Abductive reasoning is simply hypothesis-formation.

75. You cannot deduce that a mouse is eating your cheese.

--- METAPHYSICS & SPACE-TIME ---

33. In order to travel a distance of n yards, it is necessary to travel a distance of n/10 yards... (i) one cannot travel any distance at all without already having traveled some smaller distance. Consequently, (ii) Any given motion presupposes a prior motion... (v) Nothing moves. (i) is true. (v) follows from (i). But (v) is false.

34. For any possible universe U, there is some distance D such that nothing in U can move at all without covering a distance of at least D.

35. If Mills is right, then any given universe U consists of discrete cells such that, for any occupant x of U, x moves by vanishing from one cell and then appearing in another.

36. In a Mills-universe, nothing has a past and, therefore, nothing has a future. Everything that exists, exists for an instant and then vanishes.

38. All position is relative position. Therefore, changes in position are changes in relative position.

39. The sole occupant of a universe is that universe. Contrariwise, a space-time manifold has no existence independently of its occupants.

40. Position and change therein are multiply relative.

41. The more objects there are in a given universe, the greater the number of distances with which a given distance can be compared. The more such distances, the higher degree of precision with which a given distance can be meaningfully described.

42. What we think of as a case of motion on the part of a given object xi is really a change undergone by x1...xn collectively. Seemingly system-internal changes are systemic changes.

43. No matter how well populated and otherwise heterogeneous the universe is, the universe is capable of being even more populous and otherwise heterogeneous; and for this reason the class of possible states of the universe is a proper subset of the class of possible states of a more heterogeneous but otherwise identical universe.

44. Systemic changes are too complex for us to understand with any precision. It is only by conceiving of them as system-internal changes that we can have any understanding of them.

79. Identity is about continuity. If parts have to go to ensure the requisite degree of continuity, then so be it.

--- PHILOSOPHY OF MIND ---

62. The mind-body problem: Is the mind simply a biological phenomenon like any other, or is there something distinctive about and, therefore, about the way it is to be studied?

65. A property is simply a way that things can be. Equivalently, a property is a possibility.

70. Philosophers are concerned with identity, causality, the nature of thought, the relationship between universals and particulars, and the like, none of which is to any degree language-specific and none of which, consequently, is to any degree, in any respect 'semantic.'

82. Wittgenstein's so-called 'Rule Following Paradox' doesn't exist. The paradox is that in narrowly defined contexts the behaviors involved in following distinct rules are indistinguishable.

--- ACADEMIA & EDUCATION ---

13. It is very hard to keep someone down if he has talent and character. And it is very hard to prop someone up if he has neither.

14. Standardized tests are extraordinarily efficient and are indicated in contexts where only very approximate knowledge is necessary or where knowledge about whole populations are necessary.

17. School doesn't give us the requisite technical skills. Nor does it give us the requisite understanding of the economy or of its psychological underpinnings. Nor does it encourage the development of the character traits needed to not be a victim once released into the world.

19. The purpose of a dissertation is to show that the dissertation-writer can engage existing work in an authoritative and at least relatively original way.

49. Yes. Nobody reads them. Ever. Unless they're looking for a lead-in.

50. Go ahead and read some recent 'work' on the mind-body problem, or (God forbid) on 'ethics', and you will truly understand the concept of nothingness.

51. Those papers are for show only. They look nice—as in the covers and typography and lay-out all look nice. But there's not very much there.

52. Academic journals now are about circling the wagons and bestowing in-house titles on other members of a dying and now totally irrelevant club.

53. Real thinkers don't go there for ideas; they flee from the journals, as from wild bees.

54. Nothing is innovated in the journal-space. Nothing gets published if it has so much as a shred of merit.

57. Philosophy-internal problems are relatively tractable (and, when not tractable, are best not paid too much attention to), but reconfiguring frozen results in epistemology and semantics so as to make them relevant and useful-that is a challenge indeed!

66. Right now the most urgent and therefore interesting philosophical problem is how information can be encrypted so as to expedite the transmission of it and maximize the absorption of it.

69. Absolutely not. In fact, strictly semantic questions categorically fall outside the scope of philosophy, the asseverations of a few early 20th century lightweights to the contrary.

71. College is a sham, and within a few years, judicious use of already existing digital resources will see to it that it is a distant memory.

--- ETHICS & EXISTENTIALISM ---

18. It is not immoral to visit a website. It is immoral to blow moralistic hot air about visiting a website.

20. What is fluid is how you live out your true self, not what your true self is.

21. A lot of people rationalize selling out by telling themselves that they are being flexible and 'fluid', but they are actually being weak and rigid, since a genuinely adaptive person finds a way to survive without gutting his personality in the process.

32. The most dangerous question in philosophy is whether there can be political solutions to biologically or culturally rooted problems... There is only so far political systems can go in the way of contravening biological facts (e.g. differences between genders) without imperiling their own viability, and the most dangerous question of contemporary philosophy is what those limits are.

83. As the term 'if' is used in elementary logic classes, any conditional is true so long as it doesn't have a false consequent and a true antecedent. But that is an artifact of a neologism and is of no philosophical substance.

87. Camus held that, since the morality of his parents was now losing its hold, morality was categorically an illusion, and he believed this to entail that life categorically has no meaning.

88. Nietzsche obviously did believe that a lot of the moral codes people accept are basically so much soul-destroying propaganda; and he also believed that, during his lifetime, their lack of legitimacy was quickly becoming apparent.

89. Sartre's message is: 'You are free; deal with it; make the most of it. Life is a roller-coaster; don't water down the experience with false attachments.'

90. Camus' boring little diatribes about how it is meaningless are meaningless.

91. Sartre on the other-bracing and useful. Dissipated the second half of his career writing some egregiously awful Marxist screeds, but his main message 'existence precedes essence' is, at the end of the day, the right message for our time-and all other times too, probably.

--- AI & TECHNOLOGY ---

59. AI is a great liberator. It liberates people from meaningless labor; and in due course, it will liberate autonomous human beings from redundant non-autonomous ones.

61. Rationalism vs. empiricism: To what extent, if any, can 'pure thought' apprise us of the structure of reality?
