TEXT INTELLIGENCE REPORT
Generated: 12/4/2025, 11:21:56 AM
Source Length: 59901 words
LLM Used: grok

--- KEY QUOTATIONS ---
1. Numbers of one kind never size-comparable with numbers of any other kind.
2. Formal calculi inherently incomplete.
3. The laws of logic not conventions.
4. Why there are non-perspectival truths that an indexical-free language is ipso facto unable to express.
5. Empirical theories as interpreted formal calculi.
6. Statements are false that self-refute.
7. Statements are true that self-verify.
8. Nothing doesn't follow from a contradiction.
9. Nothing doesn't entail a tautology.
10. No contradiction follows from a truth.
11. No falsehood follows from a tautology.
12. A truth is necessary if it follows from any given statement-set.
13. A truth is necessary if its negation entails a contradiction.
14. A truth is possible if it does not entail a contradiction.
15. A truth is possible if its negation is not necessary.
16. k=ΣK↔DF ∀ k*(k* ∈ K→[k ⋂ k*]=1) k=ΣK↔DF ∀ k*(k* ∈ K→ ∃ x(x ∈ k* ⋀ x ∈ k ⋀∀ y((x≠y ⋀ y ∈ k*)→y ∉ k)))
17. ϕ(x)=y→(ϕ(x)=z→y=x)
18. k and k* are bijected by a function ϕ just in case ϕ is a one-one function from k to k*.
19. [k]=[k*]↔ ∃ ϕ ∃ ψ ∀ x ∃ y (x ∈ k →(y ∈ k* ⋀ ϕ(x)=y ⋀ ψ(y)=x))
20. R strictly orders k exactly if, whenever x,y,z ∈ k, ¬xRx (R is non-reflexive) xRy→¬yRx (R is asymmetric) (xRy ⋀ yRz)→xRz (R is transitive)
21. ℕ =DF{x: x=0 ⋁∃ y(y ∈ℕ⋀ x=y+1)}
22. ℤ =DF{x: ∃ y(y ∈ℕ⋀ (x=+y ⋁ x=−y))}
23. ℚ =DF{x: ∃ p ∃ q(p ∈ℕ⋀ q ∈ℕ⋀ x=p/q)}
24. ℝ =DF{x: ∃ k(SG(k) ⋀ x=L(k))}
25. ℂ =DF{x: ∀ y(y ∈ℝ⋀ ((y<0→ ∃ z(z<0 ⋀ z2=y)) ⋀ (y>0→ ∃ w(w<0 ⋀ w2=y)))
26. Statements about number are encrypted statements about order.
27. Mathematics is the study of ordinal relations.
28. Any given truth concerning ordinal relations is equivalent with a truth of set-theory.
29. Set-theory is the smallest class of truths consisting solely of the following concepts: ∅ The empty set ∈ The relation between class-member and class ⊂ The relation of subset to set Not And Or If...then... Identity All Some Property Relation
30. It will be shown that truths about seemingly exotic mathematical entities (e.g. complex numbers, formal languages, ndimensional manifolds) are identical with truths consisting solely of the justnamed concepts.
31. ℕ may be identified with the posterity of ∅ with respect to Φ, where Φ is the relation that {n: nϵα} bears to {n: n ∈ α ∨ n=α}.
32. n is a cardinal iff either n= ∅ or n=β, where, for some γ, Φ(γ)=β.
33. α+1={n: n=α or n ∈ α}, and α=β+1 exactly if α ={n: n=β ⋁ n ∈ β}.
34. α+0=α; and α+(β+1)= (α+β)+1, α×0=0; and α×(β+1)= (α×β)+ α, α0=1; αn+1= αn×α.
35. exponentiation can be understood in terms of the concept of a selection and, for reasons that will emerge, ultimately must be so understood.
36. For any n, [k]=n is equivalent with a proposition that contains no mention of n or of any other number.
37. Given that (0)-(3) are equivalent with, respectively, (0*)-(3*), it follows that any given cardinal n may, without circularity, be identified with the class of all n-tuples.
38. The meaning of (n+1#) is this: If K is the class of all classes equinumerous with a given class and k* is a member of K, then, if x is not a member of k*, k is equinumerous with k* ∪ x.
39. A perspicuous statement is one whose semantics corresponds to its syntax. A formal statement is one that is perspicuous for the reason that it is stated in a notation or language that prohibits the formation of nonperspicuous statements.
40. Cardinal arithmetic is ℕ -arithmetic. In this section, we will discuss the most generalizations of -arithmetic, these being: ℚ -arithmetic: the arithmetic of rational numbers ℤ -arithmetic: the arithmetic of signed integers ℝ -arithmetic: the arithmetic of real numbers ℂ -arithmetic: the arithmetic of complex numbers, and Ordinal arithmetic: the arithmetic of ordinal numbers.
41. ℂ =DF{n: ∃ α (α ∈ℝ⋀ (α>0→ (n>0 ⋀ n2= α)) ⋀ (α<0→ ( n<0 ⋀ n2= α )))
42. ℚℛ =DF{B: B ∈ℚ⋀ B< ℛ }
43. PK=DF{k: k ⊆ K}
44. ∀ K ∃ K* ∀ x(x ∈ K*↔ ∃ k(k ∈ K ⋀ x ∈ k ⋀∀ y((y ∈ k ⋀ x≠y)→y ∉ k)))
45. (K, O1, O2...On) is an enlargement of (K*, O*1, O*2... O*m) if, for any statement in (K*, O*1, O*2...O*m), there is an analogous statement in (K*, O*1, O*2...O*m) but not vice versa.
46. R strictly orders k just in case, with respect to the members of K, (i*) R is non-reflexive, (ii*) R is asymmetric, and (iii*) R is transitive.
47. x's ordinal number with respect to S is 1 just in case, for all y in S, ¬xRy, and x's ordinal number with respect to S is n+1 just in case if y's ordinal number with respect S is n, then x is y's immediate R-successor, i.e. xRy and, for any z such that z bears R to y, either x=z or zRx.
48. Where finite numbers are concerned, +O and ×O are exact analogues of + and ×. This is because, whenever m and n are finite, + and × commutative, meaning that m+n=n+m and m×n=n×m. For reasons that will be discussed later, + and × are not commutative when m and n are not finite.
49. Complex numbers are positions in 2-dimensional series and they are therefore vectors. (Strictly speaking, complex numbers are complex numbers are pairs of signed reals, not reals per se. We will revisit this point later.)
50. The existence of such a complex number is a consequence of the following stipulations, which, taken jointly, model the arithmetic of complex numbers: A complex number α corresponds to a real number if, for some real number m, α=(m,0). α corresponds to an imaginary number if, for some real number m, α=(0,m). β is an imaginary number if, for some positive real m, there is some even number n such that βn=−m.
51. To say of a given person that his net worth is negative $5 is to say that his financial obligations exceed his assets by $5. It is to say that α+5=β, where α and β represent his assets and his obligations, respectively, and to say that his net worth is positive $5 is to say that α−5=β.
52. Since n ∉ℤ , for any cardinal n, it follows that ℕ and ℤ do not have a single member in common and are therefore disjoint. It also follows that + ℤ and × ℤ are mere analogues of + and ×. Whereas + and × are relations holding among cardinals, + ℤ and × ℤ are relations holding among relations holding among cardinals.
53. 4/1 is not identical with 4. 4/1 is the relation that α bears to β when α×1=β×4. Since 4/1 is a relation between cardinal numbers, it is not itself a cardinal number and therefore is not identical with 4.
54. Given that + and × are relations among cardinals per se, as opposed to relations among relations among cardinals, it follows that + and × are mere analogues of + ℤ and × ℤ, respectively, and of + ℚ and × ℚ, respectively.
55. There is nothing that either ℚ or ℤ enables us to say about the world that ℕ doesn't allow us to say. The discovery of ℚ -arithmetic and ℤ -arithmetic were ultimately more notational than mathematical.
56. But the discovery of ℝ -arithmetic was a genuine intellectual advance. And even though ℝ , like each of ℚ and ℤ , can be constructed out of the elements of ℕ , the relation that ℝ bears to ℕ differs fundamentally from the relation that either ℚ or ℤ bears to ℕ .
57. Even though ℝ is built out of the same ingredients as ℚ and ℤ and therefore ℕ itself, the way in which those ingredients are arranged in ℝ differs fundamentally from the way in which they are arranged in any given one of the other three classes.
58. An algorithm is simply a useful recursion.
59. Whenever somebody articulates a thought, he does by computing the identity of the appropriate expression; and whenever somebody understands the words of another, he does so by computing its meaning.
60. Any two classes that can be recursively defined have the same cardinality.
61. Given any top-down list of elements of ℝ, expressed as nonterminating decimals, there is a number, namely D(L) (read: the diagonal of L), that is not in L.
62. Diagonal arguments are always used to prove incompleteness.
63. If it can be proved that, for any given model M of a given axiom-set, there is a model M* of that same axiom-set that is non-isomorphic with M*, then that axiom-set is incomplete.
64. Model-theory is the branch of mathematics that studies classes of sentence-schemata.
65. Quite obviously, there are infinitely many viable models of (1)-(7). More importantly, taking M to be any one of the just-proposed models of K, there are models M* of K that are non-isomorphic with M.
66. Therefore, if Δ is the class of functions ψ mapping elements of K into other such elements and Δ* is the class of functions ψ* mapping elements of K* into other such elements, there does not exist a one-one function from Δ to Δ*. In other words, M and M* are non-isomorphic and K is therefore non-monomorphic.
67. Σ can be formalized exactly if the following three conditions can be satisfied: There exists a sentence-schemata-class Γ such that Σ is a model of Γ, Γ is recursive, and Γ is monomorphic.
68. Contrariwise, let us suppose, for some statement-schemata-class Γ, that: Σ is a model of Γ, and Given any model M of Γ, there is some model N of Γ such that N is non-isomorphic with M. In that case, (i) Σ cannot formalized, and (ii) Σ is non-denumerable.
69. There are many reasons why no scientific discipline can be formalized. Some of these reasons will be identified below.
70. If a class k has at least one proper subset k* such that k≈k*, then k is reflexive. Otherwise, k is non-reflexive.
71. ℕ is reflexive, and therefore infinite, since, for any n, ℕ ≈ ℕ n, where ℕ n contains only multiples of n.
72. k is a finite class exactly if [k]=n, where n is an inductive cardinal, meaning that either n=0 or For some inductive cardinal m, n=m+1. k is infinite if [k] is non-inductive.
73. According to many mathematicians, including G. Cantor, the inventor of set-theory, k is reflexive is equivalent with k's cardinality is non-inductive. The present author happens to believe that (1) and (2) are in fact equivalent. But (1) and (2) are not indisputably equivalent. They are equivalent only if the Axiom of Choice is true.
74. ∀ K ∃ K* ∀ k ∃ x ∀ y((k ∈ K ∧ x ∈ k)→((y ∈ k ∧ y ∈ K*)↔x=y))
75. Assume arguendo that K≈PK. That means that there is a function ϕ that bijects K and PK. Define a subset k of PK such that, whenever x ∈ K, x ∈ k just in case x ∉ ϕ(x). Suppose that ϕ(α)=k, where α ∈ K. If α ∈ k, then α ∉ ϕ(α); and if α ∉ k, then α ∈ ϕ(α), then α ∈ k. Thus, if ϕ(α)=k, then α ∈ k↔α ∉ k. Therefore, ϕ(α)≠k, for all α. Therefore, K ≉ PK.
76. A class k is finite if, for any x such that x ∉ k, [k ∪ x]>k, in the sense that k can be bijected with a proper subset of k ∪ x but not vice versa.
77. A class k is denumerably infinite if there is a recursive definition of k. k is non-denumerably infinite if it is infinite and there is no recursive definition of it.
78. Therefore, unless n≥ ℵ 1, any length consisting of n-many points is vanishingly short. Therefore, unless n≥ ℵ 1, no occupant of a manifold consisting of n-many points can have a positive length.
79. Given two classes k and k*, the statement (0) [k]=[k*], i.e. k has the same number of members as k*, is ambiguous between (C1) k≈k*, i.e. k and k* can be bijected; and (C2) There is no proper subset k# of k such that k*≈k#; and, finally, there is no proper subset k$ of k* such that k≈k$.
80. C=C* exactly if [kC]=[k*C], where kC and k*C are any two classes having C-many and C*-many members, respectively.
81. there are as many multiples of ten as there are multiples of five, even though, from some other viewpoint, a collection of multiples of 5 is ipso facto twice as well populated as an otherwise identical collection of multiples of 10.
82. cardinals (so-called) are in fact classes of cardinals. ℵ 0 is not a single cardinal. It is an infinitely large class of cardinals any two of whose elements can be bijected.
83. C1 represents a viable conception of cardinality-type, whereas C2 represents a viable conception of cardinality-proper.
84. there are multiple instances of any given transfinite cardinality-type, and C1 and C2 are therefore output-distinct with respect to transfinites.
85. Cantor's system is not really about number at all. It is an analysis of recursivity and its limits---that is to say, of completeness and incompleteness.
86. An incompleteness proof is simply a proof that, for some class C, there is no recursive definition of C.
87. the non-recursivity of ℝ is really a consequence of the fact that [PK]>[K]. To say that [PK]>[K] is to say that, if R is the recursion that generates K, then R does not generate PK.
88. the non-recursivity of ℝ is a consequence of the fact that there is no recursive definition of the class of all logically true statements.
89. Kurt Gödel's celebrated (1931) incompleteness proof is to the effect that the class of all arithmetical truths is incomplete.
90. Gödel's theorem is really a special case of a more comprehensive principle, namely, that the class of recursive definitions is not itself recursively defined.
91. Therefore, supposing that K is not recursively definable, it follows that S(K) is not recursively definable, i.e. it follows that the class of logics is not recursively definable, i.e. it follows that logic is incomplete.
92. In other words, there is no formal procedure by which, when given an arbitrary statement S, to determine whether or not S is a truth of logic.
93. P strictly entails Q if Q is a logical consequence of P. Q is a logical consequence of P if there is no possible world where P is true and Q is false.
94. A language is a recursively defined class of sentences.
95. A 'language' that contains only finitely many expressions is but a caricature of a bona fide language.
96. That said, there is one intrinsic difference between formal (artificial) and natural languages, namely, that any given natural language is really hierarchy of languages.
97. The concept of formal truth is a relative notion.
98. Therefore, there is no recursive definition of the class of logical truths.
99. Mathematics is the study of structure. Statements about order can always be expressed as statements about relations holding among numbers or sets thereof.
100. But mathematics is interested in number only because truths about number are encrypted truths about structure.
101. Laws of nature are invariances. Laws of nature are framework-invariant relations between objects, and such laws are given, not by statements that assign (context-dependent) properties to objects, but by statements that assign (context-independent) relations to multiplicities of objects.
102. Geometry is not interested in this or that circle or square... geometry is interested in properties of shapes that are transformation-invariant, i.e. geometry is interested in properties of shapes such that, given some transformation T, if T maps one shape onto some other shape, the second shape inherits the structural properties of the first.
103. Formal logic is really the geometry of strings of symbols. It has nothing to do with rules of inference.
104. Syntax is symbol-geometry. Semantics is symbol-meaning. Formal logic is syntax, not semantics. Informal logic is semantics, not syntax.
105. Meaning is a relation between statement and non-statement; truth is a property of meaning. Therefore, the concepts of meaning and truth have no place in the discipline of formal logic.
106. Thus, to the extent that logic is concerned with meaning and truth, it is incapable of being formalized; and to the extent that logic is capable of being formalized, it doesn't concern meaning or truth.
107. Mathematics is the discipline that identifies structural invariants; that is, it identifies ordered pairs <C,T> such that C is a class whose members are pluralities of some kind and such that any two such pluralities are isomorphic with each other with respect to T or, equivalently, are such that any one such plurality is a T-transformation of any other such plurality.
108. According to the Platonist view, numbers and other mathematical entities are non-spatiotemporal; their existence is no more mind-dependent than that of a rock or a tree, but, unlike rocks and trees, those entities are not in space or time.
109. The formalist holds that Mathematics holds among meaningless expressions of arbitrary symbolic calculi and For that reason mathematical realities have no existence outside of the calculi that we happen to create.
110. It is therefore quite as misconceived to say that '35,247×254=8,952,738' is true by convention as it is to say that 'snow is white' is true by convention.
111. Logical consequences of conventions are non-conventions that have a conventional basis.
112. If formalism is correct, then mathematics is the study of uninterpreted formal calculi.
113. Mathematics is the study of uninterpreted formal calculi. And given any one such calculus, the rules assigning meaning to its primitive expressions (the axioms of that calculus, in other words) are indeed conventions and, therefore, tautologously true. But there is nothing conventional about the relationship between the axioms of a formal calculus and the consequences of those axioms: those relations are of a non-conventional, strictly logical nature.
114. A set of meaning-postulates models a given uninterpreted calculus just in case, if it is supposed that the expressions of that calculus have the meanings in question, the resulting interpreted calculus is consistent, i.e. it doesn't entail p and not-p, for any proposition p.
115. When an interpretation adequately models a formal calculus, the result is a scientific discipline that describes the universe (or some sector thereof).
116. Whenever it is assumed that logical/mathematical laws are creations of ours, the relations among those creations end up having all of the properties that numbers/mathematical entities per se are supposed to have. Consequently, attempts deflate mathematical truths, by turning them into fictions or artifices, end up collapsing into the very sort of mathematical realism that they are supposed to supplant.
117. Unless our inborn psychological structure shadowed mind-independent facts, it wouldn't be able to organize the effects that such facts had on us. It's all very well to describe laws of nature and logic as laws of thought and to describe theories as means or organizing data or of obtaining desired results. But given that our minds are but grains of sand in a largely non-mental world, our theories and psychological mechanisms wouldn't do a very good job of organizing raw data unless they embodied a correct, if incomplete and approximate, description of reality.
118. If arithmetical truths registered empirical facts, we'd have to adjust the laws of arithmetic with every such advance in our empirical knowledge. But we don't. The arithmetical norms remains.
119. "Physical truths cannot be read off of strictly mathematical truths."
120. "Mathematics turns out to be a kind of linguistics; and poets (and philosophers) turn out to be mathematicians, albeit ones whose data-sets, unlike those of physicists, are not best organized by calculi that are capable of numerical interpretations."
121. "Mathematical truths are not given by theorems or even by metatheorems; for, as these examples show, theorems and metatheorems are calculus internal."
122. "Substantive mathematical truths are given by metan-theorems, where a meta1-theorem is a meta-theorem and metan+1-theorem is a meta-metatheorem, a metan-theorem being a truth to the effect that: (MT) any calculus having formal properties φ1...φn is modeled by all, and only, those classes of truths having formal properties ψ1...ψm."
123. "Mathematicians-and, I would contend, all thinkers of all kinds---are interested, ultimately, only those statement-sets that either have empirical interpretations or in terms of which those that do have such interpretations are to be understood."
124. "Without raw data, it isn't possible to identify prediction- and explanation-generative formal calculi; without formal calculi, it is not possible to convert raw data into predictions and explanations. Without mathematics, it isn't possible to identify the functions, from statement-sets to statement-sets, that track physical laws."
125. The spuriousness of the distinction between mathematical and non-mathematical laws... it isn't laws that are mathematical; it is descriptions of laws.
126. The reason that physics can be mapped onto calculus is that calculus was invented to describe physical laws. The reason that banking can be mapped onto arithmetic is that arithmetic was invented to accommodate the needs of bankers.
127. The truths of the differential calculus are non-empirical but empirically motivated, the same being true of the truths of arithmetic, analytic geometry, and every other branch of mathematics.
128. A failure to understand the distinction between empirical and empirically motivated has led to disastrously wrong theories, e.g. Mill's empiricism and Hilbert's formalism, concerning the nature of mathematics.
129. When a formalism is invented, so as to provide a systematic way of interpreting empirical data, that formalism is almost always capable of multiple interpretations.
130. He would rather work with a formalism that has a great deal of scope, but always yields low-resolution truths, than one that has minimal scope, but always yields high resolution truths.
131. Platonism is the doctrine that spatiotemporal entities are 'instances' of---meaning only that they are to be understood in terms of--- nonspatiotemporal entities. This doctrine is correct.
132. The spatiotemporal world is to be understood in terms of relations holding among its constituents and, therefore, in terms of relations holding among the space-time regions occupied by its constituents. Thus, the spatiotemporal is to be understood in terms of---and, in that sense, instantiates-the non-spatiotemporal; and Platonism is therefore correct.
133. Mathematical truths are not empirical. Non-empirical truths hold entirely in virtue of linguistic conventions. For, given that they don't hold in virtue of empirical facts, there are only two possibilities as to why they are true. (i) They hold in virtue of non-empirical (Platonic) facts. (ii) They hold in virtue of linguistic conventions. (i) is a non-starter. Therefore, (ii) is the right view. Thus, mathematical truths are definitional truths.
134. Truths about structure cannot themselves always be structural truths.
135. Mathematics aspires to identify, not this or that specific formal truth, but entire classes of formal truths. The propositions that identify such classes are not themselves formal truths.
136. Given an arbitrary formal truth 1#, the proposition (E1) 1# is equivalent with 1*, cannot itself be formally true. By supposition, 1# is formally true, like Smith is tall or Smith is not tall. By supposition, 1* is informally true, like John can't know that snow is white unless he believes that snow is white. Therefore, the truth of the assertion that 1* and 1# are equivalent depends not on 1*'s form, but on its meaning.
137. Given only that a statement is structurally true, it doesn't follow that it itself concerns structure. And the contention---surely accepted by Russell-Frege---that mathematics is in the business of identifying classes of structural truths doesn't entail that the statements that identify such classes are themselves structural truths.
138. Truths about linguistic conventions are not themselves linguistic conventions.
139. Given a set of linguistic conventions c1...cn, it is a matter of logic, not of convention, whether those conventions are consistent with one another; and, given some statement S, it isn't a matter of convention whether or not: (CS) P is a logical consequence of c1...cn. is true.
140. Thus, truths about formal truths are not themselves formal truths, and truths about conventions are not themselves conventions.
141. Necessary consequences of tautologies are not themselves tautologies.
142. The real laws of logic are meta-laws: laws about laws; laws that transform law-sets into different but equally powerful law-sets.
143. Whenever it is said that a proposition pn is 'almost true' or 'as false as it is true,' what is being said can be reinterpreted as a statement to the effect that (to name but a few possibilities), for some propositions p1...pn-1 such that pi (1≤i≤n) is either true or false: pn is a conjunction, most of whose conjuncts are true; pn is a conjunction most of whose conjuncts are false, but whose remaining conjuncts are both true and, in the context in question, of particular significance; pn is a conjunction each of whose conjuncts is false, but some of whose conjuncts deviate from the truth by a tolerably small margin; pn is false, but it wouldn't be affirmed by anyone who didn't know, and wasn't trying to convey, some proposition pm that, unlike pn, was simply true.
144. By reducing primitives to two, as opposed to n>2, A-B gives itself maximal flexibility in respect of its ability to categorize propositions.
145. No viable logic has but one primitive category: there must be at least two. And however many primitive categories there are, they must be mutually exclusive: otherwise they aren't primitive.
146. The laws of logic---the real laws of logic, not the artifacts studied by so-called logicians---are not given by LEM or LNC or Double Negation (p↔¬¬p) but rather by statements to the effect that, given some data-set D=d1...dm, L1...Ln does a better job than some other law-set L*1...L*o of truth-preservingly mapping D-related statements onto Drelated statements.
147. A bona fide logical law wouldn't mention L1...Ln or L*1...L*o or any other specific law-set. Nor would it mention d1...dm or indeed any specific statement-set of any kind. Such a law would be to the effect that, given any data-set δα...δν having any statement-set having formal properties φα...φζ, and given any law-sets λα...λμ and λ*α...λ*ο, having properties Φα...Φπ and Ωα...Ωτ, respectively, the one law-set is better than the other at mapping bearing-relations of some specified kind holding among δα...δν.
148. For x to have a certain mass/length/temperature is for x to have certain causal properties. If C1...Cn are the causal properties that x has in virtue of having a certain length, it is no less absurd to distinguish x's having C1...Cn from its having that length than it is to distinguish an object from the various property-instances associated with it.
149. Seemingly synchronic forms of measurement, e.g. the juxtaposition method of length-determination, collapse into their obviously diachronic counterparts.
150. A static property, e.g. length, is a four-dimensional property. A dynamic property, e.g. velocity, is a change in a static property.
151. The arbitrariness of the metrical unit What one regards as a unit of length (or time or mass) is obviously arbitrary. In fact, it is inherent in the nature of measurement that one's choice of metrical unit be arbitrary.
152. never a priori the case that the reals yielded by measurement correspond to the cardinals yielded by enumeration.
153. large distances are non-integrable. They cannot be determined by adding together small distances.
154. Wherever complexity is involved, quantitative differences involve qualitative differences.
155. No consistent language has the resources to adequately describe its own resources.
156. The more systematic a language is, the more precise are the statements belonging to it.
157. The more productive a language is, the greater scope it has.
158. A language must therefore be able to 'turn over', like an engine, an indefinitely large number of times: if, with respect to one class of inferences, it hits a wall after a certain number of rotations, it inevitably hits similar walls with respect to indefinitely many other such classes.
159. All information-transmission relies on structure-preservation: Structures must physically be preserved if it is to be possible to know about the past or to predict the future (or to make inferences about the nonperceptible present, since doing as much always involves an element of prediction or retrodiction).
160. A language preserves evanescent physical structures by mapping them onto non-transient mathematical structures (functions from noise-types to meanings).
161. The objects of perception may be identified with any structure that validates the presumption that our perceptions are accurate within the limits set by the fact that our perceptions are effects of their objects and, therefore, are at least slightly inaccurate.
162. The only data-consistent higher-order theories---theories as to why our lower-order theories are dataconsistent----are to the effect that our perceptions have external causes and, more generally, that the psychic residues of our interactions with the world tend, however feebly, to embody the structure of the world.
163. Any given formal calculus is an instance of aleph-null, this being the cardinality of the class of natural numbers. This is because anything that is recursively defined is an instance of aleph-null.
164. Logic studies those geometrical properties of onedimensional expression-strings that are preserved under certain operations.
165. A truth is formal if it belongs to a language L such that true-in-L is recursively definable. Any recursive definition, and thus any recursive definition of true- in-L, can be expressed as a definition of some class of finite numbers.
166. Given the just-stated incompleteness principle, any truth of formal logic can be coded into an arithmetical truth but not vice versa. Thus, arithmetic, though surely not correctly described as the study of truth and falsity, is more appropriately so described than formal logic.
167. Statements about a language L must be distinguished from statements within L. What can be said in L doesn't coincide with what can be said about L.
168. If L* is the language being used to discuss L, then, in that discursive context, L* is functioning as a metalanguage and L is functioning as an object-language.
169. A language is an integrated set of semantic rules. A semantic rule is a proposition R to the effect that expression E has meaning M.
170. Ultimately, all definition is contextual definition. If you say that 'John' refers to John, you are really saying that, in virtue of having the form '...John...', a sentence is true exactly if...John...
171. In SE, the word 'nieve' is mentioned, but not used. What occurs in SE is not the Spanish word 'nieve,' but a quotation of that Spanish word; what occurs is '"nieve"', not 'nieve.'
172. The sentence Joey is a person is true. The sentence Joey has four letters is false, since people don't consist of letters. The sentence 'Joey' has four letters is true. The sentence 'Joey' is a person is false, since words are not people.
173. But S is not a language. Obviously a given group of people could use R1-R3. But because no two of those expressions can combine into a third, the members of S per se have no bonds with one another that they don't have with any expression of English or Spanish or any other language.
174. "S1 blarg S2" is true exactly if S1 is true and S2 is also true.
175. Because of (2), there are infinitely many sentences of L, and L is therefore 'productive,' to use Chomsky's expression.
176. Whether 'grumpo' is true depends on whether, at the time at which it is uttered, it is raining; and 'grumpo' is therefore time-sensitive and therefore context-sensitive.
177. A problem can be solved in a mechanical fashion, i.e. the solution to it can be computed, just in case the solution is the output of a recursive function. This is the Church-Turing Thesis.
178. If a given act is strictly shape-driven, it is not meaning-driven and is therefore mechanical in nature.
179. The meaning of a complex expression is assigned to it by a recursive rule.
180. "Smith's father" does not have the same meaning as "Smith's mother," for the reason that "father" does not have the same meaning as "mother."
181. "Smith's primary enemy" does have the same meaning as "Smith's primary foe," for the reason that "enemy" does have the same meaning as "foe."
182. Truth-in-L cannot be defined in L. R1-R4 do not themselves constitute a definition of truth-in-L, they leave it open whether there are other sentences that belong to L.
183. An axiom set is a finite set of statements s1... sn such that, for some statement-class K, a given statement S is a member of K just in case either S is identical with si (1≤i≤n) or S is a member of the posterity of s1...sn with respect to the relation of logical consequence.
184. A language is a four-tuple <s1, s2, G, M> such that: s1 is a set of simple expressions (expressions that don't consist of other expressions); G is a set of rules, defined for s1, such that G says of any n-length string consisting exclusively of members of s1 whether or not that string is grammatical; s2 is the smallest class containing every grammatical n-length strings of s1-members. M is a function that assigns a meaning to each element of s2 (and therefore to s1, since s1 is a proper subset of s2).
185. A formal language L is a class K of expressions such that K's membership is made to known to us through a recursive definition; L's semantics is made known to us through a recursive definition D such that, for any member x of K, D assigns a semantic value to x; and (iii) Each of the expressions belonging to L is non-contextually unambiguous.
186. Whenever one learns a natural language, one first learns what is meant by some reasonably large subset of the expression class generated that language and, on that basis, one infers what the relevant recursions are.
187. In the English language, there are two kinds of expressions that are not contextually unambiguous: Lexically ambiguous expressions (e.g. "bank," "dumb," "Jim is at the bank," "Jim is not dumb") and Syntactically ambiguous expressions (e.g. "Jim is strong because his mother is a good person and his father is a good person too" which could mean either Jim's father is a good person; moreover, Jim is strong because Jim's mother is a good person or It is because Jim's mother and father are strong people that Jim is a good person).
188. A natural language is one that comes into existence organically: nobody sits down and invents it; it is the unintentional or semi-intentional by-product of interactions among living creatures (usually, as far as we know, human beings).
189. The difference between a formal and an informal language is that, where informal languages are concerned, the amount of information needed to determine the identity/meaning of a given expression is greater than is the amount of information needed to identify the identity/meaning of an expression of a formal language.
190. The distinction between artificial and natural languages is not of any significance to logic. This is because there is no difference between natural and artificial languages.
191. But any given artificial language could have arisen organically and any given natural language could have been consciously constructed: it is never in virtue of its intrinsic properties that a given language is natural as opposed to artificial or vice versa.
192. The distinction between formal and informal languages is of some significance to logic; but the nature of that significance is heuristic (procedural), not substantive.
193. In some contexts, in some respects, it is easier to express extremely high level truths of logic in formal languages than in informal languages.
194. The concept of an interpreted calculus is to be understood in terms of the concept of an uninterpreted calculus.
195. The elements of s1 mean nothing. Second, the elements of s2 mean nothing. Third, the elements G are not truths; they are prescriptions, not descriptions.
196. Logical relations that hold among conventions are not themselves conventions.
197. An axiomatization that is inconsistent is worthless. An axiomatization that is incomplete is not necessarily worthless.
198. It is seldom possible to produce complete, consistent axiomatization of statement-sets that are of any scope or significance.
199. A truth is analytic just in case its truth-value is determined by its own structure and by the structures of the concepts composing it.
200. Mathematics (pure, not applied) and logic consist entirely of analytic truths.
201. There is no consistent, complete axiomatization of elementary number theory.
202. The extension of an infinitely large class cannot be defined extensionally and must therefore be defined intensionally.
203. If a given region R of spacetime is three-dimensional with respect to one definition of 'point,' there is another definition of 'point' relative to which R is 2 dimensional and another relative to which it is four-dimensional.
204. T is a formal truth iff it is an instance of a statement-form all of whose instances are true.
205. "that guy is identical with that guy," which is an instance of the sentence-form "x=x," is false, if, as may well be the case, the first occurrence of "that guy" refers to one person and the second refers to some other person.
206. given any given one of the sentenceforms typically described as "laws of logic," it is easier to find false instances of that sentence-form than it is find true ones; and we will find some reason to believe that, given any sentence that appears to be a true instance of one of those sentence-forms, careful scrutiny of its syntactic structure indicates that it is not in fact such an instance.
207. sentences are not themselves truths or falsehood. When it is said of a sentence that it is true, what is meant is that it expresses a true proposition.
208. the word "true" has one meaning in "the sentence 'snow is white' is true" and an entirely different meaning in: "it is true that snow is white."
209. Given any sentence S, it is only relative to a certain definition of 'syntax' that S is formally true.
210. the natural numbers are 0 plus the posterity of 0 with respect to the relation predecessor of. Equivalently, the natural numbers are the smallest set that contains zero and is closed with respect to the successor-relation.
211. An axiomatic system consists of two parts: A set of statements or statement-forms that are stipulated to be true; and The posterity of that statement-set with respect to the relation of logical consequence.
212. whether or not a given well-formed formula is "formally true" depends on the identity of the relevant axiom set.
213. Any true sentence is formally true with respect to some axiom set. When it is said sans qualification that a given truth is 'formally true,' what is meant, supposing it true, is that the relevant axiom-set is an important one.
214. We have constructed a consistent model in which 1-4 are true and 5 is false. Therefore, the Parallel Postulate is independent of the other four.
215. In any sentence of English, or any other natural language, every sentence contains an indexical. An indexical is a context-sensitive expression.
216. If L is an indexical-free language (i) L cannot express contextual information, a consequence being that (ii) There are many context-invariant relations of logical dependence that L also cannot express.
217. Non-perspectival information is parasitic on perspectival information: the latter generates the former. And non-perspectival utterances are parasitic on perspectival utterances: the latter generates the former.
218. Science aspires to produce non-perspectival information---and rightly so, since natural laws are mind-independent. But scientific (nonperspectival) knowledge is painstakingly extracted from perspectival knowledge, and there is no way to acquire scientific knowledge except on the basis of perspectival knowledge.
219. Also, the mind falls within the scope of science, and the same is therefore true of the subjective and the perspectival. It is a fact that perspectives exist, and science must model data-sets whose elements are perspectival perceptions and thoughts.
220. In order to assign names in L to hitherto nameless entities, it is necessary to have use context-sensitive expressions.
221. The so-called 'laws of logic' are not bona fide laws; they are (supposedly) law-schemata. In other words, they are open-sentences that are (supposedly) true under interpretations of their constants.
222. The expressions belonging to K cannot be sentences of natural language, since those are all context-sensitive. Those expressions could be expressions belonging to artificial languages.
223. The objective of any given non-empirical discipline is to identify purely logical relations among concepts: it is to identify rules of inference.
224. Rules of inference have the form: if such and such is the case, then thus and such must also be the case.
225. Such disciplines do not assert that P is true, only that it cannot coherently be asserted that Q is false supposing that P is true.
226. For each is 100% incoherent, as each is conceptually false, in the sense that its own structure prevents it from being true.
227. In the empirical sciences, a theory is given by a proposition that is intended to be explanatory and general.
228. Scientific theories are general: when correct, they explain entire categories of phenomena and, for that reason, correctly identify some structural fact about (some sector of) the universe.
229. It is not in general possible to explain an entire category of phenomena without positing entities (particles, forces, causal liaisons) not previously believed to exist.
230. A 'theory', as logicians and mathematicians use this term, is simply an interpreted expression class.
231. The just-mentioned theory, relating observable heat-related phenomena to hypothetical molecular phenomena, is given by the ordered triple (V,G,M), where V contains expressions that have no meaning independent of that theory.
232. The statements in M are meaning-postulates: they assign meanings to otherwise meaningless theoretical terms.
233. If this analysis of what theories are is correct, then 'molecule' and 'electron' and other theoretical terms are given meaning in the just-described way, in which case there is such a thing as a bridge principle.
234. Theories merely organize statements about observable phenomena; they do not, contrary to first appearances, posit states of affairs that are distinct from observable phenomena and, since causation holds only between distinct entities, capable of causing them.
235. The list of non-theoretical statements corresponding to S is infinitely long; and there is no way to identify the members of that list except in terms of S itself.
236. T is false since it embodies a failure to distinguish between these two disambiguations of the word 'meaningful.'
237. Any given finite data-set is consistent with infinitely many theories, since co-extensive finitary models need not be co-intensive.
238. "x is a closed planar figure of uniform curvature" and "x is the area bounded by the class of all co-planar points that are equidistant from a given point" are co-intensive, meaning that α satisfies the one exactly if it satisfies the other, but they are not co-hyper intensive, meaning only that α is a closed planar figure of uniform curvature is not trivially equivalent with "α is the area bounded by the class of all co-planar points that are equidistant from a given point".
239. Given an empirical statement S, T correctly assumes that S's being an observation-report is sufficient for S's being meaningful, but incorrectly assumes that it is also necessary.
240. The statement (S*) What we cannot perceive affects what we can perceive cannot be true without ipso facto failing to be synonymous with any observation-report or class of observation-reports.
241. In fact, this truth is implicit in any given observation-report.
242. I am not seeing (or otherwise sense-perceiving) X except to the extent that my psychological condition is the end-result of a causal series Σ initiated by some X-involving state of affairs.
243. I cannot, while having a perception of X, sense-perceive Σ, since I would then be perceiving Σ, not X.
244. But my observation-report has no bearing on the external world unless the observation in question is the result a Σ-similar series.
245. In fact, Σ-similar series are inherently unobservable.
246. Observations of such series, were such observations possible, would themselves be the final installments of such series.
247. Owing to the consequent interference-effects, such observations would be inaccurate, and we could not possibly know on strictly observational grounds exactly how inaccurate.
248. Thus, implicit in any observation-report OR is the assumption that OR itself is inaccurate unless some other statement NR is accurate, where NR is not an observation-report and, moreover, NR cannot possibly be justified on strictly observational grounds.
249. We may conclude that T is false and in fact deeply incoherent.
250. According to Frege, n=Kn, where n is any cardinal number and Kn is the class of all n-tuples. According to Von Neumann, n=Kpn, where Kpn is the class of all of n's predecessors. These analyses are prima facie incompatible with each other, given that Kn≠Kpn, for n>0.
251. In the present paper it is shown that these analyses are in fact compatible with each other, for the reason that each analysis can and ultimately must be interpreted as being to the effect that n=Cn, where Cn is the class of all ordered pairs <Kn#,Rn#>, where Kn# is an arbitrary class and Rn# is an arbitrary relation such that a class k has n-many members exactly if k bears Rn# to Kn#.
252. We thus have a paradox: Kn≠Kpn and yet n=Kn and n=Kpn.
253. Frege's analysis can be interpreted as being given by the proposition that, for any cardinal n, n=<Kn, ∈ >, where ∈ is the relation between class-member and class; and Von Neumann's analysis can be interpreted as being given by the proposition that n=<Kpn,≈>, where ≈ is the relation between set and equipollent set.
254. Thus, if KJ is the class of John's cars, then Frege's analysis maps (i) John has exactly one car onto (ii) KJ ∈ K1, whereas Von Neumann's analysis maps (i) onto (iii) KJ≈Kp1.
255. This suggests that, for any cardinal n, n can be identified with the class Cn of all ordered pairs <Kn#,Rn#>, where Kn# is any class and Rn# is any relation such that a class k has n-many members exactly if kRn#Kn#.
256. Given an ordered pair< K,R>, let us use the notation <K,R>n to indicate that <K,R> is an n-pair, meaning that a class k is an n-tuple iff kRK.
257. For any cardinal n, Cn is the smallest class containing every n-pair.
258. What each Cn-member <x,y> has in common with each of <Kn, ∈ > and <Kpn,≈> is that <x,y> represents n's structure and is thus, as we might put it, an n-isomorph.
259. Since nothing that isn't in Cn is an n-isomorph, membership in Cn is both necessary and sufficient for possession of the structural properties, and therefore of all of the properties, that are individuative of n.
260. Therefore, a given cardinal n not only can but must be identified with Cn.
261. Therefore, n=Cn={<x,y>│<x,y>n}.
262. For any cardinal number n, n=Cn. This analysis is consistent with the fact that any n-pair adequately represents n's structure and also with the fact that any adequate representation of n's structure is an n-pair.
263. The mind is an information-processing system. An information-processing system is anything that converts information into information.
264. All computers are information-processing systems, but not all information-processing systems are computers. The human mind is an information-processing system that is not a computer.
265. To compute a solution is to use an algorithm to identify it. An algorithm is a mechanical procedure.
266. All algorithms are concerned with the geometrical or otherwise strictly physical properties of objects; none are concerned with their semantic properties.
267. If a problem can be solved in a mechanical fashion, the solution is the output of a recursive function.
268. Wherever there is a recursive function, there is a mechanical decision procedure. According to Turing, the converse also holds: wherever there is a decision-procedure, there is a recursive function.
269. A decision-procedure that cannot add to what we know is no decision-procedure at all.
270. A decision-procedure must apply to infinitely many cases that it does not explicitly mention.
271. Decision-procedures enable us to add to what we know, it is by virtue of embodying conditional truths.
272. Any statement having this two-part structure is ipso facto a recursion. Thus, where there is a decision-procedure, there is a recursion; and, as previously observed, where there is a recursion, there is a decision-procedure.
273. A problem can be solved in a mechanical fashion---the solution to it can be computed, in other words---if, and only if, the solution is the output of a recursive function.
274. The machine's behavior is a function only of the condition of the square that it is scanning at that time, coupled with its program.
275. Turing proved that, given any problem that we would intuitively regard as being capable of being solved by a decision-procedure, the just-described machine can solve it.
276. The very purpose of an algorithm is to render thought unnecessary.
277. Intelligence is needed to create algorithms, not to implement them.
278. A computer cannot question its own program; for a computer cannot reject its own program.
279. If a computer rejects its program on the basis of its program, it is following that program and therefore isn't rejecting it.
280. Mechanical problem-solvers are not thinkers; they are thinker-proxies.
281. A mechanical 'problem-solver' is a non-problem-solver whose behavior makes it easy for an intelligent observer to solve otherwise difficult problems.
282. Turing Machines merely simulate thought.
283. logical equivalence entails confirmational equivalence.
284. confirmational non-equivalence entails logical nonequivalence.
285. There are two ways to interpret any given statement of the form: (1) All phi's are psi's (if x is a phi, then x is a psi). 1 can be interpreted (or 'read') extensionally or intensionally.
286. Read intensionally, 1 means: (1*) For reasons of natural law, all actual phi's are psi's. Read extensionally, 1 means: (1#) By coincidence, all phi's are psi's.
287. Any given motion presupposes a prior motion.
288. There is no such thing as a stationary object's beginning to move.
289. For any possible universe U, there is some distance D such that nothing in U can move at all without covering a distance of at least D.
290. The assertion that x spontaneously appears in one cell and spontaneously reappears in an adjacent cell is equivalent with the assertion that x spontaneously ceases to exist and an x-like object that is not identical with x spontaneously appears in a cell adjacent to that occupied by x.
291. In a Mills-universe, nothing has a past and, therefore, nothing has a future. Everything that exists, exists for an instant and then vanishes.
292. The sum of infinitely many positive numbers may be finite (e.g. 1+½ +¼+...=2), and any finite number can be represented as such a sum.
293. All position is relative position. Therefore, changes in position are changes in relative position.
294. The sole occupant of a universe is that universe. Contrariwise, a space-time manifold has no existence independently of its occupants. Position and change therein are multiply relative.
295. The more objects there are in a given universe, the greater the number of distances with which a given distance can be compared. The more such distances, the higher degree of precision with which a given distance can be meaningfully described.
296. What we think of as a case of motion on the part of a given object xi is really a change undergone by x1...xn collectively. Seemingly system-internal changes are systemic changes.
297. No matter how well populated and otherwise heterogeneous the universe is, the universe is capable of being even more populous and otherwise heterogeneous; and for this reason the class of possible states of the universe is a proper subset of the class of possible states of a more heterogeneous but otherwise identical universe.
298. Systemic changes are too complex for us to understand with any precision. It is only by conceiving of them as system-internal changes that we can have any understanding of them.
299. There are infinitely many quarter-sized regions on a flat table-top. Thus, if N is the exact number of quarter-sized regions, then, given any specific quarter-sized region, there is a 1/N=0 chance that a quarter dropped on that surface will occupy that exact region. But there is some quarter-sized region R that the quarter will come to occupy. Thus, there is 0% chance that the quarter will occupy R, and yet the quarter occupies R.
300. To say that there is a 1/N chance that the quarter will occupy R is to say that the likelihood of its doing so is minimal but not nil.
301. Probabilities are given by real numbers, not by cardinal numbers. Real numbers are limits.
302. "BW2 cannot possibly be true. At any given point in time, there some space-time region R is such that Bill is occupying R."
303. "The same points mutatis mutandis hold of any other proposition to the effect that the world per se is indeterminate in any respect."
304. "Given any person P, there are many particles x such that one cannot non-arbitrarily say that ‹x is a part P's body› is true or that it's not true."
305. "There is no fact as to whether the proposition x has P is true. It isn't that we don't know whether it's true; it's that there is no fact of the matter."
306. "Propositions are individuated by what they entail. Different entailment relations, different propositions."
307. "Until the entailment relations of some sentence-like string of verbiage have been fixed, no proposition has been identified to that verbiage; and all we have is, at most, a sentence-schema."
308. "What a sentence says---or, to be precise, what is affirmed by a nonabortive indicative token of that sentence ---is a function of exactly two things: first, what follows from that sentence-token (supposing it is true); second, how those things follow from it (same qualification)."
309. A proposition may be compatible with another proposition and with its negation.
310. The concept of a proposition such that there is no fact as to whether it is true is an incoherent one, and the same is therefore true of the concept of objective, as opposed to epistemic vagueness.
311. Like most predicates, 'poor' is a relational expression. Smith may be poor compared to Jones but wealthy compared to Green, or he may be poor relative to the standard set by some situation and wealthy relative to the standard set by some other situation.
312. If made in a context in which the relative standard of swiftness is set by Smith's desire to join X, an utterance of 'Smith is fast' is false. But such an utterance is true if made in a context in which the relative standard of swiftness is set by Smith's desire to join Y.
313. In a context of either kind, there is some number n such that an utterance of ‹x is slow› is true if, at his best, x's average speed when running the 100 yard dash is n and such that an utterance of 'x is fast' is true if x's average speed is n + 1.
314. Any answer seems arbitrary. If I say: 'it's exactly 3 inches', I'm making a stipulation; I'm not identifying a pre-existing fact.
315. There could (and probably would) be clouds even if there were no sentient beings; and, in the absence of such beings, there would, given just about any cloud C, be molecules that were definitely parts of C and others that definitely weren't parts of C and, what is relevant, molecules x such that x is a constituent of C wouldn't exactly be true and wouldn't exactly be false--or, to make an equivalent point, such that x's constituency in C would not itself exactly be a constituent of the universe and also wouldn't exactly fail to be a constituent of the universe.
316. We cannot expect our linguistic conventions to 'cut nature at the joints,' to use Francis Bacon's expression; we cannot expect them to be hewed to exactly those properties in terms of which the constitution of the world is to be delineated.
317. Laws created 200 years ago necessarily fail to address issues relating to the disposal of motor-oil. There's nothing mysterious about this, and it's obviously no reason for saying that the world is intrinsically vague.
318. Attempts to identify properties that are objectively indeterminate can be interpreted as cases where no one property has been identified, suggesting that so-called cases of objective indeterminacy are nothing more than projections into the external world of the platitude that open scientific questions are not to be solved by studying semantic rules.
319. Z is not a 'thing.' If we were to list all the things in the world, my pen would be on the list, and so would the table on which it rests. But Z wouldn't be on the list. Why not? Because Z lacks the dynamic cohesiveness, and concomitant predictive and explanatory usefulness, that is had by the pen or the table or any other bona fide object.
320. Things are ipso facto prediction- and explanation facilitators. One thing can be more prediction- and explanation-conducive than another.
321. Because of its relatively high degree of causal integrity, a house made of bricks and mortar is more explanation- and prediction-conducive than a house of cards.
322. A consequence of this analysis is that a given aggregate of molecules may be a thing in one respect and fail to be a thing in some other respect.
323. In a context where the interactions holding among molecules m1.....mn facilitate prediction and explanation, m1....mn constitute a thing. In a different explanatory context, one where they don't have the aforementioned virtues, they don't constitute a thing.
324. The relation of parthood is always to be understood in organizational terms.
325. Whether object x can fit into organization y often depends on where x is in relation to y. (Hence the illusion that parthood is sometimes a purely spatial relation.)
326. But it's only if x's bearing a certain spatial relation to y suffices for its being appropriately integrated into y that x's location relative to y suffices for its being a part of y.
327. Thus, even clouds aren't mere heaps of molecules. Nothing is a mere heap.
328. Any group of objects that is organized in one respect is disorganized in some other.
329. A group of objects that is organized in one respect is necessarily disorganized in some other.
330. Before we ask whether x is a part of y, there are three questions that we must answer: What kind of organization are we taking y to be? What conditions a given object must satisfy to belong to such an organization? How must a given object interact with a group of objects composing such an organization if it is to be one of them?
331. For a multiplicity of grains of sand to qualify as a heap, it is necessary and (ultimately) sufficient that they satisfy the following requirements: each member of that heap must be contiguous with at least one other such member; taken jointly, those grains of sand must form a 3-D entity; and the entity in question cannot be a structure, at least not in the same sense as a building or a ship in a bottle.
332. The difference between a heap of sand and a sand-castle seems to lie in the fact that there are quite strict conditions that a grain of sand must satisfy to become part of a sand-castle, whereas there are no conditions, apart from some very generic ones, that a grain of sand must satisfy to become part of a heap of sand.
333. There are obviously degrees of heapiness---just as there are degrees of intelligence, tallness, etc. Whether a given mound of sound sand is 'heapy' is relative to the operative standard.
334. There is no one number 3. Rather, there is 31, 32....3n... where 31 is the class of all triples of individuals, 32 is the class of triples of first-order classes; and so on.
335. Linguistic surface structure often falsely suggests that what are in fact statements about classes are statements about individuals.
336. If I say nothing, the proposition P1: I am saying nothing is true. So P1 isn't self-refuting; its truth doesn't entail its falsity.
337. There are many occasions on which I am indeed saying and on which, therefore, the proposition I am saying nothing is true.
338. The proposition that I am affirming is inconsistent, not with itself, but with the fact that somebody is saying it.
339. All we have is a proposition whose truth is dependent on its not being stated.
340. There are infinitely many numbers n such that, for some true proposition P, P: it is true that 2<n, and it is never said that 2<n.
341. "The class of classes that are not members of themselves" means: "The class K of classes k such that k doesn't have p, for some property p such that x has p iff x is a member of K."
342. "The class K of classes that do not belong to themselves does not belong to itself" means: "If K is the class of classes k such that k does not have p, for some property p such that x belongs to k iff x has p, then K does not have p."
343. "Impredicative" is impredicative means "Does not fall within its own extension" does not fall within its own extension.
344. "is a thing x such that x isn't true of x" isn't true of x.
345. None of 1-4 warrants the position that predicates (both open and closed, open predicates corresponding to classes, closed predicates being sentences and thus corresponding to propositions) may range only over entities that belong to orders lower than do those predicates themselves.
346. Propositions are sets of properties; and for a proposition to be true is for the members of the set with which it is identical to be jointly instantiated.
347. Truth is identical with the property of being a set (of a certain kind) all of whose members are instantiated.
348. The property of being identical with something that is smoking and is identical with Tommy.
349. 1 is true if, and only if, each of A, B, and C is instantiated.
350. One property 'combines' n other properties exactly if the first is instantiated exactly if the other n properties are jointly instantiated.
351. A's being instantiated is necessary but not sufficient for C's being instantiated, the same being true of B's being instantiated.
352. the proposition that Plato snores exists despite the failure of existence of entities on whose existence its own existence is constitutively dependent.
353. the cardinality of the continuum is greater than that of the cardinals... is meaningless (neither true nor false), for the same reason that, given TT, 'I 31 have pairs of shoes' is meaningless.
354. If I say 'snow is white, but I don't believe that snow is white,' what I am saying-the proposition I am affirming-is: Q: snow is white, and I don't believe that snow is white, which could obviously be true.
355. LEM and LNC are LC-equivalent, meaning that (i)LEM entails that LEM is equivalent with LNC, and LNC entails that LNC is equivalent with LEM.
356. the word 'theory' is not therefore ambiguous; rather it is polysemous... The word 'theory,' as logicians use it, is not a way of modeling empirical data and, to that extent, doesn't have the same meaning that it has when physicists use it.
357. Every extension of arithmetic had a very specific practical justification... were it not for their results, those extensions of arithmetic would introduced incoherencies into the structure of mathematics and, technically, would have rendered the discipline defunct.
358. there is no statement, and thus no falsehood, that isn't a logical consequence of an inconsistent body of statements.
359. 8 is stated in a meta-language, unlike others. Also, 8 is not one axiom; in fact, it isn't an axiom at all: it is an axiom-schema, each of whose infinitely many instances are constitutive of the axiom-set in question.
360. Thus, technically speaking, an axiom-set can contain infinitely many members. But the operative term is 'technically speaking.' There must be a finitary way of specifying the axioms of a theory.
361. When it is said that a given theory comprises infinitely many axioms, what is being is that at least one of the axioms of that theory cannot be expressed in that theory and, moreover, licenses infinitely many distinct (though structurally analogous) transformation-rules.
362. No such induction-axiom-schema qualifies as a well-formed formula in the language to which the sentences generated by that axiom-set belong. And this means that with respect to that language such an induction-axiom(-schema) represents infinitely many distinct axioms.
363. Thus, given how vague the term 'Important' is and also how unclear it is whether a given axiom-set---or hypothesis or model---will some day be important, it follows that the term 'formal truth' has to be used with extreme care, lest it have no meaning.
364. The meaning of a word is its use in the language. - Ludwig Wittgenstein
365. To be is to be the value of a bound variable. - Willard van Orman Quine
366. Necessity resides in the way we talk about things, not in the things we talk about. - Saul Kripke
367. The limits of my language mean the limits of my world. - Ludwig Wittgenstein
368. Philosophy is a battle against the bewitchment of our intelligence by means of language. - Ludwig Wittgenstein

--- ANNOTATED CITATIONS ---


--- COMPRESSED REWRITE ---
[Chunk 1]


[Chunk 2]


[Chunk 3]


[Chunk 4]


[Chunk 5]


[Chunk 6]


[Chunk 7]


[Chunk 8]


[Chunk 9]


[Chunk 10]


[Chunk 11]


[Chunk 12]


[Chunk 13]


[Chunk 14]


[Chunk 15]


[Chunk 16]


[Chunk 17]


[Chunk 18]


[Chunk 19]


[Chunk 20]


[Chunk 21]


[Chunk 22]


[Chunk 23]


[Chunk 24]


[Chunk 25]


[Chunk 26]


[Chunk 27]


[Chunk 28]


[Chunk 29]


[Chunk 30]


[Chunk 31]


[Chunk 32]


[Chunk 33]


[Chunk 34]


[Chunk 35]


[Chunk 36]


[Chunk 37]


[Chunk 38]


[Chunk 39]


[Chunk 40]


[Chunk 41]


[Chunk 42]


[Chunk 43]


[Chunk 44]


[Chunk 45]


[Chunk 46]


[Chunk 47]


[Chunk 48]


[Chunk 49]


[Chunk 50]


[Chunk 51]


[Chunk 52]


[Chunk 53]


[Chunk 54]


[Chunk 55]


[Chunk 56]


[Chunk 57]


[Chunk 58]


[Chunk 59]


[Chunk 60]


--- DATABASE ---
═══ CHUNK 1 ═══


═══ CHUNK 2 ═══


═══ CHUNK 3 ═══


═══ CHUNK 4 ═══


═══ CHUNK 5 ═══


═══ CHUNK 6 ═══


═══ CHUNK 7 ═══


═══ CHUNK 8 ═══
{
  "quotes": [
    "A real number is the least upper bound of a class Qi of rationals such that Qi is a non-empty proper subset of the class of rationals and Qi contains a given rational q only if it contains every rational p such that p<q.",
    "Not all reals correspond to rationals, i.e. for some real numbers r, there is no rational q such that r is the limit of (Qq,<). An example of such a real is √2.",
    "√2=DF the limit of (Q#2,<), where Q#2 is the class of rationals q such that q2<2.",
    "Lest "√2" be an empty label, like "phlogiston" or "Zeus", it must be proved that an entity having the requisite properties exists.",
    "Ordinal numbers are positions. In the series, 2, 4, 6, 8...n... 6's ordinal number is 3, but in the series 6, 7, 8, 9...m... 6's ordinal number is 1."
  ],
  "annotatedQuotes": [],
  "summary": "",
  "database": "",
  "analyzer": ""
}

═══ CHUNK 9 ═══


═══ CHUNK 10 ═══


═══ CHUNK 11 ═══


═══ CHUNK 12 ═══


═══ CHUNK 13 ═══


═══ CHUNK 14 ═══


═══ CHUNK 15 ═══


═══ CHUNK 16 ═══


═══ CHUNK 17 ═══


═══ CHUNK 18 ═══


═══ CHUNK 19 ═══


═══ CHUNK 20 ═══


═══ CHUNK 21 ═══


═══ CHUNK 22 ═══


═══ CHUNK 23 ═══


═══ CHUNK 24 ═══


═══ CHUNK 25 ═══


═══ CHUNK 26 ═══


═══ CHUNK 27 ═══


═══ CHUNK 28 ═══


═══ CHUNK 29 ═══


═══ CHUNK 30 ═══


═══ CHUNK 31 ═══


═══ CHUNK 32 ═══


═══ CHUNK 33 ═══


═══ CHUNK 34 ═══


═══ CHUNK 35 ═══


═══ CHUNK 36 ═══


═══ CHUNK 37 ═══


═══ CHUNK 38 ═══


═══ CHUNK 39 ═══


═══ CHUNK 40 ═══


═══ CHUNK 41 ═══


═══ CHUNK 42 ═══


═══ CHUNK 43 ═══


═══ CHUNK 44 ═══


═══ CHUNK 45 ═══


═══ CHUNK 46 ═══
{
  "quotes": [
    "Some predicates are binary. P is a binary predicate if the property it expresses is one that cannot be had to varying degrees; it is one that a given thing either has or doesn't have.",
    "Sorites paradoxes always involve non-binary predicates (i.e., predicates that express properties that can be had to varying degrees), e.g., "fat," "tall," "smart."",
    "This shows that "smart" is always relational. This, in its turn, shows that tokens of (i) are elliptical for sentence-tokens that express relational propositions---sentence-tokens having the form: (i#) "Smith is smarter than___," or perhaps: (i*) "Smith is smart enough for__."",
    "It cannot be assumed that the philosophical insights needed to solve puzzles that turn on facts about language are themselves encoded in the semantic rules of English (or of whatever language happens to be the relevant one).",
    "Given that those rules can, at least in principle, be mastered by somebody who has the idiotic belief that swiftness does not come in degrees, we mustn't impute to the semantic rules of English our knowledge that swiftness does come in degrees; and we must therefore take the position, for which there is a vast amount of independent corroboration, that this knowledge of ours is nonlinguistic."
  ],
  "annotatedQuotes": [],
  "summary": "",
  "database": "",
  "analyzer": ""
}

═══ CHUNK 47 ═══


═══ CHUNK 48 ═══


═══ CHUNK 49 ═══


═══ CHUNK 50 ═══


═══ CHUNK 51 ═══
{"quotes": [
    "relative to the ant's objectives (and also, perhaps, relative to the ways it can think of surmounting a heap), B is, whereas A is not, heapy.",
    "Smith has all of the properties of a typical Frenchman. Suppose that Smith is the only Frenchman who has all of the properties of a typical Frenchman. Let phi be the property of having all of the properties of a typical Frenchman. Since possession of non-phi is typical of Frenchman, and since possession of phi is decidedly atypical, 1 seems to entail N1. Smith does not have all the properties of a typical Frenchman.",
    "Every assertion (past, present, future) is false. 2 seems to entail that: N2: Given that 2 is true, not every assertion ever made is false.",
    "Let K be the class of classes are not members of themselves. Consider the statement: 3. K is a member of K. 3 seems to entail that N3. K is not a member of K.",
    "Russell's solution (henceforth "ATT", short for 'argument for type theory') to this problem is as follows: No significant assertion entails a contradiction. So each of 1-5, though seemingly significant, isn't.",
    "Given any s is a significant statement, either open or closed, of order n, s attributes a property to a given entity x only if x is of order m<n.",
    "If TT is right, (i) There is no one law of excluded middle (LEM): There is LEM1, LEM2, etc, the same being true of each other law of logic. A consequence is There is no such thing as truth: there is truth1, truth2, etc., where truth is a property of statements of order m<n."
],
"annotatedQuotes": [],
"summary": "",
"database": "",
"analyzer": ""}

═══ CHUNK 52 ═══


═══ CHUNK 53 ═══


═══ CHUNK 54 ═══


═══ CHUNK 55 ═══
{"quotes": [
    "1 is a set whose members include the property of being Tommy, the property of smoking, and the property of being a smoking Tommy. 1 is the result of Tommy's 'saturating' the property/concept of smoking in the sense that 1 is identical with a set S that consists of those three properties.",
    "For any proposition X, to say that X is the result of Y's 'saturating' Z (for some Y and Z) is to say that X is a set whose members are the property of being identical with X, and Z itself, and also the property of being identical with something that is identical with X and also has Z.",
    "The impression that C is part-less, or at least lacking in the right kind of parts, is reinforced when we look at what an instance of C is like. Such an instance is, to use Kenneth Taylor's (1998) apt expression, a "ripple in the quantum": (re)distribution of mass-energy.",
    "States of affairs (or 'facts', as they are sometimes called) do not have the same kinds of "articulations" as propositions. The quantum-ripples on which the truth of a proposition supervenes don't have anything like the structure of that proposition.",
    "There is no such thing, in either case, as Tommy simpliciter. There is only Tommy doing this or that, having this or that property."
],
"annotatedQuotes": [],
"summary": "",
"database": "",
"analyzer": ""}

═══ CHUNK 56 ═══
{"quotes": [
    "each of S and S* comprised, not only a-c, but also: the property of being a Tommy that does something (i.e., the property being a Tommy that does something or, in any case, has some property), and also: the property of being a something that does something (i.e., the property being a something that does something or, in any case, has some property).",
    "1 immediately implies: i Tommy smokes; ii something smokes; iii Tommy does something; iv Tommy exists; v something does something. Indeed, 1 implies (i)-(v) in a manner that is naturally described as formal.",
    "Plato doesn't exist. So if he's a (necessary) constituent of 3 - if, in other words, 3 exists only if Plato does---then 3 doesn't exist.",
    "3 exists. Plato does not. But the property of being identical with Plato, whatever it is, does exist.",
    "To be Plato is, perhaps, to be a causal sequence that is initiated by the fertilizing of a certain egg by a certain spermatozoa. To be Plato is, perhaps, to have a soul or mind of a certain kind.",
    "even though Plato does not exist, the property of being identical with Plato does. That's why I can meaningfully, not to mention correctly, say "I am not Plato" or, equivalently, "I don't have the property of being identical with Plato."",
    "we can meaningfully, and presumably correctly, say that Plato does not exist. For, in making such a statement, we aren't picking out a non-object---which would, having been picked out, ipso facto cease to be a non-object - and then saying of it that it doesn't exist. We are saying of an existing property, that of being identical with Plato, that it is uninstantiated.",
    "our analysis is still consistent with the heart of direct-reference theory, this being the idea that, for some x such that x is identical with Plato, the proposition meant by "Plato snores" is true just in case x snores, it being completely irrelevant what properties (other than being a snorer) x has."
],
"annotatedQuotes": [],
"summary": "",
"database": "",
"analyzer": ""}

═══ CHUNK 57 ═══


═══ CHUNK 58 ═══


═══ CHUNK 59 ═══
{
  "quotes": [
    "grains of sand be contiguous, at least by one legitimate metric.",
    "Wittgenstein (1958) and Quine (1960) are among those who deny their existence.",
    "molecular propositions (propositions that have other propositions as proper parts; e.g., snow is white and grass is green)",
    "quantified generalizations (propositions that, for two classes C1 and C2, answer the question 'to what extent, if any, do C1 and C2 overlap?')",
    ""Necessary constituent" is a pleonasm---hence the parentheses---since a proposition surely couldn't possibly have a structure other than the one it in fact has."
  ],
  "annotatedQuotes": [],
  "summary": "",
  "database": "",
  "analyzer": ""
}

═══ CHUNK 60 ═══


--- TEXT ANALYZER ---
═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 1 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 2 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 3 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 4 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 5 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 6 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 7 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 8 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 9 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 10 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 11 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 12 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 13 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 14 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 15 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 16 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 17 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 18 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 19 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 20 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 21 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 22 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 23 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 24 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 25 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 26 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 27 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 28 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 29 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 30 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 31 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 32 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 33 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 34 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 35 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 36 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 37 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 38 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 39 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 40 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 41 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 42 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 43 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 44 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 45 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 46 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 47 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 48 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 49 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 50 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 51 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 52 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 53 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 54 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 55 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 56 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 57 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 58 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 59 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════



═══════════════════════════════════════
           CHUNK 60 ANALYSIS
═══════════════════════════════════════


