THE INVASION
OF COMPULSORY
SEX-MORALITY

BY WILHELM REICH

P
><f>t

 
THE INVASION
OF COMPULSORY
SEX-MORALITY

BY WILHELM REICH

Ce=
oDp
 


The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you for your personal

use  only.  You  may  not  make  this  e-book  publicly  available  in  any  way.

Copyright infringement is against the law. If you believe the copy of this

e-book you are reading infringes on the author’s copyright, please notify

the publisher at: us.macmillanusa.com/piracy.                                  Contents






                                      Title Page

                                  Copyright Notice

                                        Epigraph

            Preface to Third (first English language) Edition (1951)

                        Preface to Second Edition (1934)

                          Preface to First Edition (1931)



                      Part I: The Origin of Sexual Repression

                    1. Sex-Economy in Matriarchal Society

      2. Economic and Sexual Contradictions among the Trobrianders

                  3. The Invasion of Sex-Negative Moralism

        4. Primitive Work-Democracy—Mother-Right; Father-Right

        5. Confirmation and Revisions of the Morgan–Engels Theory

              6. The Origin of Clan Division and the Incest Taboo



                  Part II: The Problem of Social Sex-Economy



                                          Notes

          Appendix: Roheim’s “Psychoanalysis of Primitive Cultures”

                                          Index

                              Books by Wilhelm Reich                                      Copyright 


      Love, work and knowledge are the well-springs of our life. They should also govern it.

                                      WILHELM REICH        Preface to Third (first English


                        language) Edition






The  clinical  and  ethnologic  material  for  this  book  was  compiled  between

1920 and 1930. It was rounded out by the extraordinary material Bronislaw

Malinowski presented in 1930 in his comprehensive book The Sexual Life of

Savages. My study of the origin of human sexual morality was written in

September 1931, in the midst of the social storm that rocked the German

republic before Hitler’s ascendancy to power; and the strong political slant of

this book stems from the experiences of that period. Nothing of what shook

our  social  existence  at  that  time  (1930–45),  in  the political  sense,  has

survived.  However,  the  facts  about  the  history  of  human  character

development have not only survived the last twenty years but have gained in

consistency and social influence, which is, in the long run, the true social

power.

  The sharp discrepancy between the screaming of a cruel political vagrant

and the calm efficiency of a study of basic problems of human nature may

well serve as a warning today when a differently colored but basically similar

political noise is disturbing our peaceful endeavors to learn and to do ever

better in determining the path humanity has been traveling toward new forms

of existence over the past few decades. In a few years the big noise will have

died out again, and humanity will continue on its journey with less anguish,

or so we hope.

  Not a single term in sociology, once of such great significance, can todaybe used without creating confusion. This is due to the prostitutes in politics,

the “freedom peddlers” who have succeeded in destroying every vestige of

clear, honest thinking for the sake of mere fact-finding. To them, every term

has become a tool of political cheating. In these decades we have begun to

turn  our  attention  to  an  understanding  of  man’s  compulsion  toward

subservience and fuehrer idolatry. Quite unaware of what they are doing, the

fuehrers misuse the helpless mass individual’s sexual and mystical longings

for happiness. Accordingly, since the early 1920’s social sex-economy has

devoted itself to a study of this social phenomenon, which is entirely new and

has never before been dealt with in sociology. Yet, quite naturally, the new

type  of  mass-psychological  thinking  grew  within  the  old  frameworks  of

social  inquiry  and  terminology.  Nothing  can  better  show  the  gradual

dissolution  of  the  old  views  and  the  emergence  of  the  new  mass-

psychological aspect of social upheaval within the last thirty years than the

invalidation  of  every  term  pertaining  to  the  old  terminology  and  the

affirmation of the new mass-psychological (sex-economic) way of thinking.

Thus, most of the terms that have become obsolete during the past twenty

years could be eliminated without in the least changing the sex-economic

context of this book. The economistic movements, which derive from Karl

Marx’s influence on sociology, have lost their base of operation with the

emergence of a completely new type of human and social problem. Further,

the  great  difficulties  these  movements  have  encountered  after  coming  to

power, in whatever country, reflect their helplessness in matters human and

sexual. The scope of human and social problems is far deeper and broader

than  Marxian  economics  encompasses.  Time  marches  on,  and  political

movements remain sitting on one spot. New human strivings emerge and

correct the trends in public awareness of social processes.

  The problem today is no longer that there is oppression and slavery and

the need for liberation from every kind of suppression. This is self-evident to

everybody,  conservative,  liberal,  and  socialist  alike.  The  problem  is  howpeople can take it all and why they irrationally follow the politicians who add

to their oppression and who manage totally to exclude the crucial human

problems from public debate. What is going on in people that they follow so

much political nonsense is the problem of the midcentury and it will remain

as the major worry in the years to come.

  This book was the first step in approaching the answer to this problem. It

was followed by The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) and The Sexual

Revolution  (1929–35). The  Mass  Psychology  of  Fascism  applied  the

principles  of  individual  and  social  sex-economy  to  the  new  movement  of

irrationalism  among  masses  of  average  people. The  Sexual  Revolution

investigated the processes in the first half of the twentieth century that were

related to sexual and mental mass hygiene. This new social trend has been

firmly rooted and is flourishing in the widespread awareness in the United

States of the problem of human nature.

  These two major works dealing with contemporary social sex-economy

could not have remained valid for two decades—as they in fact have, up to

and beyond the midcentury—had they not been preceded by a careful study

of the history of social sex-economy and mass psychology, beginning in the

early twenties. The historical investigation, which was supported by work in

clinics  with  people  suffering  from  the  plague  of  emotional  diseases

(Character Analysis,  1st  ed.,  1933),  introduced  several  crucial  viewpoints

into  the  theory  of  mental  hygiene  and  the  formation  of  human  character

structure: the dynamics and effects of sex-affirmative regulation of human

sex-economy,  the  first  such  attempt  in  the  history  of  science; the  clear

distinction  between  primary,  bio-energetically  determined,  and  secondary,

culture-made drives, never drawn before; the principle of sex-economic self-

regulation,  as  distinct  from  the  “idea”  of  self-regulation  without  any

bioenergetic  principle  (the bioenergetic  law  of  sex-economy  provided

psychosociology  with  some  natural  scientific  principles  upon  which

investigations could be based); clear-cut affirmation and support of infantileand  adolescent  genitality;  the  function  of  the  armoring  of  the  character

structure  in  man  as  fostered  in  patriarchal,  authoritarian  civilizations  (cf.

Character Analysis, 3rd ed., 1949).

  These  new  principles  in  the  theory  of  human  character  formation,

simultaneously  supported  by  and  based  on ethnologic,  clinical,  and

sociological material, have begun to turn the tide in the knowledge of human

nature—heretofore  swamped  by  lack  of  scientific  principles,  mysticism,

moralistic  prejudice,  and  educational  brutality  toward  children  and

adolescents—into  the  channels  of  a  more  rational  procedure  in  biosocial

thinking  which  began  to  emerge  slowly  and  cautiously  in  midcentury,

particularly in the United States.

  Although early orgonomic (sex-economic) pioneer work had broken the

trail  toward  a life-affirmative,  sex-positive  attitude  in  matters  of  mental

hygiene in the twenties and early thirties of this century, the general stream of

works in this field is still paralyzed by fear of touching the hot potato I took

from  the  fire  of  an  over-aged,  prejudiced  moralism  in  psychiatry  and

sociology and had to carry alone for two full decades. But the result was

worth the strenuous effort. The turn in matters of mental hygiene is here to

stay and will develop into great accomplishments. The life-affirmative, non-

moralistic,  rational  trend  in  biopsychiatry  and  sociology  quietly  and

determinedly bypasses what is left over from the old, over-aged, prejudiced

thinking in matters of “human nature.”

  The discovery of the Life Energy (Orgone Energy) in the late thirties

added further strength to the general efforts finally to get at the emotional

plague that has ravaged human life and civilization for such a very long time.

To have laid some of the basic foundations for this structure in medicine,

education, and sociology is in itself a great reward.


                                                                                    W. R.

 

Orgonon, Rangeley, Maine, U.S.A.July 1951              Preface to Second Edition






The time that has elapsed since the publication of the first edition has brought

two important confirmations of the views presented here: first, the family-

political measures of National Socialism in Germany, which completely fit in

with the patriarchal ideology of fascism and its way of reproducing itself

socially  (I  have  dealt  with  this  in  a  more  recent  publication, The  Mass

Psychology of Fascism); second, the results of Roheim’s expedition, which

place the theory of the invasion of sexual morality into primitive culture on a

broader empirical basis than was possible until now—as a matter of fact, they

do  so  without  Roheim’s  intent,  even  against  his  own  basic  theoretical

position. This is shown in the Appendix.

  As for the rest, the book appears with minor changes only.


                                                                        WILHELM REICH

 

November 1934                Preface to First Edition






The purpose of this investigation into a period of the history of sex-economy

is to provide part of the foundation for a systematic social sex-economy. It is

necessary to give an introductory survey explaining the development of the

approach to the problems dealt with in this book.

  Having proceeded from natural science to psychiatry and psychoanalysis,

I was very impressed by the possibilities of causal, i.e., theoretically well-

founded, psychoanalytic therapy of psychic illnesses. This therapy showed up

very favorably against the purely intuitive or, even more so, the superficial

persuasion methods of the old school. Although psychoanalytic therapy was

far  behind  the  theory  of  neuroses,  a  wealth  of  possibilities  for  unifying

psychological theory and psychotherapeutic practice appeared from a first

acquaintance with the subject matter. One knew, after all, that a neurosis had

to be understood to be cured, and one could rely on this knowledge, even if

very often overwhelmed by failures in everyday practice. The greater the

interest aroused by therapeutic problems, the more apparent it became that

there  was  no  better  avenue  of  approach  to  the  understanding  of  the  still

largely  unsolved  problems  of  the  origin  of  neuroses  than  the  consistent

pursuit of the question: How can the sick psychic apparatus be made healthy?

As we observed the process of transformation of the psychic mechanisms in

the  course  of  treatment,  we  were  ever-conscious  of  the  question:  What

differentiates the psychically healthy individual from the psychically sick?

Thus, a deeper insight into the dynamics of the psychic apparatus was made

possible.  Freud’s original formula—neurosis is a product of an unsuccessful sexual

repression; therefore, the first prerequisite for its cure is the elimination of

sexual repression and the liberation of the repressed sexual drives—leads to

the  question:  What  happens  to  the  liberated  drives?  In  psychoanalytic

literature there were two answers: (1) The sexual desires, having become

conscious,  can  be  controlled  or  condemned.  (2)  The  drives  may  be

sublimated—an  important  therapeutic  way  out.  The  necessity  for  direct

sexual gratification was nowhere mentioned. In the course of many years’

experience I have found that the overwhelming majority of sick people do not

have the capacity for sublimation necessary for the cure of a psychic illness.

The control and condemnation of liberated infantile instinctual drives always

proves to be merely a pious hope if the individual’s sex life has not been put

right;  that  is,  when  treatment  has  not  given  the  patient  the  capacity  for

satisfactory  and  regular  sexual  intercourse.  It  quickly  became  clear  that

neurosis does not exist without genital disturbances and gross signs of sexual

stasis.  Psychic  illness,  through  the  fixation  of  infantile  sexual  attitudes,

prevents the development of a normal genital organization and therefore of an

ordered  sexual  economy.  Furthermore,  the  establishment  of  full  genital

organization  and genital  gratification  proved  to  be  the  essential  and

indispensable factor for a cure. Only genital gratification, as distinct from

non-genital  sexual  drives,  is  capable  of  dispelling  sexual  stasis,  thus

withdrawing the source of energy from neurotic symptoms. When one had

gotten this far and realized that here was the key to sex-economy and thus to

the therapy of neuroses, experience showed that genital organization could be

established  even  in  serious  cases  but  that  the  convalescent’s  environment

thwarted the cure. That happens in the most varied situations. The chastity of

an unmarried seventeen- or eighteen-year-old girl from a middle-class home

is  strictly  guarded.  In  the  case  of  a  girl  from  the  lower  classes,  social

conditions  (housing  problems,  contraception  problems,  the  severely

moralistic attitude of the parents) are so wretched that the patient, who intreatment tried very hard to shed her neurosis, is forced by the social barriers

against sexuality to retreat into neurosis. As a child she had been destroyed

by the denial of her sexuality and now she could get well only with great

difficulty, if at all, because of the external denial of her genitality. It is very

much  the  same  for  the  unhappily  married  woman  who  is  economically

dependent on her husband or who has to consider her children. It also became

clear  how  difficult  it  was  for  a  neurotic  person  who  was  on  the  way  to

recovery to find a suitable partner. The disturbances of potency and the acts

of sexual ruthlessness of the men, as well as the sexual disturbances and

character deformities of the women, who as sexual partners were to complete

the  cure,  were  an  additional  problem.  The  very  social  conditions  that  in

childhood  had  triggered  the  neurosis  now  thwarted  the  adult’s  cure,  even

though in a different form. To this was added the criticism of my colleagues,

arising from my contention that no cure of a neurosis was possible without

the establishment of a satisfactory genital love life, a criticism that at first

seemed rather curious. They opposed my view and insisted that sublimation

or the renunciation of sexual happiness was essential. It made me feel more

and more strongly that the social barrier was operative here. In view of the

clear-cut clinical data, the neglect of these problems in the existing literature

must  have  the  same  origin: in  the  overwhelming  majority  of  cases,  the

consistent  causal  therapy  of  neuroses  demanded  that  the  patient  should

overcome the established social moralism. One shrank from that. And the

repeated checking of the therapeutic formula over a period of years, again

and  again,  produced  the  same  result:  neurosis  was  a  product  of  sexual

repression  and  of  the  stasis  of  sexual  energy;  its  cure  presupposed  the

elimination of repression and the establishment of a healthy genital life. Yet

everything  in  social  life  conflicted  with  the  practical  application  of  this

formula.

  In addition, there was the difficulty that the vast majority of people in our

culture were infected with sexual and neurotic disturbances; and since theonly causal therapy, psychoanalysis, required treatment over a long period of

time, the problem of the prophylaxis of neuroses naturally arose. There was

little point in concentrating on individual therapy. One could only marvel at

the fact that the prophylaxis of neuroses had not even been mentioned, or if it

had  been  occasionally,  the  only  answer  had  been  vague  phrases.  The

question,  then,  was:  How  are  neuroses  to  be  prevented?  Official

psychopathology,  despite  Freud,  still  clung  to  the  primary  importance  of

hereditary  etiology.  That  this  erroneous  and  fruitless  concept  has  its

sociological  basis  in  the  need  of  reactionary  research  to  distract  attention

from the conditions of the outside world became quite clear later through the

study of Marxian sociology.

  A  straight  path  led  to  Marx,  once  one  had  recognized  that  the  sexual

conditions  of  man’s  childhood  were  the  cause  of  neuroses  and  later  the

factors thwarting a cure. The problem resolved itself into several separate

questions.  Freud  had  recognized  the  child’s  conflict  with  the  parents,

especially its sexual component, the Oedipus complex, as the central element

in the etiology of neuroses. Why did the family have this function? Neurosis

originates in the conflict between sexuality and the denying outside world.

Sexual repression comes, then, from society. The family and education as a

whole exercise sexual suppression with all the means at their disposal. Why?

What  social  function  have  family  upbringing  and  the  sexual  repression

effected by it?

  Freud  maintained  that  sexual  repression  was  the  most  important

prerequisite of cultural development; culture was built on repressed sexuality.

For a time one could accept this, but eventually it could not be overlooked

that the sexually ill, neurotic person was, culturally, by no means the equal of

the sexually healthy, gratified person. The class problem was nowhere near

being  tackled  yet,  but  the  treatment  of  workers  and  employees  at

psychoanalytic clinics brought closer the world of the poorer classes, a sexual

and material world strangely in contrast with that which one had come toknow  in  the  treatment  of  private  patients  who  paid  well:  different  sexual

views, yet, simultaneously, the same as were found among the middle class.

Particularly  astonishing  was  the  family  upbringing  that,  sexually  and

otherwise,  ruined  all  classes  alike.  Psychoanalysis  had  criticized  this

upbringing so little, and when it had, it had done so most insufficiently and

mildly. Everyday experience indicated that psychoanalysis was the sharpest

instrument for the criticism of sexual upbringing. Why wasn’t it used? This

upbringing, this destroying of the sexuality of infants, this misery of puberty,

genital suppression in marriage—in short, all the social phenomena imposing

sexual repression on the individual and creating a mass plague—could not be

the prerequisite of cultural development. At psychoanalytic and psychiatric

clinics,  psychic  disturbances  were  seen  on  a  mass  scale.  Had  we  been

rendered  one-sided  by  our  profession?  I  began  studying  my  immediate

environment and more distant environments as well. Everywhere, with rare

exceptions,  I  found  the  same  deformity  of  sexual  life,  the  same  neurotic

plague in the most varied forms, here as an inhibition of the activity of a

talented person, there as a marital quarrel, elsewhere as a character deformity;

and  everywhere  there  were  genital  disturbances,  symptom  and  character

neuroses, even in people one would never have suspected of being affected.

Freud was right in asserting that the whole of mankind was his patient. He

had come to understand neuroses clinically, but he had not drawn the obvious

conclusions. What, then, was the social reason why man was turned into a

neurotic? Had it always been so?

  After  I  had  rejected  Freud’s  assertion  that  sexual  repression  was  an

essential part of the cultural development of society, considerable time passed

before the realization that sexual repression stems from society evolved into

the  further  question: What  interest  has  society  in  sexual  repression?

Sociology  did  not  provide  any  answer  except  the  stereotype  statement:

“Culture requires morality.” Finally I came across Marx and Engels, who

enabled me to understand much of the mechanism of our material existence,and  I  was  amazed  that  I  had  attended  secondary  school  and  university

without ever having heard of them. Later I understood why.

    According to Marx and Engels, class interest and class conflict determine

our present-day existence, also our philosophy and our research; behind their

objectivity, class interest is operative. Morality is a social product that rises

and then passes away, and in the class state it is in the service of the ruling

class. Engels’s The Origin of the Family leads into ethnology. Thus, morality

has developed from something else, and the family did not exist at the onset

of civilization as has been maintained. Morgan’s historical discoveries were

very gratifying to me. But his findings and the basic interpretation of the

social process by Marx and Engels were at variance with Freud’s Totem and

Taboo.  Marx  maintained  that  material  conditions  of  existence  determine

moral  concepts,  and  this  was  clearly  confirmed  by  everyday  experience.

Freud derived morality from a single event, the murder of the primeval father.

According to him, this event brought guilt feelings into the world and was the

origin of sexual repression. Thus, it is true that he offered a social event as

explanation of the origin of sex repression, but he derived this event not from

the  conditions  of  existence  but  merely  from  man’s  jealousy  toward  the

primeval father. This proved to be the cardinal point of the whole complex of

problems.  And  it  was  closely  linked  with  the  practical  interest  in  the

prophylaxis  of  neuroses.  If  Freud  was  right,  if  sexual  suppression  and

instinctual restriction were an integral part of the development of civilization

and culture, and if further, as was beyond doubt, sexual suppression created

neuroses en masse, the case for the prophylaxis of neuroses was hopeless.

But if Morgan’s and Engels’s accounts of the history of the family were

correct,  morality  was  bound  to  change  again  sometime,  and,  thus,  the

problem of the prophylaxis of neuroses, and, further, of sexual misery, could

be solved. Could, but not necessarily would, for it was not certain that the

further  transformation  of  morality  would  meet  the  requirements  of  sex-

economy.  To learn about the sociology of sexual disturbances, of perversions, of

sexual antisociality, one had to investigate the sexual experience of primitive

peoples. Sexologic and ethnologic literature provided an over-abundance of

reports.  It  was  an  established  fact  that  many  primitive  peoples  lived

differently,  but  others  were  said  to  hold  the  same  moral  concepts  as  our

civilized  world,  above  all  with  regard  to  marriage  morality.  No  solution

presented  itself,  for  the  reports  were  at  variance.  They  were  distorted  by

moral evaluations or they showed the eagerness of the authors to justify our

moral laws, either by attempting to prove that the family and marriage order

had always existed, as for instance, Westermarck tried to show, or by praising

our “progress” from the stage of “savagery” and “licentiousness” (Ploss and

others). But, simultaneously, there were lyrical reports on the sexual paradise

of the primitives, alongside lamentations by scientific and ethical literature

over the decline of present-day morality. The first impressions were merely

confusing. The only certainty was that the bulk of ethnologic literature was

moralistically biased. Primitive peoples, at least many of them, had different

conceptions and experienced sexuality differently; and the lower classes also

produced their own sexual morality, which differed from that of the middle

class.

  It was natural, then, to want to learn the facts concerning the revolution in

sexual  ideology  in  the  workers’  and  farmers’  state  of  Soviet  Russia.  The

reactionary  press  was  raving  about  the  downfall  of  culture  and  morality

brought  about  by  the  social  revolution.  But  the  wording  of  Soviet  sexual

legislation was startlingly simple and matter-of-fact. It was totally different

from reactionary sexual legislation, and it showed a complete lack of respect

for the “achievements of culture,” hitherto so vehemently defended, and for

the  “ethical  nature”  of  man.  Abortion  permitted,  even  legalized;  public

assistance  in  matters  of  birth  control;  sexual  enlightenment  of  the  young;

abolition  of  the  term  “illegitimate”;  virtual  elimination  of  compulsive

marriage; abolition of punishment for incest; elimination of prostitution; realequality  for  women,  etc.—all  these  clearly  showed  that morality  was

transformed in a sex-affirmative sense, reversing completely hitherto existing

conditions.  But  the  reactionary  press  and  reactionary  scholarship  went  on

raving about the “decline of culture.” Was Freud right, after all?

  A visit to the Soviet Union quickly revealed not only that there was no

decline of culture, but strangely enough, the moral atmosphere seemed, at

first, ascetic: no sexual importuning in the street; reserve and seriousness

everywhere; prostitution still in existence, true, but not seriously affecting the

character of the towns; lovers here and there, but not nearly as many as in

Vienna or Berlin; at social gatherings an absence of the sexual allusions and

smutty  conversation  characteristic  of  our  circles.  In  addition,  one  heard

curious anecdotes: If a man dared slap a woman’s backside or pinch her

cheek,  as  sometimes  happens  in  our  part  of  the  world,  he  might  well  be

prosecuted  before  the  party  tribunal  if  he  was  a  party  member.  But  the

question whether one wanted to become a sexual partner was being asked

more and more openly and unhesitatingly: sexual companionship without any

underhandedness, women’s genitality a matter of course. An acquaintance

was in the eighth month of pregnancy, but nobody had asked who the child’s

father was. A family offered to put up a visitor but didn’t have enough room,

so the sixteen-year-old daughter said openly to her parents: “I’ll go sleep with

X [her boyfriend].” Two members of a youth commune asked to be bound for

support of a girl, as both had slept with her and either might be the father of

her  child.  In  obstetric  clinics,  pregnancies  were  legally  aborted.  In  the

Kulturpark, a public establishment and accessible to any adolescent, charts

and  illustrations  on  procreation,  birth,  contraception,  and  venereal  disease

were available. At the same time, among the old doctors there was the same

shyness about sexual matters as there is among us, for in many instances

sexology is still the domain of moralizing and sex-psychologically untrained

urologists and physiologists. There were contradictions of course, but there

was  an  overall  sex-affirmative  change,  with  a  new  matter-of-fact  attitudetoward these problems. The old ways, including clerical marriage morality,

persisted only in circles of academics and old civil servants. It was a clear

change, not in any way final yet, but showing the economic outlines of a

future  sex  hygiene  of  the  masses  in  the  impressive  efforts  to  raise  all

members of society to a high cultural level through higher wages and shorter

working  hours  as  well  as  cultural  mass  education  and  a  stand  against

        1
religion.

    Notwithstanding this change in objective sexual existence, there was a

noticeable  absence  of  a  corresponding  sexual  theory.  Psychoanalysis  had

declined,  owing  to  its  false  excursions  into  sociology  and  to  several

reactionary  publications  by  analysts;  also,  it  had  completely  ignored  the

major revolutions then in progress. Moreover, in the last few years a clear

retreat from the strict and revolutionary libido-theory had been taking place

within psychoanalysis. With Freud’s first publications on the ego and the

death instincts, there was a flood of attempts to desexualize the theory of

neuroses and restate it in terms of the theory of the death instinct. Theories

were proposed that sought the origin of suffering in a biological “will to

suffer,” in the need for punishment and in the death instinct, instead of in the

external circumstances of existence. As a psychoanalytic clinician, I could

not  follow  this  change.  Clinical  experience  clearly  contradicted  it,  and

Marxian  sociology  made  it  possible  to  understand  it.  Psychoanalysis,

originally  a  revolutionary  theory  of  sex  and  of  the  psychology  of  the

unconscious,  began  to  adapt  itself,  insofar  as  the  theory  of  sex  was

concerned,  to  the  authoritarian  conditions  of  existence,  thus  becoming

acceptable to a reactionary society.

  It could not be said that in Soviet Russia the revolutionary character of the

psychoanalytic theory of sex had been recognized or that it had been rejected

because it had turned reactionary, but the latter fact nevertheless made its

acknowledgment  more  difficult.  The  various  Marxist  critics  of

psychoanalysis,  in  addition  to  not  being  sufficiently  acquainted  with  thesubject matter, overlooked the change in psychoanalytic theory that turned it

from a branch of knowledge that aroused antagonism in reactionaries to one

that  aroused  their  enthusiasm.  As  the  opponents  of  Marxism  rejected  the

sociological excursions of psychoanalysis, and thus its clinical psychology,

so  the  friends  of  Marxism  supported  psychoanalytic  sociology  because

clinical psychology made sense to them. Since there is no satisfactory theory

of sexuality except the psychoanalytic, which is denied, the change in sexual

life in the Soviet Union is taking place far more subconsciously, influenced

far less by subjective guidance than is the change in outlook concerning other

                                    2
problems of cultural existence. On the basis of clinical experience, it was

evident  that  the  sexual  upbringing  of  children  and  adolescents  would  be

endangered  unless  backed  by  analytically  established  facts.  On  the  other

hand,  the  sexually  freer  atmosphere  had  enabled  persons  in  positions  of

authority  to  see  many  of  the  facts  psychoanalysis  had  uncovered;  for

example,  the  conversion  of  sexual  energy  into  work  interest  (sublimation

—“Pereklutschenie”). The fact of infantile sexuality was also known here

and there; but psychoanalysis was rejected. In the discussion after a lecture at

the Neuropsychological Institute in Moscow, a high official of the Board of

Public Health said they were waiting for a workable theory of the prophylaxis

of neuroses. I was sorry to have to say that none yet existed. But, both from

the medical and from the sociological points of view, such a theory must be

worked out.

    Returning  from  the  Soviet  Union  with  encouraging  and  stimulating

impressions, I got down to the task of ascertaining the present-day political

meaning of sexual suppression in reactionary society, through practical work

in close touch with the working-class movement. The institution of marriage

and family soon emerged as the fixed point around which the struggle in the

sexual  field  revolved,  although  at  that  time  still  subterraneously.  It  was

wrecking sex research and sex reform. An outline of this problem and its

solution was given in my book Geschlechtsreife, Enthaltsamkeit, Ehemoral.                                                      3
Eine  Kritik  der  bürgerlichen  Sexual  reform.  Perhaps  the  most  important

result of my political work for future sex-sociological investigations was the

discovery that sexual suppression is one of the cardinal ideological means by

which the ruling class subjugates the working population. The problem of the

sexual misery of the population can only be solved by a movement toward

freedom from any kind of oppression. Less pleasant was the thought that the

final elimination of the effects of thousands of years of sexual suppression

and  the  establishment  of  a  satisfactory  love  life  for  the  people,  thus

eliminating  the  plague  of  neuroses,  will  be  possible  only  when  work-

democracy  has  been  established  and  consolidated  in  the  world  and  the

economic security of the population is guaranteed.

  Once the framework for further study had been created, I had to prepare

for difficult theoretical work on the foundations of sex-economy. It could

never be allowed to lose touch with clinical facts or it would risk bogging

down in empty theorizing. Also, I had to reckon with the fact that sexual

suppression is rooted in the suppressed masses themselves, and not much was

known of the way the different strata of the population would react to having

the  question  brought  up,  since  the  core  of  the  problem  was  undoubtedly

marriage  and  the  family  and  the  genital  life  of  children  and  adolescents.

Many years’ experience in the sex-political field and particularly in clinics

for sexual consultation convinced me that people were waiting for an answer

to these problems just as eagerly as they awaited an answer to the problem of

their immediate economic existence. At the moment a young but resolute

sex-political  movement,  under  revolutionary  leadership,  is  spreading

throughout Germany.

  The  attempt  to  explain  sexual  disturbances  and  neuroses  historically

nearly failed because the existing ethnologic literature had not considered

inner experiences, the character of genital gratification, and the problem of

neuroses.  One  could  not  rely  on  such  books  as  R.  Schmidt’s Indischen

Liebeskunst, for they gave recommendations but no description of the sex lifeof foreign peoples. They also failed to consider the relation between sex life

and economy. The remaining literature, which attempted a description of this

relationship—for instance, the work of Cunow, Müller-Lyer, and others—

restricted itself to a discussion of the external forms of marriage and family

and did not go into the genital function or actual sexual experience. Only the

Morgan–Engels theory was reliable. In view of all this, the investigations of

Malinowski attracted my attention because they established the connection

between sexual forms and economy in the sex life of matriarchal primitive

peoples. Also, they supplied material on actual sexual experience, including

the problem of neuroses, which we had long been waiting for. His discoveries

exceeded all expectations.

  On the basis of this new material, which was a direct continuation of the

investigations of Morgan and Engels, one could risk tackling the ethnologic

side of the problem of sex-economy. The results are given in this book. I

hope that, in the details given here, I have not made any gross ethnologic

blunders. If that should nevertheless be the case, I can only ask the reader to

consider that I had to work with existing ethnologic literature. The possibility

of personal ethnologic research has not been granted, at least until now; I

would welcome such an opportunity. However, let me add that, provided my

basic historical concept of sex-economy is correct, a few mistakes in details

should  not  be  taken  too  seriously.  The  study  of  ethnologic  literature  has

convinced me that even expert knowledge does not shield one from making

gross errors in matters concerning sex life.


                                                                        WILHELM REICH

 

Berlin, September 1931                                            I






            THE ORIGIN OF SEXUAL


                            REPRESSION                                          ONE




              Sex-Economy in Matriarchal Society




In 1929 a detailed report appeared on the sexual life of the Trobrianders by

the anthropologist, Bronislaw Malinowski. He had spent several years on the

Trobriand  Islands  of  northwest  Melanesia,  studying  the  matriarchal

                                            1
organization of these primitive people. We are indebted to Malinowski for a

description, not only the first of its kind but the most thorough, of sexual

relationships in connection with economic and social foundations, which we

will  quote  in  Chapter  2.  Where  Malinowski  is  not  expressly  quoted,  the

reader will find analytic results of my own, based on his investigations. They

enable us to give ethnologic proof for some of the laws of sex-economy.

  The sexual misery in authoritarian, patriarchal society is a result of its

intrinsic sexual negation and suppression, which create sexual stasis, which

in  turn  begets  neuroses,  perversions,  and  sexual  crime.  For  that  reason  a

society that has no interest in sexual suppression must be free from sexual

misery. Historically speaking, so long as, and to the extent that, there is no

such interest, it will remain free from sexual misery. We can then say that the

members of such a society live sex-economically, by which we only mean

that they have a naturally regulated energy economy.

  We then must inquire how sexual life is regulated, and we anticipate that

it  is  by  means  of the  gratification  of  the  sex  instinct  and  not  by  moral

standards. We are prepared to find in the sex life of the Trobrianders almost

exactly the opposite of what is found in the sex life of the members of our

society: undisturbed sex life of children and adolescents and full capacity forgratification  in  the  genitally  mature—i.e.,  orgastic  potency  of  the  mass

individual.


            THE SEX LIFE OF CHILDREN AMONG THE TROBRIANDERS


Let us begin with childhood and examine what Malinowski says. The natives

have their first sexual experiences at a very early age. “The unregulated and,

as it were, capricious intercourse of these early years becomes systematized

in adolescence into more or less stable intrigues, which, later on, develop into

permanent liaisons” (p. 51).


    The child’s freedom and independence extend also to sexual matters. To begin with, children

  hear of and witness much in the sexual life of their elders. Within the house, where the parents

  have  no  possibility  of  finding  privacy,  a  child  has  opportunities  of  acquiring  practical

  information concerning the sexual act. I was told that no special precautions are taken to prevent

  children from witnessing their parents’ sexual enjoyment. The child would merely be scolded

  and told to cover its head with a mat. (p. 54)


  This admonition has nothing at all to do with sex-negation. It is merely a

measure to prevent those having coitus from being disturbed. The children

can examine each other and otherwise play sexually as much as they like. It

must be emphasized that in spite of, or rather because of, sexual liberty in

childhood, voyeurism as a perversion does not occur. From this, all those

who are afraid of its implications can learn—if psychoanalytic investigation

into the origin of perversions has not already convinced them—that freedom

for the partial sex instinct in childhood does not of itself lead to perversions

unless there are conditions of otherwise suppressed sex life. Further:


  There are plenty of opportunities for both boys and girls to receive instruction in erotic matters

  from their companions. The children initiate each other into the mysteries of sexual life in a

  directly practical manner at a very early age. A premature amorous existence begins among

  them long before they are able really to carry out the act of sex. They indulge in plays and

  pastimes in which they satisfy their curiosity concerning the appearance and function of the

  organs of generation, and incidentally receive, it would seem, a certain amount of positive

  pleasure. Genital manipulation and such minor perversions as oral stimulation of the organs are  typical forms of this amusement. Small boys and girls are said to be frequently initiated by their

  somewhat older companions, who allow them to witness their own amorous dalliance. As they

  are untrammelled by the authority of their elders and unrestrained by any moral code, except

  that of specific tribal taboo, there is nothing but their degree of curiosity, of ripeness, and of

  “temperament” or sensuality, to determine how much or how little they shall indulge in sexual

  pastimes.

    The attitude of the grown-ups and even of the parents toward such infantile indulgence is

  either that of complete indifference or of complacency—they find it natural, and do not see why

  they should scold or interfere. Usually they show a kind of tolerant and amused interest, and

  discuss the love affairs of their children with easy jocularity. I often heard some such benevolent

  gossip as this: “So-and-so (a little girl) had already had intercourse with So-and-so (a little

  boy).”  And  if  such  were  the  case,  it  would  be  added  that  it  was  her  first  experience.  An

  exchange of lovers, or some small love drama in the little world would be half-seriously, half-

  jokingly  discussed.  The  infantile  sexual  act,  or  its  substitute,  is  regarded  as  an  innocent

  amusement. “It is their play to kayta (to have intercourse). They give each other a coconut, a

  small piece of betel-nut, a few beads or some fruits from the bush, and then they go and hide,

  and kayta.” But it is not considered proper for the children to carry on their affairs in the house.

It has always to be done in the bush. (pp. 55–56)

    All sorts of [dancing] games, which are played by the children of both sexes on the central

  place of the village, have a more or less strongly marked flavor of sex. (p. 57)


  The fact that Trobriand children play sexually is not the vital point for our

study. The great majority of children in our cultural spheres do too, especially

those  of  the  lower  classes  (with  the  exception  of  those  who  are  already

seriously  inhibited  neurotically).  But,  just  as  in  the  case  of  the  sexual

embrace, the decisive factor is not that it is done but with what inner attitude

and in what social surroundings. It is important, then, what attitude educators

and parents take toward children, toward their sexual play and their natural

motility, generally. It is this, after all, that determines the sex-economic value

of these sexual activities. We stress the point because this view is not given

any space in sexologic literature, which merely registers the fact that such

play  occurs,  or  overlooks  it  altogether.  It  was  the  examination  of  the

economy of the genital function that taught us to consider the act itself less

important  than  the  conscious  and  unconscious  psychic  attitudes  that

              2
accompany it. From the beginning of a child’s life it has a positive attitude

toward sexuality, through the pleasure mechanism. The social surroundingsalone  determine  whether  this  originally  positive  attitude  can  survive  or

whether it must give way to guilt feelings and genital anxiety, brought to sex

life by society in various ways.

  Now it has been shown that among the Trobrianders the parents’ attitude

not only is not disturbing but is rather benevolent and friendly. We can say,

therefore, that, with the exception of the incest taboo, there is no sex-negating

morality. On the contrary, a clearly affirmative ego develops and, as we shall

                                            3
see later, a sex-affirmative ego ideal. As sexuality is free, the incest taboo

cannot  be  considered  a  sexual  restriction,  since  abundant  possibilities  for

gratification  of  a  sex-economic  nature  remain.  One  cannot  speak  of

restriction of gratification of the food instinct if the eating of mutton and

green peas is banned but the person can eat as much of any other vegetable or

meat as he pleases. We stress this in opposition to the many assertions that

instinctual life among primitive peoples is restricted. These restrictions have

no  economic-dynamic  importance.  An  economically  and  dynamically

excessive incest wish is found where there is too great an interest in the

incestuous object because of a general restriction of instinctual life. This is

true of all other excessive instinctual impulses and explains the fact that the

primitive  is  quite  conscious  of  the  incest prohibition  but  it  need  not  be

repressed because the incest wish does not particularly stand out from other

desires as long as the other desires are gratified.

  Every Trobriand boy knows that he must not look upon his sister as a

sexual being. The conscious avoidance of any intimate contact shows the

consciousness  of  sexual  feelings  toward  the  sister.  If  sexual  life  were

otherwise forbidden, the incest desire would, because of the local and familial

contact with the sister, immediately increase to such an extent that a profound

repression of the desire would become necessary. This desire would then

have  to  seek  an  unhealthy  outlet.  These  facts  are  essential  for  the

understanding of the intensity of the incest wish among our own children.

Apart from the natural ties to parents and brothers and sisters, it is to a largeextent the result of the complete denial of other sexual relationships; and not

least among the causes are the sexual ties of the parents to the children, which

in turn are conditioned by the sex-starvation of the adults.

  It is typical of the Trobriand upbringing that in other respects too the

parents’ attitude toward the children lacks any of the authoritarian features

inherent in our educational measures. We come to a full understanding of the

intimate  relationship  of  sexual  denial  and  sexual  suppression,  on  the  one

hand, and other characteristics of patriarchal upbringing, on the other, when

we hear their opposite among the Trobrianders, described as follows:


    Children in the Trobriand Islands enjoy considerable freedom and independence. They soon

  become emancipated from a parental tutelage which has never been very strict. Some of them

  obey their parents willingly, but this is entirely a matter of the personal character of both parties:

  there is no idea of a regular discipline, no system of domestic coercion. Often as I sat among

  them, observing some family incident or listening to a quarrel between parent and child, I would

  hear a youngster told to do this or that, and generally the thing, whatever it was, would be asked

as a favour, though sometimes the request might be backed up by a threat of violence. The

  parents would either coax or scold or ask as from one equal to another. A simple command,

  implying  the  expectation  of  natural  obedience,  is  never  heard  from  parent  to  child  in  the

  Trobriands.

    People will sometimes grow angry with their children and beat them in an outburst of rage;

  but I have quite as often seen a child rush furiously at his parent and strike him. This attack

  might be angrily returned; but the idea of definite retribution, or of coercive punishment, is not

  only foreign, but distinctly repugnant to the native. Several times, when I suggested, after some

  flagrant infantile misdeed, that it would mend matters for the future if the child were beaten or

  otherwise punished in cold blood, the idea appeared unnatural and immoral to my friends, and

  was rejected with some resentment.

    Such  freedom  gives  scope  for  the formation  of  the  children’s  own  little  community, an

  independent group, into which they drop naturally from the age of four or five and continue till

  puberty. As the mood prompts them, they remain with their parents during the day, or else join

  their playmates for a time in their small republic. And this community within a community acts

  very much as its own members determine, standing often in a sort of collective opposition to its

  elders. If the children make up their minds to do a certain thing, to go for a day’s expedition, for

  instance, the grownups and even the chief himself, as I often observed, will not be able to stop

  them. In my ethnographic work I was able and was indeed forced to collect my information

  about children and their concerns directly from them. Their spiritual ownership in games and

  childish activities was acknowledged, and they were also quite capable of instructing me and

  explaining the intricacies of their play or enterprise. (pp. 52–53; Reich’s italics)  Under dictatorial regimes the authoritarian suppression of the child serves

to  produce  an  expediently  submissive  structure  in  conformity  with  the

organization of society in general, which constantly reproduces itself in the

child. Just as here the parents are the executive instruments of the ruling

order, and the family its ideological factory, similarly, matriarchal society,

insofar as it is still distinct, reproduces itself ideologically by allowing the

psychic  structure  of  the  child  to  develop  freely.  In  this  way  the  social

ideologies of this society are fully developed in the children’s community.

And, just as in authoritarian society sexual suppression becomes the basis for

psychic inhibitions, in matriarchal society sexual freedom becomes the basis

of characterological freedom, thereby guaranteeing libidinously well-founded

social ties between the members of the society. These facts prove that self-

regulation of the sexual life of the community is possible through instinctual

gratification (in contrast to moral regulation).


                          THE SEX LIFE OF ADOLESCENTS


Let  us  now  turn  to  the  sex  life  of  Trobriand  adolescents.  We  see  sexual

conflicts, it is true, and a certain amount of psychic suffering springing from

the  difficulties  of  many  love  relationships,  but  we  note  the  absence  of

external  restriction.  We  see  no  “pubertal  neuroses,”  no  suicides,  no

asceticism “for culture’s sake.”


    As the boy or girl enters upon adolescence the nature of his or her sexual activity becomes

  more serious. It ceases to be mere child’s play and assumes a prominent place among life’s

  interests.  What  was  before  an  unstable  relation  culminating  in  an  exchange  of  erotic

  manipulation or an immature sexual act becomes now an absorbing passion, and a matter for

  serious endeavour. An adolescent gets definitely attached to a given person, wishes to possess

  her, works purposefully towards this goal, plans to reach the fulfilment of his desires by magical

  and other means, and finally rejoices in achievement. I have seen young people of this age grow

  positively miserable through ill-success in love. This stage, in fact, differs from the one before

in that personal preference has now come into play and with it a tendency towards a greater

  permanence in intrigue. The boy develops a desire to retain the fidelity and exclusive affectionof the loved one, at least for a time. But this tendency is not associated so far with any idea of

  settling down to one exclusive relationship, nor do adolescents yet begin to think of marriage. A

  boy or girl wishes to pass through many more experiences; he or she still enjoys the prospect of

  complete freedom and has no desire to accept obligations. Though pleased to imagine that his

  partner is faithful, the youthful lover does not feel obliged to reciprocate this fidelity …

    This group lead a happy, free, Arcadian existence, devoted to amusement and the pursuit of

  pleasure …

    Many of the taboos are not yet quite binding on them, the burden of magic has not yet fallen

  on their shoulders …

    …  Young  people  of  this  age,  besides  conducting  their  love  affairs  more  seriously  and

  intensely, widen and give a greater variety to the setting of their amours. Both sexes arrange

  picnics and excursions and thus their indulgence in intercourse becomes associated with an

  enjoyment of novel experiences and fine scenery. They also form sexual connections outside the

  village community to which they belong. Whenever there occurs in some other locality one of

  the ceremonial occasions on which custom permits of licence, thither they repair, usually in

  bands either of boys or of girls, since on such occasions opportunity of indulgence offers for one

  sex alone. (pp. 63–65; Reich’s italics)


    Psychoanalytic ethnologists have tried to derive from the puberty rites of

many  primitive  organizations  the  thesis  that  among  these,  too,  pubertal

activities are punished, just as they are with us, with the one difference that

the punishment precedes the person’s entrance into genital love life. But a

study of ethnologic literature makes one suspicious of interpretations that all

too clearly show a tendency to justify our circumstances ethnologically and

lightly apply to other social organizations interpretations that apply only to

phenomena originating in our own circumstances. In saying this, it is not my

wish to question the truth of these theories. When we are able to determine

the economic interests which influence and transform sexual life, then the

theories will be important to us. If one considers sex-economy historically, it

seems quite improbable that punishments for adolescent genitality have their

roots in the instinctual structure of man (ambivalence, hatred, jealousy, etc.).

There are organizations, as for instance the Trobrianders,’ in which not only

is there no sign of punishment but on the contrary there is outright public

support (the bukumatula,  the  adolescent  consecrations  and  festivals,  etc.).

The representatives and supporters of the punitive view, which is so one-sidedly biopsychological, would first have to explain why in this organization

the  desire  for  sexual  power  and  other  negating  qualities  are  absent.  We

maintain that these punitive attitudes toward pubertal sexuality are a result of

the influence of economic interests on purely natural genital gratification, and

we are about to prove this.

  Let us return to our subject. The sex-affirmation goes as far as social

assistance:


    To meet this need, tribal custom and etiquette offer accommodation and privacy in the form

of the bukumatula, the bachelors’ and unmarried girls’ house of which mention has already been

  made. In this a limited number of couples, some two, three, or four, live for longer or shorter

  periods together in a temporary community. It also and incidentally offers shelter for younger

  couples if they want amorous privacy for an hour or two … At present there are five bachelors’

    establishments in Omarakana, and four in the adjoining village of Kasana’i. Their number has

  greatly  diminished  owing  to  missionary  influence.  Indeed,  for  fear  of  being  singled  out,

  admonished and preached at, the owners of some bukumatula now erect them in the outer ring,

  where they are less conspicuous. Some ten years ago my informants could count as many as

  fifteen bachelors’ homes in both villages, and my oldest acquaintances remember the time when

  there were some thirty. This dwindling in number is due, of course, partly to the enormous

  decrease of population, and only partly to the fact that nowadays some bachelors live with their

  parents, some in widowers’ houses, and some in the missionary compounds. But whatever the

  reason, it is needless to say that this state of affairs does not enhance true sex morality … I was

  told that sometimes a man would build a house as a bukumatula for his daughter, and that in

  olden days there used to be unmarried people’s houses owned and tenanted by girls. I never met,

  however, any actual instance of such an arrangement. (pp. 70–72)

    The ulatile (adolescent) has either a couch of his own in a bachelors’ house, or the use of a

  hut belonging to one of his unmarried relatives. In a certain type of yam-house, too, there is an

  empty closed-in space in which boys sometimes arrange little “cosy-corners,” affording room

for  two.  In  these,  they  make  a  bed  of  dry  leaves  and  mats,  and  thus  obtain  a  comfortable

  garçonnière,  where  they  can  meet  and  spend  a  happy  hour  or  two  with  their  loves.  Such

  arrangements are, of course, necessary now that amorous intercourse has become a passion

  instead of a game.

    But  a  couple  will  not  yet  regularly  cohabit  in  a  bachelors’  house  (bukumatula), living

  together and sharing the same bed night after night. Both boy and girl prefer to adopt more

  furtive and less conventionally binding methods, to avoid lapsing into a permanent relationship

  which might put unnecessary restraint upon their liberty by becoming generally known. That is

  why they usually prefer a small nest in the sokwaypa (covered yam-house), or the temporary

  hospitality of a bachelors’ house. (p. 66)  This social assistance in providing a place for the embrace is the best

expression  of  a  social  sex-affirmation,  going  far  beyond  mere  toleration.

Similarly,  the  indifference  to  and  active  hindering  of  adolescents  in

authoritarian society, which manifests itself in its failure to provide a place

for the embrace, is in harmony with its sex-negative attitude. Whereas social

assistance  has  a  decisive  positive  influence  on  the  sexual  health  of

adolescents  among  the  primitives,  its  hindrance  in  authoritarian  society

results  in  a  crippling  and  debasing  of  love  life.  It  does  not  prevent  the

embrace  from  taking  place.  But  the  embrace  is  carried  out  in  haste  and

anxiety  in  corridors  and  corners  of  fences  and  hedges,  instead  of  in

tranquillity in hygienic places.

  And what about “culture,” to which the timid continuously refer? The

brothel life of our own youth should be compared with the following facts:


    To call this institution “Group Concubinage” would lead to misunderstanding; for it must be

  remembered that we have to deal with a number of couples who sleep in a common house, each

in an exclusive liaison, and not with a group of people all living promiscuously together; there is

  never an exchange of partners, nor any poaching nor “complaisance.” In fact, a special code of

  honor is observed within the bukumatula, which makes an inmate much more careful to respect

  sexual rights within the house than outside it. The word kaylasi, indicating sexual trespass,

  would be used of one who offended against this code; and I was told that “a man should not do

it, because it is very bad, like adultery with a friend’s wife.” (p. 73)

    Within the bukumatula a strict decorum obtains. The inmates never indulge in orgiastic

  pastimes, and it is considered bad form to watch another couple during their love-making. I was

  told by my young friends that the rule is either to wait till all the others are asleep, or else for all

  the pairs of a house to undertake to pay no attention to the rest. I could find no trace of any

  “voyeur” interest taken by the average boy, nor any tendency to exhibitionism. Indeed, when I

  was discussing the positions and technique of the sexual act, the statement was volunteered that

  there are specially unobtrusive ways of doing it “so as not to wake up the other people in the

  bukumatula.” (p. 73)


  The adolescent couple are not tied to each other by any law or custom;

they are kept together by personal attachment and sexual passion and can

separate at will. We understand that this relationship does not include any

right of possession. Either partner is free to embrace other partners, especiallyon the occasion of the harvest and moon festivals. Expressions of jealousy do

occur, but on certain occasions even this is immoral, as for example when

after a death the young girls comfort the mourning men with sexual embrace.

In spite of all this—or, from the point of view of sex-economy, precisely

because of it—the relationships (without external or internal compulsion) are

frequently  more  lasting,  more  intimate,  and  more  satisfying  than  those

achieved by our sexually crippled youth.

  The common interests of the couple are purely sexual. For instance, they

never have their meals together. We shall learn later that common meals are

the symbol of marriage.

  We  see  how  inadequate  the  bombastically  learned  categories  of

“monogamy,”  “polygamy,”  “promiscuity,”  are  to  describe  these  sexual

relationships, which are directed and regulated solely by the satisfaction of

genital needs. These couples are monogamous, occasionally polygamous, and

at festivals even promiscuous; but these classifications themselves have no

meaning  in  this  society  and  only  come  to  mean  something  and  have

importance  as  moral  evaluations  in  a  society  such  as  ours  which  tries  to

subject life to moralistic regulation. With us, too, they do not correspond to

the  facts.  Our  sexual  relationships  are  also  highly  varied.  The  difference

between us and primitive peoples—this must be stressed, as it separates our

sex-economic views from all others in every respect—does not lie in the fact

that they live polygamously or promiscuously and we monogamously; nor

can  a  claim  for  monogamy  be  postulated  from  the  monogamous  lives  of

primitive  peoples,  as  many  sexologists  and  ethnologists  have  tried  to

maintain. It depends exclusively on the manner in which sex life is regulated

by society and in the different way of experiencing the embrace that results.

The genital apparatus itself has the same nature everywhere, notwithstanding

race differences and the phylogenetic influence of thousands of years of sex

suppression (weakening of the somatic sexual apparatus?). And what causes

our sexologists to rack their brains is that the genital apparatus does not knowtheir categories, their “-gamies,” but only the goal of instinctual gratification.

The  question,  then,  is  whether  the  particular  social  order  is  willing  to

recognize this function, and whether or not it can do so. That, however, is a

sociological problem.

  As  adolescents  grow  older,  their  relationships  become  more  firm  and

                                                          4
enduring—which,  as  we  have  shown  elsewhere  must  be  ascribed  to  the

gradual  satiation  of  the  sensual  needs  after  puberty.  This,  in  turn,  causes

tender attachments to arise. If there were no institution of marriage, these

relationships would not last forever either but would give way to others in the

course  of  time.  However,  under  prevailing  circumstances,  the  firmer

relationships turn into marriage. First, though, there is a probationary period

during which the young couple test their attachment and constancy and the

parents take necessary steps, i.e., make economic preparations. At this point,

sexual needs encounter specific economic interests.


                                  SEXUAL FESTIVITIES


The advanced sexual culture of the Trobrianders finds expression primarily in

various  celebrations  having  no  goal  but  sexual  play  and  subsequent

gratification. These differ from similar celebrations of youth in our society,

first in that their real purpose is not hidden; second in that there is no denial

of, inner resistance to, or outer inhibition of final gratification; and third in

the absence of genital anxiety and guilt feelings, such as corrode the genital

gratification  of  our  adolescents  if  they  allow  themselves  the  final

gratification. “He has not to stumble upon the final fulfilment of erotic desire,

he immediately anticipates it. All the customs, arrangements, and codes of

behavior dictate simple, direct approach” (p. 311).

  Another essential difference is the absence of any kind of sentimentality

in sexual relationships; yet the sex life of the Trobrianders is not devoid of a

certain romanticism. This shows up the nature of the sexual sentimentality

artificially  nurtured  by  reactionary  fiction  and  exploited  by  publishers:  itpresupposes the inhibition of final gratification, being itself an inadequate

substitute for it, and it means there is continuous orgastic longing that is

never fulfilled.


    Thus there is nothing roundabout in a Trobriand wooing; nor do they seek full personal

  relation, with sexual possession only as a consequence. Simply and directly a meeting is asked

for  with  the  avowed  intention  of  sexual  gratification.  If  the  invitation  is  accepted,  the

  satisfaction  of  the  boy’s  desire  eliminates  the  romantic  frame  of  mind,  the  craving  for  the

  unattainable and mysterious. If he is rejected, there is not much room for personal tragedy, for

he is accustomed from childhood to have his sexual impulses thwarted by some girls, and he

  knows that another intrigue cures this type of ill surely and swiftly. (pp. 313–14)


  Thus, we see that where genitality is fully developed there is no tendency

to prolong unhappiness through unrequited love, and we are better able to

understand this tendency, which is typical of our youth. It is the result of an

overestimation  of  the  sexual  object  caused  by  the  prevention  of  final

gratification. Our revered experts in the problems of adolescence ascertain

“statistically”  that  sexual  sentimentality  and  bad  verse  are  “intrinsic  to

puberty.” True! Intrinsic to puberty among our adolescents, who grow up

under conditions that sap their vitality.

  With the Trobrianders and other primitive peoples, insofar as they have

not fallen prey to emerging patriarchy or to white missionaries, things are

different: “The facts described [above] have shown us that, subject to certain

restrictions, everyone has a great deal of freedom and many opportunities for

sexual experience. Not only need no one live with impulses unsatisfied, but

there is also a wide range of choice and opportunity” (p. 236).

  The  woman’s  place  in  sexual  life  is  no  different  from  the  man’s:  “In

matters  of  love  the  Trobriand  woman  does  not  consider  herself  man’s

inferior,  nor  does  she  lag  behind  him  in  initiative  and  self-assertion.  The

ulatile have their counterpart in the katuyausi, amorous expeditions of village

girls to other communities” (p. 269).

  We shall deal with the ulatile later, in a different context. Here let usmerely give the account of the katuyausi:


    The katuyausi party remained seated, nonchalant and detached … The youths and older men

  stand facing them, pursuing their own conversations with apparent unconcern. Then banter and

  jokes begin to pass from one side to the other; boys come nearer the girls and the ceremony of

  choice begins. According to custom, the initiative in pairing off should come from the hosts, and

  each guest has to accept any offer made to her as a matter of etiquette. But, of course, definite

  preferences  between  the  outstanding  individuals  of  each  group  exist  and  are  known.  An

  unimportant boy would not dare interfere with the pleasure of his stronger, older, and more

  influential  comrade,  so  that  in  reality  the  choice  is  largely  based  on  anterior  intrigues  and

  attachments. Each boy then ceremonially offers a small gift to the girl of his choice—a comb, a

  necklet, a nose stick, a bunch of betel-nut. If she accepts the gift she accepts the boy for that

  night as her lover. When the boy knows the girl well he presents the gift himself. If he does not,

or if he feels too shy, he will ask help of an older man, who hands over the offering with the

  words, kam va’otu (va’otu—visiting present, present of inducement), “So-and-so gives it to you;

  you are his sweetheart.” Very rarely does a girl refuse or ignore such a present; if she did, she

  would greatly offend and mortify the man.

    After the boys and girls have thus been allotted in pairs, they all, as a rule, go to some spot in

  the jungle, where they spend the best part of the night chewing, smoking, and singing, each

  couple keeping to themselves. At times a boy and a girl will leave the main group without any

  attention being paid to them. Some of the boys may invite their sweethearts to spend the rest of

  the  night  in  a bukumatula  of  the  village,  but  usually  this  presents  difficulties.  All  the

  arrangements associated with the katuyausi, as well as with the ulatile, are distinguished by

  complete decorum, and by the absence of all orgiastic elements. They are carried out, no doubt,

in a less delicate manner in the southern villages than in the north, but even in the south they

  essentially differ from such orgiastic customs as the kamali, the bi’u, and the custom of the

  yausa. (p. 270–72)


  In addition to the ulatile of the young men and the katuyausi of the young

women there is—not actually in the tribe Malinowski studied, but in the more

southern  and  northern  communities—the  custom  of  the  so-called kayasa,

during which


  the relaxation of all control is complete … Sexual acts would be carried out in public on the

  central  place;  married  people  would  participate  in  the  orgy,  man  or  wife  behaving  without

  restraint,  even  though  within  hail  of  each  other.  This  licence  would  be  carried  so  far  that

  copulation would take place within sight of the luleta (sister, man speaking; brother, woman

  speaking): the person with regard to whom the strictest sexual taboos are always observed …

  The trustworthiness of these statements is confirmed by the fact that I was told several times,  when discussing other forms of kayasa in the north, that all of them were carried out in a much

  more orgiastic manner in the south. Thus at a tug-of-war kayasa in the south, men and women

  would be on opposite sides. The winning side would ceremonially deride the vanquished with

  the typical ululating scream (katugogova), and then assail their prostrate opponents, and the

  sexual act would be carried out in public. On one occasion when I discussed this matter with a

  mixed crowd from the north and the south, both sides categorically confirmed the correctness of

  this statement. (pp. 258–59)


  Why this custom has been lost among the Trobrianders we cannot tell

from  what  Malinowski  says.  Is  it  a  step  in  the  development  of  property

interests in the early stages of patriarchy, or are there other historical reasons?

We do not know. We are told that not very long ago, when the only strangers

who  came  to  the  Trobriand  Islands  were  the  members  of  so-called  Tula

expeditions (trade between the islands), the custom was for the girls from the

village to visit the strangers on the beach after the bartering was over. It was

considered a right, sanctified by custom, that the girls from the village sleep

with the strangers; and the girls’ lovers could not reproach them or show

jealousy.  However  this  custom  may  be  interpreted—as  a  relic  of  raping

incursions of old by other tribes, or as a primeval form of exogamous love

relationships—the important point for our purposes is that the ordered life of

the community was undisturbed, despite the absence of sexual moralism.


                  THE ORGASTIC POTENCY OF THE PRIMITIVES


When we read of institutions such as the ulatile and katuyausi expeditions,

we feel touched by something strange that is not in harmony with culture and

civilization  but,  rather,  excludes  them.  And  our  cultural  fellow  beings

develop an odd curiosity to learn about such institutions: a longing for the

primeval paradisiac state emerges. It can easily be shown, however, that in

fact we are longing not for the ulatile expeditions but for the primitive’s

capacity  for  genital  experience.  There  are  enough ulatile  and katuyausi

expeditions among us. Communal visits of students to brothels; youth hikes

that lead to genital activity; masked balls and masquerades, peasant dances                  5
and “Fensterln,” do not differ in principle from the sexual celebrations of the

primitive  except  in one  point,  but  that  point  is  decisive.  Our  sexual

celebrations end with a hangover because of the unfulfilled expectation of

genital  gratification,  an  expectation  that  is  usually  hidden  from  oneself,

concealed behind hypocrisy and “respectability.” These primitive institutions

have continued into our time, though in different form, but they have lost

their sex-economic value: instead of gratifying, they merely heighten sexual

tension. We also retain the initiation of adolescents, but the original meaning

is completely veiled and turned into its opposite: instead of an initiation into

genital  love  life,  an  initiation  of  intensified  church  influence  for  its

suppression.

    Certainly the genital embrace is no less frequent in our cultural world

than in more primitive areas; promiscuity among our young males is in fact

more pronounced. Unfaithfulness in marriage is more widespread among us

than among “savages,” because of intense moral pressure and disturbances of

genitality. On the one hand, moral hypocrisy seeks to persuade us that we are

distinguished from the “savages” by morality, on which we have a monopoly;

on the other hand, the breakdown of morality among us is denounced by

everyone,  from  the  Pope  down  to  the  fledgling  Nazi  and  the  reactionary

sexologist. Yet the facts are quite plain: primitive people have a full capacity

for the genital embrace; “civilized” man cannot achieve genital gratification

because his sexual structure has been neurotically corroded by the moral

inhibitions  acquired  in  upbringing.  Statistical  samplings  taken  at  random

indicate that, on the average, 90 percent of women and about 60 percent of

men  are  psychically  ill,  sexually  disturbed,  and  incapable  of  genital

gratification. Having reached this conclusion about the basic mechanism of

the disordered sexual economy of the members of our society, we must now

prove that the sexual function of the primitive is undisturbed and that for him

orgastic gratification in the embrace is the rule.

    Malinowski, to his great credit, has given us information about the sexlife of primitives that is not available anywhere else in the literature, which

records only the external forms of the sex act. On the basis of his report, we

can therefore present the following proofs for the fact that Trobriand men and

Trobriand women are orgastically potent:

  First, the Trobrianders are convinced “that white men do not know how to

carry out intercourse effectively” (p. 338), that a white man is not capable of

making a woman reach orgasm. “Indeed, to the native idea, the white man

achieves orgasm far too quickly” (p. 338). Here we have clear confirmation

that the Trobriander knows exactly what the right sort of gratification is, and

that compared with the morally uninhibited primitive, the white man reaches

orgasm  too  soon.  (I  have  elsewhere  designated  this  as  “physiological

ejaculatio praecox,” which is typical of men affected by sexual suppressions.)

That we are not dealing with racial differences is borne out by the fact that

this chronic premature ejaculation, which is not regarded as an illness, can be

cleared up by the removal of the acquired sexual inhibitions. The premature

ejaculation that occurs among the great majority of men in our culture also

involves a considerable reduction of genital gratification, for full gratification

presupposes a prolonged friction for the concentration of the whole of the

                                        6
free libido at the genital apparatus.

    Evidence of the orgastic potency of the Trobriand women is the fact that

the Trobrianders use the same expression for female and male orgasm: both

are called ipipisi momona, which means “the seminal fluid discharges … The

word momona  signifies  both  the  male  and  female  discharge”  (p.  339).

Besides, it is a matter of course that the man waits for the woman to reach

gratification.

  From the personal reports of these primitive people, too, their capacity for

sexual experience is absolutely clear. Here is what one of them says:


      “When I sleep with Dabugera I embrace her, I hug her with my whole body, I rub noses with

  her. We suck each other’s lower lip, so that we are stirred to passion. We suck each other’s

  tongues, we bite each other’s noses, we bite each other’s chins, we bite cheeks and caress the

  armpit and the groin. Then she will say; ‘o my lover, it itches very much … push on again, my  whole  body  melts  with  pleasure  …  do  it  vigorously,  be  quick,  so  that  the  fluids  may

  discharge … tread on again, my body feels so pleasant.’” (p. 341)


  The  reader  is  asked  to  compare  this  knowledge  on  the  part  of  the

primitive with the theories of many of our sexologists, that gratification is not

necessarily part of the nature of women, or that nature has arranged things so

that women are insensitive in the vagina, and thus do not feel pain when

            7
giving  birth—and  other  similar  “scientific”  effusions  of  moralistically

prejudiced brains.

  The majority of our women are incapable of carrying out the particular

rhythmical  pelvic  movements  in  the  embrace  that  lead  up  to  their  own

orgasm  and  heighten  the  gratification  of  the  man,  an  action  practiced  by

prostitutes in a conscious and cold manner, to make the man at least think

that he is being stimulated. To facilitate this movement, the primitive carries

out the embrace in a squatting position and makes fun of the coitus position

of the European, which hinders the woman in her counter-movements.


    The natives regard the squatting position as more advantageous, both because the man is

  freer to move than when kneeling, and because the woman is less hampered in her responsive

  movements … Many a white informant has spoken to me about perhaps the only word in the

  native language which he ever learned, kubilabala (“move on horizontally”), repeated to him

  with some intensity during the sexual act. (pp. 338–39)


  The reports of missionaries and prejudiced ethnologists are of little use in

the critical evaluation of the genitality of the women of primitive peoples.

Unlike  Malinowski,  they  do  not  derive  their  knowledge  from  the  natives

themselves. For example, the complaints of white men that the native women

are difficult to stimulate. Among us, one does not conclude from the sexual

frigidity of women that the men are impotent but that “by nature woman is

sexually indifferent or sexually unexacting”; and from such reports by white

men with a warped genitality, the “ethnologic proof” can easily be derived.

  An  adequate  sexual  education  is  necessary  for  the  development  of

orgastic potency. Among the Trobrianders, as has been said, the body and thepsychic apparatus are trained from a very early age in the natural technique of

producing  pleasure  in  the  embrace,  which  saves  them  having  to  learn  an

artificial  “love”  technique  later.  There  are  other  primitive  peoples  among

whom the teaching of the sex act by women plays a significant role. An

important subject for research would be whether this active instruction by

adults is not in itself a reaction to a damaging of the sexual structure of these

primitive people by the patriarchal suppression of infantile sexuality; whether

it does not signify a helping hand in the first stages of patriarchy, which is

interested in chaste girls but not in the genital disturbance of women.

  This is what Angus says about the ceremony of chensanwali among the

people of Azimba Land, Central Africa, as quoted in Havelock Ellis’s Sex in

Relation to Society:


    At the first sign of menstruation the mother takes the young girl to a grass hut outside the

  village. There, women teach her the facts about sexual intercourse and the different positions in

  which it is carried out. The vagina is enlarged by means of a horn which is inserted and secured

in place by means of bands of bark cloth. When all signs of menstruation have passed the

  women perform a dance in front of the girl. She is placed on the ground in a sitting position,

  while the dancers form a ring around her. No men are allowed to be present. The girl is made to

  go through the mimic performance of sexual intercourse. Through song she is taught about the

  relation between men and women and about all her duties when she becomes a wife. She is also

  instructed that during the time of her menstruation she is unclean, and that during her monthly

  period she must close her vulva with a pad of fibre used for the purpose. She is taught to be

  faithful to her husband and to try to bear children, and she is also taught the various arts and

  methods of making herself seductive and pleasing to her husband, and of thus retaining him in

  her power. The whole matter is looked upon as a matter of course and not as a thing to be

  ashamed of. The women of this tribe are mostly chaste.


  Further:


    In  Abyssinia,  as  well  as  on  the  Zanzibar  coast,  young  girls  are  educated  in  buttock

  movements which increase their charm in coitus. To be ignorant of this so-called Duk-Duk is a

  great disgrace to a girl. Among the Swahili, too, a system of hip movements is cultivated. From

  sixty to eighty young women practice this buttock dance together for some eight hours a day,

  laying aside all clothing, and singing the while. The public are not admitted … At the end of

  three months the training is over, and the girl goes home in festive attire. Similar customs are  said to prevail in the Dutch East Indies and elsewhere.


  This report certainly contains exaggerations, but we need have no doubt

about  the  existence  of  sex  instruction.  The  fact  that  these  women  live

chastely, or in strict marital faithfulness, points to advanced patriarchy, and

our  supposition  that  here  we  are  dealing  with  attempts  to  eliminate  the

disturbed genitality of the women becomes more probable.


                        NO NEUROSES—NO PERVERSIONS


If  the  greater  part  of  a  society  lives  sex-economically,  there  can  be  no

neuroses,  simply  because  these  disorders  arise  from  inhibited  genital  life.

That is the conclusion we must reach if we follow consistently the libido

                                      8
theory and the theory of neuroses.

  A  further  result  of  our  sociological  investigations  into  the  origin  and

effect of sex-negating morality is the discovery that it is this morality that

brings about sexual repression and gives rise to sexual stasis. In so doing, it

turns  everyday  psychic  conflicts  into  neurotic  ones.  Further,  we  conclude

from the psychoanalytic investigation of perversions that, ultimately, they are

the consequence of the deflection of sexual energy from its normal genital

goal.  Through  this  inhibition  of  genitality,  all  pregenital  demands  are

overcharged with energy, so that under certain conditions they emerge as

perversions. The fixation on an infantile instinctual goal, which is regarded

by psychoanalytic theory as the basis of perversions, is itself the result of the

hindering of the natural genital love life of children and adolescents by the

sex-negating sexual order whose executive agents are the parents.

  Since moralistic sex education first enters the history of mankind with the

interest in economic gain and develops along with it, neuroses are a feature of

a society that has a patriarchal organization. Malinowski’s observations and

comparative  investigations  provide  irrefutable  proof  of  these  connections,

while they also convince us of the possibility of self-regulation of sex life bygenital gratification.

  Besides  the  still  predominantly  matriarchal  society  of  the  Trobriands

which  has  been  described,  Malinowski  had  the  opportunity  to  observe  a

society of primitive people on the Amphlett Islands, south of the Trobriand

Islands. These people, Malinowski wrote, are very similar to the Trobrianders

in race, custom, and language but differ from them considerably in social

organization. They have a strict sexual morality with regard to the premarital

genital embrace, which they condemn, and they have no institutions such as

the Trobrianders have to further genital love life. It is significant that their

family life is considerably more restricted. Although still organized along

matriarchal lines, they have a much stronger patriarchal authority, and “this,

combined with the sexual repressiveness, establishes a picture of childhood

more  similar  to  our  own”  (Malinowski: Sex  and  Repression  in  Savage

Society).  Malinowski  writes:  “In  the  Trobriands  though  I  knew  scores  of

natives intimately and had a nodding acquaintance with many more, I could

not name a single man or woman who was hysterical or even neurasthenic.

Nervous tics, compulsory actions or obsessive ideas were not to be found.”

From  time  to  time  one  comes  across  cretinism,  idiocy,  and  speech

impediments,  and  also  occasional  fits  of  anger  and  violence.  All  this  is

attributed by the natives to black magic. The Trobrianders think, however,

that in the Amphlett Islands there is a different kind of “black magic,” which

gives rise to various forms of compulsive actions, compulsive thoughts, and

nervous symptoms:


  .… during my few months’ stay in the Amphletts, my first and strongest impression was that

  this was a community of neurasthenics … Coming from the open, gay, hearty and accessible

  Trobrianders, it was astonishing to find oneself among a community of people distrustful of the

  newcomer, impatient in work, arrogant in their claims, though easily cowed and extremely

  nervous when tackled more energetically. The women ran away as I landed in the villages and

  kept in hiding the whole of my stay … I at once found a number of people affected with

  nervousness.  Even  more  interesting  and  significant  for  our  theory  of  the  relation

between social organization, sex-economy, and neuroses is what Malinowski

says about the Mailu, a community inhabiting the southern coast of New

Guinea, who are already completely organized as a patriarchy: “They have a

pronounced  paternal  authority  in  the  family,  and  a  fairly  strict  code  of

repressive  sexual  morals.  Among  these  natives,  I  had  noted  a  number  of

people  whom  I  had  classed  as  neurasthenics,  and  therefore  useless  as

ethnographic informants” (p. 89). And further:


    It is fully confirmed in the Trobriands that free sex life does not allow any homosexuality to

  form  there.  It  cropped  up  in  the  Trobriands  only  with  the  influence  of  white  man,  more

  especially of white man’s morality. The boys and girls on a Mission Station, penned in separate

  and strictly isolated houses … had to help themselves out as best they could, since that which

  every Trobriander looks upon as his due and right was denied to them. According to very

  careful inquiries made on non-missionary as well as missionary natives, homosexuality is the

  rule among those upon whom white man’s morality has been forced in such an irrational and

  unscientific manner. (p. 90)


  Here, the economic expansion of capitalist economy is already at work,

sending missionaries as a vanguard to prepare the natives with moralism,

alcohol, religion, and other “cultural blessings,” in defense and justification

of which the emotional plague knows how to avail itself of the best and most

gifted researchers. However, we also must say that, of itself, the development

of matriarchal society leads necessarily, though incomparably more slowly

and more gently, to the same type of sexual morality. The missionaries and

other  white  robbers  merely  accelerate  this  process  and  imbue  it  with  the

cruelty of the impotent and avaricious “bearers of culture.”

  Let  us  add  what  Malinowski  reports  regarding  perversions  in  his

publications on the sex life of the Trobrianders: that there is no “unnatural

sexual activity.” Such manifestations as sodomy, homosexuality, fetishism,

exhibitionism, and masturbation are to the natives only miserable substitutes

for the natural genital embrace and therefore bad and worthy only of a fool.

The idea that he could be incapable of satisfying his drives pleasurably in anatural  way  would  be  particularly  offensive  to  a  Trobriander’s  pride.  He

despises perversions as he despises one who eats inferior or impure things

instead of good clean food.


    The following are typical remarks on the subject of perversions: “No man or woman in our

  village does it.” “No one likes to penetrate excrement.” “No one likes a dog better than a

  woman.” “Only a tonagowa (idiot) could do it.” “Only a tonagowa masturbates. It is a great

  shame; we know then that no woman wants to copulate with him; a man who does it, we know,

  cannot get hold of a woman.” In all native statements the unsatisfactory nature of a substitute or

  makeshift is emphasized, and the implication is of poverty as well as of mental and sexual

  deficiency. The natives would also quote instances such as that of Orato’u, the village clown of

  Omarakana, deformed and defective in speech; the several albinos and a few specially ugly

  women;  and  say  that  such  people,  but  not  an  ordinary  man  or  woman,  might  practice  one

  perversion or another … If inversion be defined as a relationship in which detumescence is

  regularly achieved by contact with a body of the same sex, then the male friendships in the

  Trobriands are not homosexual, nor is inversion extensively practiced in the islands. For, as we

  know, the practice is really felt to be bad and unclean because it is associated with excreta, for

  which  the  natives  feel  a  genuine  disgust.  And  while  the  ordinary  caresses  of  affection  are

  approved as between members of the same sex, any erotic caresses, scratching, nibbling at

  eyelashes, or labial contact would be regarded as revolting. (Malinowski: The Sexual Life of

  Savages, pp. 470, 471)


  The Trobriander thus develops a genital pride and a corresponding sense

of  honor  (sex-affirming  ego  ideal)  which  are  an  excellent  aid  to  him  in

evaluating the true nature of perversion. Our sex-negating social atmosphere

has managed to keep the best of our sexologists from recognizing this simple

connection between the disturbance of potency through the social suppression

of natural love life, and perversions as substitute gratifications of genitality.

“In some respects his moral regulations are biologically sounder than our

own, in some more refined and subtle, in some a more efficient safeguard for

marriage and the family” (p. 440).

  Only the first two statements are correct; the genital life of these primitive

people is naturally, sex-economically regulated; on this basis, a high sexual

culture develops. As to the alleged protection of marriage and the family that

this is supposed to entail, however, Malinowski, who in spite of his owninvestigations has not freed himself from the biological interpretation of the

family, gives it as fact.


    Such forms of licence as we find in the Trobriands fit so well into the scheme of individual

  marriage,  the  family,  the  clan,  and  the  social  group—and  they  fulfill  certain  functions  so

  adequately that there remains nothing serious or incomprehensible to explain away by reference

to some hypothetical earlier stage. They exist to-day because they work well side by side with

  marriage and family; nay, for the benefit of marriage and family; and there is no need to assume

  any other causes for their past than those which maintain them at present. (pp. 537–38)


We  shall  show,  by  means  of  Malinowski’s  own  reports,  that  the

“unrestrained,”  biologically  regulated  genital  life  of  the  Trobrianders  is,

nevertheless, at odds with their institutions of marriage and family. And if we

have to take a stand for the “unrestrained,” with no neuroses and perversions,

or for marriage and family, with perversions and neuroses and sexual misery,

there is nothing left for us but to decide in favor of one or the other.

  Whether these complementary perversions of sadism and masochism play

a large part in the sexual life of the natives I am unable to say. The cruel

forms of caress—scratching, biting, spitting—to which a man has to submit

to a greater extent even than the woman, show that, as elements in eroticism,

they are not absent from native love-making. On the other hand, flagellation

as an erotic practice is entirely unknown; and the idea that cruelty, actively

given  or  passively  accepted,  could  lead,  of  itself  alone,  to  pleasant

detumescence is incomprehensible, nay ludicrous, to the natives. I should

say, therefore, that these perversions do not exist in a crystallized form.

  Fellatio  …  is  probably  practiced  in  the  intimacy  of  love-making  …

Receiving my information exclusively from men, I was told that no male

would touch the female genitals in this manner, but, at the same time, I was

assured that penilinctus was extensively practiced. I do not feel convinced,

however, of the truth of this masculine version. The expression, ikanumwasi

kalu momona, “lapping up the sexual discharges,” designates both forms of

fellatio. (p. 475)      Masturbation … is a recognized practice often referred to in jokes. The natives maintain,

  however, that it would be only by an idiot (tonagowa) or one of the unfortunate albinos, or one

  defective in speech; in other words, only by those who cannot obtain favours from women. The

  practice is therefore regarded as undignified and unworthy of a man, but in a rather amused and

  entirely indulgent manner. Exactly the same attitude is adopted towards female masturbation.

    … Exhibitionism is regarded by the natives with genuine contempt and disgust.

    … In the treatment of these deviations of the sexual impulse, it is impossible to draw a rigid

  line between the use of certain practices—as fellatio, passionate and exuberant caresses, interest

in the genitals—when they are used as preliminary and preparatory sexual approaches on the

  one hand, and as definite perversions on the other. The best criterion is whether they function as

a part of courting, leading up to normal copulation, or whether they are sufficient by themselves

for the production of detumescence. It is well to remember in this context that the nervous

  excitability of the natives is much less than ours, and their sexual imagination is relatively very

  sluggish;  that  excitation  and  tumescence  are  usually  achieved  only  by  the  direct  visual,

  olfactory, or tactual stimulus of the sexual organs; and that orgasm, in man or woman, requires

  more  bodily  contact,  erotic  preliminaries,  and,  above  all,  direct  friction  of  the  mucous

  membranes  for  its  production.  It  is,  therefore,  plausible  to  assume  that  preparatory  erotic

  approaches with the natives would have less tendency to pass into autonomous acts, that is to

  develop into perversions, than is the case among nervously more excitable races [p. 475–76] …

  Scenes of frequent occurrence in any public park in Europe, after dark or even before, would

  never be seen in a Trobriand village. [pp. 478–79] … The whole attitude of the Trobriander

  towards sexual excess displays an appreciation of restraint and dignity, and an admiration for

  success; not only for what it gives to a man, but because it means that he is above any need for

  active aggression. The moral command not to violate, solicit, or touch is founded on a strong

  conviction  that  it  is  shameful;  and  shameful  because  real  worth  lies  in  being  coveted,  in

  conquering by charm, by beauty and by magic. (p. 491)


  We see that the moral standards of the Trobrianders are fundamentally

different from ours. Among us these standards are derived from general sex-

negation; the Trobriander derives them from a positive attitude toward genital

sex  life  and  feels  very  clearly  the  morbid  and  defective  character  of

perversions. “When a woman has no men who come to her, and takes the

initiative  and  goes  herself  to  a  man,  we  call  her  a  wanton.”  Malinowski,

rightly, adds: “It is clear that the moral censure incurred by such women is

founded on the shame that attaches to erotic unsuccess” (p. 489). That applies

in  our  society  too,  of  course,  but  this  evaluation  is  submerged,  it  has  no

official standing. The authoritarian view of discipline and moralism sets anegative mark on such behavior, not because lack of success is considered a

disgrace but because sexual desire outside marriage, and in certain strata of

society, within marriage, is so considered. The consequences of these two

different standards, the sex-economic and the moralistic, are not minor: the

former  promotes  the  full  development  of  genital  effectiveness,  physical

beauty,  and  attraction;  the  latter  causes  the  opposite,  the  crippling  of

genitality, the hiding and deforming of the body (cf. the church as the enemy

of female gymnastics).

  Let  us  look  at  another  example  of  the  Trobrianders’  sex-economic

evaluations. He condemns sexual lasciviousness and lewdness, the typical

products of sex suppression. “Inability to master desire, leading to insistent

and aggressive sexuality,” reports Malinowski, “is regarded with contempt

both in man and woman” (p. 488). Here we probably have an inaccuracy of

expression.  We  are  certain  that  the  Trobriander  disapproves  not  of  the

inability  to  control  oneself  but  rather  of  the  disturbed  capacity  for

gratification  which  is  the  pathological  basis  of  sexual  aggression.  That  is

clear from the whole attitude of the Trobriander, who, as we know, can have

intercourse every day and does not know any genital inhibitions.

  At this point we must record an important fact: the neurotic or pervert

who previously was lascivious, sexually aggressive, or insatiable because his

capacity  for  gratification  was  disturbed,  after  treatment  begins  to  show,

insofar as his genitality has been freed from moralistic pressure and he has

progressed  from  sex-negation  to  sex-affirmation,  characteristics  similar  to

those of the Trobriander, who is organized sex-economically from the start—

characteristics such as natural modesty, choice of partner on a sex-economic

basis,  refusal  to  have  intercourse  with  prostitutes  or  to  engage  in

masturbation  or  independent  perverse  acts.  We  can  say  therefore  that  the

removal of moral inhibition allows the sex-economic self-regulation of love

life to develop, whereas sexual moralism produces the exact opposite of what

is intended.  In the following section we shall deal with the changes in the direction of

European and American morality that the development of patriarchy thrusts

like a wedge into this sex-economically regulated society. We shall see that

with  the  advance  of  sexual  moralism,  and  keeping  pace  with  it,  the

characteristic features of our culture take clear shape, especially as regards

the institution of marriage and its economic basis.                                        TWO




    Economic and Sexual Contradictions among the


                                  Trobrianders




          MATRIARCHAL ORGANIZATION AND THE RISE OF PATRIARCHY


The  matriarchal  organization  of  the  Trobrianders  of  northwest  Melanesia,

studied by Malinowski, is particularly well suited to illuminate the obscure

history of the origin of sex-negating morality and its connection with the

beginning of class division.

    Malinowski emphasizes the fact in several places in his report that among

the Trobrianders very strange contradictions appear between the matrilineal

laws of inheritance and clan division and the part the male, either as mother’s

brother or as husband, plays in this society. Let us first set forth the material

from which we shall later draw our conclusions. At this point we merely

anticipate that it will be a question of contradictions between still matriarchal

and  already  beginning  patriarchal  organization.  First,  here  is  what

Malinowski has to say about the economic and social organization of the

Trobrianders, which, he repeatedly points out, and quite rightly, is the basis

                        1
for sexual conditions.

  The  Trobriand  archipelago  lies  to  the  northeast  of  New  Guinea  and

consists of a group of flat coral islands that hem in an extensive lagoon. The

land is very fertile and the lagoons are rich in fish. The inhabitants of the

separate islands trade with each other, just as the people living along the

coast trade with those living in the interior of the islands. The economy isbased on agriculture and fishing. There is a lively bartering of garden produce

for  fish  and  vice  versa.  Production  is  communal,  and  so  is  distribution.

Several times Malinowski speaks of ownership practices, and as an example

he mentions the canoe. His description of conditions governing the ownership

of canoes shows that the economy of the Trobrianders is of a cooperative

character. For each canoe there is one rightful owner. The men who constitute

the crew of the canoe belong, as a rule, to a subclan; they are tied by certain

obligations.  Whenever  the  whole  community  goes  out  fishing,  the  owner

cannot refuse his canoe. We see that, for them, ownership has little to do with

our exclusive ownership of the means of production; that, on the contrary,

property is communal. If the “owner” cannot go out in the canoe himself, he

must relinquish the canoe or send someone in his stead. Each man in a group

of canoes has a specific place and a specific task and must do his part. Every

man, too, receives his fair share of the catch. Malinowski does not mention

anywhere that “ownership” of a canoe entails special privileges. The term toli

(owner) indicates rank only and merely confers a distinction “even when it

does not give a claim to rights of exclusive use” (Sexual Life, p. 24). “Thus

the ownership and use of the canoe consist of a series of definite obligations

and  duties  uniting  a  group  of  people  into  a  working  team”  (Crime  and

Custom, p. 18).

  Both the owner and the other members of a group may give up their rights

to  a  relative  or  friend.  This  often  happens,  but  always  in  return  for

compensation. Malinowski decidedly objects  to the interpretation of these

conditions as communist and says a modern joint-stock company might be

called communist with as much justification. He reports that a definite system

of  division  of  functions  and  of  mutual  obligations  prevails,  based  on  a

binding  sense  of  responsibility  and  on  the  recognition  of  the  need  for

cooperation, along with self-interest and privileges. What Malinowski has to

say  about  canoe  ownership  fits  in  with  Marxist  descriptions  of  primeval

communism. The master of the canoe, who is also the leader of the group,must finance the construction of a new canoe (there is a natural economy)

when the old one can no longer be used, and he has to maintain it in good

condition, with the help of the other members of the canoe group. Thus the

group is always in a state of reciprocal obligation. Each man is entitled to a

specific place and the privileges associated with it. In return, he must perform

his appointed task and he receives a certain title (“master,” “watcher for fish,”

“keeper of the nets,” etc.). In other words, joint ownership, division of labor,

communal  work,  and  the  distribution  of  products  according  to  the  work

performed: primeval communism.

  Two villages usually barter with each other. Part of the catch of fish is

retained;  the  rest  is  exchanged  for  the  surplus  garden  produce  of  another

village. Every fisherman is strictly bound to settle his debt to his opposite

who sells produce, if he has accepted garden produce from him, and vice

versa. Neither partner can refuse; neither can defer it.

  The whole legal system, Malinowski writes, is based on the “symmetry of

all  social  transactions”  (Crime  and  Custom,  p.  25),  on  the  reciprocity  of

services. The exchange, then, engenders a system of sociological ties of an

economic nature, and the principle of reciprocity replaces the social sanctions

of law. Two parties, exchanging services and functions, watch closely the

degree of fulfillment and the fairness of conduct of each other. This well-

assessed give-and-take creates a free-and-easy atmosphere in which to carry

out transactions.

  At  this  point  we  must  break  off  our  description  of  the  economic

background.  We  shall  discuss  the  economic  and  social  structure  in  detail

when we turn specifically to the marriage gift.

  The most important factor in the legal system of the Trobrianders is the

concept that the mother alone forms the child’s body and that the man in no

way contributes to its formation. The child, they say, is of the same substance

as the mother, but it has no bodily connection whatever with the father; the

                                            2
man’s part in procreation is unknown. Consequently, clan division and incesttaboos exist along the mother’s line only. The blood relations on the mother’s

side constitute a clan; and these clans are divided into subclans, which are

distinguished by near or remote blood relationship.


    The sub-clans are at least as important as the clans, for the members of the same sub-clan

  regard themselves as real kindred, claim the same rank, and form the local unit in Trobriand

  society. Each local community is composed of people belonging to one sub-clan, and to one

  sub-clan only, who have joint rights to the village site, to the surrounding garden-lands, and to a

  number of local privileges. Large villages are compounded of several minor local units, but each

  unit has its own compact site within the village and owns a large contiguous area of garden-

  land. (Sexual Life of Savages, p. 495)


  Among the members of the subclan a strict incest taboo exists. For the

clan as a whole the taboo is somewhat milder. The members of a subclan

consider themselves real blood relations; members of other subclans in the

same clan are regarded as blood relations in a superficial, largely figurative

sense. Altogether there are four clans, distinguished according to different

totemistic factors. The natives believe that membership in a clan is innate, as

bodily characteristics are.

  The relationship of the mother’s brother to the children is quite different

from that of their actual father. The mother’s brother is the real head of the

family in a matriarchal society. He is the “guardian” of his sister’s children;

he  teaches  them  magic  rites  and  the  ideals  of  the  clan  when  they  reach

adulthood; he is respected by them and is an example to the adolescents who

will later inherit from him. At the same time, he has to look after his sister

and  he  is  the  one  who  provides  the  marriage  tribute.  The  husband  is  an

esteemed  friend,  who  lovingly  cares  for  his  friend’s  children  as  an  adult

companion  and  playmate.  Obviously,  then,  children  do  not  develop  the

attitude  toward  their  fathers  that  our  children  do  (the  term father,  with

reference to the Trobrianders, must be thought of in a purely social sense).

Trobriander  children  regard  their  father  as  a  friend,  not  as  an  authority.

Authority devolves on the maternal uncle.  This  purely  matriarchal  principle  is  found  side  by  side  with  another,

which, at least in its social features, already deserves to be called patriarchal.

First of all, marriage is patrilocal—i.e., the wife follows her husband to his

village. Only the son of the chief marries “matrilocally,” for which, as we

shall see later, there is a special economic reason. Outright property interests

of men already prevail, just as the actual power to exercise authority rests

with the man, although it derives from the mother’s line. Here the original

matriarchy comes into conflict with incipient patriarchy. Malinowski, it is

true, mentions institutions that give their due to tribal law and its matriarchal

claims,  as  well  as  to  “the  promptings  of  paternal  love,  which  incline  the

father to bestow all possible privileges on his son” (p. 95), but it is clear that

this “fatherly love,” with its rights and claims, is really economic patriarchy

in its first stages. Also, the village community has a chief, and several village

communities have a common superior chief, who enjoys many privileges.

“As woman is debarred from the exercise of power, land ownership, and

many  other  public  privileges,  it  follows  that  she  has  no  place  at  tribal

gatherings and no voice in such public deliberations as are held in connection

with gardening, fishing, hunting, oversea expeditions, war, ceremonial trade,

festivities and dances” (p. 36).

  Here we see such plain signs of patriarchy that we cannot agree with

Malinowski that they are only “promptings of paternal love.” That we are

dealing with advancing patriarchal rule can be clearly derived economically

from the custom of the marriage tribute. But first let us have a closer look at

the chief’s position.


    It is a very remarkable fact in the constitution of the tribe of which we are speaking, that the

  source of power is principally economic, and that the chief is able to carry out many of his

  executive functions and to claim certain of his privileges only because he is the wealthiest man

in the community. A chief is entitled to receive tokens of high respect, to command observance

  and require services; he can ensure the participation of his subjects in war, in any expedition and

in any festival; but he needs to pay heavily for all these things. He has to give great feasts and

  finance all enterprises by feeding the participants and rewarding the chief actors. Power in the

  Trobriands is essentially plutocratic. And a no less remarkable and unexpected feature of this  system of government is that, although the chief needs a large revenue, there is nothing of the

  sort directly attached to his office: no substantial tributes are paid him by the inhabitants as from

  subject to chief. The small annual offerings or tribute in special dainties—the first fish caught,

  vegetable primitiae, special nuts and fruits—are by no means a source of revenue; in fact the

  chief has to repay them at full value. For his real income he has to rely entirely on his annual

  marriage contribution. This, however, in his case, is very large, for he has many wives, and each

of them is far more richly dowered than if she had married a commoner. (pp. 130–31)


  Only the chief is entitled to practice polygamy. Now, ethnologic research

has  two  main  schools  of  thought,  opposed  to  each  other.  One  considers

matriarchal organization the original form of human society, from which, in

the course of economic development, patriarchy and polygamy evolved. The

main supporters of this concept are Morgan and Engels. The other school

takes  the  view  that  the  present-day  organization  of  the  family—i.e.,  the

patriarchal one—evolved in primeval times as an original organization in the

form  of  the  polygamous  primeval  horde  under  the  leadership  of  a  strong

male. Freud was of this opinion. We do not wish to go into the pros and cons

of these two schools and mention them only because among the Trobrianders

we find both forms of organization. We must add, however, that those who

believe  matriarchy  was  the  original  form  of  organization  stress  the

socioeconomic  motivating  force,  whereas  the  supporters  of  the  patriarchy

theory  emphasize  more  the  biological-psychological  responsibility  in  the

development of human society and the family.

  From Malinowski’s investigations it can be clearly demonstrated how the

transition in social, economic, and ideological conditions from mother-right

to father-right  takes  place  among  the  Trobrianders.  We  have  here  an

opportunity to observe a process that we would otherwise have to deduce by

logic  and  through  comparisons  of  wholly  matriarchal  and  patriarchal

organizations.

  Before we trace this process, let us see what the transition consists of:

  1.  The  transition  of  power  from  woman  to  man.  Thereby  the  power

displacement grows vertically, according to rank. The chief, in contrast to thecitizen, has the most power; his wives have the least.

  2. The transition from natural genital love life to the compulsory marriage

bond.

  3.  The  transition  from  sex-affirmation  to  sex-negation,  from  the

affirmation  of  premarital  genital  activity  to  a  demand  for  premarital

asceticism. And finally the most important thing:

  4.  The  growing  division  of  society  into  oppressing  upper  groups  and

oppressed lower groups.

  Thus, we see only the process of transition of power, not its onset. But we

are able to observe from the very first stages the beginning of sex-negation

and  the  division  into  classes.  The  central  mechanism  of  this  process  of

transition is the ritual of the marriage tribute.


    THE MARRIAGE GIFT AS THE DESTROYER OF MATRIARCHAL SOCIETY


                                    The Wedding


The wedding itself is quite unceremonious. When a permanent relationship

has  reached  a  certain  maturity,  the  frequent  appearance  of  the  partners

together in public is sufficient to express their intention to marry. Divorce is

not complicated either. Each partner is entitled to leave the other if he does

not wish to maintain the relationship. Here we are dealing with the loose

“pairing  marriage”  which  was  first  described  by  Morgan  and  which  is  a

preliminary stage to our lasting monogamous marriage. But we shall see that

the man has a much greater interest in the wedding and the continuance of the

marriage than has the woman.


    The formalities of divorce are as simple as those by which marriage is contracted. The

  woman leaves her husband’s house with all her personal belongings, and moves to her mother’s

  hut, or to that of her nearest maternal kinswoman. There she remains, awaiting the course of

  events, and in the meantime enjoying full sexual freedom. Her husband, as likely as not, will try

to get her back. He will send certain friends with “peace offerings” (koluluvi, or lula) for the

  wife and for those with whom she is staying. Sometimes the gifts are rejected at first, and then  the ambassadors are sent again and again. If the woman accepts them, she has to return to her

  husband, divorce is ended and marriage resumed. If she means business, and is determined not

to go back to her wedded life, the presents are never accepted; then the husband has to adjust

  himself as best he may, which means that he begins to look for another girl. The dissolution of

  marriage entails in no case the restitution of any of the inaugural marriage gifts exchanged. (p.

  146)


  As long as the marriage lasts, the marriage bond ties the couple “firmly

and exclusively.” This bond is upheld by law, morality, and custom.

  In marriage, for the first time, we come across moralistic demands and

manifestations, as well as the typical results of compulsory marital morality,

which do not seem so strange to us as does the Trobrianders’ premarital life:

the  bonds  are  firmer,  faithfulness  demanded,  unfaithfulness  punished.

Jealousy and adultery now disturb love life most strongly. “Any such breach

of  marital  fidelity  is  as  severely  condemned  in  the  Trobriands  as  it  is  in

Christian  principle  and  European  law;  indeed  the  most  puritanical  public

opinion among ourselves is not more strict” (p. 115). Does that not sound as

though  compulsory  morality  were  inborn  in  man?  We  shall  not  allow

ourselves to be thus led astray. Comparing this practice with the customs of

the Catholic Church and American puritanism, we shall conclude, rather, that

there are qualitatively similar reasons for each of them.

  To begin with, some characteristic features of the emerging sex-negation

should  be  noted.  No  reference  whatsoever  to  the  sexual  relations  of  the

couple or to their former love life is allowed, and an infringement of this

custom is considered indecent. The first period after the wedding is marked

by abstinence.


    Although there is no definite sexual taboo at this time, the newly wedded couple probably

  think less of love-making during the stage which corresponds to our honeymoon than they have

  done for a long time previously. I have heard this statement volunteered: “We feel ashamed in

  the house of our mother and father. In the bukumatula a man has intercourse with his sweetheart

  before they marry. Afterwards they sleep on the same bunk in the parental house, but they do

  not  take  off  their  garments.”  The  young  couple  suffer  from  the  embarrassment  of  new

  conditions. The earlier nights of marriage are a natural period of abstinence. (p. 110)Whereas, previously, taking meals together was an impossible, even indecent

act, now these common meals become the very symbol of married life by

which the intention to marry, or the fact that marriage has taken place, is

proclaimed. Strict regulations as to decency come into force. The couple must

not display any gesture that might betray a tender relationship between them.

The married woman may not have secret love affairs, which are exactly what

give the youth the best opportunity for sexual relations. It is as though custom

itself knew that what is added to love life through compulsory marriage not

only has nothing to do with genitality but on the contrary is at odds with it.


    There is an interesting and, indeed, startling contrast between the free and easy manner

  which normally obtains between husband and wife, and their rigid propriety in matters of sex,

  their restraint of any gesture which might suggest the tender relation between them. When they

  walk, they never take hands or put their arms about each other in the way, called kaypapa,

  which is permitted to lovers and to friends of the same sex. Walking with a married couple one

  day, I suggested to the man that he might support his wife, who had a sore foot and was limping

  badly. Both smiled and looked on the ground in great embarrassment, evidently abashed by my

  improper suggestion. Ordinarily a married couple walk one behind the other in single file. On

  public and festival occasions they usually separate, the wife joining a group of other women, the

  husband  going  with  the  men.  You  will  never  surprise  an  exchange  of  tender  looks,  loving

  smiles, or amorous banter between a husband and wife in the Trobriands. (pp. 111–12)

    When the pair move on to their own hut, they may or may not share the same bunk; there

  seems to be no rule in this matter. Some of my native authorities specifically informed me that

  married couples always sleep in the same bed at first, but later on they separate and come

  together only for intercourse. I suspect, however, that this is rather a piece of cynical philosophy

  than a statement of accepted usage. (pp. 110–11)


    Interestingly enough, with marriage cynical considerations arise. Further:


    It  must  be  remembered  that  it  is  impossible  to  get  direct  information  from  any  man

  concerning his own conjugal life; for in this matter a very strict etiquette has to be observed. In

  speaking  to  a  husband  the  slightest  allusion  to  this  must  be  avoided.  Nor  is  any  reference

  allowed to their common sexual past, nor to the woman’s previous love adventures with other

  men. It would be an unpardonable breach of etiquette were you to mention, even unwittingly

  and in passing, the good looks of a wife to her husband: the man would walk away and not come

  near you for a long time. The Trobriander’s grossest and most unpardonable form of swearing or

  insult is Kwoy um kwava (copulate with thy wife). It leads to murder, sorcery, or suicide. (p.  111)


  Here we see a code of conduct come into play that strikes one as forced

avoidance. Consider the contradiction between the free genital life before

marriage  and  the  hampered  genitality  in  marriage.  This  allows  no

interpretation  but  that  certain  interests  intervene  here  to  restrict  sexual

freedom in marriage, mobilizing psychic attitudes in their support that are

similar to psychic defense (repression). Malinowski endeavors in his work to

present marriage as generally harmonious. Yet there are tragic accounts of

wives’ suicides and of marital conflict, and there is the “veil” that falls over

the  Trobriand  marriage  situation.  These  betray  the  beginnings  of  all  the

contradictions common among us—i.e., between the sexual interests, which

aim toward a relationship of limited duration, and the social ones, which aim

toward indissolubility.

  Until  marriage,  sexual  life  was  completely  free  and  satisfied;  with

marriage,  severe  inhibitions  of  genitality  occur  and  great  obligations  are

assumed. Malinowski enumerates several reasons for marriage:

  1.  The  Trobriander  enters  into  his  full  social  status  only  when  he  is

married.

  2. Custom imposes the moral obligation of marriage.

  3. “There is, further, the natural inclination of a man past his first youth to

have a house and a household of his own” (p. 81); the services the wife

renders the husband are tempting.

  4. “The woman, who has no economic inducement to marry, and who

gains less in comfort and social status than the man, is mainly influenced by

personal affection and the desire to have children in wedlock” (p. 82).

  Here we are given a number of moral and biological reasons for marrying,

but none of them accounts for the existence of the institution of marriage

itself. Rather, the reasons given reflect psychic interests and moral attitudes

engendered by the social institution of marriage itself—interests and attitudes

by which this institution is rooted in the character structure of the individual.Full social status could be recognized without marriage; the custom itself

requires a sociological explanation. The woman could satisfy her personal

inclinations without marriage, since, apart from marriage, there is the lasting

sexual relationship. And finally, the concern to have children born in wedlock

derives from the concern for the institution of marriage. Therefore, unlike

Malinowski,  we  believe  that  the  economic  interest  of  the  man  cannot  be

regarded as one among several other interests, but that the decisive role, not

only in the marriage contract but in the establishment and preservation of the

institution, must be ascribed to him, for:


      Another very important reason for marriage, from the man’s point of view, is economic

  advantage. Marriage brings with it a considerable yearly tribute in staple food, given to the

  husband by the wife’s family. This obligation is perhaps the most important factor in the whole

  social mechanism of Trobriand society. On it, through the institution of rank and through his

  privilege of polygamy, rests the authority of the chief, and his power to finance all ceremonial

  enterprises and festivities. Thus a man, especially if he be of rank and importance, is compelled

to marry, for, apart from the fact that his economic position is strengthened by the income

  received from his wife’s family, he only obtains his full social status by entering the group of

  tovavaygile. (p. 81)


  Let us consider further the “most important factor in the whole social

mechanism of Trobriand society.” It will provide an answer to quite a few

riddles of this society and also to the problem of the origin of compulsory

sexual morality and the division into classes.


                          The “Only Lawful Marriage”


Through  marriage  the  husband  acquires  economic  claims  on  his  male

relations  by  marriage,  who  “in  exchange  for  their  services,  retain  a  legal

authority over the wife and her children” (p. 129). In view of the process set

in motion by the ritual of the marriage gift, we should say “retain for some

time.” Let us look at all the facts.

  Until her marriage, the girl’s family did not take any interest in her sexual

relationships. She was allowed to do as she pleased. The marriage, however,for  the  girl’s  family  is  “a  matter  of  constant  and  considerable  effort  and

worry,” and is eagerly discussed by her relatives, but they are barred from

exerting any influence on the marriage plans. All interest is focused on the

marriage gift.

  The custom of the marriage gift is very complicated. Gift and countergift,

which to begin with are exchanged by the parents of the marriage candidates,

give way to a yearly tribute from the relatives, especially from the wife’s

brothers to the husband and his family after the wedding, which has to be

paid regularly and for the duration of the marriage. The countergifts, which

are now given by the husband’s family to his wife’s, are acts of courtesy;

they are by no means equivalent to the marriage gifts from the wife’s family.

The marriage gift consists mainly of garden produce. The size of the tribute

varies  according  to  the  rank  of  the  persons  concerned,  but  in  an  average

household it amounts to about half the year’s consumption. Everyone keeps

part of his garden produce for himself; the rest goes to the female relatives

and their husbands. But the marriage gift—as Malinowski emphasizes—“is

the  chief  and  most  ostentatious  product  of  the  garden  work”  (p.  124).

Ideologically, the marriage tribute represents what is “the chief pride of a

Trobriander, i.e., to gain renown as a ‘master gardener.’” To achieve this, he

makes  tremendous  efforts  and  cultivates  the  biggest  possible  piece  of

gardening land. It becomes apparent, Malinowski writes, that


it has very considerable effect not only on the marriage institution itself, but on the whole

  economy and constitution of the tribe. Looked at from the point of view of the recipient, it is

  clear  that  every  man  has  to  guide  his  marital  choice  according  to  his  needs,  and  to  his

  prospective wife’s endowment. For he will be dependent, not only on his own industry and

  capacity, but also on that of his relatives-in-law. A fortune-hunter will lay siege to a girl who is

  the only sister of several brothers—the very existence of whom would at once cool the ardor of

a European with a similar end in view. Only a man who could face destitution with equanimity

  would court a girl who had several sisters but a single brother. As a man’s wife bears sons and

  they grow up, he acquires as it were home-made relatives-in-law—for in a matrilineal society

  children are naturally classed with relatives-in-law—and their first duty is to provide for the

  parental household. Ordinarily the husband receives the main part of his wife’s endowment from

  one relative-in-law only; but in the case of a chief or a man of importance, though one man will  nominally be responsible, many others will co-operate with him to provide a suitable gift. Even

a commoner, however, receives, besides the urigubu from his chief donor, a number of smaller

  gifts named kovisi or taytupeta from his wife’s other relatives. They are all presented at harvest

  time and consist of several baskets of yams and other vegetables. A man also receives from his

    relatives-in-law various services, given as occasion demands. They have to assist him when he

  builds a house or canoe, arranges for a fishing expedition, or takes part in one of the public

  festivals. In illness, they must keep watch over him against sorcerers, or carry him to some other

  place where he hopes to get better. In feuds or in other emergencies he may, given certain

  circumstances, command their services. Finally, after his death, the bulk of mortuary duties will

  fall upon them. Only from time to time has the man to repay the annual services of his relatives-

  in-law by a gift of valuables. (pp. 125–27)


  The taboo that forbids the woman’s brothers, on whom the burden of the

marriage gift falls, to interfere in the sister’s marriage affairs only serves to

cover  up  and  rationalize  the  husband’s  and  his  family’s  actual  material

interests. Briefly, the facts are as follows: Since the young wife’s brother and

all her relatives—the whole maternal clan, in fact—have to provide for the

husband, the common fortune of the wife’s clan is transferred to the husband.

But as he is a brother himself and has on his part to provide for his sisters’

husbands,  the  produce  is  continuously  being  transferred  from  one  clan  to

another. That would be of no consequence in itself, for as the women of the

husband’s clan in turn marry men of the other clan, the marriage gift would

flow back. The matter is complicated, however, by the fact that the clans have

different ranks, and the chief, who belongs to the uppermost clan, has the

right to polygamy. Therefore, the flow of marriage gifts, which otherwise

would be leveled out by intermarriage, is deflected one-sidedly to the chief of

one  clan  and  his  family.  Before  we  come  to  a  full  understanding  of  this

deflection as the beginning of the class division into oppressor and oppressed,

let  us  see,  with  the  help  of  diagrams,  how,  from  the  advantages  and

disadvantages that certain marriages offer, the concept of their “lawfulness”

or “unlawfulness” is derived.

  The only marriage that is considered a “really lawful one” is the so-called

cross-cousin marriage; that is, marriage between the brother’s son and hissister’s daughter. On the basis of Malinowski’s account of the marriage gift,

here are the facts as they affect the chief. First a simple diagram of a cross-

cousin marriage:





















Chief Chief's sister

Chief's Chief's Chief's Chief's
daughter son niece nephew
Figure 1. The “legal” marriage (I) and the “illegal” marriage (II), according to Malinowski. I = cross-

cousin marriage


  From  this  diagram  we  see  that,  in  contradistinction  to  the  “legal”

marriage, a marriage between the chief’s daughter and the chief’s sister’s son

“is viewed with disfavor.” The diagrams following indicate the economic

motives  that  determine  these  concepts—all  of  it  based  on  Malinowski’s

account of the ritual of the marriage gift.

  By following the arrows in the diagram here, we see clearly that only a

cross-cousin marriage makes possible the accumulation of possessions and

garden produce in the hands of the chief. He receives the marriage tribute

from his wives’ brothers, the greater part of which he has to hand on to his

sister’s  husband. If  now  his  niece  marries  his  son,  the  marriage  tribute

returns to him, for both his nephew (sister’s son and heir) and the niece’s

parents—that is, her father, the chief’s brother-in-law—must deliver marriagetribute to his son yearly for as long as the marriage lasts. But since the son

has  to  provide  for  his  mother’s  household,  in  which  of  course  the  father

partakes, he shares his son’s economic rights.
















Chief's wives Shdaty il

195929

Wives! brothers

 

Chief's
s

 
Figure 2. How the cross-cousin marriage benefits the chief by returning to him the marriage tribute he

gives his brother-in-law, thus making possible the accumulation of wealth


  His real legal heir is the sister’s son, to whom his fortune and rank pass

after his death. There is no more than a relation of friendship between father

and son; as father he has the right to procure certain privileges for his son, but

only  during  his  lifetime.  The  chief  has  only  one  way  to  secure  a  lasting

position  in  the  village  for  his  son,  with  full  rights  for  himself  and  his

offspring. There is only one way to insure the son’s lifelong enjoyment of all

gifts, and that is if the chief marries his sister’s daughter to his own son. In

this way the son acquires the right to live in the village and to participate in

tribal affairs and magic if he so wishes. He therefore has the same position

after the chief’s death as during his lifetime, a position he would have had to

                                                                            3
relinquish in favor of the rightful heir, the chief’s sister’s son, had he not

married the chief’s niece.

  As the chief can give his son as many gifts as he likes during his lifetime,

the  son  benefits  greatly  from  this  marriage,  which  secures  to  him  their

permanent possession. The real heir is bound by strict taboo not to interferewith his sisters’ marriage affairs. He has no influence, then, over this event,

which is so detrimental to his interests. When Malinowski writes that through

this an alliance is established between the chief’s son and the rightful heir, the

chief’s nephew, “which frustrates the potential rivalry between them,” we

may presume that this is an error, for by this marriage the rightful heir takes

upon himself the obligation of paying tribute to the chief’s son. Let us read

Malinowski himself:


    The matrilineal principle is maintained by the more rigid rules of tribal law. These rules

  decree absolutely that a child must belong to the family, sub-clan, and clan of its mother. Less

  absolutely but still very strictly, they regulate the membership of a village community and the

  office of magician. They also assign all inheritance of land, privileges and material goods to

  mother-line.  But  here  a  number  of  customs  and  usages  allow,  if  not  an  evasion,  at  least  a

  compromise and modification of tribal law. By these usages, a father can, for his own lifetime,

  grant the right of citizenship in his village to his son and bestow upon him the usufruct of

  canoes,  lands,  ceremonial  privileges,  and  magic.  By  cross-cousin  marriage,  combined  with

  matrilocal residence, he can even secure all these things to his son for life.

    We have to note one more important difference in the transmission of material goods and

  privileges, as from maternal uncle to a nephew on the one hand, and a father to a son on the

  other. A man is obliged to relinquish all his possessions and offices to his younger brother or

  maternal nephew at death. But usually the younger man wants to possess some of these things

  during his senior’s lifetime; and it is customary for a maternal uncle to part with a portion of his

  gardens or some of his magic while he is still living. But in such cases the nephew must pay, and

  the payment is often quite substantial. It is called by the special technical name pokala.

    When a man gives any of these things to his son, on the other hand, he does it of his free

  will, and quite gratuitously. Thus, a maternal nephew, or younger brother, has the right to claim

his share, and always receives it if he gives the first instalment of the pokala. The son relies on

his father’s goodwill, which, as a rule, works very effectively on his behalf, and he receives all

  the gifts for nothing. The man who has the right to the things has to pay for them, while the man

  who receives them without the sanction of tribal law gets them gratis. Of course he has to return

  them, at least in part, after his father’s death; but the use and enjoyment he has had of material

  benefits remain his, while the magic he cannot return.

    The natives explain this anomalous state of things by the father’s partiality to his children,

  which, in its turn, is accounted for by his relation to their mother. The natives say that his free

  gifts to the children are a reward for the free cohabitation which he enjoys with his wife. (pp.

  208–10; Reich’s italics)


  It  results  from  this  that  cross-cousin  marriage  is  not,  as  Malinowskifrequently  emphasizes,  “a  compromise  between  the  two  ill-adjusted

principles of mother-right and father-love” (p. 101), but on the contrary an

institution  that  increasingly  strengthens  father-right.  If  the  chief’s  power

grows continuously, one further step suffices—i.e., the legal transference of

the  right  of  inheritance  from  the  maternal  to  the  paternal  line,  from  the

sister’s  son  to  the  chief’s  own  son—and  father-right  stands  before  us

complete. With the Trobrianders, whose right of inheritance is still organized

on the principle of mother-right, we can see what privileges the chief can

grant his son in his lifetime, and how by cross-cousin marriage he forcibly

achieves the transference of possessions and power to his line.

  Only  once  does  Malinowski  hint  that  patriarchal  principles,  not  mere

paternal  love,  are  asserting  themselves.  That  is  when  he  writes:  “On  the

apparently unpropitious soil of strict matriliny, with its denial of any paternal

bond through procreation and its declaration of the father’s extraneousness to

progeny, there spring up certain beliefs, ideas and customary rules, which

smuggle extreme patrilineal principles into the stronghold of mother-right”

(pp. 203–4).

  Two  additional  diagrams  (p.  60)  will  make  clearer  still  the  fact  that

essentially  it  is  for  economic  reasons  that  marriage  between  the  chief’s

daughter and his sister’s son is deemed “not good” or “not decent.”

  In Figure 3 we assume that the niece marries some other man. In that

case, we see by following the arrow, the chief cannot accumulate anything, as

he hands on his possessions through his sister to his brother-in-law and his

family  and  through  his  nephew,  who  inherits  his  goods,  to  the  unrelated

husband of his niece. Not only does his responsibility for his sister cause him

great expense during his lifetime, but after his death his possessions change

clan because his nephew has to pay the marriage tribute to his (the chief’s)

niece’s husband, who is of a different clan. 
Figure 3. Economic disadvantages for the chief if his niece marries whom she will. (Arrows indicate

the flow of the marriage gift)















 

Chiofs wives Caief's Sister's.
chist er bberd

i f T

Wier bthas

  

&
Chiervson Chifr
k™

 

 
Figure 4. The “bad” marriage (between the chief’s daughter and the chief’s nephew). The fortunes of

the chief’s sons, too, leave the chief’s line


  In Figure 4 we see a situation that is even worse for the chief. In addition

to the transference of his possessions along these two lines, his sons, to whom

he  makes  gifts  during  his  lifetime,  also  enrich  his  nephew  through  his

daughter.  But  the  enriching  of  the  nephew  rather  than  of  the  son  has  no

advantage  whatever  for  him,  because  the  nephew  does  not  contribute

anything to the household. This accounts for the strained relations between

uncle and nephew and the loving relations between father and son to which

Malinowski refers time and again.                  OPPRESSION AND ITS IDEOLOGICAL ANCHORING


We have seen how the institution of the marriage tribute alters the balance of

power  in  favor  of  the  father  and  chief,  how  father-right,  and  with  it  the

patriarchal  polygamous  family,  grows  out  of  the  primeval  matriarchal

organization and the kinship clans. For the chief, possibilities and rights come

as a result of his power (and of his obligations)—e.g., the right of polygamy

and the beginnings of a feudal power to command over his wives’ brothers

and  other  relatives,  who  are  obliged  to  pay  tribute  to  him.  Let  us  read

Malinowski on the chief of Omarakana:


    The headman of Omarakana, and chief of Kiriwina is supreme in rank, power, extent of

  influence  and  renown.  His  tributary  grasp,  now  considerably  restricted  by  white  men  and

  crippled by the disappearance of some villages, used to reach all over the northern half of the

  island and comprise about five dozen communities, villages, or sub-divisions of villages, which

  yielded him up to sixty wives. Each of these brought him in a substantial yearly income in yams.

  Her family had to fill one or two storehouses each year containing roughly five to six tons of

  yams. The chief would receive from 300 to 350 tons of yams per annum. The quantity which he

  disposes of is certainly sufficient to provide enormous feasts, to pay craftsmen for making

  precious ornaments, to finance wars and oversea expeditions, to hire dangerous sorcerers and

  assassins—to do all, in short, which is expected of a person in power. (p. 132)

    Polygamy (vilayawa) is allowed by custom to people of higher rank or to those of great

  importance, such as, for instance, the sorcerers of renown. In certain cases, indeed, a man is

  obliged to have a great number of wives by virtue of his position. This is so with every chief,

  that is to say, every headman of high rank who exercises an over-rule in a more or less extended

  district. In order to wield his power and to fulfil the obligations of his position, he must possess

  wealth, and this in Trobriand social conditions is possible only through plurality of wives. (p.

  130)


  With  a  shifting  of  inheritance  from  the  maternal  to  the  paternal  line,

which  is  inevitable  in  such  a  development,  the  trend  in  society  toward  a

system  of  feudalism  and  slavery  can  no  longer  be  halted.  Once  the

possessions, and with them the power, are concentrated in the chief’s hands

and family, only some progress in the means of production is required to

bring about the situation Marx placed at the beginning of class society. Theincreasing division of labor leads to the production of goods for exchange,

but the means of production are in the hands of the chief and his family, or at

least it is in his power to make them his at any time—a characteristic of the

onset of a definitive division into classes: those who possess the means of

production, and those who do the work. When examining the legal system of

the Trobrianders, we saw this clearly in an embryonic stage, a horizontal and

a  vertical  “relation  of  exploitation”—horizontally,  the  exploitation  of  the

wives’ brothers by the husbands; vertically, a step-like converging of power

in the higher-ranking upper clans, the exploitation of the men by the chief

through the women married to him. Parallel to this relationship of oppression

runs a shifting of power from the maternal to the paternal line.


    If we examine the roundabout methods of native economy more closely, we see that they

  provide  a  powerful  incentive  to  industrial  efficiency.  If  he  worked  just  to  satisfy  his  own

  immediate wants, and had only the spur of directly economic considerations, the native, who has

  no means of capitalizing his surplus, would have no incentive to produce it. The deep-rooted

  motives  of  ambition,  honor,  and  moral  duty,  have  raised  him  to  a  relatively  high  level  of

  efficiency and organization which, at seasons of drought and scarcity, allows him to produce

  just enough to tide over the calamity. (p. 129)


  The  ever-present  real  motive  is  the  primitive  system  of  gain  through

marriage.  Ambition,  honor,  and  moral  duty  are  themselves  results  of  this

relation between brother and sister’s husband, ideological anchorings of the

already oppressive economic system, which is kept alive by the marriage

system and is constantly spreading. We cannot understand why Malinowski,

after what he himself described, comes to the conclusion that the Trobriander

is not driven by economic incentives.

  The mourning rites, which Malinowski describes in detail, also tell us that

this economic relation between the maternal and the paternal clan has already

given  rise  to  the  ideological  germs  of  hatred  between  oppressed  and

oppressor.  On  the  husband’s  death  it  is  not,  as  might  be  expected,  his

kinsmen who are obliged to express extreme grief, but his wife’s relations,especially her brothers. Of the funeral festivities, Malinowski writes:


    The ritual performances at his twice-opened grave and over his buried remains, and all that

is done with his relics, is merely a social game, where the various groupings into which the

  community has re-crystallized at his death play against each other. (p. 149)

    The  kindred  must  also  not  display  any  outward  signs  of  mourning  in  costume  and

  ornamentation, though they need not conceal their grief and may show it by weeping. Here the

  underlying idea is that the maternal kinsmen (veyola) are hit in their own persons; that each one

  suffers because the whole sub-clan to which they belong has been maimed by the loss of one of

its members. “As if a limb were cut off, or a branch lopped from a tree.” Thus, though they need

  not hide their grief, they must not parade it. This abstention from outward mourning extends, not

  only to all the members of the sub-clan beyond the real kinsmen, but to all the members of the

  clan to which the dead man belonged. (p. 150–51)

    Quite different, in the native idea, is the relation of the widow, and of the children and

  relatives-in-law, to the dead and to his corpse. They ought, according to the moral code, to

  suffer and to feel bereaved. But in feeling thus they are not suffering directly; they are not

  grieving for a loss which affects their own sub-clan (dala) and therefore their own persons.

  Their grief is not spontaneous like that of the veyola (maternal kinsmen), but a duty almost

  artificial, springing as it does from acquired obligations. Therefore they must ostentatiously

  express their grief, display it, and bear witness to it by outward signs. If they did not, they would

  offend  the  surviving  members  of  the  dead  man’s  sub-clan.  Thus  an  interesting  situation

  develops, giving rise to a most strange spectacle: a few hours after the death of a notable, the

  village is thronged by people, with their heads shaven, the whole body thickly smeared with

  soot, and howling like demons in despair. And these are the non-kinsmen of the dead man, the

  people not actually bereaved. In contrast to these a number of others are to be seen in their usual

  attire, outwardly calm and behaving as if nothing had happened. These represent the sub-clan

  and clan of the deceased, and are the actually bereaved. Thus by a devious reasoning, tradition

  and custom produce the reverse of what would seem natural and obvious to us or any observer

  from almost any other culture … In this group, and it may be in that of the sons also, an

  observer well acquainted with these natives would be able to distinguish an interesting interplay

of feigned and merely histrionic grief with real and heartfelt sorrow. (pp. 151–52)

    After the second exhumation the body is buried, the wake is over, and the people disperse;

  but the widow, who, during all this time, has not stirred from her husband’s side, nor eaten nor

  drunk nor stopped in her wailing, is not yet released. Instead she moves into a small cage, built

  within her house, where she will remain for months together, observing the strictest taboos. She

  must not leave the place; she may only speak in whispers; she must not touch food or drink with

  her own hands, but wait till they are put into her mouth; she remains closed up in the dark,

  without fresh air or light; her body is thickly smeared over with soot and grease, which will not

be washed off for a long time. She satisfies all the necessities of life indoors, and the excreta

  have to be carried out by her relatives. Thus she lives for months shut up in a low-roofed, stuffy,  pitch-dark space, so small that with outstretched hands she can almost touch the walls on either

  side; it is often filled with people who assist or comfort her, and pervaded by an indescribable

  atmosphere of human exhalations, accumulated bodily filth, stale food, and smoke. Also she is

  under the more or less active control and surveillance of her husband’s matrilineal relatives,

  who  regard  her  mourning  and  its  inherent  privations  as  their  due.  When  the  term  of  her

  widowhood has almost run its course—its length depends upon the status of her husband and

  varies  from  about  six  months  to  two  years—she  is  gradually  released  by  the  dead  man’s

  kinsmen. Food is put into her mouth according to a ritual which gives her permission to eat with

  her own hands. Then, ceremonially, she is allowed to speak; finally she is released from the

  taboo of confinement and, still with appropriate ritual, requested to walk forth. At the ceremony

of  her  complete  release  by  the  female veyola  of  the  dead  man,  the  widow  is  washed  and

  anointed, and dressed in a new gaudy grass skirt in three colours. This makes her marriageable

  again … The corresponding idea, that it is the imperative duty of the widow and her relatives to

  show grief and perform all the mortuary services, emphasizes the strength and the permanence

of marriage bonds as viewed by tradition … In the first place, it is a duty towards the dead and

  towards his sub-clan, a duty strongly enjoined by the code of morals and guarded by public

  opinion, as well as by the kinsmen. “Our tears—they are for the kinsmen of our father to see,”

as one of the mourners simply and directly told me. In the second place, it demonstrates to the

  world at large that the wife and children were really good to the dead and that they took great

  care of him in his illness. Lastly, and this is very important, it allays any suspicion of their

  complicity in his murder by black magic. To understand the last queer motive, one has to realize

  the extreme fear, the ever-vigilant suspicion of sorcery, and the unusual lack of trust in anyone

at all with reference to it. The Trobrianders, in common with all races at their culture level,

  regard every death without exception as an act of sorcery, unless it is caused by suicide or by a

  visible accident, such as poisoning or a spear thrust. It is characteristic of their idea of the bonds

of marriage and fatherhood—which they regard as artificial and untrustworthy under any strain

  —that the principal suspicion of sorcery attaches always to the wife and children. The real

  interest in a man’s welfare, the real affection, the natural innocence of any attempt against him

  are, by the traditional system of ideas, attributed to his maternal kinsmen. His wife and children

  are mere strangers, and custom persists in ignoring any real identity of interest between them.

  (pp. 157–58, 159, 160–61; Reich’s italics)


    Psychoanalytic research has disclosed that a person who displays grief in

an especially conspicuous way is covering up a forbidden repressed hatred.

We see that the Trobrianders are suspicious of each other where they are in a

mutual relation of exploitation, and that they are aware of the artificial nature

of marriage. The wife’s clan had been burdened and, through the death of the

husband, was freed from burdens; therefore, it would have reason to rejoice.The members of the clan had built up hatred, unconsciously or consciously,

for the receiver of the tribute. Now, watched suspiciously by the husband’s

family, they must show that they did not hate him for the burdens they had to

carry but carried them willingly and gladly. The dead man’s kinsmen have no

material obligations to him and so they do not have to drown any hatred by a

compensatory show. They are allowed to mourn in a natural way.

  Here  we  see  moral  customs  arising  directly  out  of  the  production

relationship, but we also recognize another of their functions, the ideological

fixation of the economic situation from which they spring. It is of course

entirely unknown to the Trobrianders that this ideology, which is rooted in

the psychic structures of the suppressed through a change of their instinctual

lives,  affects  the  economic  situation  and  makes  permanent  the  material

suppression of these individuals, preventing their rebellion. This function of

ideology can be expected to exist wherever an ideology corresponds to a

relation of oppression. We shall deal with this question in Part II.

  Since  at  this  stage  in  the  organization  of  society  the  interest  in  the

institution  of  marriage  as  the  central  mechanism  of  oppression  is  already

powerful, the widow has to take upon herself the most terrible privations for

a  long  time;  she  is  watched  suspiciously  by  the  husband’s  relatives,  who

determine  how  long  she  has  to  submit  to  the  mourning  rites.  This  is

understandable when we consider that her genitality was badly restricted by

her husband and that she of necessity hated him, too. Before she can enjoy

full freedom, she must show by suffering that she loved him and had not

practiced black magic on him. Tout comme chez nous.                                        THREE




            The Invasion of Sex-Negative Moralism




                                PREMARITAL CHASTITY


With one exception, the genital love life of the Trobrianders before marriage

not  only  is  completely  free  since  childhood  but  in  addition  is  socially

sanctioned  (see  chapter  1).  The  one  exception  is  those  children  who  are

destined  for  a  cross-cousin  marriage;  social  custom  demands  of  them

premarital  chastity,  and  they  must  refrain  from  the  otherwise  usual  and

eagerly indulged-in genital activities. Malinowski merely records this fact

under  the  heading  “Ceremonies  of  Infant  Betrothal”  without  drawing  any

connection.

  In  my  investigation  of  the  sociological  function  of  the  suppression  of

                                        1
infantile and adolescent sexuality,  connections  arose  from  the  relation  of

private property, the marriage institution, and the demand for asceticism in

youth. These are not only confirmed by Malinowski’s findings, but their very

origin becomes apparent through them. Let me briefly reiterate the results of

my investigation:

  Our youth research maintains, wherever it comes across the problem of

the asceticism of youth, that such asceticism serves the needs of “culture,”

that  culture  and  civilization  are  inconceivable  without  an  ascetic  life  for

youth. It was natural to assume that not culture generally but only a certain

form of culture considers the asceticism of youth, or at least the demand for

it, an integral part of it. But how could the demand for asceticism be fitted

into the sociological process?  At first, it was clear only that for some reason authoritarian society is

interested in the institution of compulsive marriage. It promulgates the social

protection of women, who have no rights, and of children; it establishes and

economically safeguards the right of inheritance along the paternal line, and

in addition it constitutes the backbone of the authoritarian ideological factory,

the  patriarchal  family—that  being  its  political  function  in  a  reactionary

society. This does not explain the demand for asceticism. Why should youth

not live according to their bioenergetic needs, provided that later, in marriage,

they acquiesce to the demands of patriarchy? The answer was suggested by

the  sex-economic  clinic:  persons  who  reach  the  full  development  of  their

genital needs, either through a special stroke of fortune or by a cure, become

incapable of conforming to the monogamous demand—“one partner for life.”

A comparison with the sexually crippled and therefore armored wives who

can tolerate morality, and the relative ease with which sexually crippled men

keep to monogamy, shows that: (1) the impairment of genital sexuality makes

men and women capable of marriage; (2) the full development of genitality

through  a  satisfactory  sex  life  before  marriage  does  not destroy  the

possibility  of  monogamy  of  a  certain  duration,  but  it  does  destroy  the

capacity  for  lifelong  monogamy.  Looked  at  objectively  and  without

subjective rationalizations, the social purpose of the demand for asceticism in

youth and for sexual suppression in early childhood is, therefore, the insuring

of man’s capacity for lifelong compulsory marriage. That is openly expressed

in  many  publications  of  the  church  and  of  undisguisedly  reactionary

moralists.

  We will not go into detail here concerning resulting contradictions in the

marriage institution, but only stress this fact: private power and state power

                                                                            2
have a vested interest in the institution of compulsory marriage; the latter in

turn  requires  for  its  existence  the  strictest  application  of  infantile  and

adolescent asceticism. This—and not, as a badly misinformed sex research

maintains, considerations of “culture”—is the real reason behind the demandfor asceticism. It was not difficult to prove clinically, contrary to the dreary

insistent  reiteration  that  pubertal  genital  embrace  has  a  harmful  effect  on

health, that in practice this demand is not obeyed, and that conflict-laden self-

satisfaction does far more damage than the genital embrace in puberty could

ever do. It is guilt feelings and sexual anxiety that keep the adolescent from

living a genital life. They make him impotent, incapable of gratification, and

therefore,  in  the  end,  unexacting  sexually  insofar  as  his  conscious  life  is

concerned. In the process, about 60 percent of the men and 90 percent of the

women fall ill with nervous and sexual complaints. This is not the intended

result of sexual regulation, of course, but it is inherent in the system, a system

that  finds  its  supporters  among  so  many  sex  researchers.  Until  now,

psychoanalytic youth research, too, has fallen prey to this error, in spite of the

facts, which speak so clearly.

  Statistics on the relationship between marital faithfulness and the time

when the sexual embrace begins, compiled by Barasch in Moscow, brought a

confirmation: of those who started genital sexual life after their twenty-first

year  of  life,  only  17.2  percent  were  unfaithful;  of  those  who  had  genital

sexual  life  between  their  seventeenth  and  twenty-first  year  of  life,  47.6

percent were unfaithful; and finally, among those who had started genital

sexual  life  before  they  were  seventeen,  the  percentage  of  marital

                          3
unfaithfulness was 61.6.

  Morally prejudiced sex research could offer several objections to these

theoretical conclusions and to the statistics. But in the otherwise sexually free

Trobriand society, the demand for infantile and adolescent asceticism sets in

just where the material interests are most obvious; namely, with cross-cousin

marriage. This shows irrefutably the economic background of the demand for

asceticism  and  definitely  invalidates  the  empty  claim  of  cultural

considerations. Similarly, the love life of Trobriand youth refutes the babble

about the genital embrace being harmful to health. Nobody can maintain that

the  Trobrianders  have  not  reached  a  very  high  standard  of  horticulturalsociety and yet they have free adolescent genital love life. Proof that the harm

in  active  pubertal  genitality  springs  from  the  social  obstacles  to  sex  life

(educational sexual crippling, shortage of housing, oppressing parental home,

etc.), from the contradictions between sexual and economic existence and not

from any sort of natural circumstances, has already been given in part in “The

                                4
Fiasco of Sexual Moralism.”

  Let us now return to Malinowski’s report on the break-in of the demand

for  asceticism.  The  mother’s  brother,  who  has  a  material  interest,  always

takes the initiative in bringing about a cross-cousin marriage. As soon as a

son is born to him, he approaches his sister with the request that she destine

her daughter or a daughter’s daughter to be that son’s wife. (The age disparity

should not be more than two or three years.)


    Or the boy’s father may wait, and if within ten years or so a girl is born to his sister, he may

  requisition her as a future daughter-in-law. His sister is not allowed to refuse his application.

  Soon  after  the  preliminary  agreement  has  been  concluded,  the  man  has  to  take  a vaygu’a

  (valuable), a polished axe-blade or shell ornament, and give it to his sister’s husband, the father

  (tama) of the infant bride. “This is the katupwoyna kapo’ula for your child,” he says, and adds

  that it is given “so that she may not sleep with men, nor make katuyausi (licentious escapades),

  nor sleep in the bukumatula (bachelor’s house). She must sleep in her mother’s house only.”

  Shortly after this, three gifts of food are offered by the girl’s family to the boy’s father. They are

  similar in nature to the three initial gifts in ordinary marriage, and are designated by the same

  names: katuvila, pepe’i, and kaykaboma. (pp. 104–5; Reich’s italics)

    But  before  the  two  are  safely  married,  a  somewhat  difficult  course  has  to  be  steered.

  Although nobody seriously expects the young people to be chaste and faithful to each other,

  appearances have to be kept up. A flagrant transgression of the obligation to the betrothed would

be  resented  by  the  offended  party,  and  with  some  exaggeration  called  “adultery.”  It  is

  considered a great shame to the girl if her fiancé openly has a liaison with someone else, and she

  on her side must not make a bukumatula her permanent abode either in the company of her

  betrothed  or  of  anyone  else;  nor  may  she  go  to  other  villages  on  those  avowedly  sexual

  expeditions called katuyausi. Both parties to the betrothal must carry on their amours discreetly

  and sub rosa. This, of course, is neither easy nor pleasant for them, and they tread the straight

  path of superficial decorum only under heavy pressure. The boy knows what he has to lose, so

he is as careful as he can bring himself to be. Also, the father controls his son to some extent,

  and at the same time exercises some authority over his future daughter-in-law, through his status

of maternal uncle. A man who had betrothed his son and niece to each other put the matter thus

to me: “She is afraid that she might die (that is, by sorcery), or that I might hit her.” And, of  course, her mother is very careful and does what she can to conceal and make light of her

  daughter’s delinquencies. (pp. 106–7)


  We  see  that,  with  suppression,  clandestine  activities  set  in;  the  heavy

pressure of the new morality, which so grossly contradicts the otherwise free

sexual  organization,  succeeds  in  making  a  Trobriand  girl,  in  a  society  in

which the beating of children is a disgrace, afraid of being beaten for sexual

transgressions, and the mothers of these girls begin to develop the behavior of

our mothers. To repeat, so that no misunderstanding may arise:


    At the next harvest, the girl’s father brings a vilakuria (substantial contribution of yam food)

to the boy’s parents. This latter fact is interesting, since it is a reversal, on account of the

  anticipated marriage, of what happens in the previous generation. The boy’s father, who is the

  brother of the girl’s mother, has to give a harvest gift year by year to the girl’s parents; and this

at the time of his sister’s marriage he had inaugurated by a gift of vilakuria. Now he receives on

  behalf of his infant son a vilakuria gift from his sister’s husband, who acts as the representative

of his own son or sons, that is the brother or brothers of the future bride, who, later on will

  annually bring substantial harvest offerings to the household, when it becomes such. (p. 105)


  And as the sons also have to provide for their mother’s household, by the

backward flow of the harvest gifts to the point of origin, the circle is closed,

and with that the foundation for sexual suppression is laid. We saw in the first

chapters  how,  in  a  patriarchy,  when  this  suppression  assumes  certain

proportions, it becomes a factor that produces neuroses en masse.


                                CRUEL PUBERTY RITES


Freud has endeavored to make the puberty rites of circumcision and genital

mutilation  among  primitive  peoples  understandable  to  us.  In  his  book

Negereros, Felix Bryk describes the removal of the prepuce of boys and the

excision  of  the  clitoris  and  the  lips  of  the  vulva  among  many  peoples

(Egyptians, Nubians, Abyssinians, Sudanese; also Negro tribes in western

Africa, the Susu, Bambuc, Mandingo, and Masai and Wakussi in east Africa,

and others). According to Krische, these rites, which to him are a sign of thebrutalization of sexuality and anticipated punishment for sexual activity, as

Freud would say, are not characteristic of patriarchal organizations alone. He

says that they were once prevalent among the Kamchadals and have been

found  among  the  matriarchal  Malayans  of  the  East  Indian  archipelago.

According  to  Johann  J.  Bachofen,  this  custom  also  existed  among  the

                                        5
“matriarchally-minded  Egyptians.”  Bryk  writes  about  the  African  Bantu

tribes:


    This excision, which is restricted to the clitoris, puts limits to the wanton activity of the girls.

  From being common property she becomes private property. [The African tribe described here

is wholly patriarchal.] The practical importance lies in the fact that the young convalescent girl

is withdrawn from the approaches of the young men for a prolonged period of time. But the

  primary purpose is that of restraining her wantonness by the extirpation of that organ which is

  most sensitive to the libido sexualis in order in this way to impose upon her monogamy which

  goes against her nature. (Negereros)


  That the genital ceremonies, which as part of the puberty rites include the

mutilation  of  the  genitals  and  the  infliction  of  pain,  represent  patriarchal

society’s  opposition  to  the  genitality  of  youth  is  not  to  be  doubted.  The

question is: What is the socioeconomic meaning of these rites, and where do

they  fit  historically  in  the  development  of  sexual  morality  and  sexual

suppression? It is improbable that the rites date back to primeval times, when

love  life  was  free  and  unrestricted. They  must,  therefore,  have  developed

since.  They  are  virtually  a  characteristic  of  primitive  patriarchal

organizations, and according to Krische, they are also found in matriarchal

societies. How can this be reconciled with the sex-affirmative character of the

latter?

  We must consider two things. First, these rites are not frequent among

matriarchally organized tribes; and the Egyptians, among whom they were

found,  were  only  “matriarchally-minded.”  Second,  we  must  not  imagine,

contrary to history, that mother-right and father-right are clearly separated.

Wherever mother-right passed into father-right, the transition of economicand social institutions and customs took a long time. And if we add that the

sex-economic  function  of  puberty  mutilation  is  to  suppress  adolescent

genitality, we must conclude that this measure arose in the transition period;

that, in the course of the change-over from sex-affirmation to sex-negation, it

established itself as an economically necessary measure. When and in what

connection? We can only guess at this, as the evidence is quite insufficient.

But our guess fits without difficulty into our history of sexual morality and is

in complete accord with what we know of the genital apparatus.

  As long as cross-cousin marriage, which is so important economically,

was not fully developed, and chastity therefore was not yet demanded of the

mass  of  youth,  moral  pressure  was  sufficient.  With  the  spreading  of  the

demand for chastity, sexual rebellion among the youth naturally grew and

strengthened.  If  the  whole  system  of  “lawful”  marriages  was  not  to  be

endangered,  since  premarital  genital  freedom  makes  people  incapable  of

compulsory marriage, the demand for chastity had to assert itself, and stricter

measures became necessary. The excision of the clitoris in girls serves the

purpose  of  forcefully  diminishing  genital  excitability.  Excision  has  then,

ultimately, a compulsory social function which is rooted in custom and habit

and  thus  hidden.  The  operation  adolescents  have  to  undergo  is  not  an

anticipated  punishment  for  genital  activity,  not  a  “revengeful  act”  of  the

adults, but a rational, well-founded measure of the ruling group to suppress

pubertal  genitality,  which  is  disadvantageous  at  this  stage  of  economic

development. Later and more mature patriarchy works in a subtler and more

successful way. It fights infantile sexuality and from the start, through rigid

armoring, impairs the sexual structure in the direction of orgastic impotence,

at the same time unintentionally burdening itself with neuroses, perversions,

and  sexual  crime.  Undoubtedly,  in  these  economic  interests  of  budding

patriarchy lie the historical roots of the castration anxiety Freud discovered in

authoritarian man. And the same motives that at one time laid the foundation

for  man’s  castration  complex  preserve  it  today—viz.,  the  interests  incompulsory  marriage  for  life,  the  executive  agents  of  which  are,  quite

unconsciously, the parents.                                        FOUR




                                              1
Primitive Work-Democracy—Mother-Right; Private


Ownership of the Means of Production—Father-Right




We have seen father-right grow out of mother-right among the Trobrianders,

and we recognized in the ritual marriage gift the basic mechanism of the

transformation  of  the  social  organization.  We  saw  the  primeval  work-

democratic maternal clan becoming more and more dependent economically

on  the  increasingly  patriarchal  chief  and  his  family—this  process  being

covered  up  ideologically.  Are  we  dealing  here  with  a  general  or  at  least

widely  prevalent  type  of  primeval  transformation  into  patriarchy  and  into

class division, or does this apply only to the Trobrianders and a few other

tribes? It is not easy to give a definite answer to this question. No report as

accurate  and  detailed  as  Malinowski’s  has  been  presented.  Either  the

penetrating analysis of the sex life is missing, or there is no attempt to relate

sexual and economic conditions, so that no satisfactory conclusions can be

drawn.  Moreover,  many  ethnologists  believe  in  the  priority  of  patriarchy,

which rules out a historical, developmental viewpoint from the start. Most

reports  do  not  even  indicate  whether  the  tribes  observed  are  organized

according to father-right or mother-right; whether they are work-democratic

or  have  an  organization  based  on  the  private  ownership  of  the  means  of

production. Only a few ethnologists can be mentioned whose investigations

offer an insight into the historical development of primeval society. Among

                        2
these, Lewis Morgan,  in  particular,  followed  by  Engels  in  his  book The

Origin  of  the  Family,  upheld  the  primacy  of  mother-right.  Before  them,          3
Bachaofen  had  already  demonstrated  that  mother-right  generally  was  the

original  form  of  organization,  for  it  represents  real nature-right, whereas

patriarchy presupposes complicated influences of a socio-historical nature.

  The data presented by the opponents of this point of view, the supporters

of the primacy of patriliny, are open to various interpretations; they lack the

coherence  of  the  mother-nature-right  theory  and  prove  nothing,  even  if

father-right is found among very primitive tribes. For this latter finding alone

does not constitute proof of the primary nature of the existing organization.

To take an example, although the pygmies, who are on a very low level, have

                            4
a patriarchal organization, their monogamy and their strictly organized incest

taboo indicate a long historical development. Only a precise investigation of

their folklore and myths could throw light on the question.

  That mother-right should have developed out of a primary patriarchy is

scarcely probable. We must consider that mother-right is characterized by

primeval work-democracy and the most extensive sexual freedom. Father-

right,  on  the  other  hand,  wherever  it  is  encountered,  is  characterized  by

private ownership, enslavement of women, and sexual suppression similar to

our  own.  The  former,  therefore,  is  much  closer  to  the  natural  order.  We

should have to assume improperly that the development occurred in reverse if

we wanted to derive mother-right from father-right, for this would entail the

transformation of a highly complicated organization into a more primitive,

more natural one. Thereby, all historical premises would be invalidated.

  The third possibility, that primary father-right existed side by side with

primary  mother-right,  is  no  more  probable.  Whereas  mother-right  is

understandable from the natural sequence of generations and is in harmony

with the facts of incest and primitive work-democracy in the earliest times,

the assumption of the primacy of father-right requires highly complicated,

forced hypotheses. For this assumption one usually draws upon the strength

of the male, his jealousy of the other, younger or weaker (?) males, and one

derives analogies from animal life, where a “paternal” figure leads the horde.Here, the following difficulties exist: the assumption of jealousy rules out the

irrefutable fact of incest in primeval times and also of economic primeval

work-democracy, for if there is a strong, jealous male in a horde who claims

all females for himself and excludes or drives away the other males, it must

always have been so; nothing else makes sense. The excluded, embattled men

could not cooperate in the primitive economy, for in so doing they would

come into contact with the women; also, they could not share in the produce.

It seems quite impossible, moreover, that the primeval father figure could

fend off any number of equally strong men for any length of time. The only

hypothetical basis for this view is the supposed jealousy of the leader and the

rare  occurrence  of  animal  hordes  (wild  horses,  stags,  monkeys)  in  which

there is a “leader.” These biological proofs, which again and again are taken

from  the  animal  world,  are  insignificant  in  comparison  with  the  well-

established fact that millions of other kinds of animals live a promiscuous sex

life,  with  the  exception  of  occasional  matings  in  the  breeding  season.

Nevertheless,  these  facts  are  cited  again  and  again  to  support  patriarchal

ideology.

  The patriarchal concept of primeval history has also quite logically led to

the assumption that compulsory monogamy (or the present-day privilege of

the man to have several women), jealousy, the suppression of women, etc.,

have a biological foundation. If we add that this concept serves the purpose

of justifying our patriarchal organization and forms part of the basis of fascist

sexual ideology, whereas the matriarchal theory shows that all is subject to

change and also that things can be done differently, we can hardly hesitate in

deciding which concept to make our own.

  The matriarchal theory is particularly helpful in explaining social facts

and processes, whereas the patriarchal concept makes eternal that which is in

fact constantly changing. If, thus, we assume that there was a gradual, general

transition from mother-right to father-right, we find ourselves in harmony

with a whole series of observed facts. We can then dispense with extremeinterpretations and make clear strides in our knowledge of the history of the

forms of genitality and sexual economy.

  In 1927 Krische published a compilation of pertinent ethnologic data on

                                                                                          5
the wide prevalence of mother-right both historically and in the present day.

The  difficult  task  remains  of  demonstrating  in  detail  how  father-right

developed out of mother-right in individual primitive organizations, as we

have demonstrated was the case with the Trobrianders. Mother-right has been

found: (1) among the agricultural Indians of North America—the Missouri

tribes,  the  Iroquois,  the  Hurons,  the  Algonquin  tribes,  the  Muskogee,

Choctaws, and Cherokees, the Natchez, the Pueblos; among the primitive

peoples of South America—the Tupi, the Caribbees and Arawaks; (2) in the

East among the Malayan tribes, the Nicobar and Pelew Islanders, among the

tribes on Formosa; matriarchal, primeval tribes in China and in India (the

Garos, Pani-Kooch, and Kulu); (3) in the ancient cultures—in Athens, Sparta,

Megara, Crete, Lemnos, Lesbos, Samothrace, Elis, Mantinea, Lykea, Kyria;

in Rome; also among the Arabs, the Tibetans, the Celts, the Slavs, etc.

  A fundamental theory on the interrelation of economic primeval work-

democracy and mother-right can be found only in Morgan, who first showed

that  they  were  universally  prevalent  in  primeval  society.  Roheim  made  a

                                                                                          6
study  of  the  tribes  that  have  a  primeval  work-democratic  organization,

without, however, relating their economic systems to their laws of lineage.

The  common  features  are  these:  common  ownership  of  ground  and  huts,

common work and distribution of produce, private ownership only of tools,

ornaments,  clothes,  etc.—as,  for  instance,  among  the  Kulis,  the  Lengua

Indians,  the  Eskimos,  the  primeval  inhabitants  of  Brazil,  the  Bakairi,  the

inhabitants of Australia generally, those of Tasmania; among the Comanches,

the  Sioux  Indians,  the  Indo-Chinese  peoples,  primitives  on  the  Solomon

Islands. Sometimes, however, the hunting grounds of alien tribes are strictly

divided off and trespassing leads to war.

  One  of  Roheim’s  statements  directs  us  to  our  central  problem,  themechanism of the marriage gift. Roheim maintains that among many tribes

property is equivalent to an erotic bond, and as proof he mentions the fact

that in certain ceremonies the wives represent landed property. If it is true

that the marriage gift passes through the wife into the husband’s and his

clan’s  ownership—for  the  clans  concerned  are  exogamous—we  can

understand this ceremony of eroticizing symbolism: property is transferred

by means of sexual interests. Roheim states that among various tribes with

primitive  work-democracy  the  owner’s  relationship  to  his  “property”  has

more a formal and ceremonial than a practical nature. We learn the same

from Malinowski concerning canoe ownership among the Trobrianders.

  Through  these  and  similar  findings  of  ethnologic  investigators,  which

correspond to conditions among the Trobrianders, the marriage gift assumes a

more general significance. It is, as we have seen, the basic mechanism of the

transition  from  mother-right  to  father-right,  from  primeval,  tribal  work-

democracy to the accumulation of wealth in one family, and consequently

from original sex-affirmation to sexual suppression. However, keeping all

this in mind, future research among other tribes and primitive peoples will

have to show how prevalent the custom is and with what frequency it has

transformed matriarchal organizations into patriarchal ones.

  Should  this  transition  be  found  to  apply  generally,  marriage  and  the

marriage gift would emerge as a sociological mechanism which in primeval

society, at the onset of class division, creates a relationship of exploitation in

much  the  same  way  as  the  buying  of  the  commodity  “working  power”

constitutes the mechanism of capitalist accumulation in our society.


  THE MARRIAGE GIFT AS A PRELIMINARY STEP TOWARD MERCHANDISING


If  the  sex-negating  morality  that  replaces  the  original  sex-economic

regulation of love life springs from definite economic interests, we must take

a look at the nature of this economic change. It is twofold. There is, first, an

improvement in production techniques, which leads to greater wealth in thesociety; and second, a division of labor, which is closely tied up with it and

substitutes the production of commodities for production for one’s personal

use.


    The  division  of  labour  in  society,  and  the  corresponding  restriction  of  individuals  to

  particular  occupations,  arises,  like  the  division  of  labour  in  manufacture,  from  contraposed

  starting-points. Within a family, and, after further development, within a tribe, there occurs a

  spontaneous  division  of  labour  in  accordance  with  differences  in  sex  and  age,  a  division

  therefore based on a purely physiological foundation. The material subjected to this division of

  labour  expands  proportionally  with  the  extension  of  the  community,  with  the  increase  of

  population, and above all thanks to conflicts between different tribes and the subjugation of one

  tribe by another. On the other hand … an exchange of products originates at points where

  different  families,  tribes,  or  communities  come  into  contact—for,  in  the  early  stage  of

  civilisation, the independent units that confront one another are not private individuals, but

  families,  tribes,  etc.  Different  communities  discover  in  their  natural  environment  different

  means  of  production  and  different  means  of  subsistence.  Consequently  their  methods  of

  production, modes of life, and products, are different. It is owing to the existence of these

  spontaneously developed differences that, when communities come into contact, there occurs an

  exchange of their several products one for another, so that these products gradually become

  transformed into commodities. Exchange does not create the difference between the spheres of

  production: it brings the differing spheres of production into relation one with another, and thus

  transforms them into more or less interdependent branches of a social collective production.

  Thus the social division of labour originates through exchange between spheres of production

  that are primarily distinct from and independent of one another. But where the physiological

  division of labour is the starting-point, the special organs of a directly interdependent whole

  break away from one another, decompose (the exchange of commodities with alien communities

  giving  the  main  impetus  towards  this  process  of  decomposition),  and  they  then  become

  independent to such an extent that a connexion between the various kinds of work is kept up

  only  by  the  exchange  of  products  as  commodities.  In  the  one  case  what  was  formerly

  independent has become dependent, whereas in the other case what was formerly dependent has
                    7
  become independent.


  We must distinguish, then, between the exchange within the tribe and the

exchange between different communities or tribes. The exchange within the

tribe, which turns the dependent into the independent and vice versa, is found

among the Trobrianders in a very primitive form as an exchange of marriage

gifts of garden produce. It is not possible to tell from Malinowski’s reportwhether different  garden  produce  is  exchanged;  that  is,  whether  this  is

already  an  actual  exchange  of  commodities.  But  it  is  obvious  that  the

Trobriander’s production, partly for his own and his family’s use and partly

—the  greater  part—for  the  marriage  gift,  is  an  embryonic  form  of  the

exchange of commodities. The marriage gift would thus be a preliminary to

merchandise, developing from the most primitive conditions of production,

between the woman’s husband and brother. We shall see later that Marx’s

assumption  that  the  exchange  of  commodities  starts  with  the  meeting  of

different tribes is correct, for the exchange within the tribe between one clan

and another dates back originally to the meeting of two primeval clans. But it

is  clear  and  should  not  be  overlooked  that  we  are  dealing  here  not  with

merchandise  in  the  full  sense  of  the  word  but  with  its  preliminary,  the

marriage gift, which of necessity leads first to the accumulation of wealth in

one family and then to a fully developed exchange of commodities.


      DEVELOPMENT OF THE PATRIARCHAL GREAT-FAMILY AND OF CLASSES


A further effect of the mechanism of the marriage gift is the development of

the patriarchal great-family, such as has been described by Morgan, Engels,

        89
Cunow, Lippert, Müller-Lyer, and others.

  Cunow writes:


    The more distinctly the patriarchal great-family develops, the more strongly it finds itself in

  opposition to the totem community of the clan. The heads of families appropriate one after

  another of the functions which formerly the clan community had the right to exercise. From the

  land held in common by the totem community the landed property of the great-family emerges,

  while at the same time the former claims of the members of the clan to inherit the possessions of

a deceased are increasingly restricted in favor of the members of his household, represented by

  their  head,  the  family  patriarch.  Moreover  the  latter  takes  over  to  an  increasing  extent  the

  judicial functions which formerly were exercised by the totality of the members of the totem.

    On the other hand, the rise of a caste of nobility from the chiefs of the totem, the incipient

  division of the formerly equal members of the clan into rich and poor (according to whether they

  belong  to  rich  or  poor  great-families),  the  development  of  special  professions,  and  the

  introduction of prisoners of war and slaves, which they bought, from foreign tribes, increasingly  lead to the disintegration and finally the breaking up of the constitution of the old consanguine

  community. The old kinship organization which rested on blood relationship is replaced by a

  seignorial or state organization which rests upon class distinctions. (Zur Urgeschichte, p. 45)


  The link between the development of different forms of sexuality and the

economic  premises  conditioning  them  has  been  formulated  for  primeval

society by Engels:


    The  less  work  is  developed  and  the  more  restricted  the  quantity  of  its  products  and

  consequently  also  the  wealth  of  society,  the  more  prevalently  the  social  order  seems  to  be

  dominated by bonds of kinship. But under this structure of society, which is based on bonds of

  kinship,  the  productivity  of  work  increasingly  develops  and  with  it  private  ownership  and

  exchange,  differences  in  wealth  and  the  usefulness  of  foreign  working  power;  and  so  the

  foundation for class conflicts is laid. These new social elements in the course of generations

  strive to adapt the old order of society to the new conditions until at last the incompatibility of

  the two brings about a complete revolution. The old society which is based on bonds of kinship

is broken in the clash of the newly developed social classes; a new society takes its place which

is held together by the state, the subdivisions of which are no longer kinship groups but alliances

  formed  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  same  town  or  village.  In  this  society  the  family  order  is

  completely dominated by the system of ownership and now all those class conflicts and class

  wars freely develop which form the contents of all the history written so far. (The Origin of the

  Family)


  Through the growth of work productivity and the exchange of wealth,

differences in wealth and the usefulness of foreign working power develop at

the same time, and in this way the foundation for class conflicts is laid. The

explanation for all this lies in the economic function of the marriage gift.

  Others have mentioned the shifting of rights in favor of the chief, but

either they make no comment or they offer a hypothetical explanation. Thus,

Müller-Lyer writes that after wealth has increased, the men, mainly traders,

artisans, and technicians, know how to arrange matters so that the property

they  acquire  by  work,  trading,  or  war  becomes  their  private  property.

Because of this and through the introduction of the advantageous custom of

buying the woman from her family, mother-right is undermined by father-

right. The sequence of events was this: Wealth increased and came into thepossession of the man; this led to marriage by purchase, which turned the

woman  into  the  man’s  servant.  Matriliny  gave  way  to  father-right;  the

maternal clan, to the paternal one. Succession in the family took the place of

succession in the clan. This hypothesis does not show how wealth got into the

man’s  hands,  however;  it  does  not  indicate  the  mechanism  behind  the

historical process.

  Morgan writes: “When property began to be created in masses, and the

desire for its transmission to children had changed descent from the female

line to the male, a real foundation for paternal power was for the first time

established.” (Ancient Society, p. 478)

  But  the  desire  to  transmit  property  to  children  itself  requires  an

explanation. The process among the Trobrianders indicates that this desire is

explained by the material interests of the chief or the father, who must obtain

compensation for his tribute to his sister’s husband. He can only do so, as we

learned, through a cross-cousin marriage, which returns the marriage gift to

him. Morgan goes on to say (p. 485) that the increase in property and the

desire to pass it on to one’s children was the motive power that brought about

monogamy. That is quite true, but the desire for inheritance to pass from

father to son itself is a product of the chief’s material ascendancy, which as a

result of his right to polygamy and of cross-cousin marriage, continuously

increases. The enslavement of the lower citizens arises from this ascendancy.

  The  general  increase  in  wealth  can  be  attributed  to  the  steady

improvement of primitive techniques of food production. But this does not

account for the accumulation of wealth in one family and the emergence of

two  classes,  one  growing  poorer  and  poorer  and  the  other  ever  enriching

itself, the maternal clans on the one hand and the chief’s family on the other.

Primitive work-democracy, if for a moment we abstract from it exogamy and

the mechanism of marriage, would have achieved increasing wealth without

the possessions accumulating in the hands of the chief and his family. It is the

transference  of  the  marriage  tribute,  in  the  form  of  produce,  along  thebrother-husband line, and the classification of the clans according to rank,

that leads to this division.

  But  this  does  not  happen  immediately.  It  comes  about  after  several

changes in the means of production, following the introduction of the tribute

mechanism,  which  we  shall  deal  with  later.  Only  when  production  has

reached a certain level do objects for personal use acquire an exchange value;

that is, become merchandise.


    The first step by which a useful object is enabled to become an exchange-value is that it

  should have an existence as something which has not a use-value for its owner; and this happens

  when it forms a superfluous portion of some article that satisfies his immediate wants. Objects

in and by themselves exist apart from man, and are therefore alienable by him. If this alienation

of objects is to be reciprocal, all that is requisite is that human beings shall tacitly confront one

  another as the individual owners of such alienable objects, and shall thus confront one another

as mutually independent persons. (Marx: Capital, pp. 62–63)


  We see among the Trobrianders that all the brothers have to produce a

surplus  over  and  above  what  they  need  for  themselves,  and  the  chief

accumulates the greater part of this surplus. He is the first who begins to

consider himself a private owner and to appear as such, both to the other

members of the tribe and to other chiefs. The exchange of goods with other

tribes contributes greatly to this process: it eventually becomes an important

incentive to the desire to accumulate wealth, which in turn intensifies the

interest in “legal” marriage.


    But  no  such  relation  of  mutual  independence  exists  for  the  members  of  a  primitive

  community, whether this take the form of a patriarchal family, or that of an ancient Indian

  commune, or that of the Inca State of Peru, etc. Commodity exchange begins where community

  life ends; begins at the point of contact between a community and an alien community, or

  between the members of two different communities. (p. 63)


  Here we have a seeming contradiction. Marx started from the supposition

that the communes were originally self-contained primeval communities. But

when we find a very primitive system of exchange within these tribes, we candraw the conclusion that even they are not primeval but have come into being

through the alliance of different primeval tribes. And this is correct. These

tribes  have  a  composite  structure,  and  when  they  were  formed,  the

preliminary to the exchange of commodities, the marriage gift, originated.

This, however, requires ethnologic proof (cf. chapter 6).

  Now we can see that Engels was on the right track when he said that the

origin of class division was the conflict between man and woman. Actually

the woman belongs to the oppressed clan, the man to the oppressing one, and

the marriage gift sets in motion all the processes that enslave the woman and

bring her family, the maternal clan, under the chief’s power. Thus, taken as

groups, the first classes are the maternal and the paternal clan; looked at

vertically, all the maternal clans come together on one side, and the chief’s

family on the other.

  During the period of transition from mother-right to father-right, the man

receives  the  marriage  gift.  Once  patriarchy  is  fully  developed  and  all

privileges and inheritance have passed to the father-son line, the marriage gift

from woman to man loses its meaning and the situation is reversed: a man

who wants to marry a woman now has to buy her from her father with work

or work products. Since now, under patriarchal authority, the woman herself

becomes an object of economic value to her father, the buying of women,

which is typical of the primitive stages of patriarchy, begins, and with it the

marrying of women out of their clans into those of their husbands (enuptio

gentis, among the Romans). The marriage gift of the transition-to-patriarchy

period reemerges on a higher level in later patriarchal society in the form of

the woman’s “dowry.” This change from the buying of the woman to the

buying of the man calls for a special explanation, which we cannot go into

here. The stealing of women in primeval times was not the immediate step

before the buying of women. It goes back rather to a much earlier period of

development characterized by the clash of still endogamous, alien hordes (cf.

chapter 6).                                          FIVE




  Confirmation and Revisions of the Morgan—Engels


                                        Theory




To form a basic notion of the process of development of the Trobrianders, we

earlier  discussed  the  broad  outlines  of  the  three  fundamental  ethnologic

theories of the history of primeval society: (1) father-right develops out of

mother-right;  (2)  mother-right  is  a  late  development  or  is  accidental;  (3)

father-right and mother-right originally exist side by side. We see that the

development  of  the  Trobrianders  fits  in  with  the  concept  of  matriliny  to

father-right, and with that concept only. Now we must go into the Morgan-

Engels theory in detail, for their discoveries about the relationship of mother-

right  and  patriarchy  and  the  development  of  the  family  and  of  private

ownership,  and  their  views  about  these,  are  splendidly  confirmed  by

Malinowski’s investigations (except for a few necessary revisions). Also, as a

result of the discovery of the marriage-gift practice among the Trobrianders

and  its  transforming  economic  effect  on  society,  which  has  been

demonstrated here, it provides a comprehensive concept of primeval history

in the face of which the prevalent, and highly contradictory, theories can

make even less of a stand today than at the time of the promulgation of

Morgan’s  and  Engels’s  theses.  Yet,  just  as  the  psychoanalytic  ethnologist

Roheim confirms economic primeval work-democracy but, for the sake of the

tottering hypothesis of the patriarchal primeval horde, which is upheld at all

costs,  does  not  go  into  its  relationship  to  the  development  of  forms  of

sexuality, so Malinowski overlooks the consequences of his discoveries andthe fact that they confirm Morgan’s.

  On comparing the results of Malinowski’s investigations with Morgan’s

and Engels’s findings, we stumble on a major difficulty (although otherwise

there is surprising conformity): neither Morgan nor Engels describes or even

mentions a marriage gift from the mother’s brother (in the woman’s clan) to

his  sister’s  husband  (in  the  husband’s  family),  except  for  a  few  vague

remarks  that  might  be  interpreted  as  indicating  their  awareness  of  it.  We

recognized in the marriage gift the central economic mechanism of the social

transformation  of  mother-right  into  father-right  among  the  Trobrianders;

moreover, the transition from matriarchy to patriarchy was found by Morgan

to be quite general, and by Engels to be actually analogous, down to the

smallest details, to the process among the Trobrianders. Thus, there are only

two possibilities: either this mechanism applies only to Trobriand society and

is not found elsewhere, or it is generally prevalent but was overlooked. The

question  is  quite  important.  If  the  marriage  gift  as  found  among  the

Trobrianders is the first embryonic social economic relationship setting into

motion the development of classes and of sex-negating morality, this fact is

of no slight significance both for the understanding of primeval history and

for  the  definitive  confirmation  of  the  theory  of  mother-right  and  the

comprehension of natural sex-economy.


              SUMMARY OF THE FINDINGS OF MORGAN AND ENGELS


Let  us  briefly  sum  up  Morgan’s  and  Engels’s  basic  findings  before  we

establish the connection between Malinowski’s and our own premises and

their theory.

  Morgan, who spent the greater part of his life among the Iroquois Indians,

was  the  first  to  discern  the  development  of  the  present-day  family  from

preliminary  stages;  moreover,  he  established  that  primitive  peoples

everywhere were organized in Gentes (i.e., clans) with inheritance originally

along  the  mother-line  (natural  matriliny  or  “mother-right”).  Before  him,Bachofen (in 1861) had derived his theory of original “mother-right” from

Greek and Roman mythology. Bachofen’s theory postulates: (1) Unfettered

sexual  intercourse  in  primeval  times;  so-called  hetaerism.  (2)  Uncertain

paternity; therefore, descent along the female line. (3) Privileged position of

women (gynecocracy). (4) Transition to monogamy through infringement of

an age-old religious commandment that all men have claim to one and the

same woman; the price paid for this infringement was that wives were shared

from time to time, to a limited extent, with other men (sacred prostitution).

  Engels remarks that Bachofen’s derivation of father-right from mother-

right is historically true but incorrect inasmuch as it supposes this transition

to be due to a religious development.

  In  contrast  to  the  English  investigator  J.  F.  McLennan,  who  in  1876

published  his Studies  in  Ancient  History,  in  which  he  distinguishes  two

primeval  forms  of  human  organization,  “exogamous”  and  “endogamous”

tribes, Morgan found the Iroquois organized in endogamous tribes consisting

of exogamous clans. In these matriarchally organized clans, within which

mating  was  forbidden,  Morgan  saw  the  primeval  form  from  which  the

patriarchally  organized  clans  of  the  Romans  and  Greeks  later  developed.

Wherever the clan was found, matriarchal organizations or traces of them

could be found too. This was so among the aborigines of Australia, of whom,

for example, those on Mount Gambier were organized in one tribe consisting

of two clans (kroki and kumite); among the Kamilaori on the Darling River in

New South Wales (originally two, later six clans); among the Iroquois and all

American Indians. McLennan, who had not grasped the difference between

clan  and  tribe,  found  the  clan  organization  among  the  Kalmucks,  the

Circassians, and the Samoyeds; in India among the Warelis, the Magals, the

Munnipuris.  Kovalewski  found  it  among  the  Pschavs,  the  Shefzurs,  the

Svanetes, and other Caucasian peoples; also among the Celts and Teutons

(organized, according to Caesar, gentibus cognationibusque). In Scotland and

Ireland,  clan  organization  existed  until  the  eighteenth  century.  BesidesMorgan, Arthur Wright too found it among the Seneca Iroquois. The Greeks

and  the  Romans,  however,  came  into  history  with  patriarchally  organized

clans (gens, genos), which join into phratries and tribes and only gradually

give  way  to  the  Greek  state  constitution  along  individual  family  lines.

According to Bede, clan organization with female inheritance existed among

the Picts. Engels derives the fora (i.e., gens, clan) among the Lombards and

the Burgundians from faran (i.e., migrate), which is in complete harmony

with  the  nomadic  way  of  life  of  the  primeval  horde  (natural  right  and

kinship).

  If we add all the earlier tribes mentioned, among whom, according to

Roheim,  primeval  work-democracy  has  been  found,  and  consider  that

economic primeval work-democracy in the long run rules out intimate family

organization and is found always with clan organization; if, further, we keep

in mind that exogamy applies always to the whole clan, never to individual

families; then, even if for the moment we disregard other factors, we get a

picture  of  universal  primary  clan  organization,  with  matriliny,  primeval

work-democracy, exogamy in the clan, and endogamy in the tribe, which

supplants the concept of a single family, either monogamous or polygamous,

as the first form of organization.

    According  to  Morgan,  the  development  of  the  family  parallels  the

development from the primeval horde to the maternal clan, to the patriarchal

clan,  to  the  patriarchal  great-family,  and  finally  to  patriarchy  itself.  First

comes  the consanguine  family  (the  parents’  generation,  the  brother-sister

generation  and  their  children,  each  having  genital  satisfaction  with  one

another); then the punaluan family (brothers and sisters excluded from genital

embrace, but several sisters married to several brothers of another clan); then

the pairing  family,  such  as  we  still  find  among  the  Trobrianders  (single

pairing for a limited period of time), and eventually the lasting compulsory

monogamous family of final patriarchy.

  Each of the three stages in the development of mankind distinguished byMorgan—savagery, barbarism, and civilization—corresponds to a different

stage  of  the  family:  consanguine  family,  savagery;  punaluan  and  pairing

families, barbarism; monogamous family, patriarchy and civilization. When

Bachofen writes of incestuous procreation, and Caesar says of the Britons:

“Groups of ten and twelve of them have their wives in common, i.e., mostly

brothers with brothers and parents with children”—“this,” writes Engels, “is

most typical of the Punaluan family.”

  The chief’s polygamy, which some ethnologists place at the beginning of

human development, is thus a feature of late matriarchy already on the way to

becoming patriarchy. This is the stage found among the Trobrianders. It is the

stage of the pairing family.

  Except  for  the  marriage  gift,  the  following  uniform  structure,  which

corresponds fully to that of the Trobrianders, has been found wherever clan

organization has been thoroughly studied:

  1. Two (aborigines of Australia) to eight (Iroquois) clans matriarchally or

patriarchally  (depending  on  the  stage  of  development  of  the  social

organization) united into tribes.

  2. Clan or tribe distinguished by language, custom, and mythology. (Only

rarely is there a difference from tribe to tribe. Among the Trobrianders it is

one clan, one origin, one magic, one garden, one rank, etc.)

  3. Chief’s son excluded from inheritance. Instead, the sister’s son or the

younger brother (as, for example, among the Seneca Indians, according to

Morgan) is the rightful heir to title and possessions.

  4.  The  chief  of  the  tribe  (in  some  places,  of  the  clan)  can,  in  purely

matriarchal  organizations,  be  forced  to  abdicate  and  has  the  right  of

polygamy. The custom of choosing the chief from different clans gradually

gives way to election from one and the same clan, which eventually turns into

the  hereditary  usurpation  of  the  chieftainship  (a  step  toward  patriarchal

power).

  Thus, according to Morgan, the chieftainship among the Iroquois, whileremaining  in  the  same  clan,  passed  to  the  sister’s  son  or  to  the  younger

brother. “The fact that among the patriarchal Greeks,” writes Engels, “the

office of Basileus (military chief) passed as a rule to the son merely proves

that the sons had the probability of being elected successors by people’s vote,

but  on  no  account  does  it  prove  that  there  was  legal  succession  without

popular  vote.”  This,  Engels  remarks,  was,  among  the  Iroquois  and  the

Greeks,  the  first  step  toward  special  noble  families  within  the  clan,  and

among  the  Greeks,  in  addition,  the  first  step  toward  a  future  hereditary

leadership, monarchy. We can follow this process among the Trobrianders

just as Engels described it: the chief tries in every way possible (gifts to his

son during his lifetime, matrilocal marriage for his son, the contracting of a

cross-cousin  marriage)  to  exclude  the  rightful  heir,  to  an  ever-increasing

extent, and to put his own son in his place. The motive for this is the material

advantages the chief himself enjoys through his son’s privileged position; for

the son has to provide for his mother’s household, and the marriage gift the

chief supplies to his sister returns to him in this way.

  First of all, the chief can abdicate, as among the Greeks. He is the leader

but has no real power to rule. This, in the words of Marx, is merely a case of

“military democracy.” But once wealth has accumulated in his family, and

possibilities for exercising power have thereby emerged, then the next step,

the  actual  transition  to  patriarchy  through  father-son  inheritance,  follows:

chief  to  chief’s  son.  Thus,  Engels’s  view  that  father-right  first  favors  the

accumulation of riches in the family through the inheritance of wealth by the

children and then brings about a change in its composition in the direction of

a hereditary nobility and the enslavement of the members of the tribe and

clan  (pp.  103  ff.)  requires  a  correction,  which  we  derive  from  conditions

found among the Trobrianders. The tributary obligation of the members of

the tribe to the chief exists before patriarchy. It is this obligation that leads to

the  accumulation  of  wealth  in  the  chief’s  family  and  through  it  to  the

establishment of patriarchy. The tributary duty consists, on the one hand, ofthe wife’s brother’s marriage gift to her husband, or, more specifically, the

marriage gifts from the chief’s wives’ brothers, from several clans, to the

chief. It also involves the marriage gifts from his sisters’ sons, i.e., his heirs,

to their sisters if the sisters marry his sons in cross-cousin marriage. In this

way  the  one  clan  becomes  subject  to  the  other,  and  all  the  lesser  clans

become subject to the chief’s and his family’s. The marriage gift at this stage

exists, it is true, without official sanctions. If a member of the clan does not

meet his obligations, there is no forcible collection, no punishment; only his

reputation suffers. The paying of tribute is guaranteed solely by custom. It is

in the final stage, in the patriarchy, that legal sanctions appear in the form of

forcible collection. Only then can one speak of enslavement. Thus, Tacitus

speaks of the “slaves” of the Germans, “who pay tribute.” Just as among the

Trobrianders  every  citizen  endeavors  to  give  handsome  marriage  gifts  in

honor of the chief, so the heads of the German clans, the principes, lived

partly on “gifts of honor” from members of the tribe.

  Tacitus stresses the especially intimate relationship, among the Germans,

between the mother’s brother and his nephew. When, for instance, hostages

were demanded, the nephew (sister’s son), who was a member of the clan,

was more highly valued than the son, who was of a different clan. Because

these  conditions  correspond  to  those  found  among  the  Trobrianders,  who

have been studied in such detail, we may conclude the existence of other

institutions, such as the marriage gift or some related practice, not mentioned

by Tacitus. As long as there is no evidence to the contrary, and the clan

organization  of  most  of  the  tribes  studied  in  depth  shows  such  exact

uniformity, this assumption is not only permissible but mandatory.

  If, moreover, we now gather together all the scattered allusions in Morgan

and Engels, as well as in Krische’s study, the assumption that the marriage

gift is not solely a Trobriand institution is amply confirmed.


              EXISTENCE OF THE MARRIAGE GIFT IN CLAN SOCIETYEngels writes of the Irish clan (“sept”) that the land, until clan land became a

domain of the king, was the common property of the clan, “in sofar as it had

not already been transformed by the chiefs into their private demesne.” That

shows  us  a  two-way  process  of  development  toward  patriarchy  and  the

subjugation of the members of the clan: one that is introduced from without,

by foreign tribes or peoples, and another that is operative from within. But

how does the latter originate? Because of the incompleteness of the data, it is

necessary  to  consider  similar  institutions  jointly,  even  if  they  are  found

among different tribes, provided that clan organization and the brother-sister-

sister’s son relationship have been ascertained for all of them. And that is the

case  here.  Among  the  Welsh  Celts,  pairing  marriage  still  existed  in  the

eleventh century as it was found by Malinowski among the Trobrianders in

the twentieth century. When a marriage was dissolved, the woman divided

the goods, and the man chose his part. If the man dissolved the marriage, he

had to return the wife’s dowry to her, along with other goods. If it was the

woman  who  dissolved  the  marriage,  she  received  less.  Among  the

Trobrianders, the payment of the marriage gift ceases upon the severing of a

marriage. Consequently, the man and his family, but not the woman’s, are

interested in preserving the marriage. Now, since among the Celts the woman

brought the dowry—it is not mentioned whether it is a gift made once or a

lasting obligation on her family—we are justified in drawing the conclusion

that the institution of the marriage gift from the woman’s clan to the man’s

existed.  About  the  matriarchally  organized  Nicobar  Islands  in  the  Indian

Ocean, south of the Andamans, Vogel writes, according to Krische: “The

women are very highly respected, and the girls have the right to turn down

unpleasant suitors.” That can only be the case, of course, if it is the woman

who  brings  the  material  advantages  of  marriage  to  the  man.  In  incipient

patriarchy,  where  the  woman  is  bought,  such  a  right  is  no  longer  hers.

Further: “the women enjoy complete freedom, they go about freely like the

men, and as mothers they possess the respect and love of their children.”“Vogel’s report that the girls receive a dowry,” writes Krische, “means, I

suppose, that the young couples are alloted pigs, coconuts and pandanus trees

by  the  mother’s  clan.”  In  other  words,  clearly,  a  marriage  gift  from  the

woman’s clan to the man’s family is customary.

  Ratzel, Grosse, and Cunow’s report on the matriarchal islanders of the

Carolines shows to what a great extent clan organization among the most

different peoples coincides even in details, a fact that allows us to conclude

that the marriage gift exists even if it is not mentioned or is only hinted at. It

is shameful among these people to show that the husband has an intimate

relationship with his wife, just as it is among the Trobrianders. Moreover, as

among the Trobrianders, there exists the institution of the men’s clubhouse,

which  was  given  this  name  by  Ratzel  (Bai,  doubtless  the  same  as  the

Trobrianders’ bukumatula), to which the girls move at maturity; there is also

matriliny.

  Le Bon writes about the Garos of Assam (north of Burma, east India) that

the  women  once  wielded  the  supreme  power  in  each  tribe.  Now  this  is

exercised by the “Laskar,” a man “who is usually chosen from among the

richest  slave-owners  but  who  always  requires  the  women’s  consent  and

remains subject to their advice.” Thus, once again we have a clear transition

to  patriarchy:  rich  chief,  but  still  women’s  voting  power.  According  to

Ratzel, it is customary among the Garos for the bride’s parents to make the

marriage contract. This allows two interpretations: either the bride is bought

by the man, in which case patriarchal bought-marriage already exists; or the

woman’s parents are interested in her marriage, as among the Trobrianders,

because through the marriage they take on the obligation of making gifts to

the husband. In any case, the mechanism of the marriage gift is there, and to

judge from other instances, it is unlikely to diverge essentially from that of

the Trobrianders. But we will not make any conclusive statement about this.

  Very important for our demonstration of the widespread existence of the

practice of the marriage gift is a passage from Engels regarding the Greekclan:


    At  the  time  when  the  Greeks  enter  into  history  they  are  standing  on  the  threshold  of

  civilization; between them and the American tribes which were discussed above there lie two

  very long periods of development … The clan of the Greeks, therefore, is no longer the archaic

  one of the Iroquois, the signs of group-marriage are definitely beginning to disappear. Mother-

  right has given way to father-right. As after the introduction of father-right the fortune of a rich

  heiress would have become her husband’s through the marriage, consequently another clan’s,

  the basis of all clan law was broken through and the girl was not only allowed but in this case

  forced to marry inside the clan in order to preserve the fortune for it. (The Origin of the Family)


That  should  be  clearly  understood:  the  woman  brought  the  dowry  to  the

marriage, and as her husband was of a different clan, at the time of complete

mother-right  the  fortune  was  transferred  from  the  woman’s  clan  to  her

husband’s. Only father-right, having originated through the mechanism of the

marriage gift, has the power to render this process harmless, which would

now of necessity work to its own detriment, as in the past it had worked to its

advantage. This is achieved through infringement of clan exogamy. We have

seen  that,  except  for  this  possibility,  the  custom  develops  among  already

patriarchal tribes for the man to buy the woman, whereby the marriage gift

goes  in  the  reverse  direction  and  once  and  for  all  enslaves  the  woman.

Through marriage, she now brings her father material advantages.


          THE MARRIAGE CLASSES OF THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES


Among the Trobrianders we have found the institution of “legal” marriage in

the  form  of  cross-cousin  marriage,  which  in  this  tribe  is  a  means  of

compensating for the burden of the brother’s (and his clan’s) marriage gift to

his sister’s husband (and his family): his son must marry his niece (sister’s

daughter) so that the marriage gift may at least in part return to him. We have

seen, moreover, that this marriage arrangement, originally a compensation for

the  tribute,  changes  in  the  case  of  the  chief,  who  has  the  privilege  of

polygamy,  into  a  mechanism  for  the  accumulation  of  property  in  hisembryonic  patriarchal  family.  We  are  no  longer  dealing  with  a  mere

mechanism of alleviation for him insofar as he is a brother, but with more

than that, with a mechanism of enrichment insofar as he is a father and an

incipient patriarch. We are now justified, when we find cross-cousin marriage

in any other tribe, in concluding that here, too, it first fulfilled the function of

alleviating tribute and later changed into a mechanism for enrichment.

  Cross-cousin marriage can be inferred in its entirety from the marriage

classes of the Kamilaori as described by Morgan in Ancient Society. After a

great deal of effort, we were able to establish that the strange and complicated

system of the Australian marriage classes is simply a manifestation of the

universal  institution  of  “legal”  cross-cousin  marriage.  Once  this  has  been

done, there is no longer any doubt—considering the fact that in everything

else  the  organization  of  the  Australians  is  quite  similar  to  that  of  the

Trobrianders—that the marriage gift also exists from clan to clan in some

form or other. Otherwise, the whole complicated structure of marriage classes

makes no sense.

  First, let us repeat Morgan’s description. The Kamilaori are divided into

six clans, which, for marriage purposes are split into two sections:


I:(1) Goanna (Duli); (2) Kangaroo (Murriira); (3) Opossum (Mute)

II:(4) Emu (Dinoun); (5) Bandicoot (Bilba); (6) Blacksnake (Nurai)


Originally, the first three clans were not allowed to intermarry, because they

were subdivisions of one original clan. In the beginning, then, there were

only  two  clans.  The  later  groups  should  not  be  called  clans  but  rather

phratries, on the model of the Greek groups. In addition to the division into

two primeval clans, which we find split up into six daughter clans, there is a

division into marriage classes. Each of the primeval clans consists of four

marriage classes. There are eight in all, divided by sex—four male and four

female:MALEFEMALE

1. Ippai1. Ippata

2. Kumbo2. Buta

3. Murri3. Mata

4. Kubbi4. Kapota


  Each  male  and  each  female  marriage  class  consists  of  the  respective

brothers and sisters, now separated. Consequently, Ippai and Ippata, Kumbo

and Buta, Murri and Mata, Kubbi and Kapota are brothers and sisters and

must not marry each other. But also, apart from this, they may not marry

whom they will, which completely contradicts clan organization, according to

which anyone from clan A would be allowed to marry anyone from clan B.

Marriages are only permitted between:


  Ippai and Kapota

  Kumbo and Mata

  Murri and Buta

  Kubbi and Ippata


  Thus,  three  quarters  are  excluded  (a  quarter  of  whom  are  brothers  or

sisters), and the choice can be made from among one fourth only. The system

becomes  even  more  complicated:  whereas,  since  this  is  a  matriliny,  the

children remain in the mother’s clan, they pass, within this clan, to a different

marriage class from their mother’s, i.e.:MALE
Ippai
‘marries

Kumbo
marries

Murri
marties

Kubbi
marties

FEMALE

Kapota

Mata

Buta

Ippata

Their
children are

Their
children are

Their
children are

Their
children are

MALE  FEMALE

Murri and Mata

Kubbi and Kapota

Ippai and Ippata

Kumbo and Buta
In following the parentage, we find that in the maternal line a Kapota is

always the mother of a Mata and a Mata in turn the mother of a Kapota.

Similarly, an Ippata is the mother of a Buta and a Buta in turn the mother of

an Ippata. The same applies to the male classes.

  The Kamilaori derive the two original clans from two primeval mothers.

The connection of each child with a certain clan is also evident from the

marriage law. Classes and primeval clans have the following relation:


  Primeval clan I (Goanna, Kangaroo, Opossum), a primeval mother

  Classes: Murri, Mata, Kubbi, and Kapota

  Primeval clan II (Emu, Bandicoot, Blacksnake), a primeval mother

  Classes: Kumbo, Buta, Ippai, and Ippata


  Thus, the clan is preserved through the fact that it includes all the children

of its female members. Morgan writes that very probably there were only two

male and two female classes originally, which later were split into eight. We

shall  indicate  our  agreement  with  this  thesis  when  we  introduce  our

hypothesis of the origin of exogamy. But from the fact that the three subclans

contain  the  same  marriage  classes,  it  follows  that  originally  they  were

homogeneous  clans.  The  subdivision  into  eight  classes  must  have

significance,  as  must  the  whole  marriage  order,  which  Morgan  merely

describes, giving no explanation. He only remarks that the class system is

older than clan division, the second being a later development that chokes offthe  former.  This  explanation  of  Morgan’s  follows  of  necessity  from  his

presupposition that the clans and the marriage taboo within the clan arose as

the  result  of  “natural  selection.”  We  can  demonstrate  that  it  was  purely

socioeconomic factors that led to the subdivision into marriage classes, just

as  other  circumstances  conditioned  the  division  into  four  classes.  The

division into eight marriage classes, and therefore the further restriction of

marriage to one fourth of the tribal members of the opposite sex, occurred to

make  possible  the  economically  compensatory  institution  of  cross-cousin

marriage. We shall see that the practice it was to alleviate—the payment of

tribute—resulted from the division into four classes.

  If we examine parentage and marriage order closely, it becomes evident

that the sons of the brothers always marry the daughters of the sisters. The

daughters of the brothers never marry the sons of the sisters. There is no other

possibility. This, then, is a perfect system of cross-cousin marriage, and it can

have only one function, as it has with the Trobrianders—the alleviation of

tribute. First let us verify this statement by means of a table derived from

Morgan’s descriptions.

  If we now look at the different classes, we see that a Buta woman is not

just the daughter of an Ippata; she is also the niece (sister’s daughter) of an

Ippai and can marry only a Murri. The Murri would be the group-son of her

mother’s  brother.  We  also  see  that  a  Murri  belongs  to  one  of  the  three

subclans of primeval clan I, whereas his cousin, a Buta, belongs to primeval

clan II, as do her mother and her mother’s brother. Similarly an Ippata, who

marries  her  cousin  (mother’s  brother’s  son),  a  Kubi—together  with  her

mother, a Buta, and her mother’s brother, a Kumbo—all belong to the same

primeval clan. The same applies to every Kapota and every Mata woman.

Whatever marriage class we pick out and examine in its marriage relation to

another, it is always the brother’s son who marries the sister’s daughter. In

this class system any marriage other than cross-cousin marriage is out of the

question.  We  shall  discuss  the  economic  implications  in  the  followingchapter.


































Bothent sors Sisers” davghiers

o

N

 
Figure 5. The Australian marriage classes as a system of cross cousin marriage


  Since  the  marriage  gift  has  such  a  significant  function,  we  are  very

interested in its origin. The period of loose marital bonds—that is, of pairing

marriage—seems clearly to coincide with the establishment of the institution

of the marriage gift. But pairing marriage did not exist from the beginning,

and the marriage gift must have developed from more primitive forms, from

some sort of payment of tribute. But who paid this tribute and to whom?What could so deeply have affected the primal incestuous horde—in which

paternity was not known because matings were unregulated and in particular

because the role of the father was unknown (as it is unknown even today

among  the  Trobrianders)—that  it  instituted  a  practice  with  such  serious

consequences? The payment of tribute, from clan to clan or from tribe to

tribe,  is  found  among  the  Trobrianders  and  among  many  other  peoples.

Within  one  clan,  in  a  primevally  work-democratic  society,  a  tribute  is

senseless, whatever its form, and it does not occur. We find it, however, in

the form of the marriage gift from clan to clan in one tribe, making one clan

tributary to the others, and eventually all the clans tributary to the chief’s

family. What is the meaning of this? For the present we know no more than

that this economic institution is related to the exogamy of the clans. To obtain

a deeper insight, we must look into the origin of clan exogamy; in other

words, the incest taboo among the descendants of the same primeval mother.

We would not undertake such a study were it not for certain facts that at first

sight seem unrelated but on closer observation appear to fit together.                                          SIX




  The Origin of Clan Division and the Incest Taboo




                            RELICS OF PRIMEVAL TIMES


It is recognized by most students of the primeval history of mankind that clan

division and the incest taboo within the clan are central problems of primeval

development. On this subject a number of more or less credible hypotheses

have been proposed, among which Morgan’s and Engels’s, and Freud’s, will

engage  our  close  attention  later.  They  are  generally  characterized  by  the

attempt  to  derive  primeval  conditions  either  from  the  supposed  economic

conditions of remote times or from the nature of human instinctual life. Freud

was the first to recognize in the incest taboos the reaction to original incest

wishes.  From  our present  knowledge  of  the  Trobrianders,  thanks  to

Malinowski’s accurate research, a hypothesis can be deduced that solves a

series  of  problems  without  doing  violence  to  the  data.  We  would  have

refrained  from  proposing  a  new  hypothesis  had  not  some  present-day

institutions among the Trobrianders that seem relevant struck us as being

relics of primeval times, making possible a reconstruction.

  A hypothesis that is to explain plausibly the origin of the incest taboo

must be sociobiological—i.e., it must show that the taboo arose of necessity

out of the people’s way of life; it must provide a solution to a number of

problems; and it must not be at variance with the actual organization but must

reproduce in the essentials its preliminary historical stage. The basic elements

of the hypothesis, therefore, must be found in the present situation.

  Our assumption can claim to be universally valid only if it provides a keyto the problems discussed here, as well as to others.

  We  derive  our  hypothesis  from  the  following  facts  about  the

Trobrianders:

  1. The wife’s brother is her actual supporter and the “guardian” of her

children. Only the genital relationship is lacking for him to be her husband.

He belongs to the same clan as she does (this is so wherever there is clan

organization).

  2. He pays marriage tribute to the husband, who is a stranger and who has

a genital relationship with the sister.

  3. The husband belongs to a different clan and derives only advantage

from the sexual bond with the sister of the supporting brother.

  4. Trobriand society is divided into four clans, which are exogamous. The

clans are of different rank; there are nobler and lesser clans.

  5. Legend has it that the primeval mother emerged from a hole and gave

birth to two children, a brother and a sister, who lived together in incest. The

myth on the origin of the clans is as follows:


    It is the rule in Trobriand mythology that, originally, only one couple emerged from each

  such “hole,” a brother and a sister; she to start the lineage, he to protect her and look after her

  affairs.  Thus  the  rule  is: one clan, one  village, one  portion  of  garden-land, one  system  of

  gardening and fishing magic, one pair of brother and sister ancestors, one rank and one pedigree.

  (Malinowski: The Sexual Life of Savages, pp. 497–98)


Legend hands down a picture of a society springing from a brother-sister pair

and organized in a primeval work-democracy, with incest. This group is later

the clan. Now, the brother, who is even today the real husband of the sister

except for the genital relationship, must enter into a relationship of economic

obligation to her stranger-husband.

  What brought about this double obligation, the renunciation of genitality

with the sister and the tribute to her husband? Let us now fit in the first piece

of our hypothesis—that the clans, contrary to general belief, did not originate

from a division of primeval society through exogamy but, conversely, thatone clan, the originally self-contained primeval horde, imposed the incest

taboo  on  the  other  clan,  which  was  equally  self-contained,  or  rather

prohibited  marriage  within  its  own  group.  Accordingly, the  clans,  later

joined together, were originally separate primeval hordes. Why did one clan

impose this prohibition on the other?

  Let us further consider that the primeval hordes were not settled in one

place but were nomadic hunters. Particularly after some natural catastrophe,

the young men had to go off hunting and live in abstinence, wandering about

for weeks, perhaps for months. When such a horde of hunting men came

upon a stranger tribe living at peace, two things were bound to happen. The

intruders  would  seize  what  the  peaceful  tribe  had  gathered,  presumably

killing a number of tribe members in the fighting; and they would steal the

women, the men’s sisters, in order to embrace them, to which they were

especially incited by their abstinence. If they emerged victorious, it was easy

to enslave the vanquished men, to prohibit them the genital embrace with

their own sister-wives, and to bind them in some way to work for them.

  In the course of hundreds and thousands of years, as man increased in

number and migrations became more frequent, such catastrophes were bound

to  recur  more  and  more  often,  so  that  the  stealing  of  women  and  the

imposition of tribute on their brother-husbands became a custom. In these

clashes between primeval hordes the advantage could not remain with the

victors. The vanquished would take revenge on their attackers when they had

retreated (later, clan vendettas), or the victorious horde might be attacked by

a third horde, with similar consequences. These incidents must have brought

such  uncertainty  to  the  originally  peaceful  organization  of  the  primeval

hordes that mutual fear led to their alliance into tribes, retaining matriliny

(the clan division of the tribes) and giving a peaceful sanction to what had

earlier been forced—i.e., to the introduction of reciprocal marriage between

two primeval hordes. The original prohibition from outside, by the victors, of

the sexual embrace within one’s own clan became, in the course of time, theestablished custom in the clan. But the earlier arrangement, that the male

relatives of the women, i.e., their once brother-husbands, provide for their

economic needs, was retained, all the more so as it brought advantages to the

victorious clan.

  With  the  alliance  of  the  hordes  (clans)  into  tribes  and  with  the

introduction of reciprocal marriage (exogamy) and the continuation of the

manner of providing for the women within the framework of their own clan,

peace and quiet could return to the organization. As the economic provision

rested on reciprocity, no other consequences would have been forthcoming

had  not  one  clan  inevitably  been  the  original  victor  and  the  other  the

vanquished.  Under  the  circumstances,  the  victorious  clan  would  have  to

maintain  its  position  in  some  way.  It  was  justified  in  considering  itself

“superior” and in deriving certain economic advantages from this. It could,

for example, determine that its elder would become “chief” or military leader

of both clans (tribal chief) and enjoy certain privileges, such as receiving

additional marriage gifts or tribute. Thus, the chief’s claim to polygamy need

not have existed from the beginning. On the contrary, it could be a result of

his  economic  ascendancy,  which  automatically  arose  from  the  greater

quantity  of  marriage  gifts  received  by  him.  Thus,  the  institution  of  a

chieftainship and the division of the clans according to rank can easily be

derived from the relationship of victor to vanquished.

  Let us summarize:

  1. Two primeval hordes, living peacefully at some distance from each

other, organized according to natural law, in a primeval work-democracy, and

in incest.

  2. Economic or natural reasons (change of hunting grounds) cause them

to come into conflict.

  3. The men of one primeval horde, while wandering and, of necessity,

living  in  abstinence,  attack  the  other,  resulting  in  the  prohibition  of  the

genital embrace in the clan attacked (external, ultimately economic, origin ofincest taboo) and imposition of tribute on the former brother-husbands.

  4. Retaliation by the brothers, mutual destruction, primeval catastrophe,

introducing violence in hitherto peaceful primeval society and mutual fear

between the men of the hostile hordes.

  5. Reestablishment of peace through alliance and regularization of status

quo “by contract”—i.e., institution of reciprocal marriage (exogamy), with

maintenance of the economic advantages resulting from the lasting sexual

unions (later marriage institution).

  6. A token of the victory of the one clan over the other is retained in that

the clans are of different rank and have a common chief. This becomes the

primary impulse in the development from natural right through mother-right

                1
to father-right.

  Among the Trobrianders, we see the primeval hordes peacefully united in

tribes  but  split  into  exogamous  clans.  There  is  payment  of  tribute  by  the

brothers to the husbands; polygamy of the chief, as a late result of his original

ascendancy; and primary matriliny side by side with incipient father-right.

We have already seen how class division and negative sexual morality derive

from these conditions.

  Let us now test the validity of our hypothesis against further data and

evidence  taken  from  other  peoples,  before  discussing  objections  and

analyzing the Morgan-Engels and Freud hypotheses of the origin of the incest

taboo.

  We have assumed that the endogamous tribes of primeval peoples, which

consist of clans or gentes, in America as well as in Europe, in Australia as

well as in India and Africa, did not originate through division from within but

through  the  union  of  alien, originally  hostile  primeval  hordes,  which

constitute  the  later  clans.  We  inferred  this  from  present-day  conditions

among the Trobrianders and derived the rest from it.

  1. Morgan and Engels concluded from the stone implements of the earlier

Stone Age, which excavations have uncovered in all continents, that in thesavage  period  of  mankind,  when  fishing  began  and  fire  was  discovered,

migrations were universal. Morgan postulated the pure consanguine family

living in incest. Hunting and cannibalism characterize this stage, which is that

of a great many Australian and Polynesian peoples today. But that is not as

significant as Morgan’s statement that the clan consists of a solid circle of kin

in  the  female  line,  distinguished  from  other  clans  of  the  same  tribe  by

common  institutions  of  its  own  of  a  social  and  religious  nature.  Engels,

working from his concept of the splintering of the original clans into a tribal

organization, assumed that it was a case of “consolidation” through special

customs of the clans. Is it not more probable that the fact that the clans differ

in their mythology, as well as in other respects, is rather an indication of their

original self-contained nature and not of a later consolidation of groupings

within the tribe? Wherever there are clans, we see this clan unity in all their

functions (matrilineal inheritance, common descent, common grounds, clan

solidarity, etc.) which distinguish them as a group from the other clans of the

same tribe. Among the Trobrianders the separate origin of each clan is as

obvious as among the Iroquois, the Romans, etc.

  2. Morgan found eight clans among the Iroquois, each tracing itself back

to a different animal. Thus, the tribe could not have originated through a

division into clans, but only as the result of an alliance of clans.

  3. We see the process of fusion in human organizational groups among

the  American  Indians  as  well  as  among  the  Romans.  The  legend  of  the

“founding  of  Rome,”  writes  Engels,  “shows  that  the  first  settlement  was

effected by a number of Latin clans united into a tribe (a hundred, according

to legend), which were soon joined by a Sabellian tribe that is said to have

numbered a hundred clans too, and finally by a third” [Italics, Reich]. Engels

himself mentions (p. 119) that “here little of the original organization was left

except for the clan. The foreheads of many members of the tribe indicate

blood mixture, mostly with other Indians, conforming to the image of the

original authentic tribe.” Engels seeks here to uphold the division hypothesis,which is intended to support Morgan’s concept of the origin of exogamy in

natural selection. We see, however, that at the time of Morgan’s observations

the  Iroquois,  already  constituted  into  tribes,  behave  in  the  same  way  we

assumed the primeval clan hordes behaved—i.e., there is peace within the

tribe and hostility outside it; enemy tribes fight and then make peace, joining

together in larger entities, with tribute being imposed. That is at variance with

the division theory, which is not supported by present-day data and which

rests  on  the  assumption  that  the  increase  in  the  population  and  “natural

selection”  through  the  exclusion  of  kin  necessitated  the  internal  division

through exogamy. Elsewhere, Morgan says that, among various American

Indian tribes with more than five or six clans, three or four are found joined

together in a special group, “fraternity,” or phratry—a fact that Engels also

mentions in his studies. Here, too, there is alliance, not division.

    Moreover,  the  exact  description  Morgan  gives  of  clan  organization

upholds the primary nature of the clan: election of the Sachem (administrator

in peacetime) and of the chief (military leader); ban on the election of the

chief’s son, who is of a different clan, in favor of the sister’s son; right of

inheritance within the clan; an obligation of mutual protection; vendetta by

the whole clan if one of their members is slain by someone from another clan

(thus the clans become hostile to one another); the existence of clan names

that only the clan may use; individual religious customs. Among the Seneca

the tradition was that “Bear” and “Stag” were the two original clans from

which the others branched off.

  In Morgan, too, we learn that the names of the tribes seemingly originated

by accident instead of having been chosen deliberately. Tribes were often

given their names by other tribes; the name “Teutons,” for example, was

bestowed upon the Germans by the Celts.

  We must leave it to later investigations to ascertain to what extent the

theory of internal division and that of an original union of primeval clans are

justified. Among the Trobrianders, for instance, we see the tribe split intounrelated  clans.  The  clans,  however,  are  divided  into  distantly

consanguineous subclans.

  4. Among the Greeks, one finds nobler and lesser clans, just as among the

Trobrianders. This is easily explained by our derivation of the division by

rank from the relationship between victor and vanquished clans. But we fail

to understand how a clan consisting of members with equal rights could be

split into subdivisions of different rank. In the second case, the later tribe

would have had to be the original clan, which conflicts with the concept of

one overall organization.

  5.  Apart  from  the  brothers’  obligation  to  pay  tribute  to  their  sisters’

husbands, the strongest evidence that the clans were originally alien to each

other is found in the strange courtship customs not only of the Trobrianders

(the ulatile and the katuyausi expeditions) but of other tribes.

  Consider the following description of a custom among the Samoans:


    From  personal  observation  Kubary  gives  a  graphic  description  of  a Samoan  youth’s

  courtship of the girl he has chosen and of her love. In Samoa, so quiet in the day time, the young

  people of both sexes gather in the Malae in the evening. A young warrior of well-groomed

  appearance stands near a group of young girls … He stands erect and gesticulates with his raised

  arms in such a way that the whole of his head shakes. He stamps his foot, he paces backwards,

he stretches his arm forward as though he was armed with a spear, then he swings it round in a

  circle as if he was about to smash his enemy with a club. Undoubtedly he is a warrior telling his

  beautiful listeners about his feats, his victories. They are all eyes and ears. One can see how

  strong an impression his account makes on the young girls, who cheer him enthusiastically.

  Then he asks some comrades to join him in a song … Our narrator is the first to sing, all those

  present form the choir; yet the singing does not last very long … The warrior stands up and

  steps in front of one of the most beautiful maidens. She hesitates; almost unwillingly she allows

  herself to be pushed near by her friends and to be drawn out into the open by the handsome

  dancer …

    A sugar-cane field is a safe hiding place for two lovers at night. Nobody will disturb them

  here in the hour of ghosts and spectres. Our couple know that and one can hear them speak

  without fear of being overheard. “You know, Lilomajava, that my parents hate you, only the

  awanga is left us.” The awanga, the flight, is arranged and is to take place on the third night …

  On the beach of the neighbouring village there is silence but on the white sands dark figures

  move. A toumalua, the native travelling canoe, is pushed into the water. The dark figures have

  disappeared, an upright triangular sail unfolds and glides along the beach, it disappears from  sight. Only after it has gone a great distance is the muffled sound of a triton horn heard. This

  sound  accompanies  the  happy  couple  along  the  coast  announcing  something  special  to  the

  inhabitants, who are roused from their sleep. It hurries ahead of them to Palauli where the lovers

  will stay till their parents’ anger has cooled …

    The next morning there is commotion in both villages. The happy bridegroom’s friends walk

  through  their  village  shouting: “Awanga!! Awanga!!  The  beautiful Tanetasi  and  the  brave

  Lilomajava are awanga!! awanga!!” The bride’s proud parents hear with suppressed anger the

  public proclamation which seals their daughter’s destiny. For some time angry feelings prevail

  everywhere. The old fathers avoid each other, the young men look at their clubs and spears, but

  the main role is played by the young couple … After a few weeks everything calms down and

  the parents send their daughter a white mat as a sign of forgiveness. The couple who up to now

  have kept at a distance from each other return. The feiainga is carried out and the white mat

  with traces of the bride’s worth upon it is exchanged for part of the dowry. The other part is

  handed over on the first confinement … If the pair do not marry out of love or if there are no

  difficulties to be expected, everything is arranged by the relatives. In former times the awanga
                                                  2
  (flight of the bride) was the order of the day in Samoa.


  The  poetic  mood  of  the  writer  cannot  blind  us  to  the  fact  that  the

courtship does not reflect a serious present-day situation. Various parts are

played by various people. The villages stand in playful hostility toward each

other. If these were not historic customs but actual acts of violence, if the

parents were really angry, matters would turn out differently. But, as it is,

everything runs its peaceful course. In earlier times the flight of the bride was

an everyday occurrence—in primeval times as a real abduction (the suitor in

the guise of a fierce warrior); later as a custom that gradually dies out, even

as  a  recurring  dream  that  reflects  an  actual  traumatic  situation  eventually

fades away.

  Let us now add Malinowski’s account of the ulatile expedition of the

Trobriand  young  men.  Echoes  of  the  primeval  abduction  of  women  can

definitely be heard:


    There  are  two  forms  of ulatile  expeditions  to  which  the  word  applies  in  a  somewhat

  technical sense. The first is a matter of necessity: a lover must visit his sweetheart in her own

  village. If, on one of the several occasions described in the previous section, two people from

  different  communities  have  become  strongly  attracted  by  each  other,  they  will  arrange  a

  meeting. As a rule the boy has some intimate friend in the girl’s village, and this makes things  easier, since this friend will help him. It is a matter of etiquette for the lover to adorn himself for

  the tryst, and this compels him to observe a certain measure of secrecy. He will not walk on the

  main road, but surreptitiously steal through the bush. “Like a sorcerer he will go; stop and listen;

  go sideways and push through the jungle; no one must see him.” Thus one of my informants
                                                              3
  likened  such ulatile  to  the  clandestine  expeditions  of  sorcerers  who,  on  their  nocturnal

  expeditions, must not be seen by anybody.

    As he approaches the village he has to be specially careful. In his own village such a passing

  intrigue, if discovered, would only arouse the jealousy of the accredited lover and start a minor

  quarrel. But an erotic poacher caught in another community might be seriously mishandled, not

  only by the jealous lover, but by all the other boys. He might also bring upon his sweetheart the

  reproaches of her regular lover. However, the main reason for secrecy is that it is enjoined by

  custom as a rule of the game. The two usually arrange to meet in the jungle near the girl’s

  village. Sometimes the girl guides her lover to the chosen place by lighting a fire; sometimes

  they agree to imitate the call of a bird; sometimes she marks the way into the chosen spot of the

  jungle by tearing the leaves in a pattern or by placing leaves on the road.

    … Sometimes a group of boys, who have brought away specially pleasant memories of

  another community from some festive gathering, will decide to go there in a body, on a regular

  ulatile expedition. Here secrecy is necessary, too. For though such expeditions are customary

  and, in a way, lawful, they constitute an encroachment on the rights of two other groups, the

  ordinary sweethearts of the ulatile boys, and the youths of the other village. If caught by either

  party the adventurers would have to face a volley of abuse, or even of blows; for girls in the

  Trobriands  can  defend  their  rights  by  force,  and  the  boys  in  each  community  regard  their

  womenfolk as their own preserve. The adventurers would, therefore, usually steal out at night

  and  put  on  their  ornaments  outside  their  village.  But  once  on  the  main  road,  they  become

  boisterous and defiant, for this is the proper behaviour on such an occasion. There are even

  some special bawdy songs, called lo uwa, to which they keep time as they go along. (Sexual Life

of Savages, pp. 263–65; Reich’s italics)

    An example of such a song is:

      “Hoho! I awake from my sleep, I hear the festive beat of the drums, as they throb with dance

    music—attracting women with full-dress skirts, with festive skirts on their flanks. With his song

  on his mouth, with his small drum in his hand, his teeth blackened, Tokivina rhythmically treads

in the village of Wavivi, he walks in dancing rhythm through the village of Wavivi. (pp. 266–

  67)

    Such songs … were also sung in olden days to indicate that the party was neither on the

  warpath nor on a sorcery expedition, nor bent on any other real mischief. As they approach their

  goal they become quiet again, for they must not be seen by the village youths. The girls, of

  course, know when the expedition is drawing near, for everything has been previously arranged

in detail. The visitor most familiar with the village creeps near, and gives the agreed signal. One

  by one the girls sneak out of the houses and meet their lovers in the bush. Sometimes the girls

  are already awaiting them at some pre-arranged meeting place outside. Should this gathering of

  lovers be detected, a fight might ensue, leading, in former times, even to war between the two  communities. (p. 267)


  Certain contradictions are apparent here. On the one hand, such “love

expeditions” are a custom; in a certain sense, even “a legitimate right.” On

the other hand, serious fighting sometimes ensues between the members of

the ulatile  expedition  and  the  local  youths.  These  contradictions  can  be

understood, however, if we think back to the fundamental institutions of the

Trobrianders. For then the ulatile expedition is seen as a relic from primeval

times when the men of one primeval clan invaded another clan.

  We find here an instance of natural jealousy side by side with full social

support of the institution of the love expedition. The clandestine behavior,

too, seems more a custom deriving from the abductions of primeval times

than something arising out of actual circumstances.

  Here  let  us  quote  Malinowski’s  account  of  a  strange  custom  that  still

exists on the southern Trobriand Islands:


    Now this communal weeding when practised by women of the villages of Okayaulo, Bwage,

  Kumilabwaga, Louya, Bwadela, or by the villages of Vakuta, gives weeders a curious privilege.

If they perceive a stranger, a man from any village but their own, passing within sight, they have

  the customary right to attack him, a right which by all accounts they exercise with zeal and

  energy.

    The man is the fair game of the women for all that sexual violence, obscene cruelty, filthy

  pollution, and rough handling can do to him. Thus first they pull off and tear up his pubic leaf,

  the  protection  of  his  modesty  and,  to  a  native,  the  symbol  of  his  manly  dignity.  Then,  by

  masturbatory practices and exhibitionism, they try to produce an erection in their victim and,

  when their manoeuvres have brought about the desired result, one of them squats over him and

  inserts his penis into her vagina. After the first ejaculation he may be treated in the same manner

  by another woman. Worse things are to follow. Some of the women will defecate and micturate

  all over his body, paying special attention to his face, which they pollute as thoroughly as they

  can. “A man will vomit, and vomit, and vomit,” said a sympathetic informant. Sometimes these

  furies rub their genitals against his nose and mouth, and use his fingers and toes, in fact any

  projecting part of his body, for lascivious purposes. The natives from the north are very much

  amused by this custom, which they despise or affect to despise. They love to enter into details,

  and to demonstrate by convincing mimicry. Local informants from the south confirmed this

  account in all essentials. They were by no means ashamed of their custom, regarding it rather as

a sign of the general virility of the district, and passing on any possible opprobrium to the    stranger-victims. Some of my local informants added that at the yausa, as this custom is called,

  women would throw off their fibre skirts, and naked “like a band of tauva’u” (evil spirits)

  pounce upon the man. He also added that hair would be torn from the man’s head, and that he

  would be lacerated and beaten till he was too weak to get up and move away.

    … At the same time, I had a practical demonstration of the contrast between the way in

  which such a custom is represented by those who have it, and by those who do not. By the local

  men it was obviously caricatured as a shameful and savage habit. But the southern visitors,

  some of whom had come from Okayaulo and Bwadela, the home of the yausa, took, in a later

  conversation, a different view, showing no embarrassment whatever. They told me boastfully

  that no stranger ever dared to enter their district at that time, that they themselves were the only

  people  free  to  walk  about,  that  their  women  were  the  best  garden-weeders  and  the  most

  powerful people in the island. (pp. 274–75, 278–79)


  This custom strikes one as a relic from primeval times, when women

learned  to  defend  themselves  against  intruders  from  foreign  tribes.  The

manner of their revenge reflects their actual experience; they anticipate what

they are afraid the man might do to them: they violate him. Peace within,

violence without—that  was  the  primeval  situation.  Alliance  of  the  hostile

hordes into one peaceful tribe divided into clans was the solution; it meant a

return to tranquillity. But traces of violence remained in the subdivision of

the clans according to rank and in the marriage tribute. These, in turn, led to

                4
more violence.

  Let us hasten to mention some other peoples among whom are found the

typical customs of the marriage gift, joint meals as a symbol of economic

alliance when the marriage is contracted, and the ceremonial abduction of

women. The fact that in all the studies we see reference to one or another

detail from the complex of rites found in full force among the Trobrianders

encourages  us  to  assume  that  most  of  the  peoples  of  the  globe  probably

underwent  the  same  process  of  fighting  hostile  hordes,  followed  by

subsequent peaceful alliance. The omnipresence of the incest taboo and of the

marriage institution thereby loses much of its enigmatic character.

  Max Ebert in his Reallexikon der Vorgeschichte gives a compilation of

ethnological facts from which we take the following:      Throughout all of South-West Asia it is the custom that the couple eat a common meal from

  one  dish  when  the  marriage  is  contracted.  (Quoted  from  Skeat  and  Blagden,  in  Ebert’s

  Reallexikon)

    Legends among the Tschuktschen tell of the “abduction” of girls by men of other tribes, by

  ghosts, eagles, whales, ravens, etc. But it also happened in former times that a few young people

  would get together and abduct a young girl, tie her hands and feet, and take her to the house of a

  man who wanted her for his wife. Not only the men of stranger families but even relatives and

  cousins often did this when they had been refused by the father or by the girl. After such an

  abduction, the parents usually received another woman from the abductor’s family in exchange

for their daughter. Marriages by flight, in cases where the parents refuse their consent, occur

  very seldom. (Czaplicka, pp. 72 ff.)

      Similarly, among the Camchadales, the woman must be earned by the man. When he has

  been  given  permission  to  take  his  bride,  a  ceremony  takes  place  in  which  he  has  to  take

  possession of her by force. All the women of the village try to protect her from him. In addition,

  she is dressed in several heavy garments which are bound tightly around her so that she looks

  like a stuffed figure. The ceremony now consists in his having to tear her clothes from her body

  and then to touch her genitals with his hands. Meanwhile the other women try to defend her.

  (Ebert, p. 251)

    On the Andaman Isles, among the hunting tribes, marriages are arranged by the elder men

  and women.

    …  Sometimes  the  parents  promise  their  small  children  …  Also  the  parents  take  upon

  themselves all other arrangements for the marriage of their children. The parents of the young

  man do not, however, themselves talk to a girl’s family but ask one or several of their friends to

act as mediators … From the moment the possibility of a union is considered, the man’s parents

  avoid talking to the girl’s and any message between them is transmitted by a third person. In this

  way they also send each other food and other objects. The recipient of such a gift always hastens

to hand over a counter gift of equal value. If the marriage takes place, the parents of both

  partners enter into a special relationship entailing certain duties. From the beginning of maturity

to the time when they marry, the young men on the Andaman Isles live in a bachelors’ house.

  (Brown, quoted in Ebert, p. 253)

    The Koita and Motus tribes of southern New Guinea have the same premarital customs as

  the Trobrianders, the same courtship and wedding customs … Gifts are handed over for years by

  both families, particularly food gifts. (Seligman, pp. 76 ff., 253)

      Among  the  Tillamook  on  the  coast  of  Oregon  in  North-West  America  …  his  relatives

  collected food of all sorts and even made money contributions for the purchase of the girl. The

  girl’s relatives promised certain gifts for her … After the marriage celebration the people were

  treated to berries, fish and meat and then the bride’s father distributed more food among the

  young man’s relatives which they took home with them. (p. 255)

      Among the Chukmas of South-East India both the bridegroom and the bride must behave

  timidly at the wedding ceremony of the common meal. (Lewin, quoted in Ebert, p. 258.) [We

  are reminded of the shyness of the newly married among the Trobrianders.]    To this day the connection between the Wahhabi tribes of the Njed, the mountain plateau of

  the  interior  of  Arabia,  is  only  maintained  by  marriages  which  are  contracted  between  first

  cousins. (S. A. Powell: World’s Work, 1923)

      —Among the Nalit Eskimos of the Bering Strait marriages between first cousins frequently

  take place with the idea that in times of scarcity the woman is nearer to the man. In the case of

  want, they say, the woman would otherwise steal from the man and the man would starve. But

as it is she looks after him. (Nelson: The Eskimos about Bering Strait, 1899)


              THE MORGAN—ENGELS HYPOTHESIS OF EXOGAMY


To explain the prohibition of marriage within the clan, Morgan, and after him

Engels, assumed that the law of exogamy or the incest taboo was a product of

the “principle of natural selection.” The forbidding of marriage between even

collateral kinsmen constitutes, according to Morgan, “an excellent illustration

of how the principle of natural selection takes effect.” Engels adds:


    It is beyond doubt that these tribes in which incest was restricted by this progressive step of

  necessity developed more quickly and more fully than those in which marriage between brothers

  and sisters remained the rule. And how deeply the effect of this progress was felt is proved by

  the institution of the clan which directly sprang from it and which forms the basis of the social

  order of most, if not all the barbaric peoples of the world. (The Origin of the Family)


And when discussing the division of the Kamilaori into marriage classes,

according to which maternal cousins of the first degree cannot be husband

and wife—only those of the second degree can—Engels remarks: “One sees,

the  urge  to  prevent  incest  again  asserts  itself,  but  quite  gropingly  in  a

naturally primitive way, without clear consciousness of the goal” (p. 28).

  Thus, both Morgan and Engels attributed the division of the tribe into

gentes to the splitting up of an originally consanguineous tribe. Both had

been  influenced  by  the  recently  propounded  Darwinian  theory  of  natural

selection, which they extended to the elimination of incest. This view can no

longer be maintained, for the following reasons:

  1. Incest has never been proved harmful. Early Soviet sexual legislation

was right, therefore, in adopting the view that the incest law is senseless,when  incest  is  harmless.  The  only  possible  connection  between  natural

selection and incest is that morbid dispositions accumulate if brother and

sister are both ill. But the situation is exactly the same when two persons who

are not related by blood procreate if they both have a morbid disposition.

Moreover, as medical research increasingly restricts the effects of heredity,

turning  instead  to  the  social  causes  of  widespread  diseases  such  as

tuberculosis, that principle proportionately loses its validity.

  2.  Morgan’s  and  Engels’s  assumption  presupposes  that  primitive  man

knew the role of the father in procreation and was able to assess the supposed

harm to the offspring of an incestuous union and to make the connection

between the two. The first cannot have been the case, and Morgan himself is

elsewhere of the opinion, confirmed by Malinowski’s research, that with the

then  unregulated  state  of  genital  life,  paternity must  have  been  unknown.

Moreover, we are justified in assuming that man at the stage of savagery

lived in incest for thousands of years without being in the least harmed by it.

There is no proof that greater advances were made after the introduction of

exogamy, and even if this were the case, an explanation may be found in the

advantageous effects of the mixing of different tribes, after peace was made,

which may have stimulated technical or cultural progress.

  3. The most important objection to the thesis that exogamy originated in

the principle of natural selection is the fact that even if the primeval tribes

had  divided  into  clans,  they  could  not  have  done  away  with  kinship.  No

matter how far a tribe might have branched out through its children and its

children’s  children,  they  all  came  from  blood-related  primeval  pairs  of

brothers and sisters. This was overlooked by Morgan and Engels. Thus it

follows that, to uphold the very hypothesis of natural selection, one has to

assume the mingling of two not consanguineous—that is, entirely foreign—

primeval  clans.  Accordingly,  the  clan  must  have  existed  before  the  tribe,

which adds fresh support to our concept of the joining together of clans into

tribes.  Thus  we  have  explained  the  origin  of  the  incest  taboo  and  its  further

development on biosociological grounds instead of through natural selection.

The riddle of the Kamilaori’s complicated division into marriage classes, first

into four, then into eight—which Morgan attributed to natural selection, and

which he thought offered an explanation of the punalua practice—lends itself

to a sociological solution, as follows:

    Originally, there were four marriage classes, two male and two female,

which could marry only crosswise. Later, through a further division, eight

classes came into being. We regard the last division as an offshoot of the

widespread  introduction  of  cross-cousin  marriage,  which  was  meant  to

compensate for the payment of tribute, as it does among the Trobrianders.

The payment of tribute, therefore, cannot have existed always. Not only must

it  have  been  related  to  a  particular  system  of  marriage,  but  it  must  have

caused  this  system  to  come  into  being.  The  division  into  four  classes

followed as a matter of course from the division of two primeval clans each

into  a  women’s  class  (sisters’  class)  and  a  men’s  class  (brothers’  class),

which, after the conclusion of peace and the alliance of the clans, entered into

crosswise marriage (mutual exogamy). The punalua family was thus the first

stage in the family after the alliance, just as the consanguine family was the

last step before  the  encounter  of  the  two  clans.  The  brothers  had  to  pay

marriage  tribute  to  the  husbands,  or  at  any  rate  make  gifts  linked  to  the

marriage.  The  victorious  tribe,  according  to  our  hypothesis,  had  secured

advantages for itself: for instance, payment of special tribute to the chief or

military leader, who among the Trobrianders is from the “noblest” clan. That

meant a one-sided burden for the defeated clan. From this must have arisen

the need for relief such as only cross-cousin marriage could provide. And out

of this need came the further division into eight classes, which represents the

perfect system of compensatory matings. The rest is unclear. But we saw

among  the  Trobrianders  that  the  chief’s  ascendancy  was  not  eliminated.

Perhaps  that  was  why  he  sought  a  partial  compensation  for  the  loss  thedivision into eight classes entailed for him. The confirmation or refutation of

this theory must be left to later research.


  THE FREUDIAN HYPOTHESIS OF THE MURDER OF THE PRIMEVAL FATHER


Freud bases his reconstruction of primeval history on Darwin’s theory that

among the apes there are families, which live alone and in which the chief

male  does  not  tolerate  any  other  males.  The  “primeval  father,”  who  is

envisioned on the model of this chief ape, in Freud’s concept, would always

chase away his adult sons. At some point the brothers conspired together,

slew the father, ate him, and thus put an end to the primeval father’s horde.

Here Freud utilized Atkinson’s observation that the lead stallions in a herd of

horses often clashed with other roaming stallions. He cites Atkinson’s theory

according to which the horde disintegrates because of the ensuing quarrel of

the sons, which prevents the development of a new organization. On the other

hand, Freud believes that it is precisely in the killing of the primeval father

that “social organization, moral restrictions and religion” (Totem and Taboo)

originate. To give credence to this sequence of events—the origin of religion

and of the social order in the murder of the primeval father—Freud argues

that  one  need  only  “assume  that  the  conspiring  group  of  brothers  was

dominated by the same contradictory feelings towards their father as we find

in the ambivalence of the father complex in all our children and neurotics.

They hated the father, who stood so much in the way of their need for power

and their sexual claims, but they also loved and admired him. After they had

done  away  with  him,  satisfied  their  hatred  and  carried  out  their  wish  for

identification with him, the tender feelings which had been suppressed in the

process could be expressed again. This took the form of repentance … What

the  father  had  formerly  prevented  by  his  existence  they  themselves  now

prohibited in the psychic situation of subsequent obedience which is so well-

known to us from psychoanalysis … They refuted their action by forbidding

the  killing  of  the  father-substitute,  the  totem,  and  renounced  its  fruits  bydenying themselves the women who had been set free. Thus, out of their filial

guilt  feelings  they  created  the  two  fundamental  taboos  of  totemism,”  the

prohibition of incest and of the killing of the totem animal. The totem animal,

consequently, was thought by Freud to be the “natural and nearest substitute

for the father.”

  A  series  of  arguments  by  Freud,  and  particularly  the  whole

psychoanalytic  ethnology  developed  subsequently  by  Roheim,  Reik,  and

others  of  his  students,  are  based  on  this  hypothesis  of  the  murder  of  the

primeval father. Since the views that we have evolved here contradict this

premise, it is necessary to go into its basic elements in greater detail.

  It seems to provide a compact interpretation of primeval development,

and at first it is satisfying because it applies to primeval times well-known

clinical findings from analytical practice which have been tested hundreds of

times. It also explains, with apparent effortlessness, the two key problems,

totemism and the origin of the incest taboo. In spite of this, however, some of

its suppositions do not correspond to the facts.

  1. The first supposition is that the primeval horde consisted of one strong

male adult, the father of the group; several women, his wives and daughters;

and several sons. If the primeval father, supposing he did exist, again and

again  chased  away  the  sons  when  they  matured—and  that  cannot  have

happened once only and in only one place but must have happened often and

all over the world, throughout the millennia—it is incomprehensible how any

primeval  horde  managed  to  propagate  itself,  withstand  the  struggle  with

nature, and establish a culture. Furthermore, when did the expulsions take

place? Among primitive peoples genital life begins at a very early age, long

before puberty. Were male children expelled as soon as they had coitus? This

cannot be correct.

  If,  as  in  Roheim,  reference  is  made  to  legends  of  a  father  killed  in

primeval times, one must remember that the father group consisted originally

of strangers—this is obvious from clan division—with whom the membersof the son group were in conflict, not because of the son relationship but

because of earlier hostilities between alien hordes. That has nothing to do

with incest. The Oedipus complex could arise only after the hordes joined

together, after close-knit families were formed.

  2.  Another  supposition  is  that  the  sons  denied  themselves  the  genital

embrace  with  their  mothers  and  sisters;  consequently,  these  women  were

without husbands, and the sons were, as before, without wives. Why did the

group not die out, then? The contention that the men took women from other

groups leads to nebulous speculations, considering how thinly populated the

world was in the earliest days of human history. Here, too, we go astray.

  3. To uphold the hypothesis, it is also necessary to postulate the natural

violent jealousy of the males and the biological ambivalence of feelings. But

the assumption of the jealousy of savages as proposed by Freud becomes

questionable  in  the  face  of  the  following  facts.  First,  consider  the  sexual

ceremonies  of  primitive  peoples,  and  especially  the  sexual  life  of  the

Trobrianders, as described by Malinowski; jealousy is excluded. Consider

also the fact that violent jealousy, as we know it in our society, came into

being  with  the  marriage  bond,  when  economic  interests  turned  natural

jealousy  into  a  vehement  claim  to  property;  and,  finally,  the  fact  that

monogamous  marriage  is  a  late  manifestation  in  human  society.  As  to

ambivalence of feelings, we must first determine to what extent this is a result

of social conditions (restriction of genital gratification; hence, the emergence

of  an  attitude  of  hatred  toward  a  denying  world:  ambivalence).

Psychoanalytic experience with psychically sick people unequivocally shows

that ambivalence may indeed exist as a tendency in the instinctual apparatus,

but what we see in the sick person has developed through the restriction of

his genital needs, and that is nonexistent in primeval society. Essentially,

then, ambivalence is socially conditioned. Its form and intensity depend upon

the manner in which libidinous needs are satisfied; therefore, being a social

consequence, it cannot be the primeval basis of human culture. We have alsoseen  in  the  mourning  rites  of  the  Trobrianders  how  a  specific  historical

relationship  of  production  creates  ambivalence  of  feeling.  If  the  wife’s

relatives did not stand in a relationship of tribute to the husband, they would

have no reason to be ambivalent and to hide their hatred in rigorous mourning

rites. And if ambivalence dominates the inner life of twentieth-century man,

one must ask what its social causes are. Such ambivalence cannot simply be

ascribed to primitive man who matures and lives under altogether different

conditions. We can be certain that the Trobriand child does not develop any

wrong notions of sex, since he knows that, except for the incest wish, he need

not repress genitality, but is allowed to gratify it. No fixations of penis envy

or  masculinity  complexes  develop  in  little  girls,  because  the  social

atmosphere does not accord the boy a privileged position, as it does with us.

That comes in with patriarchal authority and inheritance along the father’s

line. Thus, we do not deny the analytical findings. However, not considering

them biologic but historical, we try to place them in the right connection to

the history of society.

  4. The other hypothesis, that the sons denied themselves the practice of

incest  out  of  guilt  feelings,  stems  from  the  assumption  of  the natural

ambivalence of feelings. It is supposed to be the origin of morality. That is a

petitio principii. For what must first be explained is here presupposed. Guilt

feelings are themselves the expression of a moral reaction; therefore, they

cannot explain the origin of morality.

  Freud regards the religious concept of the fall of man, from which Jesus

would redeem mankind, as the expression of a primeval act of murder. The

biblical  myth  of  Adam  and  Eve,  however,  as  well  as  the  whole  Catholic

ideology of original sin, reveals itself essentially as the myth of a sexual

crime, as the concept of sinning against a sexual restriction. That does not

exclude the possibility that this sexual crime was accompanied by an act of

murder. Our derivation of the incest taboo implicitly contains the historical

primeval murder, when two alien hordes clashed. In those circumstances, thefirst moral precepts doubtless originated from sexual prohibitions that have

nothing  to  do  with  the  Oedipus  complex—for  the  Oedipus  complex  is

historically younger than sexual suppression. And, as we have said, the later

father-group  was,  originally,  a  horde  of  strangers.  So  the  concept  of  the

murder of the primeval father corresponds to a combination of two things that

are far apart in time: a bloody clash with men who were not the fathers but

from whose clan sprang the later real fathers who were not murdered.

  5.  The  Freudian  hypothesis  does  not  allow  the  possibility  that  incest

existed in primeval times. It has, however, been proved from myths and from

direct observation that incest was prevalent for thousands of years. Also, the

ignorance of fatherhood, which is obvious from the sexual life of primeval

                                                                      5
societies, contradicts the core of the Freudian interpretation.

  6. The Freudian concept cannot be reconciled with the typical legends of

the origin of clans from two or several primeval mothers or primeval brother-

sister pairs. It is based on the assumption of son-mother incest, but in reality

it  was  brother-sister  incest  that  was  decisive.  The  confirmation  of  the

existence of a primeval father, which Roheim sought to provide, is based on

the existence of a totem animal. But first it must be proved that the totem

animal  did in  the  beginning  represent  the  primeval  father.  Neither  the

interpretation of the incestuously desired sister as a mother-substitute nor the

interpretation  of  the  totem  as  an  original  father-substitute  is  conclusive

without historical derivation.

  7. According to Freud, the incest taboo must be thought of as operative

within the family. The incest taboo, however, dominates the whole clan. As

the family was a much later development, the restriction of the incest taboo to

members  of  the  family—father,  mother,  children—is  a  late  result  and

therefore irrelevant to primeval history.

  To  sum  up:  the  Freudian  hypothesis  is  at  variance  with  fundamental

institutions of primitive organization (two incestuous primeval clans, incest

taboo  within  the  clan,  promiscuity  and  incest  in  the  primeval  stage,  anoriginal organization along the maternal line, etc.) and it so seriously neglects

the  historical  development  of  the  family  in  relation  to  the  socioeconomic

development that it is difficult to uphold.

  Thus  far,  we  have  explained  the  proscription  against  eating  the  totem

animal and against living in incest as having originated in a historical event:

the victorious clan prohibited the defeated clan from hunting and eating the

animal  prevalent  in  the  particular  hunting  area  and  from  having  genital

embrace  with  the  women  of  their  own  clan.  These  prohibitions  did  not

originate  within  the  clan  but  were  imposed  from  outside  by  a  victorious

group.  In  certain  festivities  of  primitive  peoples  in  which  there  is

promiscuous intercourse and eating of the totem animal, we recognize the

sanctioning of a breakthrough of the old rules between hordes, the expression

of  a  longing  for  the  more  peaceful  organization  of  the  incestuous  horde,

which knows no obligation other than to provide for its own clan. It is, above

all, the barriers of primitive pairing-marriage, and occasionally also of the

incest taboo—relatively late developments of human society—that fall during

these festivities. Freud’s premise that these totem-meal festivals represent the

murder of the primeval father is, even from his own point of view, at variance

with the breaking down of the incest barrier on these occasions. Do men

perhaps allow themselves, at a much higher stage of organization, what they

denied themselves at a stage of cultureless savagery? Had they at that time, as

savages, stronger guilt feelings than today? And, if so, why?

    Conceivably, further research will link the legends of the murder of the

primeval  father  and  the  clashes  of  primeval  hordes.  The  totem  animal

secondarily  became  a  symbol  for  the  primeval  mother  and  later,  in  the

patriarchal organization, a symbol for the patriarch. We are of the opinion,

therefore, that the Freudian interpretation of the totem as the first beginnings

of a religious concept is valid, but not as the ideational cause of religion.

Rather, we think it mirrors primeval catastrophic economic and social events,

which,  in  view  of  man’s  urge  to  explain  natural  processes,  gave  rise  toreligious concepts. If man in the patriarchal age created god in the image of

the father, he must have formed him, earlier, on the model of his hunting

animal, which naturally occupied most of his thoughts, or on the model of the

primeval  mother.  If  one  reads  Malinowski  attentively,  one  finds  that

totemism  is  not  nearly  as  important  as  other  institutions,  sexual  and

economic. And, after all, the degree of importance attached to an institution

cannot be neglected if one is to fit it into a comprehensive picture of primeval

organization. A thorough study of totemism must be undertaken, from the

standpoint  of  the  theory  of  mother-right.  That  can  probably  not  be  done

without taking into account the unconscious meanings of religious concepts

and customs, as they have so far been determined. Our criticism is directed

against the method of psychoanalytical religious research hitherto practiced,

of  drawing  immediate  conclusions  about  the  origin  of  a  religious

phenomenon from its latent meaning—of equating meaning with genesis. To

understand the origin of the present-day irrational meaning of a hysterical

symptom, we must be able to fit it into the historical development of the

symptom  at  a  point  where  what  is  now  irrational  was  entirely  rational.

Similarly,  we  must  fit  the  latent  meaning  of  a  mythological  or  religious

concept into the historical context of the social process: we must understand

the  meaning  of  the  religious  idea  from  its  socioeconomic  genesis  and

function. A particular totem may well represent the father, whereas in its

origin it was a hunting animal that only secondarily became the symbolical

father- or mother-substitute.

  The  validity  of  this  statement  is  clearly  borne  out  by  the  historical

development of the function of the chief. In studying primeval history, Freud,

like  most  ethnologists,  saw  only  that  all  organizations,  even  the  most

primitive, have a chief and live in families. This fact is at first confusing to

the supporters of the theory of matriarchy. For this reason the other fact was

overlooked—that the chief is neither sovereign nor patriarch, in our sense of

those words, except where pronounced patriarchy already exists; and that thefamily at the beginning of history is not incompatible with the organization of

self-contained clans. The family organization within the clan obscured the

latter to the eyes of most investigators, who could not rid themselves of the

theory of the primary nature of our present-day family and therefore thought

along unhistorical lines. Just as the “chief” fits in well with matriliny, but

later  comes  into  opposition  to  it  because  he  becomes  a  patriarch,  so  the

gradually evolved monogamous family organization is compatible with clan

organization, but eventually, with the transformation of the chief’s function,

comes into opposition to it and destroys it. The refusal today to recognize the

Morgan–Engels  theory,  which  in  essentials  is  so  splendidly  confirmed  by

Malinowski,  has  a  sociological  significance:  if  one  clings  to  the  primary

nature of patriarchy and its form of the family, one sees compulsory morality

as always having been a characteristic of man.

    Morgan’s  discoveries,  however,  show  that  everything  is  constantly

developing  and  changing.  Thus,  suppressive  sexual  morality  intruded  into

primeval society at some point and will at some future time disappear from

human society. But what takes its place?                                          II






  THE PROBLEM OF SOCIAL SEX-


                                ECONOMY 


 


 


                                  HISTORICAL SURVEY


Social development from primeval clan society to the present-day national

state  shows  two  interrelated  processes.  On  the  one  hand,  there  is  the

development from primeval economic work-democracy to the capitalist state

—i.e.,  the  development  of  the  means  of  production,  the  spread  of  and

increase in production, and with it the growth of human needs and eventually

the concentration of the ownership of the means of production in the hands of

an upper social stratum, private capitalists or state capitalism. On the other

                                                                                1
hand, there is the development from natural, sex-economic freedom and the

clan  consanguine  family  to  the  ideology  of  extramarital  asceticism  and

lifelong  compulsory  monogamous  marriage;  and  consequently,  increasing

restriction, repression, and distortion of genital sexuality. But if one starts

from present-day economic and sexual organization and follows it backward,

one  eventually  gets  to  a  point  where  the  economic  and  the  sexual

organizations  flow  into  each  other.  There  we  find  the  origin  of  private

property and social stratification in the sexual organization of clan society,

which in the course of time made possible an accumulation of possessions,

produced in a primeval work-democratic way, in the chief’s family. We have

seen that at that time, at the very beginning of the present-day economy of

goods of exchange, when the first claims of avarice and ownership interest

stirred, first conflicts within human society also arose. Engels correctly writes

about them:


    The  first  class-conflict  that  appears  in  history  coincides  with  the  development  of  the

  antagonism between man and woman in monogamous marriage and the first class-suppression

  with that of the female sex by the male sex [Now we can say: of the woman’s clan by the man’s  clan. Reich]. Monogamous marriage was a great historical progress, but at the same time it

  initiated, apart from slavery and private property, that epoch which has lasted to this day in

  which  every  progress  is  at  the  same  time  a  relative  regression,  for  the  welfare  and  the

  development of the one is achieved through the misery and suppression of the other. It is the

  embryonic form of civilized society in which we can study the nature of the conflicts which are

  fully developed in the latter.

    Thus in the individual family, in the cases which in keeping with their historical origin

  clearly show the conflict between man and woman brought about by the exclusive rule of the

  man, we have a miniature picture of the same conflicts and contradictions in which society, split

  into classes since the beginnings of civilization, has been moving, unable to solve or overcome

  them. (The Origin of the Family)


  Thus, parallel with the progress in the production of goods there was a

decline  of  sex-economic  morals  and  culture.  The  natural  morality  of  the

primitive matriarchal peoples, living in sexual freedom based on gratification,

was infinitely superior to the morality of our age. This is particularly apparent

in the absence of antisocial sexual behavior (rape, sexual murders, etc.). All

discussions of cultural and moral progress are  empty talk so long as this

contrast in social development is not recognized, so long as the “savage” is

looked upon as the prototype of the “cultureless,” therefore not acceptable,

sexual  being.  His  sexual  culture  is  judged  from  the  point  of  view  of  a

morality that identifies “cultural” with “pure” (= “asexual”) (cf. the fascist

racial  theory).  Has  monogamy  meant  progress  or  regression?  That  is  an

unhistorical question containing an abstract evaluation.

  Compulsory monogamy arose out of the concentration of wealth in the

hands of one person, out of the desire, as Engels writes, “to leave this wealth

to  this  man’s  children  and  nobody  else’s.”  This  was  the  reason  for  the

demand that the woman must be monogamous. But when the development of

human society is traced further back, beyond the point of common origin of

wealth  concentrated  in  the  hands  of  one  person  and  of  compulsory

monogamy,  one  finds  social  organizations  that  are  characterized  and

dominated  by  genital  love  life,  while  production  is  still  almost  entirely

undeveloped  and  is  based  on  communal  economy,  on  primitive  work-            2
democracy. This type of organization is disturbed by a process consisting of

the growing  restriction  and  suppression  of  genital  freedom.  Its  first

appearance is the prohibition of the sexual embrace within one’s own clan,

i.e., with all maternal kin. This process of sexual suppression is older than the

“class  conflict”  between  man  and  woman  and  is  the cause  of  this

antagonism.  Traces  of  primeval  history  found  in  mythology  point  to

elemental catastrophes that threatened the economic existence of primeval

man and caused migrations, from which the first impulse to sexual restriction,

in the form of the incest taboo, derived. The constantly increasing sexual

taboos and restrictions of genitality went hand in hand with the widening of

the  economic  interests  of  certain  groups  in  primeval  society.  Conditions

among the Trobrianders show that these are the interests of the chief’s family

as opposed to those of the clan. In primeval times, in essentially the same

way as today, conditions of social existence gave rise to certain legal and

moral  institutions,  such  as  the  incest  taboo  within  the  clan,  the  marriage

order, etc., which perpetuated themselves by ideologically pervading every

individual of this society.

  In accordance with Morgan’s arrangement of the development of human

society from savagery to barbarism to civilization, we see that the decisive

turning point from primitive work-democracy to the emergence of interest in

the private accumulation of goods occurred in the transition from savagery to

barbarism. Its chief characteristic is the decline of matriarchal society and the

evolution of patriarchal authority. Human history before this point is many

times as long as the subsequent period of development of private economy.

If,  since  then,  the  economic  interests  of  the  owners  of  the  means  of

production and the opposite interests of the suppressed have filled social life,

previously it was sexual interests; if afterward private economy determined

                                                                  3
social  structure,  previously  kinship  community  did  so.  This  does  not,  of

course, affect the fundamental fact that previously the primitive conditions of

production were the basis on which a society could be built whose maininterest was genitality. Apart from the fact that the individual’s interests were

mainly genital and were satisfied, the material needs were slight. Interest in

property and avarice increased in proportion to the extent to which genital

interests had to be suppressed. During one phase of human history, living

conditions (first the union of primeval hordes, later the excessive pressure of

the marriage gift) gave rise to sexual restriction and sexual repression. This

freed psychic interests for a specific type of economic evolution, i.e., private

economy. These interests were avarice and the desire to accumulate, and they

                                                        4
sprang up at the expense of the genital interests.

  We  are  confronted  with  the  question—decisive  in  the  history  of  sex-

economy—whether sexual suppression is an integral part of the development

of human society or belongs only to a certain economic and social stage of

this development. The former is assumed by Freud and most of his disciples,

and  also  by  many  Marxists  (Salkind,  for  example).  On  the  basis  of  this

investigation we repudiate the idea that sexual suppression is a necessary

component of the development of human society, because we recognize in it

a mechanistic view which can be refuted factually on the basis of present-day

events, and historically as well. Also, the study of the relationship of the

social order and the sexual order has led us to think otherwise.

    Psychoanalytic research maintains that the cultural process is based on

instinctual  conflicts  rather  than  on  social  factors.  Thus  it  has  obscured  a

problem in its own sphere of discipline of such importance that it cannot be

overestimated. If we derive the instinctual conflict from the clash of primitive

needs  (hunger,  genital  needs)  and  the  conditions  of  existence  (economy,

influences  of  nature,  technique),  we  not  only  do  justice  to  the  prevailing

influence of social existence but we grasp the interrelation of socioeconomic

living conditions and the formation of human character structure. Also, we

find an avenue of approach to both the conservative and the progressive role

of the characterological processes of a society. The last section of this book is

devoted to a discussion of the fundamental aspects of this problem.  But first we must give some attention to an examination of the role of

character structure in the history of instinctual gratification.


                INSTINCTUAL GRATIFICATION AND SOCIAL REALITY


Quite  early,  Engels  had  an  inkling  of  the  part  played  by  sexuality  in  the

structure and development of human society. If his views about this could not

properly  assert  themselves,  it  was  because  his  concept  of  sexuality  only

considered  the  function  of  procreation,  leaving  untouched  the  function  of

genital gratification. Also, at that time the process of sexual repression, with

its social background, was unknown. Engels, who wanted to fit sexuality into

his materialistic concept of history as a factor in shaping history, writes in the

preface to The Origin of the Family:


    According  to  the  materialistic  concept  the  ultimately  decisive  impetus  in  history  is:  the

  production and reproduction of life. This process has a double nature. On the one hand, man

  produces food and provides himself with clothing, a dwelling place and necessary tools; on the

  other hand, he produces human beings themselves, i.e., he propagates the species. The social

  institutions under which man of a certain historical epoch and of a certain country lives are

  conditioned by both kinds of production: on the one hand by the development of work, on the

  other hand of the family.


  This view can now be corrected. Man stands in a relationship of mutuality

to his fellow creatures for the purpose of gratifying two basic physiological

needs: the need for food and the sexual need.  The  way  in  which  society

effects the gratification of these vital needs has been dealt with exhaustively

in  economic  writings  of  many  different  schools.  Since  the  need  for  food

cannot be transformed, as the sexual needs can, but only gratified more or

less, it does not play such an important part in the detailed formation of the

character structure as do the sexual needs.

  In Capital, in the discussion on the needs which production serves to

satisfy, Marx distinguishes between those that spring from the “stomach” and

those that spring from “imagination.” Now, the needs of “imagination,” asthey were called by Marx, have been shown by psychoanalytic research to be

the  transformations  and  developmental  derivatives  of  the  variable  sexual

                                                    5
impulses. They appear as “subjective factors” in the history of mankind and

society—not  as  the  urge  to  propagate  but  as  the  urge  to  remove  sexual

                                              6
tensions conditioned by inner secretion and outer stimuli, i.e., the desire for

sexual gratification. The generation of offspring, which in The Origin of the

Family  Engels  sets  side  by  side  with  the  production  of  food,  takes  place

objectively, not subjectively like the production of food (for the purpose of

gratifying the need for food). It is, therefore, not parallel to the production of

food.  As  we  know,  it  appears  as  a  function  only  very  late,  after  sexual

maturity, whereas the actual parallel to the gratification of the need for food,

sexual gratification, appears simultaneously with it immediately after birth.

Only  in  this  subjective  sense,  as  the  urge  to  release  a  tension  that  is

experienced  as  sexual  gratification,  with  its  sublimated  transformations

(inventive  spirit,  technical  interest,  scientific  research),  may  we  introduce

sexuality into history as a motive power analogous to hunger.

  Just as the food instinct appears subjectively as hunger and objectively as

a “tendency” toward the preservation of the individual, the sexual instinct

appears subjectively as an urge for sexual gratification and objectively as a

“tendency”  toward  the  preservation  of  the  species.  These  “objective

tendencies” are not concrete facts, however, but assumptions. In reality there

is no tendency toward the preservation of the species, as there is none toward

the preservation of the individual. Both kinds of preservation are functions

for  whose  explanation  “objective  tendencies”  are  introduced,  whereas

                                                                                          7
actually  they  are  secured  by  specific  mechanisms  of  the  physiological

apparatus. The tension in the stomach which manifests itself psychically as

hunger produces an urge to eat, thus preserving the individual. The tension in

the  organism,  especially  in  the  genital  organs,  which  manifests  itself

psychically as desire for the genital embrace (desire for gratification, desire

for pleasure), impels one to sexual activity in the genital act, thus preservingthe  species.  The  assumption  of  an  “objective  tendency,”  then,  becomes

senseless. Neither in the case of hunger nor in the case of genital gratification

does the individual think of self-preservation or of the preservation of the

species. We must therefore ask:

  1.  What  are  the  natural  processes  in  the  gratification  of  hunger  and

sexuality?  (Physiology  of  nutrition,  sexual  physiology,  and  sexual

psychology.)

  2. What is the structure of society? Does it safeguard the gratification of

these  basic  needs;  does  it  encourage  or  hinder  their  gratification?

(Sociological treatment of needs.)

  3.  If  society  hinders  the  gratification  of  these  needs  instead  of

encouraging it, it does so for what reason? What class or stratum is interested

in so hindering gratification? (Political economy and sociology.)

  Just as we should speak of the manner in which society provides for the

gratification of the need for food of all its members as “food economy,” we

should  call the  way  in  which  society  regulates,  promotes,  or  hinders

gratification of the sexual needs “sex economy.” There is a regulated and an

unregulated assimilation of food in the same way that there is a regulated or

unregulated  sexual  economy  of  the  individual.  It  depends  on  the  attitude

society with its institutions takes toward this gratification.

  We must distinguish the sex-economy of the individual from the sex-

economy established by society. The former, apart from the constitutional

differences of individuals, depends chiefly on the sex-economy of society.

Clinically, we judge whether sex-economy is regulated or unregulated by the

extent  to  which  discharge  equals  tension  in  the  psychic  apparatus  of  the

average  individual.  Moreover,  we  judge  it  by  the  efforts  this  apparatus

expends to bring about an equalization of tension and discharge. Elsewhere, I

                                                        8
have  tried  to  indicate  these  characteristics:  genital  gratification—i.e.,

orgastic potency—and free-flowing work capacity (sublimation) characterize

the  ordered  sexual  household;  sexual  substitute  gratifications,  neuroticsymptoms, and spasmodic work capacity (capacity depending on the process

of reaction-formation) characterize the unregulated one.

  The organization of social life determines the quantity and quality of the

equalization of tension and discharge in the psychic apparatus. If there is a

lack  of  social  possibilities  for  genital  gratification  and  sublimation,  if  the

psychic apparatus has been distorted by educational influences to such an

extent  that  it  cannot  make  use  of  existing  possibilities,  if  the  measure  of

unpleasurable stimuli is too great owing to distress and want, the psychic

apparatus works with substitute mechanisms that seek to bring about some

discharge  at  any  cost.  The  results  are  neuroses,  perversions,  pathological

changes of character, antisocial manifestations of genital life, and, not least,

work disturbances.

  Contrary to the many economistic concepts of the social process which

identify  “social  basis”  with  technique  and  nature—consequently,  with

material living conditions alone—and relegate needs to the “superstructure of

society,” it must be strongly emphasized that such a concept, being sheer

economism, has nothing to do with Marxism. As in my book on the ideology

of fascism, I must here remind the reader that Marx refers the fundamental

needs to the “basis.” Needs are constantly changing, it is true, as a result of

progress in production, and new ones are continuously being created; but that

does not alter the cardinal fact that both the fundamental needs that existed

from the beginning and the needs created secondarily are “basis” elements,

“subjective factors in history.” Marx writes in German Ideology, Part I: “The

presuppositions with which we begin are no arbitrary ones, no dogmas; they

are  real  presuppositions  from  which  we  can  abstract  only  in  imagination.

They  are  the real  individuals,  their  actions  and  their  material  living

conditions, both the already existing ones and the ones produced by their

actions.” The sexual needs, although subject to change through the social

process,  are  therefore  elements  of  the  “basis,”  for  they  constitute  a  very

essential part of the “real individual” and decisively determine his “actions.”The psychology and physiology of instincts consequently study these basis

elements in their interrelation with other basis elements and social ideology

in the socialized individual. Eliminating the sexual needs (as the subject and

the object of history) from sociology is equivalent to eliminating the need for

food, clothing, and shelter. If one adds that, essentially, the productive power

—“working power”—is transformed sexual energy, no extensive exposition

is required to establish the urgency of sex-economy.

  We are left with the task of arriving at a characterology and theory of

work-economy  on  the  basis  of  sex-economy,  and  of  clarifying  goals  for

pedagogy. This task can be carried out only by a society that has put into

practice  an  economy  regulating  the  gratification  of  the  needs  of  all  its

members.

  As sexual misery is a result of the compulsive regulation of genital life,

we always come across it where considerations of compulsory monogamous

marriage determine genital life. The relation of the sexual suppression of the

population to the constraints in its social existence (food, habitation, cultural

needs) is determined as follows. Whereas economic misery affects only a

small segment of society, sexual misery encompasses all social strata. Sexual

misery in the class that is economically prostrate takes a different form from

that in the propertied classes, however. The misery of hunger and of bad

housing conditions does not merely aggravate the sexual misery of the poor;

in conjunction with severe sexual laws, it deprives them of the possibility of

easing  their  burden,  a  possibility  that  is  open  and  unrestricted  for  the

propertied. If now, in analogy to the question of the gratification of hunger,

we ask why authoritarian society regulates the gratification of sexual needs in

this way and not in some other, denying it as it does, pressing it into such

frames as compulsory marriage, even completely suppressing it until a given

age as in childhood and adolescence, we find the answer in certain specific

economic interests of this society. We then see that it is society based on

government by armored man that is interested in sexual suppression, becauseit  needs  it  for  the  maintenance  of  two  of  its  most  essential  institutions,

compulsory monogamous marriage and the patriarchal family. The severe

sexual misery, neuroses, perversions, sexual murders, etc., that result—along

with the considerable restriction of the individual’s working capacity—are a

by-product,  not  intentionally  sought  by  the  authoritarian  order,  but

inseparable from it. The psychic disturbances produced in this way are the

                                                    9
expression  of  a  disturbed  sexual  economy.  As  long  as  the  dynamics  of

psychic illnesses and neurotic character formation and their connection with

sexuality were unknown, however, the history of sex-economy could not be

elaborated. First, clinical discoveries in the realm of sex-economy had to be

made,  and  indeed  they  sprang  from  the  very  soil  of  the  patriarchal

authoritarian sexual order, which produced neuroses and with them the means

of studying and treating them.

  This  sexual  order,  however,  has  not  always  been  in  existence.  It  has

evolved from other forms dating back to earlier stages of social development.

Although the respective sexual economy had a considerable influence on the

development of society and especially on its intellectual output, it is itself the

result of a specific social regulation of the production and distribution of

food.

  In  the  history  of  mankind,  in  a  way  directly  related  to  the  economic

interests of society, the sexual order changed from an essentially affirmative

one that promoted human sex-economy into a sex-negating, suppressive one

that conditions man’s sexually uneconomic way of life. This historical event

was  brought  about  by  the  transformation  of  matriarchal  into  patriarchal

society, of primeval work-democratic society into a society based on work as

a commodity. Natural society did not know sexual suppression, any more

than any other natural organization of living beings does. Not until patriarchy

and the armoring of children came into being were all the economic interests

created which have since provided the social basis for sex-negating morality

and  the  consequent  disturbed  sex-economy.  From  the  progressivelydeveloping phases of the dependence of man, negative sexual morality draws

its  right  to  exist  and  also  its  contradictions.  It  finally  establishes  itself  in

authoritarian society as a pronounced reactionary factor, becomes one of the

mainstays of the church, and puts the socially suppressed into a relation of

dependence to the state, also with regard to sexuality. Further, through its

influence on all education in and outside the family and all sex research, it

creates, from childhood, psychic structures in the mass individuals that are

altogether in harmony with the interests of the ruling classes. Negative sexual

morality interests us, therefore, not just in an academic-theoretical way but

from a practical point of view, as it hinders the restructuring of the masses.

For, through its suppression of sexuality, the patriarchal family, in addition to

reproducing  itself  ideologically,  becomes  the  most  important  ideological

producer of the pillars of reactionary society, viz., hierarchy in state, church,

and  business.  It  is  therefore  defended  in  every  way  possible  by  every

reactionary  social  philosopher  and  sex  and  culture  researcher  as the

foundation of the state, making recognition of its reactionary nature difficult.

  The  disintegration  of  the  compulsory  family  is  taking  place  largely

without conscious awareness, as one of the symptoms of the transformation

of our social organization. The conscious and active guidance and promotion

of this objective process of disintegration will be possible only when the

sociological  role  of  sexual  suppression  and  repression  affecting  every

individual has been fully recognized and the knowledge thus gained has been

                                                                  10
turned to practical preventive and educational measures.

  When the compulsive regulation of sex life disappears, catch phrases such

as “sexual freedom,” “sexuality is a private affair,” etc., are not sufficient to

enable us to understand and consciously guide the new, self-regulated sex life

which then comes into existence, whether we want it or not. Chaos ensues

when a society does not understand the process it is subject to at the moment,

which therefore it is incapable of guiding.

  What  follows  when  the  compulsive  regulation  of  sex  life  disappears?Sexual chaos, says the horrified citizen admonishingly. The history of sex-

economy,  however,  tells  us  that  hitherto  existing  compulsory  regulations,

which failed utterly everywhere and which led to sexual chaos, give way to

regulation  that  is  not  moralistic  and  negative  but sex-economic  and life

positive, thus attaining real self-regulation of sex life.

  Let us summarize what we have learned so far about the laws of sexual

economy from our clinical and sociological study of the clash of instinctual

need and social process:

  1.  The  compulsory  regulation  of  sex  life  works  by  means  of  sexual

inhibitions which it anchors in the individual in childhood. These inhibitions

produce an insoluble conflict. On the one hand, through sexual repression,

they cause sexual stasis and thus intensify sexual needs and turn them into

“secondary,”  cruel,  perverted  drives  which must  be  curbed.  On  the  other

hand, they transform the structure of the person, diminishing or completely

impairing  his  capacity  for  gratification.  As  a  result  of  this  conflict,  the

capacity for gratification does not and cannot equal the instinctual tension,

and sexual illnesses, neuroses, perversions, and antisocial modes of sexual

behavior appear as compensatory reactions.

  2.  In  every  individual  the  removal  of  these  conflicts  presupposes  the

removal of the compulsory sexual inhibition. It is replaced by sex-economic

self-regulation  of  sex  life  through  sexual  gratification,  which  renders

compulsory regulation superfluous. That is attained in the individual by the

elimination of armoring and the establishment of orgastic potency. The sex-

economic,  genital  sex  life  deprives  the  antisocial  and  morbid  secondary

drives of their energy through gratification of the primary needs.

  3. Sexual gratification is not in opposition to the sublimation of sexual

drives  in  work;  the  latter,  on  the  contrary,  presupposes  the  former.  The

relation between sexual gratification and sublimation is not a mechanical one

(“the  more  sexual  suppression,  the  more  social  achievement”)  but  a

functional  one:  to  a  certain  degree,  sexual  energy  can  be  sublimated.However, if the diversion goes too far, sublimation changes into its opposite,

a disturbance of work capacity.

  4.  There  are  high  cultures  that  have  no  repression  of  sexuality,

particularly of genitality, but, on the contrary, avowed sex-affirmation and

social  assistance  for  the  love  life  of  their  members.  Sexual  repression,

accordingly, is not the prerequisite of cultural development and social order.

  5. The compulsory regulation of sex life, and with it sexual repression,

sets  in  at  the  beginning  of  social  stratification.  Compulsory  marriage  and

family serve as safeguards of sex repression, and it is in connection with

these  institutions  that  the  demand  for  premarital  and  extramarital  chastity

arises.

  6. With sex-affirmative, i.e., life-positive, social organization there are no

neuroses,  no  perversions,  no  antisocial  sexual  behavior,  no  neurotic  work

disturbances on a socially significant scale. (That provides the ethnological

proof that neuroses are the expression of a disturbed sex-economy.)

  7.  Genital  gratification  under  social  protection  from  infancy  onward

automatically regulates sexual sociality, but it presupposes the absence of

negative sexual morality and the presence of sex-affirmative education since

childhood.

  8.  Sex-negative  morality  deriving  from  the  compulsory  marriage  and

family situation achieves on a social scale the opposite of what is desired:

neuroses, perversions, and antisocial behavior.

  9.  Sex-affirmation  and  sex-economic  self-regulation  of  sexuality

characterize primeval clan society; the development of the patriarchal family

introduces compulsory  sexual  regulation  and  with  it  the  suppression  of

infantile and adolescent sexuality.

  10. The present, twentieth-century development gradually does away with

compulsory sexual regulation and reinstates sex-economic self-regulation and

social protection of sex-life, on a higher level owing to natural science and a

conscious sex-economy. That becomes the prerequisite for the elimination ofpsychic  illnesses  and  antisocial  behavior;  and,  not  of  least  importance,  it

becomes  the  foundation  of  enhanced  intellectual  development  through

liberation  of  life  energy  that  was  constricted  in  the  severe  processes  of

armoring.


            PRODUCTION AND REPRODUCTION OF SEXUAL MORALITY


When we derived some basic elements of Trobriand sexual morality from

interests  of  the  chief  and  his  family,  we  were  able  actually  to  see  the

development of sexual ideologies. We have to leave unanswered the question

whether all or only some elements of sexual morality develop in this way.

Now, let us sum up what we know about the process through which sexual

ideologies come into being.

  Until there is interference from economic interests, sex life is governed by

the laws of natural self-regulation of the pleasure-unpleasure principle. They

develop into social customs, such as the ulatile and the katuyausi, which are

not directed against sexual gratification but on the contrary serve to safeguard

it. Sex-negating morality first appears as the demand of a group which has

economic and political power, and is directed against the other members of

society for the purpose of securing and increasing this power. The demand of

the one who profits becomes, consequently, the morality of the one from

whom the profit is derived. The sphere of production of morality lies in a

group that has superior power.

  But to maintain compulsory morality it is not enough to make a demand

or a law just once. For the continued restriction of the gratification of needs

by external compulsion, the new morality would have to impose and assert

itself over and over again; it would continuously have to overcome resistance

in every new adult member of society and thus would scarcely be able to hold

its  own.  It  has  to  be  rooted  more  deeply  to  fulfill  its  social  purpose

completely; it must start operating in early childhood when the resistances of

the ego are still easily overcome; and from an external demand of a group insociety, it must become the inner morality of all members of society. How

does that happen? Through the transformation of the character structure of

the  mass  individual.  This  transformation  takes  place  in  the  sexual  sphere

through fear of punishment. Fear of punishment for sexual crimes can, in the

long run, suppress the sexual drive only if it removes it from consciousness;

that is, if it represses it and mobilizes counterforces against it and firmly fuses

them into the personality. The conflict that originally took place between a

sexual ego and a sex-negating external world thus becomes, first, a conflict

between an ego that is afraid of punishment and an ego that consciously

demands sexual gratification, and then passes into a (temporarily) stable state

in which a moral ego permanently keeps down a repressed sexual drive. The

ego  that  was  formerly  pleasure-affirming  has  itself  become  sex-negating,

moralistic. Social  morality  has  reproduced  itself  in  the  individual.

Henceforth,  all  individuals  are  armored;  i.e.,  bioenergetically  rigid  and

subject to pleasure anxiety, which in turn makes them orgastically impotent.

This applies to all who are subject to the same sex-negating social situation.

The individuals thus transformed will consciously influence their offspring in

the  direction  not  of  their  repressed  attitudes  but  of  their  moral  ones.

Moreover, the specific social situation endures, incessantly reproducing the

moral demands of the ruling social strata, so that the external social pressure

continues too. Thus, sex-negation, sex-repression, and character armoring are

secured and with them the interests of social suppression of life.

  Production  and reproduction  of  compulsory  morality  must,  then,  be

distinguished  from  each  other.  The  former  presents  itself  as  a  “cultural

demand”; the latter, in all members of society, as morality, i.e., as armoring.

The relation of the social basis to the ideological superstructure is, therefore,

not an immediate one. Ideologies evolve through many intermediate stages,

which can be outlined as follows:

  1. Development of society in the direction of suppression of biological

needs and corresponding social interrelations.  2. Certain specific economic interests of a social group or class.

  3. Corresponding moral demands on the members of society.

  4.  Influence  of  these  demands  on  the  needs  of  the  mass  individual;

restriction of instinctual gratification; generation of social fear, etc.

  5. Anchoring of the moral group demands in the mass individual through

transformation  of  his  variable  needs,  through  alteration  of  his  character

structure in the direction of the new morality: constant reproduction through

internalization of the demands, making them inherent.

  6. Inner acceptance of this compulsory morality by the mass individual;

character  armor;  individual  formation  of  ideologies  that  in  all  mass

individuals in turn become (reproduced) compulsive social morality.

  This  social  morality,  which  is  rooted  in  all  individuals  and  which

continually  reproduces  itself,  exerts  a  conservative  influence  on  the

socioeconomic basis: the exploited himself affirms the economic order which

guarantees  his  exploitation;  the  sexually  suppressed  himself  affirms  or

helplessly  tolerates  the  sexual  order  which  restricts  his  bioenergetic

gratification and makes him sick, and he himself instinctively wards off any

development  which  would  answer  his  needs.  Thus,  compulsory  morality,

through the process of armoring, fulfills its socioeconomic purpose.

  The manner in which reactionary society maintains sexual repression by

every means at its disposal affords a good example. In order to suppress life,

it refuses to abolish the abortion law, though this law no longer achieves its

original  purpose  of  producing  industrial  reserve  armies.  It  opposes  the

dissemination  of  contraceptives  and  limits  the  function  of  sexuality  to

propagation; and it resists marriage reform with all its might. Now, as ever, it

suppresses adolescent sexuality. It is not prepared to cope with prostitution

and venereal disease because for it the “morality” of women and girls is more

important.  Social  sex  repression  and  character  armoring  are  reactionary

factors of great importance, and authoritarian society cannot do without their

retarding effects on the social process.  1. It powerfully backs every reactionary institution which by means of

sexual  fear  and  sexual  guilt  feelings  deeply  roots  itself  in  the  exploited

masses.

  2. It backs the compulsory family and marriage, which require the atrophy

of sexuality for their existence.

  3.  It  makes  children  subservient  to  their  parents,  and  thus,  as  adults,

subservient to the state, by creating fear of authority in the mass individual.

  4. It paralyzes the intellectual critical powers and the initiative of the mass

individual, for sexual repression uses up much bioenergy which otherwise

would manifest itself intellectually and emotionally in a rational manner.

  5. It impairs bioenergetic agility in many people, makes them inhibited,

and paralyzes their power to rebel against social evil.

  All this, taken together, means the ideological anchoring of the existing

authoritarian system in the character structure of the mass individual, thus

serving the suppression of life. This is the sociological meaning of sexual

suppression  in  society  governed  by  powerful  political  cliques.  Not  much

education is required—only a little intellectual courage—to recognize that the

powers  seeking  to  dominate  do  not  bring  colonial  peoples  Christianity,

clothing, and “morality” out of cultural considerations but because they want

to anchor the spirit of the coolie in the individual. Moreover, they seek to

weaken  people  with  alcohol  and  thus  make  them  subservient.  And  this

anchoring  of  serfdom  in  the  character  structures  of  primitive  peoples,

intended  to  make  inspectors  and  police  cudgels  superfluous,  can  most

successfully be implemented through the subjugation of the power springing

from gratified genitality.

  Since  it  was  possible  to  find  the  sociological  meaning  of  sexual

repression, we should also be able to see the contradictions it creates, which

destroy  it.  For,  although  sex  repression  strengthens  every  kind  of

authoritarian rule, it simultaneously undermines it through the sexual misery

it  produces.  On  the  one  hand,  it  instills  in  youth  a  characterologicalsubservience to the adults; on the other hand, it generates the sexual rebellion

of  youth.  The  sexual  crisis  which  has  increasingly  afflicted  authoritarian

society since the turn of the century is motivated by a need to resolve the

contradictions of sexual suppression. It varies in intensity with the economic

crises on which it depends. The deterioration of the masses’ material position

not only loosens the familial and marital fetters of sexuality but forces out the

sexual  needs  along  with  the  rebellion  against  hunger.  That  is  the  simple

explanation of the “decline of morality” in times of crisis. It is significant that

during  economic  crises  the  forces  of  reaction  intensify  sex-reactionary

pressure on the masses, even going as far as bloody terrorism. The Pope’s

message on Christian marriage promulgated at the end of 1930 bears out this

                                                  11
link between material and sexual rebellion. Another instance is the violent

clash, in May 1931, of Czech state authorities and the members of hiking

clubs who had been forbidden by the public prosecutor to spend the night in

tents unless they had marriage certificates. Many were wounded in the clash.

Here sexual reaction was manifested blatantly and for the first time in this

form.

  Social sexual suppression thus undermines itself by generating a steadily

growing divergence between the tension of sexual needs and the external

possibility of and internal capacity for gratification. Such social phenomena

as so-called “juvenile delinquency” are direct expressions of the sexual crisis.

In many cases “juvenile delinquency” involves nothing more than the genital

embrace before it is legally sanctioned.

  There  can  be  little  doubt  that,  since  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth

century, human society everywhere began to enter an entirely new phase of

social  upheaval.  Life  started  to  rebel  against  every  kind  of  suppression.

Unconscious of their nature and of their true goals, misled by the stupidities

of an ignorant politiciandom, without leadership and therefore chaotic, the

multitudes have appeared on the social scene, claiming their right to live in

happiness.  Outworn  political  systems  may  still,  for  a  while,  abuse  andmislead  this  genuine  striving  of  the  people,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt

whatsoever: the sexual revolution is in progress, and no power on earth will

stop it. What it needs is rational direction toward its goals.                                      Notes






Preface to First Edition

1. [1934] This process has since met with serious obstacles and has partly given way to a regression to
  attempts at regulation. Soviet sex-economy will be dealt with in a special detailed publication.
    [1951] In this interval, the U.S.S.R. regressed to complete reaction in sexual matters, in full
  agreement with its development of a rampant imperialism, imperiling the world under the dogma of
  “progress.” This book, together with many other sex-economic writings, has been suppressed in and
banned from countries dominated by red fascism.
2. How clearly and systematically religion is being eliminated through the enlightenment of the masses
by the natural sciences and the workers’ development of technology!
3. Translated into English as “The Fiasco of Sexual Moralism,” Part I of The Sexual Revolution.


1. Sex-Economy in Matriarchal Society

1. The Sexual Life of Savages in North-Western Melanesia. Quotations and page numbers refer to the
  Harcourt, Brace & World edition. Also quoted in this book are Malinowski’s Sex and Repression in
Savage Society (1927) and Crime and Custom in Savage Society (1926). Page numbers for these
books refer to the editions published by Routledge & Kegan Paul, London. Used by permission.
2. See my interpretation of orgastic potency in The Function of the Orgasm.
3. [1934] However slight the difference may appear to be between mere toleration and the affirmation
of infantile and pubertal sex life, it is decisive for the psychic structure formation of the child. The
tolerant attitude of educators that is found today in certain small circles must be looked upon as
  complete sex-negation. Not only does the child experience the toleration as the non-punishment of
  something  actually  prohibited,  but  the  mere  toleration  or  “permission”  of  sexual  play  does  not
constitute a counterweight to the overwhelming pressure of the social atmosphere. The explicit and
  unmistakable affirmation of infantile love life on the part of educators, however, can become the
basis  of  sex-affirmative  elements  of  the  ego  structure,  even  when  it  cannot  palliate  the  social
  influences. This view is intended as a criticism of the attitude of those psychoanalysts who dare not
take the important step from toleration to affirmation. Replying that this has to be left to the children
is nothing but a shifting of responsibility. If, in the analysis of children, adolescents, or adults, no
  counterweight to social influences is offered, the removal of sexual repression remains theoretical.
Just as wrong as it would be to force on a person something not organically desired, is it necessary
to support in the child or in sick people such tendencies as work in the direction of sex-economy.
  Between  the  toleration  of  sexuality  and  its  affirmation,  the  social  sexual  barrier  is  operative.
  Affirming sexuality means stepping beyond the sexual barrier.
4. See Part I of The Sexual Revolution.5. Fensterln: climbing in and out of a girl’s window (peasant dialect).
6. The Function of the Orgasm.
7. Cf. reference to Krische, p. 191.
8. [1934] I alone bear the responsibility for this view. Freud and his school reject it and oppose it; they
do not want to see it upheld in the name of psychoanalysis. I have to agree with Freud on that point:
this fundamental view of sex-economy arose when the orgastic function of genitality was discovered
and  introduced  into  psychoanalytic  theory.  It  has  basically  changed  our  understanding  of  the
  economy of psychic illnesses, however. This is what has caused the gap between sex-economic
theory and the present-day psychoanalytic theory of neuroses.


2. Economic and Sexual Contradictions among the Trobrianders

1. The following description is taken from Crime and Custom in Savage Society, pp. 9–39.
2. It is evident from this that among the Trobrianders the pleasure function is the only basis for genital
  contact. Contrast this with the attitude of the church, which views genitality as being only in the
  service of procreation. [Editor]
3. An analytical interpretation of the cross-cousin marriage easily offers itself: the incest taboo between
brother and sister is canceled by their children’s marriage, through identification of the brother with
his son and of his sister with her daughter. And the explanation offered by the primitive sounds very
  tempting from the point of view of this interpretation: “Sometimes, for instance, it will be stated as a
rider to the principle of exogamy that ‘the marriage between brother and sister is wrong’ (‘brother
and sister’ in the extended sense, all people of opposite sex and of the same generation related
  through the mother). ‘To marry a tabula (cross-cousin) is right; the true tabula (the first cross-
  cousin) is the proper wife for us’” (Sexual Life of Savages, p. 101). But the economic interests are so
clear that in this instance we can allow the psychological factor only a subordinate part.


3. The Invasion of Sex-Negative Moralism

1. Part I of The Sexual Revolution.
2. Cf. The Sexual Revolution.
3. M. Barasch: “Sex Life of the Workers of Moscow,” Journal of Social Hygiene, Vol. XII, No. 5 (May
  1926).
4. The Sexual Revolution, Part I.
5. After Paul Krische: Das Rätsel der Mutterrechtsgesellschaft.


4. Primitive Work-Democracy—Mother-Right; Father-Right

1. In the German edition of this book published in 1931, the term primeval communism was used to
describe the economic functioning of original matriarchal primitive society. However, the complete
misuse and prostitution of the word communism by red fascism over the past decades has made the
term primeval communism misleading and unusable. For this reason, and in accordance with the
  development of the sex-political sociology of 1931 into the orgonomic sociology of 1951, the term
  work-democracy is hereafter substituted for primeval communism, save in those instances where the
author is quoting from or referring to the work of others who used the term primeval communism.
  Work-democracy  is  defined  as  the  natural  and  intrinsically  rational  work  relationships  between
human beings. The concept of work-democracy represents the reality (not the ideology) of these
  relationships,  which,  though  usually  distorted  because  of  the  prevalent  biological  armoring  and
  irrational  ideologies,  are  nevertheless  at  the  basis  of  all  social  achievement. Work-democracyexcludes  all  forms  of  dictatorial  work,  and  dictatorship,  in  turn,  excludes  work-democratic
  functioning.
2. Ancient Society.
3. The Mother Right (1861).
4. Cf. Roheim: “Urformen und Wandlungen der Ehe,” in Marcuse’s Ehebuch, p. 33 ff.
5. Das Rätsel der Mutterrechtsgesellschaft.
6. Roheim: Die Urformen und der Ursprung des Eigentums (Archiv für Ethnographie, Bd. 28, H. 1/2).
7. Marx: Capital (Everyman’s Library, Vol. 1), pp. 370–71.
8. Heinrich Cunow: Zur Urgeschichte der Ehe und Familie (Ergänzungsheft der Neuen Zeit, No. 14,
  1912/13).
9. Müller-Lyer: Die Familie, 2nd ed., 1918.


6. The Origin of Clan Division and the Incest Taboo

1.  Natural  right  could  be  said  to  correspond  to  the  primeval  incestuous  situation;  mother-right,  to
  exogamous clan organization.
2.  Ploss-Bartels:  “Brautwerbung  und  Brautstand.”  “Das  Weib  in  der  Natur-  und  Menschenkunde.”
  Geschlecht und Gesellschaft. Vol. 12, p. 548.
3.  In  the  evil  spirits  and  sorcerers  who  play  such  a  considerable  part  in  the  emotional  life  and
  mythology of primitive peoples, it is not difficult to recognize the powerful foreign invader. In the
  imagination  of  human  beings  who  had  never  seen  a  stranger,  had  never  even  thought  of  the
  possibility that they existed, they were bound to appear as supernatural beings. Similarly, when
America was discovered, the whites were at first worshipped by the natives, until their quite earthly
nature was revealed.
4. In his book Die Psychoanalyse primitiver Kulturen, Roheim describes the distribution rite among the
  Papuas in the Luai District. It not only agrees in essence with the rite described by Malinowski but
  supplements our knowledge of the psychic conflicts accompanying the payment of the marriage
tribute.
5. One could object with some justification that ignorance of fatherhood is convincing during the stage
of promiscuity but not when monogamous pairing marriage evolves. In addition, it would not be
  difficult  to  conclude  from  the  Trobrianders’  attitude  toward  fatherhood  that  they  repress  their
  knowledge  of  the  role  of  the  father.  The  assumption  of  such  a  repression  does  not  preclude
  ignorance during the promiscuous stage. It is conceivable that affective denial of the clan-alien men
after the union of the hordes was so intense that their fatherhood was not acknowledged—but that
  requires  further  research.  Another  consideration  is  the  fact  that  acknowledgment  of  fatherhood
  would have severely shaken the matriarchal system of clan kinship.


Part II: The Problem of Social Sex-Economy

1. This is the exact opposite of sexual libertinism due to orgastic impotence.
2. Engels: The Origin of the Family. “The less work is developed, the more restricted the number of its
  products, consequently also the wealth of society, the more strongly the social order appears to be
  predominated by sexual ties.”
3. “It will soon be perceived that in the initial stages of savagery, community of husbands and wives,
within  prescribed  limits,  was  the  central  principle  of  the  social  system.  The  marital  rights  and
  privileges, established in the group, grew into a stupendous scheme, which became the organic
  principle on which society was constituted” (Morgan: Ancient Society).
4. Psychoanalytic ethnologists are, therefore, incorrect when they trace the culture of primitive racesback to their instinctual constellation and speak, for instance, of anal-sadistic culture. In reality, the
changed instinctual structures were created by the social process, first by restricting genitality and,
  second, by conditioning an intensification of the nongenital partial drives. The desire to accumulate
has primarily a social origin but, in becoming anchored in the psychic structure, it makes use of
anality that has been produced by sexual restriction.
5. [1934] By “subjective factor,” present-day political psychology means chiefly the average psychic
  structure of man in a particular society. This structure itself is determined by the libidinous forces,
which condition it.
6. [1952] Orgonotic, bioenergetic energy functions.
7. [1952] Bioenergetic.
8. “Der genitale und der neurotische Charakter,” Intern. Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse, 1929. See also
The Function of the Orgasm, 2nd ed., 1948; and Character Analysis, 3rd ed., 1949.
9. See The Function of the Orgasm; also Character Analysis.
10. The goal is prevention of armoring in man from birth onward.
11. In his Encyclical, Casti Connubii (Christian Marriage), Pope Pius XI made a strong restatement of
the Church’s traditional strictures against abortion and birth control. [Editor]                                  Appendix






    Roheim’s “Psychoanalysis of Primitive Cultures”




                ROHEIM’s METHOD OF ETHNOLOGICAL RESEARCH


In  the  spring  of  1929  the  Hungarian  ethnologist  and  psychoanalyst  Géza

Roheim made an expedition to Australia and New Guinea, underwritten by

Princess Mary Bonaparte. The result of this expedition, which lasted several

years, is now available in a preliminary report consisting of some hundred

      1
pages. The conclusions of these investigations, insofar as they do not simply

render observations but go on to theory formulation, can be understood only

if one grasps the fundamentals of the method Roheim applied to effect his

aim of providing psychoanalytic ethnology with a “solid base.”

  Roheim  undertook  the  expedition,  as  he  writes,  in  order  to  invalidate

those  theories  which,  by  referring  to  matriarchal  organizations,  deny  the

universal  existence  of  the  Oedipus  complex.  He  seeks  to  establish  the

universal  validity  of  this  complex—that  is,  its biological  character.  And

herein lies the root of his mistakes. He turns against Malinowski, who, on the

basis of his study of a matriarchal society, maintained that the child-parent

conflict  that  Freud  investigated  in patriarchal  society  shows  an  entirely

different  structure  in  a matriarchal  society.  I,  too,  on  the  basis  of

Malinowski’s research, had refuted the biological nature of the well-known

typical child-parent conflict.  Whether one applies the term “Oedipus complex” to conflicts in which

the “educator” is not the father but the mother’s brother and in which other

circumstances, too, are different, or whether one then refers to an “Oedipus

complex of a different type” is of secondary importance. Roheim had started

out  on  his  journey  with  the  intention  of  demonstrating  that  the  Oedipus

complex  in  the  form  in  which  Freud  found  it  in  Europe  was  a  universal

biological fact.

  Roheim now seeks to study the culture of primitive peoples by means of

psychoanalytic interpretation, and he believes he can do this by identifying

society, its culture and civilization, with an individual. To this, one must say:

a social organization cannot be studied by psychoanalytic interpretation, for

society has no drives, no unconscious, no super-ego, no inner life. It consists

of  social interrelations  between  men  possessing  a  psychic  apparatus  of  a

certain  structure.  Only  man’s  character  structure  can  be  investigated

psychoanalytically, and insofar as the results of this investigation establish

typical—therefore, mass-psychological—facts, they also explain the structure

of the respective social ideology.

  Man, it is true, shapes society and creates the social content of life, but he

does  so  only  under  certain  external  conditions  (economic,  climatic,

geographic,  etc.).  Thus,  he  is  restricted  in  the  expression  of  his  will.  In

addition, the social interrelationships created by him become independent,

with  their  own  inherent sociological  laws,  to  which  man  then  is  subject.

Sociology is essentially the science of the laws of social interrelations which

dominate man yet are independent of him. These laws are external to the

psyche; they are biosocial. Those who disregard them in favor of psychic

forces represent psychologism; those who rule out the psychic structure of

man,  as  for  example  the  Russian  dictators,  must  be  representative  of

economism and fall prey to a mystical sociologism.

  Roheim not only denies the fundamental function of the biosocial laws;

his interpretative technique is so primitive, it so strongly resembles the “art”of the wildest analysts, that he cannot be accepted even as a psychoanalyst.

  We read, in his report, that “Just as in therapeutic analysis through the

interpretation of the transference the analyst is able to reconstruct the original

infantile libido organization, the ethnologically investigating analyst can see

from the transference dreams (of primitive people) what is the nature of the

libido-organization and of the character of a people.” First we must make a

correction:  we  do  not  reconstruct  the  infantile  libido-organization  of  our

patients  through  interpretation,  as  Roheim  does;  our  interpretation  puts

together unconscious material offered by the patient and gives it the language

of consciousness. Without unconscious material, there is no interpretation.

Anything  else  is  wild  analysis.  To  reconstruct  an  individual’s  infantile

history,  an  actual  reenactment  of  childhood  in  recollection  and  action  is

needed. Roheim analyzes the dreams of “native X, but at the same time a

human society, to wit that to which X belongs.” Let us assume for a moment

that it is permissible to draw conclusions concerning the structure of society

from the structure of dreams, instead of conversely the structure of dreams

from the structure of the society that determines the instinctual structure of

the individual. Then, free association would be the first requisite. But the

primitive, from whose dreams Roheim—in contrast to sociologists—believes

it is possible to “find a formula for the unconscious desire by which every

structure  of  society  is  determined,  in  the  same  way  as  a  system  of  such

unconscious desires underlies every dream and every neurosis,” is not even

capable  of  that.  “A  primitive,  however,  cannot  possibly  be  induced  to

associate freely; nothing else can be done but to wait until one day he does so

spontaneously.”  We  can  scarcely  thank  Roheim  for  the  disservice  he  has

rendered  psychoanalysis  with  his  “method  of  culture-research.”  What  a

struggle it is to get patients to associate freely so that we may reconstruct

their childhoods—and Roheim deduces a whole culture from one primitive

who was not willing to associate freely.

  Let  us  reflect  for  a  moment  what  purpose  is  served  by  ethnologicalresearch and what it seeks to do, to understand fully what Roheim proposed

to accomplish through his method. Man continuously struggles to establish a

more favorable way of life, to gain a greater mastery of nature, to obtain

some glimmer of light about his existence. With a knowledge of past history,

one hopes to be able more easily to cope with the present. Everyday practical

problems lead us to undertake research in order to be better equipped to cope

with the future. We explore old forms of economy and of the family in order

to understand the social developments we are subject to, so that we can give

them some direction and even try to master them. Roheim is above such

things: “In our opinion, all the publications of this school (the ‘functional

school’), whether they concern canoes, marriage, magic or trade, come to the

same conclusion in reverse order; to wit, that the phenomenon concerned is

the structural element of a totality, that it fulfills a well-defined function in

the social mechanism and acts and reacts on other social phenomena. We

shall  hardly  be  satisfied  with  wisdom  of  such  self-evident  nature.”  To

Roheim  what  matters  is  of  course  the  famous  subconscious  cultural

aspirations! The ethnological schools certainly suffer severely from serious

defects  in  their  methods  of  investigation.  They  rarely  go  beyond  mere

description;  they  see  only  economic  relationships  and  then  only  from  a

psychological  point  of  view.  They  cannot  distinguish  a  single  process

governing social development. Also, they approach nowhere near the sex-

economic question of how and through what means biosocial existence is

transformed  into  character  structure  and  what  effects  the  human  psychic

structure that emerges has on the social relationships out of which it comes.

That is a functional bioenergetic question foreign to their manner of thinking

and  likely  to  make  ethnologists  uncomfortable.  Roheim  regresses  even

further  beyond  the  achievements  of  his  colleagues:  he  confuses  the

phenomena, mystifies them, fails to notice the most obvious things, such as

the  biosocial  function  of  the  Mwadare  as  a  primitive  exchange  of  goods

availing itself of the marriage relationship. He sees nothing but symbols, andthus,  like  all  wild  interpreters  of  symbols,  betrays  his  deep  doubt  of  the

realities of the psychic processes themselves.

  It will be said that I am exaggerating. On the contrary, I am endeavoring

not to exaggerate, in the interest of the decisively significant role of depth-

psychology in sociological research. I am eager to learn, from the mistakes of

an ethnology specialist such as Roheim, what mistakes must be avoided and

how important methodological accuracy is in historical biosocial research.

  I am now going to present a dream of a primitive as related and analyzed

by Roheim, and I shall try to indicate what this dream reveals if one refrains

from  “interpreting  transferences”  but  views  the  dream  within  its  social

environment.

  The Christian chief of Loboda, Doketa, tells Roheim a dream from which

                                                                        2
Roheim then deduces the cultural history of Normanby Island.


    “I went fishing with Gomadobu. We caught a quadovara and pulled it out. Near Bwaruada

we went ashore and cut the fish open and it was being boiled as the church bells were ringing.

  Mr. Walker said: ‘Leave your fish, it will wait for you; first go to church, then return and eat.’

  Then we came back and Gomadobu cut the fish in pieces. I received the body and said: ‘Give it

to our friends.’ But Gomadobu said: ‘The body is your share, I give it to you, our friends will

  get their shares later on.’”


  Roheim gives a complicated reconstruction of Doketa’s infantile past, that

he eavesdropped when his parents were having coitus, that he wanted to kill

the  father,  etc.,  etc.  There  is  no  way  of  determining  whether  Roheim’s

interpretation is correct; but that is not important from the point of view of

cultural, biosocial research. If one reads pages 305–8 of the report, one sees

how unreliable these findings are even if Roheim had submitted Doketa to a

proper analysis.

  Let us try to understand the dream on the basis of the life environment

and  the  present-day  conflicts  of  the  dreamer.  We  are  more  modest  than

Roheim,  for  we  do  not  pretend  to  reach  beyond  the  present-day,  easily

accessible  social  environment  into  the  infantile  individual  conflicts  ofDoketa,  who  does  not  himself  provide  any  recollections.  Yet  a  rough

knowledge of present-day causes can lead to an understanding of the present-

day conflicts reflected in the dream. We shall see, too, that the latent meaning

of the dream provides elements such as no European can produce.

    Malinowski’s investigations, on which I base the ethnological foundations

of social sex-economy, give evidence that primitives suffer from two serious,

typical  conflicts  deriving  from  the  beginnings  of  change  in  the  social

organization. They are conflicts, then, which cannot always have existed and

which,  with  the  further  transformation  of  the  social  organization,  will,  of

necessity, also change their content and form. One conflict, an economic one,

is the pressure of the marriage tribute exercised by one clan on the other.

This  seemed  to  me  a  preliminary  stage  of  the  later  condition  of  private

economy of exchange of goods. Roheim gives a highly accurate description

of  the  exchange  of  marriage  gifts  and  of  the  accompanying  emotional

conflict, though he has no inkling of what he is in fact describing. The yearly

marriage tributes are paid under pretense of the greatest friendship, as gifts of

love, but they are accompanied by wild ritual insulting of the receiver of the

gift.

  In his book, Die Psychoanalyse primitiver Kulturen, Roheim describes

the distribution rite among the Papuas in the Duau district. Not only does it

tally  in  essence  with  what  Malinowski  described;  it  supplements  our

knowledge  of  the  psychic  conflicts  accompanying  the  payment  of  the

marriage tribute.

  “There is no doubt,” Roheim writes, “that the distribution of goods (food

distribution) is the paramount symptom of Papuan civilization in the Duau

district.” The Mwadare is a festival given either by the husband’s sister in

honor  of  his  wife  or  by  his  wife  in  honor  of  his  sister.  It  consists  of  a

complicated ceremonial in which garden produce is handed over. The entire

clan participates in the formal presentation, in the background. The Mwadare

is essentially a ritual exchange of goods between two different totem groups,the husband’s sister representing one clan, his wife the other. Officially, these

festivals  of  the  delivering  up  of  goods  are  meant  to  give  the  two  clans

entering into a marriage relationship an opportunity to manifest mutual good

will. The two groups outdo each other in generosity, but mutual suspicion

and hatred are evident in every detail of the ceremony. Roheim’s informant

said: “Mwadare Gidemusa sei ja”; that is, the Mwadare is like a war in which

each fighter has his special adversary. How heavy a burden the tribute is for

the  clan  that  pays  is  attested  by  the  songs  that  accompany  the  rituals.

Whereas every effort is made not to seem stingy, to give an especially rich

Mwadare, the songs express the exact opposite, the ardent desire that the yam

hut may not be large, the yam piles smaller, etc. One song goes:


  Boe Kotona

  Hero the nape of his neck

  Janoujama

I have pulled back

  Janu hetu hetunani

I pull to make it shorter

Ni Ketaurina

  This filling (with yams)

  Tuna heta siwenaja

  Full it overflows

  Ija, ija, ijo, ijo.


  With this song, which openly expresses the wish that the yam house may

be smaller so that it may be filled more easily, the festival is initiated. The

filling  of  the  yam  house  is  accompanied  throughout  by  songs  reflecting

anxiety and mourning, detailing catastrophes and the wish that children may

not be born, etc. At the end, according to Roheim, who was an eyewitness, a

great quarrel arises, all in the form of ceremonial songs, in which the two

parties seemingly make serious reproaches, saying that the produce is not

good and is not plentiful; counter-reproaches follow. “Mwadare is like war.”

  The  second  conflict,  a  sex-economic  one,  concerns  the restriction  ofgenital  freedom.  Through  the  development  of  the  patriarchal  family

organization, and even more cruelly through the actions of the church, which

consciously eradicates the high sexual culture of the primitives in order to

anchor mystical faith, this restriction at some point becomes complete. The

sexual conflict is clearly expressed in the dream; the economic one is only

hinted at. I do not know what part fishing plays in the economy of Loboda.

Maybe none. What is in any case clear is that the choice of the penis symbol

(fish) is not accidental. Everywhere—in our society, too—social conditions

are largely responsible for the symbol chosen. A primitive is hardly likely to

use an umbrella or a dirigible as a symbol of the male organ, nor a sausage;

but much more often than a Central European he will use the fish, especially

if fish is his staple diet. That is decisive; for what Roheim seems unaware of

is that in clinical analysis it is of no importance that a certain symbol signifies

the penis. That is easy to determine. What is important is why the dreamer

has  chosen  this  symbol  and  no  other.  If  Roheim  had  asked  himself  this

question, he would have spared psychoanalysis the ridicule he exposes it to in

his book. For example, “The fish was being boiled as the church bells were

ringing”: Roheim makes no comment whatever on the “church bells,” the

foremost  experiential  element  among  a  primitive  people  which  has  only

recently come to feel the pressure of the church against happiness in the

genital embrace. Yet this is the most significant element of the dream for an

understanding not only of the culture of the country but of the effect the

coming of the church had on the character structure of the inhabitants. In this

connection, and only in this connection, can we understand part of the dream.

The meaning is this: when our penis is being “boiled,” then the church bells

begin  ringing—that  is,  when  we  are  excited  genitally  and  want  to  obtain

gratification, the clergyman calls us to church; he keeps us from having our

happiness: “Go to church first.” The boiling of the penis is a sign of sexual

excitation, comprehensible and significant only in this connection. Roheim

correctly discerns that he, himself, is identified with the clergyman, also thatthe primitive feels aggression toward him; but since he does not know the

social  situation,  he  overlooks  the  fact  that  this  aggression  is  immensely

significant, that, for the primitive, he represents the whole of white culture,

which  the  primitive  hates  and  at  the  same  time  fears.  Roheim  is  only

interested  in  the  fact  that  the  primitive  “directs  his  aggression  against

himself.” “He tells me that he has kept some magic remedies for me.” No, the

primitive consciously hates the clergyman; he is afraid of Roheim (hence, no

associations with the dreams) and tries to cheat him by appeasing him, by

making a confession to him. He knows only too well that the whites are

keenly interested in magic remedies, but he does not want to be robbed of

them. Deep down, his behavior must presumably be traced back to fear of

punishment for sexual activity. We do not wish to make the same mistakes

Roheim made, however, and so will stop here.

  The  first  conflict,  the  socioeconomic  one  (undoubtedly  bearing  a

relationship to castration), emerges in the part of the dream that deals with the

division of the fish. Doketa himself—though Roheim does not notice it—

touches upon the subject of the marriage tribute, the sociological elucidation

of which Roheim so strongly resents.


      Besides, everyone knows that it is high time the Sagari (festive distribution of yams) for

  Lobesenni (the father-in-law) was prepared. But he withholds it from him because he needs the

  yams of his own garden for the funeral repast of his sister … As long as possible, he keeps the

  magic remedies back from me, just in the same way as he keeps back the produce of his garden

  from his father-in-law. In the dream this is represented by the opposite: generously he offers his

  friends the best part of the fish.


  The reversal in the dream reflects a reversal in the life of these primitive

people,  and  behind  it  a  social  tragedy:  the  first  economic  compulsion  of

mankind, the payment of marriage tribute. (I do not know, because Roheim

does  not  mention  it,  whether  the  tribe  is  still  matriarchally  oriented  or  is

already patriarchal. I am inclined to assume the latter; otherwise, Doketa as a

husband would not have to provide his father-in-law with marriage tribute butwould himself receive it from his wife’s brother, as among the Trobrianders.)

We  therefore  see  that the  social  structure  of  society  is  reproduced  in  a

specific manner in the character structure of the primitive of this society, and

with it the prevailing moralistic ecclesiastical system.

  Since  Roheim  set  out  on  his  expedition  with  the  preconception  of  an

unalterable, eternal child-parent conflict that takes the same form at all times

and  in  all  places,  he  not  only  did  not  learn  anything  about  the  specific

differences between the structure of the primitive and our own, which would

of course be very instructive, but he overlooked the most important elements

of  social  organization.  Doketa’s  individual  conflicts  are  of  little  interest

ethnologically. What would be significant for a different psychology of mass

structure are the typical differences. If only Roheim had learned something

about those, we would have reason to be indebted to him. But he remarks:

“According to my present view, it will be possible at some future time on the

basis of similar investigations to draw up a psychological classification of

mankind  and  to  arrange  the  single  peoples  according  to  degrees  of

primitiveness.”

  Not only will that not  be  possible  with  this  method,  but  it  will  make

psychoanalysis  entirely  useless  as  an  instrument  of  ethnology:  “culture

springs  from  the  genitofugal  libido-current.”  It  is  interesting  for  the

biosociologist to see how any thesis of this sort goes wrong and just hangs in

mid-air. If it were not for the fact that psychoanalysis is a splendid instrument

for research and that Roheim himself involuntarily touches upon an important

new point without knowing it, we would not take the trouble to consider his

interpretations.

  In the winter of 1926 Roheim visited me and we discussed ethnological

problems for a few hours. We did not understand each other in one essential

point,  among  others.  We  talked  of  the  interpretation  of  symbols  and,  in

connection with that, of the analytic interpretation of the origin of tools. I

maintained  that  an  ax  was  originally  created  for  rational  motives—secondarily, it might acquire a symbolic meaning, but not necessarily so.

A tree or a stick might signify a phallus in a dream, but it did not have to. The

wrong  application  of  symbol  interpretation  only  helped  the  opponents  of

psychoanalysis,  particularly  insofar  as  biosocial,  rational  activity  was

concerned. Airplanes were built so that man might better contend with time

and space; the fact that in dreams they become phallic symbols is important

only  for  the  psychology  of  an  individual,  not  sociologically.  Roheim,

however, believed that an ax was a penis symbol, that it was created as such,

that the rational function was secondary, that therefore the making of tools of

production was nothing but a projection of unconscious symbolisms. I owe to

this discussion a fruitful clarification of the relationship of the rational to the

                                                      3
irrational which I formulated some years later. At the same time, I became

aware  of  the  unbridgeable  gap  between  metaphysical  and  scientific

psychoanalysis. Fundamentally, the conflict still centers around the question

whether an ax is merely a symbol of the penis and nothing but that, or, at

most, secondarily a tool of production; or whether the motive for making an

ax is primarily a rational one—to master a part of the world. And behind this

disagreement about “the nature of the ax” there is the embittered conflict of

two viewpoints of the world that cannot exist side by side without friction.

Only one of them can be correct, that is, can comprehend the world correctly

and master it. This disagreement is at the root of a conflict, costing millions

of  human  victims—the  conflict  between  a  functional,  natural-scientific

                                                                                          4
concept of the world and a metaphysical, fascist, dictatorial, mystifying one.

It is a question of whether or not Roheim is right in summing up his criticism

                                      5
of my ethnological investigation in the sentence: “It is not as Reich thinks,

that civilization (= capitalism) arises from some economic cause or other and

then produces the neurosis, but the other way round; the collective neurosis

explains, conditions and creates social organization, religion, economy, law

and  all  the  rest.”  And  where  does  the  “collective  neurosis”  come  from?

Apparently from the everlasting.  Roheim maintains that culture originates from the “genitofugal libido-

current.”

  Where does the libido-current of culture flow?

  What causes this flow?

  When and how did it begin?

  What is the difference between this flow among the Trobrianders and in

America?

  If these questions remain unanswered, Roheim thereby admits that he has

merely manipulated words. He must be able to offer concrete reasons for

such a categorical sentence in a scientific paper claiming to put ethnology on

an entirely new basis.

  I tried to formulate concretely what Roheim here vaguely suspects, or

perhaps  vaguely  suspects,  for  his  book  does  not  show  any  signs  of  it.  I

maintained that in the beginning, by nature, there is no restriction on sex life,

because  natural  phenomena  cannot  impose  it.  Sexual  suppression,  which

produces  a  retrogression,  a  tendency  to  withdraw  from  the  genital,  is

generated by elements of biosocial development. New economic interests,

gradually  emerging,  make  the  sexual  suppression  of  children  desirable  to

economic profiteers. Thereby, the members of the society gradually change;

they acquire a different structure. Sex-affirmation turns into sex-negation, and

a  “genitofugal  direction  of  the  libido”  arises—to  wit, fear  of  sexuality  in

human  beings,  not  in  the  culture.  And  the  same  human  beings  who  had

created a culture on the basis of sexual and economic freedom now establish

a new culture of sex-negation, with all its consequences, such as rejection of

happiness in life in general. They create an ideology and moralistic structure

in which there is no room for libido-currents of any sort, for neither society

nor culture has a body and a vegetative nervous system in which such things

can occur. The biosocial process consequently has transformed man through

the transformation of his sexual structure; and man, thus transformed, shapes

economy and culture in a different way, maintaining class division, sexualsuppression, life negation, etc.

  There is, consequently, a “retrogression in culture,” but it can only be

comprehended and mastered if first its biosocial basis and then its psychic

reproduction is understood. This latter appears as an inhibition of the genito-

libidinous powers of man in the culture in question. It compels him either to

fall back to earlier forms of culture or to develop other forms of the inhibition

of  cultural  development,  mostly  mystical  ones  (e.g.,  the  mysticism  of

national-socialist ideology in German and Russian state imperialism).

  Roheim,  however,  is  very  proud  of  his  ethnological  application  of

psychoanalysis, though he makes mistakes even in dealing with individuals.

He  disputes  Malinowski’s  right  to  maintain  that  he  has  applied

psychoanalysis in ethnology.


    Although Malinowski himself does not claim to be an analyst, all the same some of his

  statements regarding analysis might give rise to gross misunderstandings. Thus he mentions, for

  instance, that while living among the Trobrianders he received some of Freud’s publications

  from Prof. Seligman and thereupon set about trying out the correctness of Freud’s theory of

  dreams on the Trobrianders. A person admitting that so far he has never analyzed a dream—and

  that  for  the  plausible  reason  that  he  did  not  know  how  to  do  so—wants  to  check  Freud’s

  theories!


  Ignorance is here joined with a poorly justified lack of modesty. I met

Malinowski personally in December 1933; till then I knew him only through

his writings. If Malinowski admits that he has never analyzed dreams and

only read Freud’s publication on the Trobriand Islands; if Roheim, on the

contrary, boasts that he is the long-experienced psychoanalyst and that he

interprets  dreams  brilliantly—then  everything  speaks  for  Malinowski  and

against Roheim. For in his research Malinowski has made splendid use of

psychoanalytic  knowledge,  and  Roheim  has  from  the  beginning  made

catastrophic use of it. From reading Malinowski one can learn really new

facts and ideas, whereas Roheim merely gives rise to confusion. We shall see

what that implies.WILD INTERPRETATION, HENCE GROTESQUE EXAGGERATION OF THE USUAL

                                  ERRONEOUS VIEWS


The life-negative concept of sexuality, if it goes beyond mere description to

the  formulation  of  a  philosophy  of  life,  maintains  that:  men  are  the  born

masters  of  women;  children  should  be  spanked  for  any  sexual  activity;

sadism is natural in man, masochism in woman; women are passive in sexual

experience, men are active; jealousy, which finds expression in murder and in

the tormenting and embittering of life, is a natural phenomenon characteristic

even of protozoa and certainly of animals in general; sexual suppression in

childhood  and  puberty  is  the  most  natural  thing  in  the  world,  also  the

biopathies  and  neuroses  resulting  from  it.  Roheim  not  only  attempts  to

confirm ethnologically the absolute nature of these things, he exaggerates

them into the grotesque. His views are important to us because they reveal

the mentality of a type of research which makes a show of being objective

but in reality is corroded by the severest sexual inhibitions and reactionary

tendencies.  They  throw  into  bold  relief  the  unscientific  procedures  of

moralistically prejudiced researchers which otherwise are covered over and

difficult to see.

  Let us review some instances of this “objective” research:

  In dealing with the Pitchentaras, Roheim interprets incest-phantasies from

stories, and maintains—something we can neither confirm nor refute—that

“masturbation is tied to subconscious incest-phantasies.” He goes on to say:


      Considering these incestuous masturbation-phantasies, one might expect to learn something

  about threats of castration directed against masturbation. But that would be erroneous. Nobody

  objects to children masturbating and I have often seen Tankaj playing with the penis of her son

  Aldinga. [As our mothers are in the habit of doing, only neurotically and unconsciously. W.R.]

  Also my direct question as to the existence of threats of castration was answered in the negative;

  nevertheless, I think that this information is not correct and that my informants had repressed

  their recollections of threats of castration.


  I have offered sociological reasons for the origin of the fear of castrationthat destroys our children and adolescents, body and mind—without looking

for a justification in these reasons, as Roheim does.

  It does not occur to Roheim that character structures can exist which do

                                                                                    6
not include a fear of castration, for he regards this fear as biological. And

when,  later,  to  save  his  position,  he  emphasizes  that  he  has  often  heard

children  playfully  threatening  to  tear  out  each  other’s  penises,  he  merely

confirms a view which I maintain clinically: that it is not important whether

an idea exists per se, but solely whether it is bioenergetically charged and

thus  becomes  pathological.  That  also  applies  to  the  incest  phantasy;  it

assumes importance only when it acquires driving power owing to general

sexual inhibition.

  I  have  found  that  what  today  is  merely  a  threat,  implemented  only

indirectly, in more subtle forms, was once practiced in a literal sense, for

pubertal circumcision betrays its function as a means of preventing pubertal

sexual activity. It is not universal, does not occur in matriarchal tribes, but

emerges  in  incipient  patriarchy,  together  with  the  restriction  of  pubertal

genitality and the interest in compulsory marriage on the part of the woman’s

father. This is the core of the function to which all manner of religious and

other implications have been ascribed. Roheim describes the infibulation of

girls among the already patriarchal Somali; one may here read with what

inexorable cruelty genital sexuality is destroyed. His informant supplies the

reason for it.


    If we did not have this custom we should never know whom we were getting. For the girls

  go about freely and do as they please. On the wedding-night the husband has to open the vagina

  (which was previously sewn up) … This coitus which is terribly painful for the woman has to be

  enforced … This weakness of the man (not to be capable of doing so) is looked upon as a great

  disgrace, as an avowal of impotence.


    Sex-economy demonstrates that the patriarchal customs of the wedding

night have nothing to do with natural love life, that in authoritarian patriarchy

the genitality of men is considered a proof of potency, while the genitality ofwomen is basically a disgrace. It notes that things are different among the

matriarchal peoples and inquires into the causes of the change. For Roheim,

the  superior  “psychoanalytical”  ethnologist,  such  questions  are  too

“superficial,” too simple; he is concerned only with “deep” research. Here are

the results, and we quote Roheim:


    We therefore see that the operation achieves a doubling of the hymen: “Twice the woman

  bleeds, once when the husband cuts through the sutures with his knife, the second when he

  perforates the hymen with the penis.” It must therefore be assumed that the virgin as a sexual

  object has a specially great importance for the Somali, as he tries to preserve the woman’s

  virginity by an operation of such a traumatic nature and with the ultimate aim of doubling the

  hymen.


  Very true! Only, in reality, such treatment of the woman destroys her

genitality  just  as  thoroughly  as  it  generates  hatred  for  the  man.  Roheim

continues: “Thus the assumption seems to me to be justified that this doubly

stressed  virginity  of  the  bride  means  a  double  negation  of  the  mother,  a

negation of the child-bearer and the castrating queen.”

  We ask ourselves how this negation of motherhood (let us not forget that

Roheim, after all, is concerned with social processes) fits in with patriarchy’s

supreme interest in unsexual motherhood, in killing woman’s genitality in

order to make her especially willing to bear children. We know what part it

plays in the structure of oppressive society, in its slavery and deprivation of

sexual rights, to what extent the patriarchal sexual ideology of black and red

fascism depends on these concepts. Roheim now tells us how he interprets

this phenomenon:


    When  women  want  to  inflict  wounds  on  the  vagina,  they  express  the  fact  that  they

  themselves feel the vagina is a wound in which the man’s flesh putrifies. In order to do away

  with this fear, the vagina must disappear … and the woman’s penis is the clitoris which as a

  preparation for normal sex-life is cut off.


Now we know how a woman is brought to the height of sexual happiness: bythe excision of the clitoris!


    Thus for the man the infibulation actually means a complete destruction of the sexual object:

  Through the suture the vagina disappears; through the cutting off of the clitoris the woman’s

  penis also.


  We thought Roheim had said that the man wanted to preserve the sexual

object, and here we have the exact opposite! Perhaps Roheim believes that

this is an expression of ambivalence. He believes even more than that: even

phylogenetic and ontogenetic development requires the operation.


    Before we ask why the man needs such a destruction of the sexual object, we must attempt

to understand the operation from the woman’s point of view. It is, however, to be mentioned

  above  all  that  the  operation  is  fundamentally  a  dramatically  abridged  repetition  of  the

  phylogenetic and ontogenetic development. The woman is to give up her clitoris-erogeneity and

  proceed to vaginal-erogeneity.


  Sic! We bow to this profound scholarship which, quite unprejudiced, was

able to plumb the deepest secrets of phylogeny and ontogeny. Roheim also

makes conclusive statements about the sexual psychology of women: “One

could therefore think that the operation promotes the right attitude of women

in sex-life.” (!!)

  In a sense, Roheim is correct. This operation indeed promotes the “right”

attitude of women in sex life. Only two words are missing, and those two

words make all the difference: “—in patriarchy.”

  Although  Roheim  cannot  be  concerned  with  the  differences  between

patriarchy and matriarchy and does not even like to have them mentioned, the

question is justified: If this operation is an expression of profound phyloand

ontogenetic laws, why do we not find it among the Trobrianders? Or are they

phylogenically  different  from  the  Somali?  This  is  essentially  the  same

question I once asked Krische, who maintained that 60 percent of all women

were, through  nature’s  foresight,  given  an  insensitive  vagina  so  that

childbearing might be painless. The remaining 40 percent were apparentlyoverlooked by nature.

  Such were the ideas that governed sexology at the turn of the century.

  In  my  comparison  of  matriarchal  and  patriarchal  organization  and  the

transition  of  the  former  into  the  latter,  I  found  that  with  the  economic

interests of a developing upper social stratum and the suppression of the sex

life  of  children  and  adolescents,  the  sexual  experience  of  the  whole

community  changed.  Sexual  disturbances  and  neuroses  appeared—sadistic

attitudes in the sex life of the men and sex negation in the women—which in

turn  necessitate  artificial  measures  for  the  reestablishment  of  destroyed

sexuality. Thus, a clinical fact which is systematically hushed up because it

upsets many concepts was ethnologically confirmed. Sadism in sex life is as

prevalent as it is today only when the natural genital functions are hindered or

disturbed; in other words, inhibited genitality changes not only into anxiety

but  also  into  sadism,  and  perhaps  this  is  the  sole  origin  of  sadism—a

statement which is certainly important for the prophylaxis of neuroses. But

Roheim and most analysts view sadism as a natural manifestation in the area

of sex, and its origin is therefore biological. As a result, not only is individual

development  squeezed  into  rigid  biological  formulae,  which  bars  any

possibility of prophylactic measures, but also ethnology must be brought in to

help. Instead of asking why things are different among different peoples, why

sexual  sadism  is  nonexistent  in  one  place  and  so  marked  in  another  (as

Roheim himself reports), he proclaims with scientific authority:


    We know that the deepest sadistic attitude is tied up with the first appearance of the teeth

  and that it has as a sexual aim the eating up of the partner. Now we see with this people where

  the men’s general attitude to women is so much influenced by sadism that for them the most

  important  preparation  for  sexual  intercourse  is  a  square  meal,  symbolically  presumably  the

  eating up of the woman.


  I am no ethnologist, it is true, nor have I been able to make an expedition,

but I believe my view is correct in considering the eating rite of married

couples—a  rite  not  existing  among  the  unmarried,  at  least  for  theTrobrianders—a symbol of the marriage and the economic unity of marriage.

As we know, the conditions of economic production are expressed sexually

to a far larger extent among primitive peoples than with us.

  Also, instead of comprehending the fact that “every husband beats his

wife”  as  a  sociological  problem  and  discovering  its  origin,  because  the

beating of the sexual partner is certainly not a universal phenomenon and

does  not  occur  everywhere,  Roheim  betrays  his  completely  reactionary

outlook on life in the following sentences:


    In the purely physical sense their manner of carrying out intercourse seems to be more

  genital than the European’s. They penetrate more deeply, work with stronger physical stimuli;

  with  a  slight  exaggeration,  one  might  even  say  that  the  woman  is  only  satisfied  if  after

  intercourse she falls ill with an inflammation.


  With  a slight  “exaggeration”?  Has  psychoanalysis  been  founded,  the

existence  of  the  unconscious  discovered,  the  morbid  sadistic  concept  of

coitus revealed, in order that an official representative of psychoanalysis may

summon up the courage, and the narrow-mindedness, to assert such things

with authority?

  The supporters of “free scientific research” will probably make neutral

statements about this and say that they cannot prevent people from saying

what they think. We know, however, that they are not at all tolerant toward

life-affirmative  researchers  but,  on  the  contrary,  are  highly  dictatorial.

Besides, so-called freedom of research must not be confused with libertinism.


  ROHEIM REFUTES HIMSELF AND CONFIRMS THE INVASION OF COMPULSIVE

                                  SEXUAL MORALITY


Occasionally Roheim renders observations in a plain and undistorted manner.

Where he does so, he refutes himself and confirms my concepts in social sex-

economy.

  Clinical insight into the effect of external suppression of infantile sex lifeinduced me to doubt the biological nature of the so-called period of sexual

latency.  There  are  children  in  our  cultural  circles  who  do  not  show  a

significant reduction of sexual agility between the ages of seven and twelve.

And if it is true, as is suggested by clinical investigation, that, in children who

seem less sexual externally at this age, sexual dynamics subconsciously go on

being operative, then Freud’s assumption of a biologically given “dichronous

beginning of sex life” separating man from the animals must be revised. The

absence of the latency period in many children in itself refuted the biological

explanation. It is permissible then to conclude that educational influences are

responsible for the occurrence of sexual latency. Ethnological research alone

made a final judgment possible. Malinowski’s investigations confirmed my

view of the social origin of the latency period, for among Trobriand children,

who—with the single exception of brother-sister incest—live without sexual

restrictions,  there is  no  interruption  or  even  lessening  of  sexual  agility.

Latency, therefore, is brought about by the first great series of repressions

during the first puberty—i.e., in the fourth to fifth year of age—which result

from  the  severe  genital  denial  of  infantile  self-satisfaction  and  infantile

genital play at this age. This undermined Freud’s assumption that the origin

of neuroses is also conditioned biologically by the “double beginning of sex-

life.”  Thus,  too,  the  assumption  of  a  phylogenetic  readiness  for  sexual

repression was put in doubt. This theory had never acquired any concrete

substance  anyway.  Yet  it  was  the  germ  of  the  concepts  of  the  biological

nature of sexual repression that took up more and more space in the work of

the English psychoanalytic school and blocked any avenue of approach to the

sociology  of  sexual  repression.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that  the  nature  of

sexual latency in our children and of sexual repression is not an academic but

a  practical  problem  in  every  sense  of  the  word.  If  both  phenomena  are

essentially biological, there is no basis for a prophylaxis of neuroses, and

thereby the therapy of neuroses also takes on a pessimistic cast. But, if they

are,  in  essence,  socially  conditioned,  the  problem  of  the  prophylaxis  ofneuroses is closely related to social sexual economy. My investigation into

the  intrusion  of  compulsive  sexual  morality  is  essentially  a  theoretic

elucidation and an ethnologic basis for the future prophylaxis of neuroses. As

little had been heard in psychoanalysis about this as about the theory that

sexual repression has a socioeconomic origin.

  Now,  Roheim  reports  plainly  and  straightforwardly—though  he  is  not

aware of the significance of what he says—that the primitives of Central

Australia are distinguished from us by the absence of the latency period. I am

convinced that, in spite of this, he is unshaken in his faith in the biological

nature of this phenomenon, for were he to abandon that premise, he would

have to change his entire basic attitude.

  On the basis of clinical facts, I have begun to doubt the concept, prevalent

in  psychoanalytic  theory  today,  that  the  instinctual  structure  is  fixed  by

heredity and thus represents the constitutional basis of neuroses. According to

this concept, an oral or anal sexual zone, for example, which quantitatively is

particularly strongly developed constitutes the hereditary basis of a tendency

to a depressive and compulsion-neurotic illness. Here, too, a clinical study of

the psychic illnesses involved first gave rise to justified doubts as to whether

this biological concept was entirely correct. There can be no doubt, that there

are differences in the excitability of the various erogenous zones which are

fixed by heredity. But there can be as little doubt that it is not the propensity

in  itself  which  determines  whether  a  person  will  fall  ill  or  not,  but  the

combined effect of tendency and experience—and not in the sense of Freud’s

“complementary  series”  constituted  by  tendency,  infantile  experience,  and

present-day experience. According to Freud, tendency and experience interact

as absolute quantities complementing each other. If the neurotic instinctual

tendency is strong, a slighter pathogenic experience is sufficient to produce

the neurosis; if the former is weak, numerous and more intense educational

influences are required. To me, the relationship seems to be one of variable

quantities, i.e., functional. In the first place, it can be demonstrated that thereare persons with a strong pregenital tendency who show no neurotic effects.

Then, an observation of the change in the libidinous structure in character-

analytic  treatment  shows  the  interdependence  of  the  various  erogenous

sources.  A  tendency  which  manifests  itself  as  a  strong  anal  zone can

disappear when, after the elimination of the genital repression, the respective

excitation  is  discharged.  The  excitations  consequently  are  in

intercommunication and above all depend on the regulation of the total sexual

economy.  It  could,  furthermore,  be  seen  that  a  good  part  of  what,  for

instance, was ascribed to an anal tendency was the result of the anal-erotic

character  of  the  compulsive  mother.  If  a  mother  insists  that  her  child  be

completely clean, at whatever cost, by the age of six months, she may well be

referring later to an “anal disposition” as an explanation of why the child has

fallen ill with a compulsion neurosis. It also became clear that the intensity of

the various erogenous zones is influenced socially by the nature, speed, and

intensity of educational measures. Supposing a society existed which allowed

the child to suck at its mother’s breast up to the development of the genital

phase, then we might expect such children not to show any anal reaction-

formations or any symptoms of an anal nature, simply because they would

not go through an anal phase in our sense. Yet the Trobrianders are very

clean.  This  proves  that  anal  cleanliness  is  not  of  necessity  a  reactive

formation, as it is with us.

  As  a  result  of  these  considerations,  quite  a  few  theories  came  into

question.  The  most  important  conclusion  was  that  an  upbringing  which

presses  all  children  into  a  fixed  system  of  renunciation,  irrespective  of

instinctual intensity,  produces  conditions  which  seem  to  be  tendencies. A

child who, on the whole, generates less energy can more easily adapt itself to

the same situation of renunciation than a child who generates more energy.

If,  then,  the  latter  becomes  “nervous,”  a  hundred  psychiatrists  out  of  a

hundred  conclude  that  they  are  dealing  with  a  “nervous-degenerative-

tendency.” A greater production of energy in a biological system is, however,no nervous tendency. If the psychic energy of the different individuals in the

younger generation had sufficient scope to find its own level, if these young

people were not subject to a uniform ideology and education, the stronger

“instinctual  organization”  would  not  appear  as  a  “nervous  tendency”;  the

child  who  generates  greater  bioenergy  would  merely  romp  about  more

vigorously than a child with lesser energy and it would masturbate every

second night instead of every fourth as a weaker one does. In a family of five

children, all of whom have to be equally “good,” quiet, and controlled, the

reaction of the different children clearly must differ. I believe this premise is

sound and refutes a number of assumptions concerning heredity. Thus, we do

not deny heredity, but we assess it by the degree of energy production in the

biological system. Then one can understand that the very persons who are

deemed psychopaths and morally insane by narrow-minded heredity research

prove themselves, in character analysis, to be the richest in energy, the most

intelligent and agile. But they do not fit into this life-negative society and

therefore have a difficult life. When, in Hitler Germany, fifteen-year-old girls

who have boyfriends are condemned to sterilization as psychopaths, we look

                                                        7
at it from a different point of view than Roheim.

  I wanted to show how important such controversies are for the weal and

woe  of  generations.  It  is  therefore  not  immaterial  whether  a  prominent

representative of psychoanalysis derives correct or incorrect data from his

voyage  of  exploration.  Roheim  considers  the  instincts  to  be  absolute  and

believes  that  their  suppression  has  a  biological  origin.  That  supports

irrevocably  the  laws  on  sterilization  of  psychopaths  and  schizophrenics

whom a rotten social order itself produces. Roheim, however, reports that

anal-reactive  characteristics  are  entirely  absent  in  the  primitive  cultural

circles  he  explored—and  sadomasochistic  perversions  too.  Roheim  is

undoubtedly a keen advocate of the theory of the original nature of sadistic

aggression. How  does  he  explain  its  absence  in  entire  cultures?  Since

Roheim considers it superfluous to describe and discuss the economic andsocial  structures  of  the  organizations  he  studied,  his  positive  findings  are

useless. Malinowski’s findings, however, afford far-reaching insights, among

them that the development of natural aggression into sadism presupposes the

social inhibition of natural genital sex life in the masses of a society. That

applies both to the sadistic alteration of the structure of the individual and to

the existence of a sadistic sexual ideology. The central mechanism of this

social evolution is the interest in permanent compulsory marriage which has

developed from loose pairing marriage. In it one sees for the first time the

sadistic behavior of men toward women. This does not exist otherwise and is

therefore not biological as Roheim believes.


    IS INFANTILE ANXIETY SOCIALLY OR BIOLOGICALLY CONDITIONED?


That  the  anxiety  which  our  children  regularly  develop  is  caused  by

unsatisfied  inner  bioenergetic  impulses  is  generally  known  and  accepted

today.  For  the  problem  of  the  prophylaxis  of  neuroses  it  is  of  decisive

importance  to  determine what  is  responsible  for  the  failure  to  master

instinctual  impulses.  Here  opinions  differ,  and  not  in  the  sense  of  “not

only/but also” but of “either/or.” Freud traces anxiety back to the reaction of

the ego to external or internal dangers and holds that every anxiety represents

a repetition of the traumatic experience of birth. The English psychoanalytic

school maintains that the anxiety of the small child is fixed biologically in the

weakness of the infantile ego, which is not equal to the powerful instinctual

drives and has to defend itself from them by repression. We ask, however: If

anxiety  represented  a  repetition  of  the  anxiety  of  birth,  would  it  not  of

necessity affect all children—those of the Trobrianders too—as  though  it

                                                                        8
were an expression of the biological imperfection of the ego? If this does not

apply, however, it is important to know what it is that determines whether or

not the child’s ego will lag behind its drives, whether or not it will reproduce

the birth situation. Freud abandoned his thesis that anxiety is the expression

of inhibited sexual excitation. I consistently worked on this assumption, for itis the only one that makes sense, the only one that is correct. It permits the

further thesis that it must be external circumstances and experiences—i.e.,

social factors—which condition the transformation of sexual excitation into

anxiety. That means that we include social sexual economy in our theory of

neuroses, whereas the theories outlined above not only rule it out but present

themselves  as  theses  advanced ad  hoc  for  the  purpose  of  avoiding  the

biosociological approach. In addition, my theory has the advantage that it

does not depart from the central concept of the conflict between need and

world, but fully fits in with it and carries it further.

  When  we  thus  confront  the  biological  and  the  sociological  theory,

additional differences become clear. The biologic concept of anxiety does not

inquire into the social origin of or the differences in infantile experience in

different social organizations. For that reason, its work is easier. But it has no

answer  when  a  social  organization  is  found  in  which  children  have no

anxiety.  Such  social  organizations  supply  us  with  the  decisive,  practical

approach to the problem of the prophylaxis of neuroses, at the core of which

is  the  problem  of  infantile  phobia.  For  when  we  compare  them  with  our

organization, they reveal the broad outlines of the conditions under which

infantile anxiety, and with it the crux of the formation of neuroses, can be

avoided. And all analysts agree that anxiety, as an expression of active but

blocked bioenergy, is the central problem of neuroses.

  Roheim, in spite of himself, also confirms my views on anxiety. Not only

does he describe the experiences of the “fearless sons and daughters of the

wilderness”; he also details quite exactly the relationship between the child’s

anxiety and its sex life, without suspecting the importance of what he says.


    If I call these children (among the Arada, Luritjia, Pitchentara and Jumu) “fearless,” I do so

  quite  consciously,  although  I  know  that  strictly  speaking  they  are  not  entirely  free  from

  experiences of anxiety.


  Of  course  not!  What  living  being  is  free  from  anxiety?  Surely  it  is  aquestion of distinguishing between neurotic anxiety and rational anxiety! If

the children in certain social organizations are free from neurotic anxiety, we

are then faced with the question: What factor causes children in other social

organizations to become anxious and neurotic?

  Roheim  describes  in  detail  a  genital  game  that  children  played  quite

openly; essentially, it represents the genital embrace. He does not go further

into the relative frankness with which the children demonstrated the genital

game to him, but arbitrarily introduces into the game the Oedipus complex he

has brought with him from Europe. What ensues demonstrates precisely what

sex-economy has discovered: the introduction of a social restriction in the

sexual life of the children, and with it a far-reaching change in their character

structure.


    What  follows  now  is  a  compelling  representation  of  the  Oedipus  complex  not  to  be

  surpassed for its clearness. The little boy takes a snake and puts it at the monkey’s breast. “The

  snake drinks milk.” Then he squeezes the snake between the monkey’s legs. “The snake has

  coitus with the monkey.” An incident which took place two months later makes it perfectly clear

  that Depitarinja himself is the snake having intercourse with the milk-giving woman; that is, the

  mother.


  That is of no interest whatever. That the children of the wilderness, too,

desire coitus with their mothers and fathers is a matter of course; there is no

doubt of it. What is of decisive importance is whether the inhibition of this

desire  has  a  pathological  effect  even  if  children  have  complete  freedom

among themselves. Sex-economy maintains that the inhibition of the incest

wish has no pathogenic effect if the child is otherwise unrestricted, but it

develops fully if sexual restriction is general. Consequently, what is decisive

for the child’s health is not the incest wish itself but the conditions under

which it is experienced and dealt with. Roheim continues:


      Deparintja,  otherwise  a  jolly  fellow,  is  obviously  depressed  one  day.  We  are  in

  Hermannsburg and the descendants of the altjiranga matina (totemistic ancestors) go to the

  missionary school. “Why are you so sad?” I ask him. After some hesitation he makes up his  mind to tell me the reason. I already know it in advance. He has been beaten by the missionary

for having kissed a four-year-old girl. The missionary has given him a sound thrashing. After a

  short pause he starts playing, asserting that the snake is sad. Then he makes the snake smell the
                                                        9
  vagina of the goat. Thereupon the snake is to marry the goat. [Reich’s italics]


  If the scientific investigator Roheim did not regard the brutal beating of a

child for a kiss given to a playmate as entirely in keeping with the “natural

order of things” and in the interest of the “necessary discipline and order,” he

could not pass by such a phenomenon without asking himself why it is that

the boy wants to marry the goat at this moment. Is that not a transference to

an animal produced and fixed by the external denial of a natural interest? But

again Roheim comes in with his depth psychology:


    What Deparintja makes the snake do is his own crime … he had kissed the girl’s genital. For

  this he had been beaten. Now the game goes on and all the toy animals and dolls must smell the

  vagina and the anus of the monkey who has always been made to represent the mother of all

  these beings. Thereupon he has a big rubber doll perform as the chief and this chief thrashes all

  the other dolls and animals for having smelt the goat. In this connection it must be mentioned

  that in Hermannsburg the inkata is the head of the missionary station … One of the many ways

of expression in which the Oedipus complex manifests itself in the games …


  Something  else  is  of  interest:  the  very  thing  that  Roheim  so  avidly

bypasses confirms my viewpoint. Does not the game described by Roheim

indicate an actual transformation in the beaten boy? Is that not the beginning

of identification of the boy with God’s apostle, an identification that has far-

reaching consequences for the mass psychological development of the whole

tribe?  Does  not  the  boy  simply  adopt  as  his  own  something  that  he  had

previously declined and that he will shortly apply to others? Is this not the

phenomenon I described—the reproduction of a new social system in the

character structure of the human beings subject to it; a small instance, it is

true,  but  an  exemplary  one?  Roheim  writes  in  his  “criticism”  of Der

Einbruch:


      Finally some examples may show that Reich draws conclusions from assumptions which do  not answer to the facts. Reich writes, on page 22: “But as moral sex education only enters into

  the history of mankind with the interest in private property and develops with it, neuroses are

  features of a society that has a patriarchal organization and private property.” When I attended

  the consecration of a Pitchentara boy I was told that he was treated indulgently, that he was not

  beaten too hard during the throwing up towards the sky because he was always a good boy,

  obeyed  the  old  men  and  did  not  occupy  himself  too  much  with  girls.  The  Pitchentara  are

  certainly those humans on the earth whom one would be most justified in calling communist. By

  the  way,  they  are  organized  neither  matrilineally  nor  patrilineally,  nor  have  they  any

  promiscuity; jealousy is a main motive of their actions both in everyday life and in fairy tales—

  but it is to be hoped that not even Reich would maintain that here there exists class rule and

  capitalism.


  No one has ever maintained that matriarchal primitives are communists,

but  rather  that  they  have  a primeval communist—i.e., work-democratic—

form of society, which is not the same as the communism of the twentieth

century. It is different from the patriarchal form both in economic and in

sexual organization. There must be transition stages, too. On the basis of a

comparison of the two fundamental social organizations, I distinguished two

ways  in  which  patriarchy  evolves  out  of  matriarchy:  (1)  an internal

development through the mechanism of the marriage gift, the tribute from

clan  to  clan,  which  Roheim  himself  describes  without  suspecting  what  it

signifies;  (2)  a  development  arising  out  of external  influences  such  as

conquest by patriarchal tribes or the intrusion of white “culture.” Within the

matriarchal  organization,  then,  the  patriarchal  beginnings  must  gradually

emerge as special factors in the social environment. Thus, to begin with, only

some of the children fall under the sway of asceticism; only some are subject

to the pressure of pubertal sexual restriction; only some of the adults are

subject to the coercion of permanent compulsory marriage. These embryonic

forms  of  authoritarian  patriarchy  grow  at  the  expense  of  matriarchal

characteristics.  I  also  believe  that  I  was  able  to  identify  the  point  where

mother-right becomes father-right. That occurs when the inheritance passes

from  the  nephew  of  the  mother’s  brother  to  his  son.  This  is  clear  from

Malinowski’s material. However, Roheim states that there are people who areorganized neither matriarchally nor patriarchally. If he had analyzed his data

from that point of view, he would not have maintained such impossibilities.

All peoples show one of the two forms, or else they are in a transition stage;

there is no third form.


    The degree of openness with which (the children) Deparintja, Myiki, Iliakurla and the others

  talk about coitus and sexual perversions, as well as the exclusiveness and the clearness of the

  sexual meaning of their games, distinguish these children from those of our race.


  It is an established fact that the children observed by Roheim behave

exactly like those observed by Malinowski; the reports of their games are

further  proof  of  this.  And,  as  though  Roheim  had  fully  accepted  my

ethnological theory, which is diametrically opposed to his, he concludes his

report:


    We have studied two groups of children both belonging to the same race: the missionary

  children go to school and their character has undergone a change in many respects although they

  have retained many features of the real children of the wilderness. The children of the bush,

  however, romp about, fight and have coitus with each other but I have never seen anything in

  them similar to the sadistic and masochistic playing in which Deparintja indulged (Deparintja is

  the boy who was beaten by the missionary). As we know, he has so often been punished for

  unhampered outbreaks of his natural instincts that indulgence in these impulses has come to be

  connected in his mind with the idea of tormenting or being tormented. The native originally has

an aggressive character, it is true, but not a sadistic one. He may shout at a child in a fit of anger,

he may even throw his boomerang at it, but he will hardly punish it deliberately. Thus the child

of the bush never has the opportunity to acquire a sadistic super-ego through introjection and it

  will never learn to enjoy playing at punishing and being punished.


  I  could  scarcely  have  wished  for  a  better  confirmation  of  the  sex-

economic concept. What can we deduce from the above?

  That  sadism  is  a social  product  resulting  from  the  suppression  of  the

natural infantile impulses of love, from the muscular diversion of libidinous

energy;

  that the explanation of this phenomenon must be looked for and will be

found in the social intrusion of compulsory moral regulation of sex life;  that neuroses result from the patriarchal change of the social order and

that capitalism is not a consequence of neuroses as Roheim thinks;

  that sex life regulates itself spontaneously, sex-economically, according

to natural laws, if it is not hindered;

  that  with  the  invasion  of  compulsory  moral  regulation,  its  permanent

ideological motive, the necessity to control the instincts, is established in the

form  of  unnatural, secondary,  anti-social  drives  such  as  sadism  and

masochism; this applies to all perverse impulses. Human brutality is like an

explosion, like a break from the prison in which human love life is held

captive.

  The confusion in Roheim’s views has its parallel, though less grotesquely,

in psychoanalysis wherever the scientific findings of psychoanalysis come

into  conflict  with  the  psychoanalyst’s  moralistic  outlook  on  life.  A  clear

instance of this confusion is that he postulates and demonstrates the absence

of sadism; yet, when describing a patriarchal tribe, the Aranda, he reports: “In

this social order a man can always obtain other young women either by brute

force or by his authority as chief … The sadistic component of male sexuality

can  therefore  be  abreacted  very  well.  Men  and  women  have  a  natural

cruelty.”

  Thus,  all’s  well  with  the  world,  and  with  us  too.  Sadism  is  a  natural

component of male sex life, and the Hungarian boyar can go on beating his

wife, exactly as the Arandas do, for Roheim has “shown how happy and

untroubled the sexual life of the Aranda is; the husband, every inch a man, is

his  wife’s  lord  and  father.”  That  is  not  politics  and  not  philosophy  but

“objective research”! This is the opinion of the whole life-negating view of

human  affairs.  But  it  can  no  longer  claim  to  be  objective  and  attempt  to

disavow our work with the reproach that we are politically biased.


                        WHAT MAKES ROHEIM IMPORTANT?


In a scientific controversy it is difficult fully to separate the subject matterfrom  its  advocate.  As  we  have  seen,  a  scientific  concept  does  not  hang

suspended in mid-air but is inseparable from the structure, the thinking, and

the social attitude of the scientist concerned. I think it right to emphasize at

every opportunity that what is important is not whether research on human

nature derives from a particular outlook on life and is colored by it; that this

cannot be otherwise is clear to any man of science. What is decisive is what

outlook on life allies itself with a scientific activity. One outlook places the

knowledge, the whole personality of the scientist, often his very existence, in

the  service  of  the  investigation  of  life.  The  other  proceeds  in  everything,

literally everything—from the harmless erroneous formulation of theories to

the  boycotting  and  scientific  plundering  of  the  adversary  to  reactionary

actions  and  pamphlets—with  the  aim,  on  the  one  hand,  of  securing  the

nimbus of scientific research for itself and, on the other hand, of concealing

every item of knowledge laboriously acquired, of blunting it and sidestepping

its  consequences.  Roheim  is  a  shining  example  of  this  type  of  scientific

attitude, and it is for this reason that he is important.

  From this discussion, one can clearly see what the future tasks of sex-

economy are. Let us summarize them:

  The preservation and continuation of the psychosociological method of

research is currently one of the most important tasks of every cultural and

political investigator. We are confronted with the job of solving, once and for

all,  theoretically  and  practically,  the  problem  that  has  dominated  man

subconsciously and consciously for thousands of years: Can there be a social

order  fulfilling  its  function,  the  regulation  of  human  relations  and  the

safeguarding  of  the  gratification  of  the  instinctual  needs,  without  sexual

suppression, sexual repression, and armoring?

  All hitherto existing cultural research asserts that there cannot be social

order with freedom of the instincts. In opposition, sex-economy maintains

and proves not only that such a social order exists and that it can exist but, in

addition,  that  through  the  sex-economic  regulation  of  love  life,  whichpresupposes full sex-affirmation instead of sex-negation, some of the great

problems oppressing men’s lives today can be solved for the first time, and

that social democracy and real mass culture cannot begin until the love life of

the  working  population  of  the  earth  is  regulated  sex-economically.  As

existing conflicts clamor for a solution, and as they will always eventually

find  one,  the  conflict  between  sexuality  and  morality,  nature  and  culture,

sexual life and work achievement, the individual and the collective, cannot,

on principle, constitute the exception.

  Here is the place to consider the following problems:

  1.  The  sexual  suppression  dominating  the  masses,  which  finds  its

expression in superstition, mysticism of all kinds, inhibition of thinking, fear

of authority, blind obedience, readiness to make sacrifices for the oppressors,

etc., is the most powerful weapon of social tyranny. The sexual awakening of

the masses, which also gives rise to their awareness of their economic plight,

spells the end of tyranny.

  2.  Social  sexual  suppression  creates  the  illnesses  constituting  mass

plague.  The  elimination  of  sexual  suppression  is  the  most  important

prerequisite of a mass prophylaxis of emotional diseases.

  3. Sexual inhibitions and disturbances ruin human intelligence, courage,

sense of reality, and working capacity. The gap between the working capacity

of man and his actual achievements and work interests is gigantic. A solution

to the problem of the lack of a rational, joyful, cooperative work process is

impossible  without  social  sex-economy.  If  this  is  erroneous,  character-

analysis and the orgasm theory are completely wrong.

  4. The continued existence of any kind of religion and mysticism depends

on the continued existence of sexual suppression and armoring of the bio-

system.  As  long  as  the  sex-economic  regulation  of  sex  life  has  not  been

established, a large-scale solution to these problems cannot be expected.

  5.  Every  social  system  is  reproduced  ideologically  in  the  character

structure of its members, and structure formation is essentially a matter ofsexual structure. In Soviet Russia, where the trend toward the alteration of the

sexual structure made a clear breakthrough in the years 1918 to 1923, though

the leaders of the revolution were not conscious of it, there is today [1931], to

an ever-increasing extent, a contradiction between the economic foundation

of socialism and human structure formation, resulting in the regression of an

                            10
incipient socialist culture. Essentially, the adaptation of man to the socialist

economic  system  must  be  considered  a  failure  there.  But  as  every  social

system either reproduces itself in man libidinously or else endangers itself

and, since man only, not dead productive power, is the driving force of social

processes (which Marx knew when he based his theory on the difference

between living and dead productive power), the problem of sex-economy is

of vital importance to the Soviet Union.

  These  problems,  which  await  study,  justify  our  resolution  to  be

unrelentingly,  ruthlessly  critical  and  to  devote  ourselves  to  serious,

uncompromising  work.  Our  path  is  laborious  and  socially  dangerous,  and

reaching  the  target  is  therefore  highly  uncertain;  the  opposition  of  the

authoritative and responsible leaders of present-day political parties, as well

as of scientific circles, is enormous.

  Our  knowledge  of  human  longing,  of  human  structure  and  its

contradictions, of the obstacles, both internal and external, standing in the

way of the realization of a work-democratic, rational organization of society

enables us, better than would mere instinctive resolution, to fight our way

step  by  step.  What  today  sounds  incredible  will  some  day  be  taken  for

granted. We are “swimming against the current” but, in doing so, we have

venerable predecessors. That we err here and there is certain. But it is just as

certain  that  we  are  on  the  verge  of  disclosing  the  secrets  of  a  cultural

barbarism of thousands of years’ duration and, in fact, that we are standing on

the threshold of the sexual revolution of the future.


 1. Roheim: Die Psychoanalyse primitiver Kulturen.
2. Off the eastern tip of Papua, not far from the Trobriand Islands. [Editor]
3. In Dialektischer Materialismus and Psychoanalyse, II. Auflage 1934 (Verlag f. Sexualpol.).
4. [1951] The most efficient exponents of the latter view today are the political prostitutes who took
over the once great thoughts of Karl Marx.
5. Roheim, in a review of Der Einbruch der Sexualmoral (Intern. Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse, 1934).
6. In order to prevent any misunderstanding: Every animal is afraid of bodily harm, especially harm
that would affect the pleasure-giving organs. In this sense, the fear of castration is universal. But
when in psychoanalysis we speak of fear of castration we mean something different: not so much the
rational fear which appears whenever the genital is really threatened, but the neurotic fear regarding
the penis which has no present-day rational cause but which was well justified in the past. The
former will never bring about disturbances of potency, but the latter regularly does.
7. [1951] We also judge the red fascist elimination of co-education from this bioenergetic point of
view.
8. Cf. my view on birth anxiety, in The Function of the Orgasm.
9. [1951] See also the account of missionary influence on the sex-economy of primitives in Top of the
  World,  by  Hans  Ruesch  (Harper,  1950),  which  developed  into  red  fascism,  the  most  cruel
  suppression of life and love ever known to mankind.
10. The Sexual Revolution.                                      Index






The index that appeared in the print version of this title does not match the

pages in your eBook. Please use the search function on your eReading device

to search for terms of interest. For your reference, the terms that appear in the

print index are listed below.


affirmation of infantile sex life

Amphlett Islands

Angus

anxiety

Atkinson


Bachofen, Johann J.

Barasch, M.

Bartels

Bede

Bonaparte, Princess Mary

Bryk, Felix


Caesar, Julius

Cunow, Heinrich


Darwin, Charles; theory of natural selection


Ebert, Max

Ellis, Havelock

emotional plague

Engels, Friedrich; The Origin of the Family


fascism; patriarchal ideology of; see also red fascismFreud, Sigmund; Totem and Taboo


genital gratification

Grosse


heredity


incest

incest fantasy

incest taboo


Katuyausi

Kayasa

Kovalewski

Krische, Paul


Le Bon

libertinism; sexual

libido theory

life energy; see also orgone energy

Lippert


Mailu

Malinowski, Bronislaw

Marx, Karl

Mass Psychology of Fascism, The

Morgan, Lewis

Müller-Lyer


national socialism; mysticism in

Normanby Island


Oedipus complex

orgastic potency; of the primitives

orgone energy; see also life energy


Ploss

polygamy

Pope Pius

primary drivesprophylaxis of neuroses

psychoanalysis; psychoanalytic ethnologists; psychoanalytic investigation of perversion;

psychoanalytic research; psychoanalytic religious research; psychoanalytic interpretation


Ratzel

red fascism; see also Soviet Russia Reik, Theodor

Roheim, Géza

Ruesch, Hans


sadism

Salkind

Schmidt, R.

secondary drives

self-regulation

sex-economy; in matriarchal society; disordered; standard of

sexual latency

Sexual Revolution, The

social sex-economy

sociology

Soviet Russia; see also red fascism


Tacitus

therapy of neuroses; psychoanalytic

Trobriand Islands and Trobrianders; divorce; economy; influence of missionaries; legal system;

matriarchal organization; perversions and sexual excess; sexual character of natives


Ulatile


Vogel


Westermarck

wild analysis

work democracy

Wright, Arthur                              Books by Wilhelm Reich


                              CHARACTER ANALYSIS

                              (third, enlarged edition)


                      THE FUNCTION OF THE ORGASM


          THE INVASION OF COMPULSORY SEX-MORALITY

                      (third [first English language] edition)


                              LISTEN, LITTLE MAN!

                            (illustrated by William Steig)


                  THE MASS PSCYHOLOGY OF FASCISM

                                  (a new translation)


                          THE MURDER OF CHRIST


                          REICH SPEAKS OF FREUD

          (edited by Mary Higgins and Chester M. Raphael, M.D.)


                  WILHELM REICH: SELECTED WRITINGS


                          THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION

                              (fourth edition, revised) 


Copyright © 1971 by Mary Boyd Higgins as Trustee of the Wilhelm Reich Infant Trust Fund

All rights reserved

Library of Congress catalog card number: 70-164538

First English-language publication, based on a draft translation by Werner and Doreen Grossmann of

Der Einbruch der Sexualmoral by Wilhelm Reich

eISBN 9781466846937

First eBook edition: May 2013